O you three dear sons, I have completed this book which is the last of the science of medicine along with its fulfillment, and have made the end through its expositions and through its declarations. And it came to me in vision that I complete it with this treatise, which is part of the work of hands, namely “surgery”.
And because the work of hands is fortified in our region and is strange throughout everything, so has the science perished and been cut off, and nothing remains of its strength except for small descriptions in books of the ancients that have been moved by hands. And from this came the error and the vanity, and are closed the intentions and is alienated the science.
Or it seems to me that I will revive it together with the ordering of this treatise according to the way of exposition and declaration and abbreviation; and I will come together with the forms of the tools of cautery, and of the other instruments of the work with the adjustment of the declaration and preparation of them, as it is necessary.
And for the reason of those that no good masters of hands are found in our time, is the art of medicine prolonged. And it is necessary that he who engages in it should ascend in the science of anatomy, as Galen says, until he knows the judgment of the members, and the forms and the conjunctions and separations of tissues, and have knowledge of the bones and nerves and veins and the number of vessels, and the movement and of moving and resting veins, and the place of their issue.
And for this reason Hippocrates says that the hand with the name is not much, and with the work is little; and similarly in the art of hand.
We say to you at the beginning of this book that whoever is not familiar with the things said before, let him be careful so as not to fall into error and harm people; as I have often seen many who engage in this science and abandon their knowledge and experience.
For I saw a fool who cut i.e., an abscess of scrofulous or the neck of a woman, and he cut the arteries of the neck; for which so much blood came out that the woman died in his hands.
And I saw another surgeon who treated a stone of a man's bladder, and the stone was large; so he removed it with a piece of the bladder, and the man died within three days.
And I had already been called for the treatment, and saw the disposition of the patient and the size of the stone, and it is well if one cut it he would die.
And I saw another surgeon who treated a duke of our land who had a broken leg, and with the fracture there was a wound; and the ignorant surgeon forced the fracture over the wound to the stars with strong ligatures, and did not leave any washing on the wound, and left it thus; and he commanded that he should not untie it; and remained so long that the leg was completely swollen and the foot came to perdition.
I was called to come to him, and hastened to come to untie the leg; and when I untied it so it was at peace and felt no pain.
But every way the corruption was already confirmed in limb, and it could not heal it; and did not cease the corruption to go through the limb as long as the limbs were altogether lost.
And see i. another sore which breaks open i. abscesses, and then inflames by the malice of its lord.
Because a sore, when it is pure of melancholic humor, it does not behoove that one touches it with iron unless in such place one can entirely remove that which is corrupted.
And therefore, dear son, it is necessary that you know the work of hands is divided into .ii. divisions: that is to say, works where there is peril in many dispositions; and I will show in each place of this book where there is fear and peril.
For which reason it is necessary that you keep guard of this, so that foolish people may not speak ill of you.
If you take up your arms in caution, and undertake your patients lightly and firmly, and use the best way so that by the grace of God you come to salvation and be praised; and leave the diseases fearful of grief health; and remove your weapons from those who make you doubt, and have done in yourself so that you may come from this world to the other of glory.
Galen says in some of his admonitions: “Do not take on any ill disease that you may not be called a foolish fool.”
I have devised this treatise according to .iij. chapters.
The first chapter is of fire cauteries and of medicine cauteries, and is the chapter ordered from the head to the foot; and of the forms of the instruments, and of the methods of cautery, and of all that is necessary in the work.
The second chapter is of cutting and probing, and of cupping and wounds, and of the extraction of arrows, and similar things; and is the chapter ordered and the forms of the instruments.
The third chapter is of restoring dislocations and twists, and similar things; and is ordered from the head to the foot, and of the forms of the instruments.
Therefore, as we remember from the work, it behooves me to speak of the quality of the help and of the ailment of each constitution.
I say that the qualities of help and of ailment are the longest speech and most subtle science and secret responses; and about this speak the most sages, and agree with it; and I suffice myself little their words, because I fear the length.
I say that cautery helps universally to every constitution where it has matter, except for two complexions: namely, hot constitution without matter, and dry constitution without matter.
In hot and dry constitution assembled matter, some say that cautery is great help; and the others say the contrary: that cautery is of no value for illness that comes from heat and dryness.
For the nature of fire is so hot, and it should not be cured with heat from a hot sickness by heat, nor by dryness; and he who says the opposite that cautery does great help to a hot and dry sickness that comes in the body of men. For when you compare the body of man and its moisture to the complexion of fire, you find the body cold.
And I agree with this statement. For I have found it no time through experience.
And all ways, let not anyone intervene except he who has proven it, and who knows by long usage the chapter of cauteries, and the diversity of complexions of men, and the dispositions and causes of their illnesses, and the occurrences and space of time; of other complexions we have no more fear, even in cold and moist diseases. And all the mirrors assembled and agreed to the cautery.
And know, sons, that cautery assembled fire is of the secrets of cures, and of greater goodness than cautery of burning medicine.
For the fire is simple, and does not come outside except to the member that is burned, and does not harm another member if it is named.
The hot medicines come from one member to another by moving, and bring diseases to the member healing; and perhaps kill the patient.
Fire for its height and for the goodness of its substance does not do this, unless there is superfluity.
And this I have found through experiment and the length of service and study that I have put into the art, and it is based on the truth of things; and for this reason I excuse myself for the length of the speech, because it does not please me that I lose the secret that is placed in fire, and the quality of the work, how it expels diseases from the body, as the philosopher says when demonstrating; but receive it in your thoughts.
And know, son, that it is agreed upon in what time the cauteries should be done, and how they are applied.
And I say that cautery is advisable at all times, because the harms arising are diminished by the aid of cautery; and even if the cauteries are for necessary pains outside and hastening so that they cannot wait for the time when greater malice comes to the limb.
And do not ever think, dear son, as the foolish ones do; because the disease which is healed by cautery has no return; and they say thus; but it is not so as they believe, for cauteries are not only a medicine that changes complexion, and dries the humors that are the cause of pain, and is more effective than medicine for the hastening of its recovery, and for the virtue of its work and its sovereignty.
And it is a remarkable thing that illness comes at times according to the complexion of the patient and the location of the disease and its virtue; and are gathered in him superfluities by the acquisition of meats and similar things, unless cauteries are administered where there is little superfluity and moisture, such as cauteries of fire for pain, and similar things, and such pain does not return; but this happens rarely.
And many people do not understand for what reason cautery is called the last of medicine, and this is true; but they do not believe that cautery is worth after medicine, but their understanding is false, and it is cautery the last of medicine for because when we administer ways of cures in any disease and they are not worth, then we administer our cautery, and it is worth. Therefore, it is well understood that cautery is the last of medicine, not according to the understanding of foolish people.
The ancients said that cautery of gold instrument is more effective than iron, and they said this because of the quality of gold and the height of its substance; and they said that the burn from cautery does not cause rotting, but this is not true because I have experienced it, and found that it is true in some people; and cautery of gold is worth more than iron, as they said.
And although when you heat an instrument of gold, you do not know when it is heated by the color of the gold, and it cools quickly; and if it is heated too much; so they do in the fire; and thus there is enough impediment.
And for this we use our fire cautery that we have made appear in our work.
I have ordered this chapter from the head to the feet for you so that the way is lighter to find.
of the olive cautery
This cautery is good for moisture and cold on the brain, and there are two types made because of a disease called "soda," and because of many humors that descend from the head to the eyes, and ears, and for a multitude of dreams and tooth pain and sore throat, and also for all diseases that come from cold like paralysis and soda and apoplexy and similar diseases.
The form of this cautery is that the patient be purged by medicine solutive modifying the head 3 or 4, according to what the virtues and the age and the custom of the patient can suffer; and then make round the head of the patient.
And then make him sit crossed between your hands, and put his hands on your waist; after put the root of your palm on the root of his nose between his two eyes; and where your two fingers will come, if it bleeds then heat the cautery which is called "olivare", because this is its form:
And place it on the place marked with ink, and make by descending and straining your hand poc and poc turning; then raise your hand gently, and look at the place if you see the bone i.e. small; and if you do not see it, so begin again the cautery until you see the bone as I have told you; after take .i. poc of wool, and put in soft cotton inside, and put on the place, and let it for .iij. days; after put on cotton moistened in butter; and let it on until the burn is gone; after cure the wound with the ointment which is called "tetrafarmaçon", until it is healed.
And the ancients said, that when more the wound stays open, more it purges; and for this reason they aided it to move.
And they said none of these that one must let the cautery so much that part of the bone is burned, and then set those who are burned of the bone, and be cured.
And they say the other that one must leave the cautery thus, and thrust it so strongly one lowers the bone as wide as a whorl that women put in their spindles for that the humors may come out moved; and one must leave the wound long exposed; after that one must cure and soothe.
And these two ways of cauteries do not seem to me to be good in any way whatsoever, except for certain men who have a way of fear; and it seems to me that I ought to leave them; because the shoulder is weakened by continuous solutions of nature, as we testify in other members; and even when the shoulder of the patient is weak by nature, and the first appearance of cautery is more safe and moderate for me, and from this use I act thus altogether well.
of the ancient pain of the head
When throughout the head comes chronic pain, and lasting long, the patient must use herbs and pills which are called "cochie," and of purgation of head and oils and plasters; and if one does to him the cautery that we have said before, and it is not worth.
Take ward if the shoulder of the sick man is of strong nature, and that it be not too cold; therefore cauterize below that cautery a bit that we have said above.
After make cautery on each horn of the head until the bone, as we have said before, and make one cautery where it is called "vasselz"; and there are one's in which one puts ventouses; and align your hand so that you do not see until the bone: the sick man feels much more great pain in this cautery than the others, and I will speak of it later; and it is necessary that the cauteries of the horns be more subtle than those with which one cauterizes the middle of the head, and this is the form:
about the cautery of the head When in one part of the head comes sudden pain, and it extends to the eye, and the joint is purged by medicines softening, and we have done the other cures that I said in the division of diseases, and all this does not benefit: therefore I make cauteries according to .ij. manners, that is to say of medicine hot and of fire.
The cautery of hot medicine is that you take a slice of garlic, and remove the husk and cut it 1 pock as 2 joints, and then make the temple where the pain holds in such a manner that you can place the slice of garlic under the skin; and when it will be placed so tie it and restrain it well and leave it so for 12 hours; and then untie it and remove the slice of garlic, and leave the wound so for 2 days or 3; then put on top cotton dipped in butter as long as possible.
After the ointment cure until it is healed; and if you see so do those of certain burning medicines that I have written or doze treatment of burning medicines.
The iron cautery is done this way. Heat the cautery as much as it has the shape:
And is called "clos" because the head is made in the shape of a clo or it has .i. inch of curvature, and in the middle a small appearance; and put it on the painful place, and hold your hand and stir the fire a little lightly, until the half of the thickness of the spear of the heart is burned; and lift your hand so that the artery does not burn, which is outside, and flows abundance of blood.
After put cotton in awe of wool, and put on the place for .iij. days; then I put cotton moistened in butter, and then cure the place with ointment until it is healed; and if you want to cauterize this migraine with the cautery which is called "cultellare", at all the point, and keep from covering the artery in this migraine which is not ancient.
of migraine
When you cure migraine as we have said before in divisions of diseases, and it does not profit, and see that the cauteries before said of medicine and of iron do not fit him, then it is necessary that you heat the cautery which is called “cultellare” until it is white; and reign thus on the place ailing a line of half a two of long, and remove your hand once, and strain that you do not cut the artery and that you do not come until the bone; and ward yourself from the jaw that moves when one puts, and the nerve does not look but the silent and that spasm does not come to the patient, and ward yourself from a decrease of blood from the artery when it will be cut, or cutting has great fear and also to him who does not know it, and who is not studying and experienced; and leave the work in half way; but I will tell you how one restrains blood when the artery is cut, and I will show you at the place where it appears in this book.
And if you see that this cautery does not fit the disease, and the patient is suffering, cauterize him in the middle of the head as we have said, and cure the wound until it is healed; and if you see, administer the cautery that we have said or chapter of the extraction of the artery, with the cautery which has .ij. coutelz; and this cautery is better than that one and more helping.
of the pain of the ears from cold
When in the ear comes pain from cold, and there is opened of medicines solutives and other cures that we have said in the division, and the pains do not move, then takes this cautery which is called "point", for this reason is the form:
After point all around the ear of the sick, or between two if the pain holds in both, and you distance a bit above the root of the ear after that you have marked the place to burn; and have ten points around each ear; after cure the place until it is healed.
of the torture of the mouth
Torture that must be cured by cautery are not others than those that move from phlegm, as we have said in the divisions of diseases; and do not make cautery on appearances that come from dryness and sprain of nerves.
When you cure this appearance of torture that moves from phlegm of the eyes and expectorations of the head and gargles, and it does not work, then it is necessary that you cauterize the patient with three cauteries: one at the root of the ear, and the other a finger's breadth from the temple, and the third in the adjustment of the two lips; and put the cautery in the part that opens healthy, and let him cauterize the place above the head of the ear a finger's breadth below the horn of the head, and another one in the temple as long as a finger's breadth; and leave the cautery there until half of the heart is burned; and this is the form of the cautery:
And is the appearance of the cautery that we have put before, but it is a little more subtle and it is necessary that the knife be a little thicker; after curing its place as I have said before, until it is healthy.
When apoplexy is old and you treat it as we have said, and it does not benefit, and the patient has no fever, then I make .iiij. cauteries: .ij. on the .ij. horns of the head, and .i. in the middle of the head, and .i. where it is called «vessels» as we have said before, and the last cautery on the mouth of the stomach; and be cured as we have said before.
Of lethargy
For this illness it is necessary to give the patient large doses of herbs and pills that clarify the brain; after which raise the head of the patient, and place on the nape of the neck the ointment of mustard which is written in the treatise of ointments; and this is the manner of cautery: if I do as I have said.
If he is healthy like this, good is; and if he isn't, make him 3 cauteries from the midst of his head descending to his neck, and have space between each cautery 2 finger widths; and cure it as the others, and if you see it join, and the patient is suffering, make 1 cautery in the middle; and if need be, 2 others on the 2 horns, and cure it until it is healthy; and be the cauteries which are called "olivare", as I have said before.
of the cold of the head It is necessary that the head be purified with herbs and of what we have said before; after raise the head of the patient, then make cautery in the midst of the head and on each horn, and 1 behind and 3 on the spine of the neck; and if you need more, and the body is moist and the patient is suffering, and the illness is strong, make 4 cauteries on the spine of the back; and leave him until the most of the heart be burned, and raise your hand; after cure it until it is healthy, and be the cauteries which are called "olivare" as we have said before.
of epilepsy
The epileptics must not use cautery fires except those who are phlegmatic, and it is necessary first to modify the brain with herbs and other remedies that we have said in the division when the patient is great and suffering from a lack of medicine.
And if it is a child who cannot endure it, make gargarisms and mastication modifying the brain often with cooked meats; after which the king makes a point in the middle, and there I put 1 cautery according to what we have said before, and 1 cautery on the vessel, and on each horn; and if the patient is weak and suffering, then I make cauteries as I have said to the one who has paralysis and softening of the body, on the spine of the back and neck, and be the cauteries olive oil according to the manner that I have said.
If the patient is a child, make 1 subtle cautery according to this manner:
When because of melancholy there are the superfluities or the moistures corrupted and thick phlegm, then one should cauterize with these cauteries as we have said to him who has paralysis.
And if because of melancholy there are the superfluities inclining to melancholy, and the body of the patient is moist, then one gives him to drink something by which the brain should be purified, according to that which is before in the division.
After you have reset the head of the patient; after that make one tortell of flax well made, as well as one circle, and put it in the middle of the head; and the patient sits crossed, and be held well on all sides; after present the liniment, and worth muffs of mutton fat old; and heat it to fire moderately, so that the two if it is put on him he may suffer; after empty the circle from inside the head, and let it cool; and make this to the patient every week once with other good governance, until he be healed.
Or if you see the one being cauterized, make many points all over the cautery. This manner of cautery moistens the brain a great deal; and then put cotton moistened in butter and fat of gelling on it.
from the weeping of the eyes When weeping comes first to the eyes by the signs that I have said in the division, then begin and give the patient things purifying the head, and warding off all moisture, and make him sweat or bathe many times fasting.
Afterward, command him to rear his head, and make a cautery in the middle of the head, and make two cauteries on the two temples if the descent of the weeping is to the two eyes together, or one if the descent is to one; and cut all the veins and arteries that are under the heart with every cautery, and let the cautery be long according to the width of the temple; and ward off the discharge of blood, and if you see too much blood issuing, restrain it as best you can.
And I will teach you in the extraction of arteries and in the incision the caution how to stop it; and sometimes one makes cautery or a knife under the two bones behind.
of the tears of flesh
When the tears of the eyes are old and accustomed and are on the veins, or near the arteries that are in the appearance of the head outside; and one sees that they are cold phlegmatic superfluities, then I make the cautery that I said at the beginning of the above concerning the eyes: 1 cautery removing the head, and 2 cauteries on the 2 temples, and 2 cauteries or incisions under the 2 bones; and if there is a need for more, one cauterizes carefully above the eyebrow with all 1 small cautery.
of the tears of flesh within the eyes
When you medicate according to what we have said in the division, and it does not help, then give the patient three cups of wine; after that, cover the head and make a cautery or middle cautery with olive oil; and make two cauteries with the cautery called "clavilis" on the two ears, one just below the eyebrows; and guard yourself from the artery so that you do not cover it. And this is the form of the cautery called "clavilis":
When the paper of oil is softened by illness and moisture, then cauterize with this cautery called "olivare". This is its form:
And if you see so make two cauteries on the two eyebrows as long as the eyebrows are; and do not leave the hand except until a third of the paper is burned, according to the manner that I have said.
Hair which pricks the eye Sometimes it happens that the hairs of the eyes are converted to the eyelids, and prick the eye, and in this case one makes cauteries according to two manners: that is to say, of fire, or of burning medicine.
For the fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
When they are born and are even, then place the patient on your healthy side; after draw a figure on the paper of their eyes that is like the leaf of myrtle, and let it be the beginning of the sign near the hairs; then put cotton moistened in the white of an egg and muscilage of persimmon on the eye, then heat the cautery of this which is the form:
After cauterize on the figure that you have signed little by little many times, that the kernels be burned in that place; and the sign of the healthiness of the work is that you see the paper retracted, and the hairs raised at the height of the eye; then lift your hand, and leave it thus for 3 days, then put cotton moistened in butter until the burning is removed; after the cure of ointment until it is healed.
And if after this the hairs come, and the paper is softened then begin again the cautery on that same place, as you did first; and if the hairs are few, cauterize until the paper is raised to its natural place, and is even, and do not prick the hairs the eye.
The cauteries of medicine burning is that you command the patient to let the hairs grow long and even, then make of parchment the shape of the leaf of myrtle; then take of French soap and live coal, of each one part, and grind together well; and do it hastily, so that it does not cool, then spread on the form that you have made like the leaf of myrtle, and put under the eyes; and if the patient holds in one eye alone, so must we work in one, and if in both also; and put under the eye cotton moistened in the white of egg; and the head of the patient be in your health and put your hand showing on the medicine, and press one piece and the other every time that the patient feels burning from the medicine, for he feels burning as well as fire. When you have done this lengthwise, so remove the medicine with your hand. And when the burning will have passed, so lift the place with awe, and reward if you see the parchment lifted as if it had been lifted by constraint of fire or by incision; and if it is thus, so it is well. If this not, so put back encore of the medicine on the place where the medicine has not worked, until your works are even, and your eyes set; then put on cotton moistened in butter until the cured parts are healed, afterwards cure the place of the ointment which is called 'dyafenis' and other, until it be healthy.
And if it is necessary that you guard well your work with great care so that it does not fall from the medicine to the eyes.  And if the paper becomes soft afterward, and the hair prickles in the eye, then recommence the medicine on that place which is softened by the paper properly, just as you did before; after the cure until it is healed; and this is the form of the leaf of myrtle:
And know that the eyes of men are diverse in size and smallness, and according to these be your constraints; and let not the right way be returned to him whose is the study of this art.
Of the cure of fistula by cautery
When you cure a fistula as we have said in the divisions of diseases, and your treatments are of no use, then it is necessary that you make cauterization according to this manner.
Instruct the patient to put their head on a healthy place; and hold the head between your hands in such a manner that it does not move, nor does he move his head; after putting moistened cotton in the egg white or in parsley juice on the eye; after heat the cautery which is such: and it is shaped to the head like the shape of an arrowhead, together with whatever the cautery may be; if you see, so pointed from one end to the other, and if you see, also like a tent; but nonetheless, this which is shaped is useful for your work.
After press the fistula if it is open, and treat the rottenness, and dry it; and if it is closed, so operate it, and treat away from the bow; after put on the hot cautery shape, and hold your hand to the cautery at the part of the nose above the eye, that your hands do not make a mistake; and put the cautery into the fat of the eye, and corrupt.
If you come to the beginning of the cautery until the bone, it would be good. If not, begin the cautery again once, and another if you need it, and leave it for three days; after that put on cotton moistened in butter, and the cure of the drying ointment until it is healed, and if forty days pass and it is not healed, put on corrosive medicine until the bone is uncovered; and the king according to what he would come in his chapter.
And there is a manner of cauterizing a fistula that none of the ancients said. Attend to the fistula, and make the place; after put in the fissure one camel’s hair fine of which this is the form: and it is made to the quantity of three points; and hold your hand or camel’s hair firmly, and let not the patient move at all, lest the melted wax run to his eye; and it is necessary that one puts on the eye of the patient cotton moistened in a balm of eggs or in honey: the wax will close the place of the fistula, and the healing by miraculous health.
And if the fistula is healed by the cautery that we have said, it is good. If not, then it is necessary to administer pertuse to the nose and bring the fistula back to the body of the nose according to what is appropriate in its own place.
Openings in lips Many times openings in the lips appear that are called "pores," and even on the lips of children.
When you treat these openings as we have said in the divisions, and the treatment does not benefit, then burn a small scalpel cautery according to this form:
And put it carefully into those hollows until it comes to the end; after that care for the place with cerote until it is healed.
Of the abscess of the throat
When an abscess comes in the root of the throat or in the uvula, or palate, or at the roots of the teeth, after it has rotted and swollen and becomes a fistula; and you cure it as we have said in divisions, and it does not benefit; therefore it is necessary that you have one cautery according to the quantity of the fistula; after which burn or pierce the fistula and hold your hand there until the iron glows at its end; and do this once or twice, after curing as we have said in cures, until it is healed; and if it is cured thus, it is well; and if not, then it is necessary to uncover the place and remove the rotten bone, according to what you will find in your chapter.
Of the movement of the teeth
When the gums are softened by moisture and the teeth move, and you treat them with medicines and it does not help, then put the head of the patient in your healthy one; after heat the cautery whose form will come here after in such manner that you put a chain over the tooth; and put inside the hot cautery until, and hold so long as the patient feels the heat coming to the root of the tooth; after lift your hand and recommence the cautery according to your will; after fill the mouth of the patient with salt water, and let it stay one hour and spit out fiercely.
And in such manner the tooth which was moving is thus confirmed, and the softened gum restrained, and the moisture corrupted dried.
of the pain of the teeth
When pain of teeth comes from cold, or there is cold or dampness, and the treatments of medicine are not helpful, then there is need for cautery according to two ways: and cautery of butter and cautery of fire.
Cautery of butter is such that you take butter of whey, and the end in a spoon of iron or steel; after take cotton and envelop on the point of a tent, and moisten it in hot butter, and put on the aching tooth gently and hold until it is cooled; and thus do often as long as its virtue comes to the root of the tooth, and if you see so moisten wool and cotton in cold butter, and put on the aching tooth, and put on one iron hot until the heat comes to the tip of the tooth.
The cauteries assembled fire is such that you take a piece of iron or steel, and be so thick that the heat does not come to the mouth of the patient; after heat the cautery, for the shape will come here after, and put it on the tooth and hold your hand until the cautery is cooled; do this often, because the pain will be removed that day itself or the next. And it befits the patient to fill his mouth with good butter in the haste of this cautery, and then root it out; and this is the shape of the cautery:
When the scrofulas are of phlegm and cold moisture, and are not obedient to digestion by medicines, then cauterize with the heated iron according to the form that comes after; and let it have 2 openings for the smoke to issue from the cautery on the other side; and put the hot cautery on the abscess once or twice if necessary, until it reaches the bottom of the abscess; and if the abscess is small, put the cautery according to the quantity of the abscess, and leave it so for 3 days; and put cotton moistened in butter on top until the burn is removed; after that cure the place of openings and tents until it is healed.
When the humors prevail upon the channels of the throat, and even when it comes from a cold constitution, then it is necessary that the patient be first emptied by solutive medicines; afterwards make a cautery at the root of the throat, and take care that you do not come any closer than to the throat, and do not burn more than an inch near the heart. Afterwards make 1 other cautery at the junction of the neck with the top of the spine, and let it be the cautery called 'clavile' according to what we have described before; and cure the place as we have said before until it is healed.
of the pain When all and disease of the cold, and the patient has no fever nor dryness, and the sickness is old, if one makes two cauteries on the flank in their joints; and one other cautery between the two breasts; and be the cauteries that are called 'clavicle' according to the form which is said before.
And if you see, make cautery in pricking at all the cautery which is called 'point' because the form is before in the sickness of the ears; and be the points up to xxx, or as much as it surrounds. After cure the place according to what is said before, and be the cauteries at three reins according to this form:
And for these are the cauteries lighter, because you make three per copy.
of the dislocation of the shoulder When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first reset the dislocation. Afterward, support the patient on his back and sides; after lifting the heart which is inside with the tip of your left hand; and if the joint is dislocated inside, then apply the cautery which has two nerves as this is its form:
and cauterize the heart until it pierces to the ribs, and let the figure of the cautery come together with four cauteries; and for this is made cautery with the cautery which has three nerves, so that the form of cauterization are six cauteries; and the nerves are according to the subtlety of a tent and this is the form of the cautery which has three nerves:
And sometimes is adjusted on this, i.e. nerve for which there are viii. cauteries.
After place on the cautery perlz bruised with seil; after make rest the patient, and do not move the limbs for long time until it be well fortified.
And if it is dislocated from above, which thing happens rarely, then make cautery on the thick of the cautery clavicle, or much of cauteries in pricking. Because the jointure is closed and is removed the moisture and is healed the patient.
of the cautery of pleuresin
The ancients said that one must make on the pleuresin cauteries of roots of aristologe, and in such manner: take a root of aristologe long, the greatest that you will be able to find, and be dry, and also as thick and as long as your two hands; and the moisten in oil, and the impress at the fire, and cauterize one cautery between the shoulder and the neck, and two small cauteries a little going down in the part which is under the beard; and two cauteries between the fifth rib and the sixth, declining behind a little; and one cautery between the hip, and one other on the stomach, and one between the two shoulders, and two as two ribs from the lower side of the cautery which is between the two shoulders; and do not press your hand, but make openly as if smelling.
And the ancients said that no man use cautery of fire resembling one razor, and they heat it and put it between the ribs, until it comes to that abscess; and forth from pain, as we have said in the abscess of the liver. But in this work there is fear or the patient dies now, or a fistula comes which cannot be healed.
of the mouse
When you treat the illness of mice according to what we have said about the divisions of treatments, and it does not benefit, then there are three kinds of cauteries that are all good.
Of which one manner is that you make three or four cauteries, aligning according to the length of the mice, according to the figure of the liver cautery that we have said before; and do not hasten your hand to the whole cautery, and let the patient be laid on his back;
And another manner of cautery is that you heat the cautery which has two prongs, as we have shown it in the dislocation of the shoulder; and lift the heart which is where the mice is, or the cut of the patient comes from the left, and let the elevation by which you lift the heart be according to the heart, according to the length of the body, and the cautery be according to the width of the body.
After it puts the 2 nerves on fire until the kernels are pierced from the other side, and then pulls out the cautery, and so there will be 4. And if you see, it cauterizes all the cautery to 3 nerves. After the cure when it has gotten rot for a long time, and this is worth more than the other cures before mentioned.
of dropsy
Cauterization is not good for dropsy, except for the manner that is called "ascites". When you treat it according to the methods we have said in divisions, and your treatment does not benefit, then it is necessary that you make 4 cauteries around the belly, and 1 on the stomach, and 1 on the liver, and 1 on the spleen, and 2 behind the back on the spine, and 1 place the hip; and let the cauteries be close to the edge of the heart.
After leave the cautery open for to fight corruption long time, and do not let the care of the sick after the cautery; and healing will hasten, and will be together the two intentions with the help of God.
The form of the cautery for the belly is the key that we have in front shows; and the one for the back is olive, according to what it is here before put.
of the swelling of the feet When the feet are swollen in the one who is hydrophytic, and are full of yellow water, it behooves you to cauterize on the back of the foot between the little finger and the ring finger; and raise your hand with the cautery without turning. And do not enter too deep, so that the yellow water will run out, and let the cautery be according to this form:
After do on two legs two cauteries in each leg at the point of the knife; and let the cauteries be long, one below the knee forward and the other outside, in the middle of the leg; and leave the cauteries open lengthwise without curing, that they may become inflamed; after the cure of the other cures that we have said.
of the house
When solution of the belly comes from cold and moisture, so that the retentive and digestive virtues which is in the stomach and in the intestine are weakened, and cannot be cured by means of cures; and you see the patient suffering greatly and of great virtue, then do one great cautery on the stomach according to what has been said before about the cautery of the stomach, at the circulating cautery; and four cauteries around the navel subtle to each cautery clavile subtle, and two cauteries on the hips.
And if you see the humors abundant and the patient suffering, make a cautery on the thigh, and one cautery on each hip, and two small cauteries on the stomach near the large one, because the cure is beneficial when there is good help.
Of the cure of hemorrhoids
When hemorrhoids are or at the foundation, or one or more, and are old and are of large humors cold and moist corrupted, and are cured as we have said in divisions, and it does not benefit, if you make cauteries: three on the spine of the back, that which is all outside below the almecdate poc and poc in triangulating, and one cautery below the buttock; two fingers.
And if you think that his stomach is cooled, and the meat does not cook, and one sees the face swell, then on the face one places one large cautery on the stomach, as it has been said before, and one other on the liver, and one other on the mouse to all the cautery clavile; and let the cautery be open long time. After cure the place as long as it is healed.
of the carnosity that is called "thelul"
When you cut thelul, then heat the cautery which seems like a razor, and then put it all ablaze on top of that thelul cut; and let it there as long as your hand  that the cauteries comes to the birth of the vein, from which the blood flows; do this one or two times, and if there is much thelul, then cauterize each one as we have said; after cure with ointments beneficial as long as they are healed; and if you cauterize with a large cautery on alchatim, it will have more help.
of a poorly healed wound
When the patient cannot endure incision or opening, which we will recount in its place, there comes such a malady that can only be healed by cautery.
When a fistula comes to any person, and is filled and surrounded with putrefaction and corrupt moisture, then you must first probe it carefully with a subtle probe, and guard that you know the depth of the probe. After this, apply the cautery which resembles .i. razor, and insert it into the fistula according to the quantity that the probe has entered, and restart the cautery until the flesh putrid and corrupt is burned, once, or twice, or thrice, according to the quantity needed; and guard yourself from burning the nerves which are there, and the large veins. If the fistula goes to the body of the bladder and intestine, then guard yourself from these areas, and only do this in the fleshy part, and think that it is not pierced; after healing the area until it is sound, and if the area is sealed, and the materials are removed for a long time, then know that the area is healed entirely; and if the materials are not removed, know that the area is diseased, and the bones at the base are corrupt; and thus as one of these which we will say in its place.
of the malady of the kidneys When pain from cold comes with great windiness, and does not take root in woman, then it is necessary that you make a cautery on the loins on one side and the other with the cautery of the clavicle that we have said before; and if we cauterize it in the middle, then there will be three cauteries in a line, and they will give more aid.
of the bladder When the bladder is soft and weak from cold and moisture, so that the patient retains urine, then I make a cautery in the outer part above the bladder, where the hairs of the groin begin, one on the right and one on the left, and each cautery as long as my thumb; and I make one cautery outside the back, or two if you need it; and let the cauteries be clavicle-shaped according to the form said before.
of the marshes When the marshes are cold and moist, and do not allow for this to conceive, and the flowers are corrupted and their ends late; and when they come, there is great pain: therefore it is necessary that one make three cauteries around the bud, as we have said of the cautery of the bladder, and two cauteries above the back; and let the cautery be clavil, as we have said.
of the hip
When the viscous moistures descend to the bone of the hip, and for this cause it moves from its place, and the sign is that the thigh is longer than the other when measured together; and it is found the location of the viscus department, then it is necessary that you cauterize the patient on the bone of the hip with one cautery seeming to a circle, and mark before the location around the bone as it turns, so that the bone be inside the circle; and let the cautery be such as that used to cauterize the stomach.
And if this cautery is not present to you, make iii. cauteries of the olive large, and let the cauteries be as perfect as all the others; and cure until it is healed.
of the pain of the hip When pain comes in the hip joint, and it is from cold and moisture, and the patient is cured of what we have said in the division and the cure does not work, and the illness is old: then it is necessary that you purge the patient of the gross humors with fetid pills, or other good-seeming pills.
After this, make a cautery; and the manner of the cautery is according to two manners: that is to say, together with hot medicines, and cautery by fire. Cautery by fire is according to many manners, some of which are such: that you cauterize on the hip joint three triangular cauteries according to this form, and make them good depth and large, and have between each cautery a space the size of a finger, and let the cauteries be olive; sometimes one makes a cautery in the middle on the top of the hip, so there are four according to this form:
And if you see, so the cauterize with the cautery of the circle that we have said before in the dislocation of the hip; but do in such manner that the circles contains the whole hip, and all the spaces of the heart be burned.
And this is the manner in which it is done for sciatica, when pain holds in the hip, and does not reach to the thigh nor to the leg. And if it comes to the thigh and the leg, then one makes two cauteries there where the patient says that the pain holds him, and one cautery above the ankle four fingers, at the left part a point; and let the cautery be cuticular, and let the thickness of the heart be burned; and if the patient feels that the pain extends to the foot or near it, then he cauterizes where he feels the pain three points or four with the cautery which is called 'point'.
And if it is necessary, then one makes more; and if he knows that the pain is below the knee towards the thigh, then one makes a cautery with the cuticular or circular cautery, and be well warned in all your cauteries that you do not leave so much of the cautery that you burn the nerves and the great arteries, and that you do no more harm and contraction to the patient.
And I myself have seen many who have cauterized on the ankle of the foot, and they left it so that the leg was all swollen, and the foot also, and it was pierced and corrupted all the foot. After a belly discharge from which he died.
And if the pain is in 2 parts together, make cautery in one and the other, according to this manner. // And the wise said in the cautery of the hip, because of what follows here is the manner, make 1 such iron and be at the head also as large as a thimble of finger, or a little less, and be by entrechetres and be from one entrechetres to the other with space the quantity of a knuckle of the thumb; and let the entrechetres be toward 2 parts, and let them be also like nuts, and there be 1 hinge of iron well made; and this is the form:
And be heated until it is all red and feels hot, and then put it on the bone of the sick hip, and be turned on the healthy side; and cauterize once 1 cautery reont and let it lie for 3 days; and then make a plaster of butter, and leave the wound covered for a long time; after the cure of oiling until it is healed.
Albucasim says that we use little of this cautery because of the fear of its appearance, and we see few who use it; and nevertheless those are good cauteries, which can endure it, and where it is applied.
of pain of the back
When pain comes to the back, whether by falling or percussion or by too great evacuation, or by similar appearance of cold expanded matter, none of these appearances are worth cautery, except for that which comes from the infusion of cold matter.
It behooves after these things that the patient is void of fetid pills or other similar ones, that one makes on his back, where the pain holds, three lines marked with incisions, and in each line five cauteries or more according to the virtue and quantity that the patient can endure; and let the cautery be made according to the cautery that is called 'point'; and if you see, make three or four cauteries at the clavi middle cautery according to this form:
Many times this illness comes to small children, and the signs of its beginning are that they have a narrow spine when they are lying down, and fear; and you find in the last spine of the back and in us the appearance which comes above the other spines.
When you see this and you want to cure it, cauterize it with the cautery of this kind according to this form.
So that the cautery pricks each part of the spine equally. And if you see it, cauterize around the spine with the cautery prick .ii. lines or .iij., and let the points be near each other. After curing the place until it is healed according to what we have said, and beware that you do not bring the cautery to a gangrened spot which is in the spame of the nerve.
of the pain of the joints
When pain of joints is from moistures that are spread to each member of the body, and when pain comes in feet, which the wise call "podagra" properly, and when it is from cold cause and cures of medicines cannot cure it, then it is cured by cauteries in this manner: make the cautery around the joint of the foot, and let the cautery be olive-shaped according to this form:
And if there is need that you prick on the face of the foot, then you make cautery to the whole cautery which one calls "point". And if the pains come up to the knees and other joints, and this happens many times, then you make cautery on each knee 3 or 4 cauteries of each part, with all the cautery olive-shaped; and if you have need of more, then you make more, but do not hold your hand further than while the head of the cautery is burning.
And if the pains descend to the knee and the back, then administer the cautery that we have said in our chapter. And if the pains are in the hands, then make points around the wrist 2 lines; and if there remains no pain in the arms, then make points on each joint and on the hair of the hand; and if the pains come to the hips or shoulders, then cauterize each part, and do good government for the patient and prescribe medicines. For if you do good government for him and purge phlegm, he will be healed with the help of God.
of the rupture of the shoulder
When rupture comes in the angles, and the boils descend to the hips and it is new, so that when you see him healed, he does not move that day; and that he uses things that lie on his belly, so that the fiends descend from his belly; after that make him sit on his back between your hands, and command him to hold his wing as long as the boils are repaired, and bring them to your heels, and mark with fire beneath the rupture over the bone of the fist, and all a sign like half a circle above the body; then heat the cautery with this form:
until it is white and it feels tender. Then bring the boils back to their place; and the ministers hold his hand so that they do not return backward; and work well the thighs of the patient, and put below him one cushion and one sergeant on the thighs, and one other on the leg that holds his hands; then put the cautery on the sign with all your hand, and hold it straight and hold it as long as you reach the bone, and if you do not reach it the first time, redo it again until you come to the bone; and be careful that the boil does not jump when you do the cautery; that you do not burn it; and that by this the patient does not die, or any other evil.
And knows that when you do not come just to the bone with the cautery, your work is worth nothing. And it is necessary that the cauteries of children be subtle according to the measure of their bones, and of large people also great according to their measure; after .iij. days cure their place of the cautery of butter until the burning is removed; after the cure of other ointments until it is healed, and lie the patient .xl. days on his back until the wound is well joined; and it is necessary that his dressings be left long, so that the boil do not come out when he will go to bed in chambers.
And after .xl. days, when he wants to get up, if he is given a well-made splint and wear it for another .xl. days; and have good rest, that he does not work much and keeps himself from too much drinking and eating, and from too high laughter; and when he follows this instruction he will be healed completely. And I will say here after the cure of tailoring in his chapter. of the rupture of the belly
When ruptures come in other bellies and are known, and you see that they do not grow anymore, then you make one cautery of the cautery according to its quantity, and be it at the third of the heart; after the cure according to what we have said; and none of the ancients said that one must cauterize with three angles according to this form.
But first sign the place of the rupture and make a line through the width above the rupture, and another outside, and hold your hand amidst all the cautery. But the first cauteries are lighter and more modest.
of old pain in no member When pain comes in any limb, whether from falling or striking, and this pain lasts a long time, and the cure of medicine does not avail, then it is necessary that it be cauterized with the cautery which is called “poins,” and let the cautery be according to the length of the limb and its smallness and its weakness and its virtue and its location of torsions and of its pain. If it is healed by the first cautery, it is well; if it does not, begin another cautery on top of that one, because such is the custom that it must move to the member that is closest to it, so it is necessary that you make the cauteries as long as the patient is not healed.
of meselary
The meselary are aided at times by cautery with great help, and also the disease that comes from the putrefaction of phlegm and melancholy. As soon as you see it being cauterized, take heed if the disease is at its beginning, and if it is cured according to what we have said in the division, and does not spread or remain, and you doubt that the corruption will spread throughout the entire patient, then make five cauteries on the head: one in the middle of the head, and the other towards the front at the end of the eyebrows; and two on the two horns, and one behind on the haiterel; and let your hand rest so that the cauteries reach to the bone, and as far as the escorces come out so that the vapors of the thick humors can escape; and cauterize on the mice according to what is written before.
And if the malady is spread everywhere; and it is manifestly felt, it is necessary that you cauterize it with these cautery tools that we have said or chief, and 1 cautery in its neck, and 2 cautery on the spine of the neck, and 6 cauterys on the spine of the back, and 1 large one on the hip and another near, and 2 on the 2 shoulders; and 2 on the knees, and 2 on the tendons of the thigh, and 1 on each joint of the hands and feet, and on the hollows of the hands; and guard yourself from the nerves that are on the last calf, so that you do not burn them; and at no time is cauterization made on the bone of the thumb, and 1 other on the bone of the stomach, and 1 other on the liver.
And know that when more cauteries are made, the more help is done, and it benefits; and know that the sick person does not feel any pain from the cautery as much as a healthy person feels it, because the body is already totally corrupted. And it is necessary that the cauteries be large and small according to the limbs and joints, according to what you will find in manners of irons. After curing the place with flour of chickpeas mixed with honey and other cures until it is healed.
of inflammation
When swelling comes in any limb and is cured by medicines and oils and plasters, and it is not healed, then I make cauteries on the limb according to the size and smallness of the limb; and let the cautery be a point going into the thickness of the flesh; then cure with dressings until it is healed. And sometimes one makes cauteries on the hand and foot and back, at the end of the nerve that numbs the limb, and thus the swelling is removed; and nonetheless let no one interfere unless he is knowledgeable about the members and the exits of the nerves moving the body.
of  albaras
When the illness that is called “albaras” is present, and the means of medicine are of no avail, then cauterize with a cautery a point in depth, according to the quantity of the thickness of the flesh, until the blanching is removed, and its color has changed; then cure with flour of chickpeas and lentils with rose oil and plantain leaves, and blood of colon and blood of alder, of each one part; and be mixed all together, and be bound with a cloth, and be aerated in place until it is healed.
The cure of an ulcer by cautery
When an ulcer comes at the beginning, and you see it arrested, if you cauterize it with the cautery which seems .i. circle, all around the tour of the ulcer.  And although some sages say that one should cauterize also in the middle of the ulcer; and yet this does not seem good to me, because I fear that it may be ulcerated and corrupted, and I have never seen it happen any time; and more right thing is that it be cauterized around, with the cautery which is called "circle", as we have said in many cauteries.
of the swelling that cannot die
When someone has a sickness that is called "adubelati", and it delays dying or because of the superfluity that it makes or because of the water of the patient when he is decrepit (that is to say too old) and he has little blood, or because of the tension; and you see it hasten to die: then cauterize it around with many small cauteries by pricking; after let it be as it is. For it will hasten to die.
And if you see it inspected with the whole cautery, so heat the cautery of which this is the form:
And put your hand in the middle of this sickness called "adubelati" until the cautery pierces the heart, and let the cautery be such that the patient feels it from outside in such a manner that the course of the rot is lightened. After the cure as long as it is perfectly healed.
The cure of fire by iron
There is another kind of sickness called "corrodens", which is nothing else than a corruption of the limb, because it consumes the limbs like dry fire consumes the tendons. If you see this sickness in a place where it can suffer cauterization with both fire and iron, then sharpen small and large cautery irons, according to what is suitable for the place where the sickness is; after which cauterize all around until you reach all the corruption, and nothing remains of it, that all that is corrupted be removed. And then leave it for three days, and put on the cauterized places softened broths with oil until the scabs from the fire are removed, and all the corruption. Then apply a cure of ointment-generating flesh. And if after three days you see that healthy flesh is not being born, it is good; and if not, then reapply the cautery on what remains corrupted. This corruption has sometimes been cured by aguie medicine in place of fire cautery; but nonetheless, fire cautery is of greater help, and I have already said the cure for aguie medicine in the division: take it when you need it.
of the tendons that come to the feet
Many times it happens that at the feet by fire there is born a sickness which is called "clos" according to our understanding, and it is a large thing of bad fortune that bleaches the foot. And the cauteries for this sickness are thus in .ij. manners. It's to know cautery of fire, and cautery of hot water. Cautery of fire is that you heat one cautery pointed like as it is a quill of vulture, and be made of good iron at the measure that it can bend the nail on all sides, and that it have subtle margins; after put it all hot upon the nail, and turn your hand all around the nail until it comes to the bottom of the nail; and let it thus for .iij. days until it begins to fester rot; then I make a poultice of wild mallows ground with wool, and leave the poultice on all night, and the nail will fall off and will be uprooted from its roots. Then cure the place with ointment enjaring flesh until it is healed.
And if they are converted by fire the body, and many times happens and in hands and in feet, it is fitting that you bring them cautery of hot water; and it is in this manner: take a chain of iron or iron, or a quill of vulture, and put on the nail and the other side, that is to say tendons warts; and put the chain so that it encircles all around, then I put a pot of hot water, and hold your hand well, and press your hand turning so that the margin of the chain comes to the root of the nail, and can find the hot water way deep until the root; and let the patient one hour the burning of the hot water; then leave him thus, and it will be uprooted from all its roots. Thus do another one after the other, as long as you uproot all those that are in the body, then cure them with ointments that generate flesh.
The cure of trembling
When some tremble from cold or from quartan fever or another, it is fitting that you make for him 4 cauteries or 4 on the spine of the back, 1 cautery between each spine; and 1 cautery or weight, and 1 on the stomach at the olive cautery; so let the trembling leave, and hasten the health from the cold disease.
of bursting pustules
Sometimes appearing by fire the body bathes, or bursting pustules, which come from large corrupted matters. So it is fitting at first when they appear that one makes cautery on each head of the pustule: a subtle cautery of myrtle wood, so that the point is grasped by the fire, or of long aristolochia root, or the lentil-shaped cautery. And sometimes they are cauterized at the beginning when they appear, according to this manner, and they cannot grow from them forward, but are broken down the superfluities from which they come, and they are healed; but it is fitting that this be done after the evacuation of blood.
when the artery is cut Many times there are great discharges of blood from the artery that is cut at the wound that comes to the outside, or in the incision of the abscess, or in the cautery of the member, and similar things; and it is a very grievous thing to prolong.
And nevertheless when this happens to anyone, quickly place your index finger on the wound of the vein, and strain it very hard until the bleeding is appeased under your finger, and no more drops issue; then put olive cauteries, several small and large ones, onto the fire until they are all red; then take one, or a large one or a small one according to the wound and its location where the artery is cut, and place the cautery on that vein where you hold your finger, and hold the cautery there until the bleeding is stopped.
And if it jumps out when you lift your finger from the vein, and the cautery is extinguished, then take hastily another one of the cauteries that are on fire.
And do not cease to make these one after the other until the vein is stretched; and guard that you do not burn the nerve that is nearby, and that another malice does not come upon the patient; and know that when a vein departs from the artery, it cannot be well stretched even when the artery is large, unless by one of the .iiij. ways that we have said: or by cautery, or by extraction when it is not treated, or by strong tying of thread, or by medicines put upon which have power to stretch a vein; and be bound and strained properly.
Whoever will bring about a tightening of the binding, or tight bandage with strips or to put fiery things upon, or other similar things, if it does not profit them not.
And if this happens to anyone and he has not medicine present, then he must put his two fingers on the wound of the vein as we have said, and bind tightly until it is stretched above the wound and above the vein; and do not move the band, but moisten with cold water often that be very cold until the vein is congealed and thickened and stretched; and make then those things which he needs of cauteries and medicines.
We have told you in the first chapter all illnesses where it is necessary to use fire cautery, or burning medicine, and the incisions and causes and instruments and forms of cauteries; and I put that chapter from the head to the feet, and I will in this chapter by the same way for those who more easily find what they want.
And therefore as I begin this, it is necessary, dear student, that you learn that in this chapter there is more danger and fear than in the first of the cauteries, and for that reason it is necessary to take more great care.
For in the work of this chapter, there is often the evacuation of blood when opening a vein, and incising an abscess, and in the treatment of wounds, and in the extraction of arrows, and in cutting into stones, and similar things; where there is doubt and fear, and many die.
And I warn you that you do not undertake folly. Because many kinds of people come to cures. Some come so sick with their malady that they die easily because of the foolishness they find in their illness, and of the greatness of their wickedness; and of these one must have fear. And of these there are those who give you their senses, and say: "Wait, I am cured"; and the illness is deceitful. It does not become you that you consent to those who come to you who have this manner, but put more care in your honor than in your covetousness, and do not act foolishly but wisely of those whom you are certain of, and whom you can have taken and praised; and use divination and indication in the cures of your sick so that health may be converted; and this will help you to acquire good reputation, and glory, and memory of length.
Most dear son, Our Lords give you good understanding and rightness, and if you want to be inspired by the holy inspiration of his hand, Amen.
Or I have ordered you this chapter in devising by chapters, according to those that it is before or chapter of cauteries, that I have devised them from the head to the feet, for those that you find more easily those that you will need.
The chief full of water
Know that this disease comes many times to children at birth, and when the delivery is too strong the head of the child; and some times it comes from a cause unknown which one does not know.
And I have never seen this disease except in children, and to all those that I have seen it hastened death; and for that reason it seems to me that it is better for me to leave the work on such cures.
And I saw one child of whom the shoulder was full of water, and the head grew larger each day until he could not bear it; and so much moisture had gathered that he died, and this moisture is assembled under the bone on the scapula, between the heart and the bone; and the work is such if the moisture is between the heart and the bone, and the abscess is small, that you open the head with a wide incision; and be as long as two thumbs, as much as the moisture goes; and see here the shape of the spatula:
If the moisture is more swollen, and the abscess is larger, make two incisions in the shape of a cross, according to this form:
And if the moisture is under the bone, and the signs that you see are the commissures of the head open from each side, and the water jumps out when you press it with your hand inside, and this does not return to you: then it is necessary that you make three incisions in the head according to this manner:
And after the incision, extract the moisture entirely outwards. After, extract the fissures of linen and powders, and put wine and oil there, and leave it so until the fifth day; then untie it, and cure the wound with tents and ointments, and leave the chief bandage to be tightened, and afterwards feed the patient dry meat from the source of moisture until the limb is fortified and healed.
And another manner of incision is that you watch where the greatness of the abscess opens, and the assembly of the water; for sometimes it is in front; sometimes behind; sometimes on the right; and sometimes on the left.
Then cut where the abscess opens, and the gathering of the water, and follow it according to what you are able; and beware that you do not cut the artery; and vein blood flows, so that the patient dies from the loss of blood and the evacuation of moisture.
of summary
When it happens to anyone a sickness called "catarrh" in the eyes or on the breast, and the sickness is old, and the cure of medicine does not profit, therefore the last cure is cauterizing with this one which one covers the two arteries.
It is therefore necessary, when you want to cover them, that the patient recline his head; after which rub the place with a rough cloth until the arteries appear, then restrain the patient's neck with one cloth; then look where the vein beats, and its sides on each side are after the ears, and so they are placed back; then sign the sides with ink, then cut both with a sharp spatula of two parts. Until the cut reaches the bone, and this be by the wide part of the head.
And if you see, put the spatula below the artery and cut it above, cutting also like two fingers across.
And when the vein is cut, the blood leaps out continuously upwards.
And if the artery does not open at the touch, you must measure the quantity of the space of 3 fingers, then guide it and make it until the bone; and what is due to put out blood is 6 ounces, and perhaps a little more or less, according to what the patient can bear, and the fullness of the artery; then look at the wound: if it remains above the bone with no sign of a scab, then cut it so that an abscess does not come, then restrain the wound and bind it, and the ointment cure until it is healed.
of migraine
When an old migraine comes, and acute catarrh, because of the moisture of the tears and the heat in the temples and ancient soreness and similar things, and it is medicated by means of cures of medicine and all those do not benefit him, then we drain the arteries of the temples and cauterize them, as we have recounted.
And the manner of extracting them is that the patient makes rear the hairs of his temples, and attends to the artery which opens in the temple, for it opens well by its beating, and is poorly returned outside than in some men who are too cold; and if it is returned, he strains his neck from the patient with some cloths, then rubs the place with some rough cloth, and raises the place with hot water until the artery appears manifestly; then take the spatula of which this is the form:
then scrape the skin lightly until you come to the artery, then draw it upward as with pincers, and depart well from the webs that are under each part; and if the artery is subtle, turn it back to the point of the uncine, then cut it from that part according to the quantity of the two chies. For if it is not cut, it does not jump out all at once.
And draw out the blood of the six points, up to three; and if the artery is large, it is necessary that you tie it in two places with a double thread strong silk, so that putrefaction does not come before the soldering of the wound, and comes hemorrhage; then cut the superfluity which is between the two ties in the same hour, and then, if you wish, cauterize it with the cutellaire cautery up to the bone until the chies are cut; and this is the best work, if the patient does not have fever and he is of a hot complexion.
For the cautery is help to finish the moistures: for this reason it is of greater help to moistures. Where it is necessary for the extraction of arteries that one fills their place with old cotton and puts on tents well made; and when they are untied, let them be covered with dry medicines which make flesh grow, and with tents, until it is healed; and if without cord of the artery as much as you work upon it, then hasten to cover by cautery, or you employ the place with vitriol and restrain it to your hand that the wound be stanched; and if you have not these things present, put on the place your finger until the bleeding ceases, and rise the place of cold water until the bleeding stops, and be restrained as it is necessary; and what is more mature and lighter in the extraction of the artery is that you cauterize the vein of this cautery trenching of .ij. parts, but the trenchings be well spaced to keep longer their heat. For when the instruments are too hard, it holds less its heat. And it must have between the two knives one must of wide space, and then when you have signed of them the two points, and you place the burning iron over it until it comes to the bone, and cut the vein in two points; and be separated between the two shoulders because it is not joined of this cautery at all; and that is the form of the cautery:
of tears
When the tears of the eyes are descending from veins that are on the skin of the head's forehead, and it does not profit any medicine one makes, and you see the face of the patient become contorted, and feels on the forehead a walking as if of trembling; and where oil is being held and moist so that the hair of the eyebrows is falling, and the eyebrows are burned, and scorched by the heat of the tears, then there is need for this cure.
And they called it by the ancients “a contused cure,” and you do to the patient who has this malady the hairs that he has on his forehead, then make three incisions in the forehead evenly according to the length of the forehead; and let one incision be as two should entirely through the forehead down to the eyebrow, and the other two at the two ribs above the cheekbones; and guard yourself from the incision of the arteries that are at the two ribs above the cheekbones; and keep your hand away from the continuation of the two mandibles, and let each wound be the quantity of three fingers across.
from the incision which is below the temple to the second incision; and scrape all the kernel that is between the two incisions to the entire surface that is on the bone, then make another part from the middle incision to the other second one, and then extract far this spatula.
If it is put into the first fissure the instrument which is called "cultellaire", and is very sharp on one side, and on the other side is blunt, not sharp, and this is its form: And put the sharp side toward the fleshy part to the heart, and the blunt side toward the bone, and push it as far as it comes to the middle fissure. And cut all the vessels that descend from the head to the eyes as long as the incision is continuous until it reaches that which opens to the heart, and then on the other side make in the middle fissure until the other edge; and then extract the blood equally, and press the place for the blood taken; then put in each fissure a tent of old cotton, and put above cloths moistened in wine and oil and asil, and keep that no abscess comes; and on the third day untie the linen, and there administer great quantities of lukewarm water, then the cure of basil ointment with rose oil, and other cures which are used for wounds, until it is healed.
of the eyes
When to any come catarrh acute customarily, and you see the eyes sunk in and small, and weakening of sight, and the papers burned; and the hair falls out, and where chief in they do a pain acute, and the sick one sneezes; therefore know by these accidents that those matters and this catarrh ne comes from many veins, and the change cure that is, so is this.
And is that you command to the patient to rear his forehead, then make a great fissure amidst the forehead, and another wide one. i. poc. And commence from the temple left to the temple right, and let the incision be unto the bone; and keep your hand from the nerves of the temples which move at the eating; and when the bone is uncovered, then wipe all the blood with a sponge, and then sew between the two lips of the fissure and put there old cotton, and linen bandage; then tie above draping moistened in wine and oil, and guard against hot abscess; when it is removed, then it behooves you to rub the bone until flesh begins to come forth, then cure with drying things, that they cause flesh to grow.
In such manner: take .ij. parts of flower of wheat, and .iiij. parts of colofine, and make thereof a plaster; and administer it in these wounds to cause flesh to grow throughout.
of the stopping of the ears
Everything that falls into the ears is one of four things: or grains, or beast, or stone or semblance such as iron; or seed, such as peas, beans, lentils; or flowing thing such as water and oil and semblance things.
When it falls into the ear a stone or another kind of thing that does not fit in the ear nor grows in the ear, put the ear to the sun. If you see the stone, instill a drop of violet oil or sesame oil, then administer extraction; and have him sneeze with condiment, and stop his nostrils when sneezing comes, and put around the ear pieces of cloth or wool; and keep the ear upwards. Many times it comes out by this cure; and if it does not come out, administer extraction with fine tweezers, for that is the form:
If it jumps out with the tweezers, that is good; if not, administer extraction with a fine, double-edged needle; and if it does not come out by this, make a cane of iron and thrust the head of the cane or puncture of the ear strongly, and stop those around the cane with soft wax so that no air can enter there with the cane; then try to pull it out, for many times it comes out as we have said; and if it does not come out in this manner, take a piece of glue that is used to catch birds, and put it on any instrument that is pointed for this purpose, and put a dab of cotton around it; then press the glue onto the stone or whatever it may be, and try to pull it out. And if she does not come out of all these things that we have said, then you must hurry to cut the ear thus as an abscess comes and spasms; and the manner of cutting it is that you first bleed the patient from the cephalic vein, and extract blood according to the measure of his virtue, then make the patient sit between your hands and turn the ear upwards, and make a small cut at the root of the ear to the fat or where it depends; and let the cut be like a crescent moon, as far as you come to the bone, then the bone according to your strength, and suck it diligently with your mouth; and the cure until it is healed. And if it is grains that are inside and it swells, then administer extraction; and if it cannot come out, then administer one spatula thin according to this form:
and administer incision of that grain. But do not do this when you think that the grain is moist from the moisture of the ear, until you have made many pieces of it; then extract with subtle pincers and sucking, as we have said, so that the extraction be aligned.
In the case where water falls into the ear, it behooves the patient to use externally of condis first, and ample the ear with old cotton. And let him lie on that same ear where the water is. If it goes out by this, it is good. If not, take many stones according to the length of your finger, thin and light, and heat them a little in the fire; and put them into the patient's ear where it hurts, and throw them up from his side with his feet; and make him do this of stone after stone until the water is all gone, and thus if it is all out; and if you see it, take one reed, and put one end in the ear, and the other end catch fire until the best part of the reed is burnt; then make another piece of others until the water is gone completely, as we have said about the stone.
In the extraction of the beast, if it is of small body, such as a flea and similar thing, cure it as we have said in the division; but if it is of great body that one can feel it, then administer the extraction with forceps; and this is the lightest thing to remove which is in the ear.
In the extraction of worms from the ears, when you cure them as we have said in the division and where we treat distillations, and the cure does not help, then it behooves you to look at the ear in the sun: if there appears no worms, then you treat them with subtle forceps, and if they do not appear, then take the instrument of which this is the shape:
And it should be narrow below and wide above. And put the most subtle head into the ear according to the quantity of the suffering of the patient, then succeed forming at all the canine; do this often until all the worms come out. And if they do not obey to come out, so stop around the canine with cotton as I have said in the stone; and if they do not come out further as we have said, so administer distillations that the ancients have experienced in the killing of worms, and you will find them or treat distillations; and if you distill your oils and your medicines into the ear to all this instrument, for this is the form as you see:
And it should be of silver or brass, narrow below to one little holes, and wide above to distill; and for pressing within the distillation one instrument of brass well made for this, and if you see take one razor and wrap around the point conveniently cotton; then I throw your oil or your juice, and what you want from your medicines into the canine, and the canine be in the ear; then put within the razor to all the cotton, and press your hand temperately until the oil is distilled or at the end of the ear; and feel the patient inside, and let the distillations one pock be warmed by the fire then one distills it into the ear; and keep that it be not too cold, for the medicine would not be so good.
of the stopping of the ears
No child is born without any holes in their ears; and this same thing happens to men by clogging of a wound, or of flesh born inside the ear, and these blockages come sometimes from deep within the ear, if one cannot see them; and sometimes they happen i.e. one point of fire, and it can be seen well.
That which comes from deep within if one cannot see it, is of great damage in many dispositions, and in this, you should put the ear of the sick person to the sun; and look inside: if you see the apparent opening, then the work has all this spatula form:
And be sharp and trenchant in front and behind all plain, so that it does not bleach the ear; if the opening is of flesh born or a part of the ear, then hold it with subtle pincers, and cut lightly, until that flesh is entirely removed.
And if the boil is in the ear, then take one razor subtle and light and heat it a little to the fire, then put it where the ear's body.  If you feel the boil that the patient feels great pain in the ear, pierce lightly, and guard that you do not injure the nerves of the ear; then put in the ear a tent according to the width of the hole made, and moisten it with Egyptian ointment.
Do this with no day until the wound is healed, or you take a tent and moisten it in rose water, and powder on powdered vitriol; and if you see the ear swollen, then it is necessary that you pull out the tent and move another tent moistened in cerote which is made of rose oil and wax, until the swelling is gone; then cure it until it is healed.
And if bleeding comes, then dip a sponge and cloth in cold water, and put it on the ear, and use other cures that stop the bleeding which are or treated by distillations.
of the skin of the papers
This althlul that comes in papers of the eyes when they are moist and are dry, then it is necessary that you extend them with tweezers and pincers, and the cut off with a spatula from its roots; then put on their place powdered vitriol.
And if without it decorts, then cauterize them with the subtle lentil cautery, and the cauterization after incision is worth a move; and many times they return, because nothing remains of their roots; and when they are cauterized by fire, those roots are burned and do not return at all.
of the groin
Many times in papers come to the eyes things that seem gravel in its shape and in its hardness, and for this reason is this disease called "grapes", and is an assembly of moisture large on the paper above and below; the work is such: take care if the gravel moves from one side and the other, and this is a light thing to know; make then with the wide, then the peel of each part lightly, then take with the tweezers, and cut. If you cannot cut it without piercing a bit the paper, then it grieves nothing to the patient; and if the fissure is large, so assemble it with a stitch, and cure as long as it is healed; and if it is small, then do not make any force, because the healing restores it soon and prevents flesh.
And if the gravel is descending into the inside of the ear toward the top part, then turn over the paper, and being the gravel with tweezers, and cut it and press on one side and the other; and if the paper is separated by the incision, it grieves nothing; and when the gravel is cut, let leave the eye of salty water, and cure the place from that which prevents flesh as long as the patient is healed.
of the fat of the eyes
Exinach is a fat that is engendered in the tissues of the papers above, and this happens more to children than anyone else, and grieves them greatly at their eyes, and they come to have cataracts in the mornings, and cannot look at the light of the sun because the tears hasten to their eyes; and for that reason they lie down on their faces, and sleep so, and are their papers below their eyebrows moist that the inflammation and the appearance has covered with exinach which opens in the eye. And when you press it with your fingers and feel the exinach between them.
And the manner of working it is that the patient puts his head on your thigh; and then take one drapeil of linen, and prepare a tent in the manner of a circle according to the quantity that contains exinach from each part, then place it on top; and press with your fingers on one side and the other so that the exinach is assembled within the circle; then make in the middle of the moisture with a spatula trenching a fissure of the width, and not be more than large as the wound made on the vein's opening; and making the skin in parts until you reach the exinach; and in many dispositions comes exinach from the fissure, according to the form of a piece of white fat.
Extract then with a whole piece of cloth between your fingers on the outside, and turn your hand to right and left until it is spread; and keep that you do not add in the fissure, that you do not reach all the spatula up to the eye, that you do not blind it.
And if the exit does not open at the beginning of the split, so gently widen the split until it opens; then extract as we have said, then moisten bandages in oil and water, and put them on top, and restrain with bandages.
And if there are such men who grind flax and put it on top to corrupt the moisture that is lingering. Then treat it until it is healed. And if pus comes back hot to the site, then treat it with soothing ointments until it is healed.
of hairs of the papers
When on papers hairs are born aligned other than the natural, and are grown, they harm the eyes, and bring manners of maladies as tears accustomed and softening of the papers and albuginea, until it is cause of the destruction of the eyes; and is the cure according to .iiij. manners: or by cautery entire fire, or by medicine ague according to what it is before or chapter of cautery, and is done or by incision and stitching or by canes, according to what I will say.
It behooves you to put the head of the patient in your healthy one, then turn the paper of the eye with your left hand; if it is converted, it is good; if not, it puts an needle to all .i. thread above; and let it be below the margin of the paper or where the hair grows near these hairs, and draw .i. thread to the top of the paper, and turn it to the razor; then make in the part below the paper, below the aligned hairs, to all the spatula, from the great tear to the small; then extract .i. thread, and put under the paper a small tent of cotton and cloth, then lay on the paper a figure of enche, like the leaf of myrtle, and nevertheless it behooves that the figure be according to the quantity that you see to raise the paper which is divided to all.
And if a tail who needs one copes much quantity of the paper according to what the paper is softened; then make to all the spatula above the .ij. lines that you have signed, and begin from the great tear to the small; and let it be one of the clefts near the natural hairs in the thickness of a root, then put the oncine in one of the .ij. angles of the heart, then exfoliate it all; then assemble the .ij. lips with a stitch of a needle to all .i. thread of fine wool, and wipe the blood, and make air the superfluity of threads above the .ij. eyebrows to no glutinous things, if you want to do this; and if not, have no care about it, then leave the stitch and the threads until .iij. days or .iiij.; then cure the wound without stitching with dry and constricting things, because the paper revives at the bottom of the wound and the assembly of it, but the stitching is muedre (as they said the ancients), and this work without fear;
and if in another manner: and is that you signify the paper with a figure which is as the leaf of myrtle, as we have recounted, at iii. ounces separated according to the form which is here:
then cut what rises above the small strengths equally according to the form which is here:
And if you are not able to hold the pliers, and the thing is not equal, then take a needle which has one thread, and put it into the figure; and put another thread alongside the large tear, and the second thread alongside the small one, and assemble between your two threads equally; then lift your hand equally, and lift all the skin upon what you have signified, as we have recounted, then assemble the two lips of the wound by stitching, and cure it until it is healed; and if an abscess comes to your incision, then appease it with cerote and similar soothing ointment;
and sometimes it happens that the hair of the paper are converted: so it is necessary that you use those that we have said about the incision; but the suture in one and in the other is more artificial.
The cure of the cauteries is as follows: and it is that you convert the paper and its make inside according to what I have said, and then make two cauteries by art, and two threads subtle also long as the paper and the width of the spatula is; and cut the two heads from two parts where you hold the threads; then assemble the one and the other subtly upon those that summit over the paper of the eye, and strain the two cauteries of the two parts form; and let it thus for some days, and the skin which is strained will die and shrink and hold, as long as it seeks by itself.
If it delays, then cut it with more force, then cure it until it is healed; and when the wound is soldered, and if the paper is lifted, and they will no longer prick the hair; and this is the form of the two cauteries that you will make according to this figure, and according to this quantity of length and width:
The work is such that you take a fine needle, and it puts 1 silk thread fine and subtle; then assemble the shoulders and knot them one and the other subtly, and let the length of the threads be a palm long; then order in the chase another fine silken thread briefly, and knot the chief of the two threads; then put the patient's head on your healthy; and let it be towards the sun so that the work is clear, because it is a subtle and small work, then put the needle to all the chase into the root of the hair adjusted, and make it pierce the paper hastily until you draw it above the natural hair; then extract the hair up to the chase, and put in the chase that hair, if there are 1 or 2 or 3 or more; then extract your hand until the hairs come out all the chase in the paper with the natural hair.
And if the chase is treated and the hairs do not come out with it, so you will draw the chase down to all the thread that you have ordered it, until the chase comes out from the hole above and you see it by the vision of the eye; then you will draw the chase and the thread, and close the eye and leave it closed for 2 or 3 days, until the hair hardens in its place and lets the flesh grow up; and if the hairs are small, accompany 1 long hair from the natural ones, and let it be raised with that one or you leave it, until it is lengthened and then lift it.
Of the rot of the eye
When this illness that is called “aleacrati” or rot comes to the eye, there are two ways: one natural, and the other unnatural. And it happens by sudden blow, or cut or cautery, and by similar things.
And the manner of treatment for this is that you cut the suture, and separate the eyelids, and put within wadding of linen, and bind it until it is healed; and it is not proper that you use in its cure things that dry and restrain. For if you do so, the illness returns worse than the first; but work with softening things, such as fenugreek; and rose water or althea and flax seed boiled, and diacoylon ointment melted in any of the oils, and envelop a wadding, and cure it with this.
And the treasure of your cure is that you take care that it does not close according to the form it was before; and this work that we have said is nothing but a treatment for this illness, that it may not return according to the form it was before.
of the flesh which comes in the eye
This illness that is "axacrati", and it is truly called "swollen eye," and it is natural and accidental. The accidents come from wounds and cuts and cautery and similar things; and the way of working on it in this is that you take a needle, which has two threads, and put it into the flesh, and let it go through from the left tear duct to the right, so that the threads come out in two sides of the flesh; then keep the flesh above the entire needle, and cut at one spatula wide.
And if the shape of the flesh returns according to what is right, it is good; if not so, then take one razor and put it in the fissure, and turn the skin, and make two incisions where there are edges inside the skin; and let the ends of the two incisions be at the two corners of the incision that you have cut, and make such angles so that when they are assembled, the shape is like the shape of a letter which has no "j" ; then remove that flesh, according to the amount that its edges are pushed downwards, from what follows the skin, then adjust the two separated parts, and sew them with a thread of wool; then treat with those that we have said about softening medicines, and bandages, until it is healed.
And if the illness comes from a rupture or stitch or cautery, it is necessary that you make a plain cut under the hairs of the papers, and according to what is said above; then bind between the two leaves of a tent, as I have said; and one must do the work according to the form of the illness, because it is very diverse in form, and the wise masters equip everything of all their power how it makes return the figure to its natural form; and the sick man himself, according to what is necessary of work and instruments in many dispositions.
of the paper
When this suture occurs to hands of men in such a manner that the paper above is sewn with the white of the egg, and cannot move nor make its natural works, then it is necessary that you put the point of a razor under the paper, and lift it up; and the while as pinches, until you cut what is attached to the spatula, subtle, which is not too sharp nor too blunt, so that the patient may not suffer that the spatula be too sharp nor pierce the eye; and let your incision, with which you scrape together that assembly, be slight, so that the paper returns according to its natural form; and it is healed all that assembly, and do at no time in the eye salt water, and the lift of sweet water, and of collier; then put between the paper and the eye a tent of linen, and put on top of the eye wool moistened in abundance of egg; and after the third day use the collier and things soothing until it is healed.
of the angle of the eye
Know that the angle is in .ii. manners: it is nervous and seeming to .i. hard syfac, and another which is not nervous but is seeming to white moisture congealed, that when one touches it with iron and one cuide panre as pinces, it cannot om; and the one and the other semblance commences towards the great tear, and crosses poc and poc until it covers all sight and all light and the movement of the eye.
And the manner of the incision is that the patient puts his head in your hand, then the one opens the eyes; and lifts the paper with your hand, then coil the angle as pinces with a small doubleure, and the one on top; then take a needle, and put in it .i. hair of horse, or calf, or ox, and .i. strong thread; and double the point of the needle a poc and place it into the angle, and pierce it through the whole needle, and tie the angle with a thread and the one on top, and scrape at all the hair the side of the angle which follows the prunele and silk to the hair until the head, then cut the remaining in the root of the tear to all the spatumile subtle and as small forces, and leave the flesh naturally or tear, so that by the incision does not come the body of tears customarily; and no times is the angle on the one only, and to the thread, as we have said; then the scraping one has all the spatumile souef of this is the form:
And guard that the spatula does not touch the fleshy cloth and tear it, and that the needle is not pierced; and after the incision put in the eye a little bit of ground silk, and from the collar made of lead ore, and leave it until the next day; then cure it as it is necessary until it is healed.
And if the nail is not nerved, and you cannot push the needle, and the tweezers cannot enter, many times this semblance of a nail is cured with medicines; and they grow as I have recounted in the division, and if you see it covered, so operate on the eye of the patient, and take the spatula light point acute according to this form:
And lift the nail up subtly, and if you see that it diminishes not and the reason hastens, then distill from your mouth into the eye collar made of lead ore and red collar and ground silk, and plug the eye until the next day; then begin the other work according to this same operation, as long as it is completely removed.
If no thing is contrary to you in the eye, such as an abscess of chaus, then milk it, and cure first the abscess hot until it be healed, then begin again the work as before, until it be healed.
And if the appearance of the flesh by the tear hurts in the eye by great annoyance, then suspend it to the bone and in cut a part and not half too, that body of tears doesn't come; then distill in the eye colic red which is made of litharge.
of the flesh that arises on the iris
The eyes of some men are born at times red flesh, and covers the iris and restrains on the eyelids and turns them to the outside, and it seems like a rose of baume; and the work is that the patient puts his head in good health, then he operates the eyes, and coil all that flesh with suitable instruments for this, and support it with force; then cut the first flesh, and go on cutting to the razor until the end, and keep you that you do not bleach the eye during the operation; and let the incision be of the spatula which we have said in the incision of the angle and the small forces of which one removes the sebum, as the form after this chapter shows.
and when the incision is complete and all the flesh is removed, then apply the oil of seal ground or you distill red mercury and similar corrosive medicines, and put on the oil of fire cotton with yolk of egg, so that it be assured of a hot abscess; and if it remains nothing, and the sinew cover it, and you doubt a hot abscess, so leave the oil and cure the abscess of things soothing a hot abscess; then return to your work until it is healed, and thus do as long as flesh is joined in the eye by this manner.
But nevertheless it is necessary that you apply the cure of each weak oil from the natural way; and from the accidental way, in the work of iron; and do not put your hand in any of these works as long as you see that this member be undergoing that work.
of the veins of the eyes
Red veins that are covered over the eye, and they take away from sight their work and weaken the eye all days. It is necessary then for you first to look at the eye, in which one is, if it is, or not, and there is no other disease except the red vein; therefore the coil in this manner: instruct the patient to put his head on your shoulder, then suspend those veins to the whole outline according to his wisdom, and let the outlines be subtle double according to this form:
And let the two outlines by degrees in one body according to this form:
Then the coil as forces those veins subtly, and wipe the blood hour after another, until you see remove those veins out of the eye; and guard that you do not prick the eye with the points of the spatulas, and do this work at the hour of midday before the sun, and be very fervent in your work so that you do not cut further than those veins; and when you will have done this, then distill in the eye green and red collyrium to corrode what is remained of the red vein.
And if you cannot collect all of these in that hour, then make a plaster on the eye of things soothing the pain of the eyes, and let it for some days until the pains are calmed and it is assured of a hot abscess, then begin again according to this manner which is before until it is healed; and this is the form of forces.
of the eye fistula
The mire is called "arissati" fistula: when you treat it with cautery and with medicine burning according to those that I have said before, and it is not healed, then there is something in it that you cut into the abscess, where it must die, and treat all the moisture that is there, until the bone is uncovered.
And when the bone is uncovered, and you will see the corruption and the blackness, if the king has all the instruments of what here is the form; and it is called «aspre chief», and it is made of iron one head, and it is pointed like a file as it is in the present form:
And put it on the place of the corrupted bone, then turn it between your two hands, and press your hand a little while you know that this corruption is reset; and do this several times, then restore the place with medicinal drying agents.
If the wound is soldered and there is no birth of pus, and the body of the bone is soldered, and it remains so for forty days, and it does not renew and is not an abscess, know that it is healed; if this is not the case, if there is another way than to bring the fistula back to its original opening according to this form: And it is that you uncover the bone a second time by iron, and by sharp medicines, and when it is uncovered take one forest according to this form, and let the head of iron be at three angles, and let the shaft be thinned to the end as you see here:
then place it on the bone below the tear duct, and move your hand away from the eye  1 finger width, then turn to the whole forest until it pierces the bone and the patient feels it through what comes in this if he holds his hand on his forehead; and then restore the place of dry medicines, as I have taught you, and when the flesh is born and hardens the places, so goes the matter to the forehead; thus it is lighter thing for the patient.
of the issue of the eye
When the eyes are open and throughout entirely, and nothing comes to disturb the forehead, nor diminishes, then it is necessary that you bind the patient; then heal, then place suction cups or a halter without hurting for sucking, then put on the eye  1 layer made of acacia and aloe and incense and sarcocolla, and then strain the eye, and plaster above with bandages and cloths; and the manner of the cloths is that you take cloths soft enough, and double each one in 4, and then put one on top of the other according to the quantity that the eye has need for; then strap it from above with a strong bandage, and restart the suction cups for sucking without hurting; then remove the suction cups and leave the eye strained day and night, and if the layers soften, it is necessary that you tighten it very much; then remove the layer after the day and night, and if you see the eye healing, it is good; if not; then restart the plaster and cloths and the layer and suction cups until it is healed.
of the dislocaiton of a sleeve
When disruption comes in the sleeve, then open it, and it comes out like a piece of resin, grain by grain, and is easy to see; therefore if you see it covered, the work is such that you put a needle at the root of the lower part until the upper one, then put another needle where there is one double thread from the lachrymal part; and make it pierce, and leave the first needle according to the disposition; then cut the place of the double thread and tie one part of the vine around, and restrain it well, then extract the needle and put over the other eye half in a circle of an egg; and let him until the threads fall with the vine, then cure the eye with comforting things as long as the wound is healed; and any time the wound is restrained by the vine on each side by a circle of cloth, until it is healed.
And if the eyes show a great appearance, then pierce them with a fine spatula that comes from the eye itself, and correct the albuminous moisture and descend the eyes, and enter into them immediately; then extract it as long as it is healed.
of the eye cavity
This disease which is called “alcunnati”  is nothing but the cavity of the eye assembled in the eye, seeming like a sharp descending, and it is not a sharp; and the manner of the appearance of the work is that you make the sick person sit on i. a seat equipped and straight, then take the head between your hands of .ij. parts, and move it as much as you see the cavity coming upwards to your eyes; then be it fixed, and do not descend and let the light be scattered, and the sick person sees things as he used to; and if it does not descend below, know that it is sharp, and if the descent of the cavity is not equipped as we have said. so make the sick person sit between your hands, then take the small spatula and make on the cornea .i. pock by the continuation of the conjunctiva with the cornea and the corona, as much as the cavity exits; and when it is exited, distill in the eye hot water mixed with honey, or water or fenugreek is boiled and honey, then be cured of other cure until it is healed.
of the eye's sharp points
We have seen the resemblances of needles in division, and those that are needed to pierce; so in work according to the health. It is necessary that you make the patient sit between your hands crossed, away from the light of the sun, and tie his healthy eye and hold it very firmly; then put the paper of the eye on your left hand if his eyes are left, or on your right hand if his eyes are right; then take in your right hand, if his eyes are left, the instrument that is called "almagda," or in your left hand, if his eyes are right; then place the point of the instrument near the crown by the width of a fingernail in that white part of the eye to the side of the tear duct, then push the instrument which is called "almagda" virtuously, and restore your hand until it pierces into the white part of the eye, and feel that almagda comes to the empty thing; and it is necessary that the measure of the way almagda be at the end of the measure of the space which is from the pupil to the end of the black; and this is the crown of the eye; so you will see the bone in that paper for the clarity of the cornea, and then put the instrument until where the needle is, then express it down one way after another. If the needle sinks now, if he sees in front of him and the instrument in his eye.
After repose .i. little, and if the eye returns the second way, put the force with the instrument, and when it is ensfiched and it does not go up, si extract almagda lightly by turning your hand poc and poc; and then put back into the eye a point of silk gemme, and leave of those the eye inside. Then put on outside the eye stuffed or linen moistened in rose oil and in yolk of egg, and tie with the healthy eye. Nos, and those who are of our time, put upon coming broiet with yolk of egg.
And if almagda cannot enter into the eye because of its hardness, for there are some men who have their eyes too hard, then it is necessary that you prick the instrument which is called "alberit," of this it is the shape:
And pierce therefore the conjunctive only, and do not go too deep in by force, but make .i. them subtle, then put almond, as we have said; and at the completion of the work equip the patient with .i. dorteur, where he sleeps on his back in .j. dark place; and be kept from all movements, and eat light meats, and do not move his head neither to the right nor to the left, and be bound according to his disposition until the third day; then untie it in the same dark house, and examine his sight, and let him see some things, and then put the bandage back on until the seventh day; and it is not necessary that you do these after the hour of the cure or after the incision now, but it is necessary that you align these, because the liquid mounts hastily.
If an abscess comes from the eye, that you untie the eye before the seventh day, and address it with those who soothe the abscess; and when it is calmed down, then untie the sight and put on his face .i. orilliet to cover any day, and be in the same dark house. And then go out of the house little by little, and return to his things; and know that none of disciples should interfere in this case.
And one came to us who was from the Yrach, who told us that in their country they made almond pierce, to which one sucks the liquid, but nonetheless I have never seen any in our land, nor have I ever read it in books of the ancients; and perhaps it is a new thing.
And these are the resemblances of the forms of almonds, for those who do not know them see them; and they are properly of arrain.
And let the head of these be of the same subtlety, and the last in three angles acute.
of the flesh where the veins
At no time do veins arise or join together in diverse ways, so that there are none that resemble scorpions with many legs; and if there are such ones where flesh is discolored, and if there is flesh of good color. In those of these veins which is smooth, and not discolored, it behoves you to make the patient sit between your hands facing the sun; and open his nostrils, and drop the ointment on those veins, and drive them outward; then cut what you can support with a subtle sharp spatula from one side, until you know that the flesh is all removed.
And if any thing remains that one cannot cover, open it completely, i.e., with subtle instruments lightly, so that nothing remains; and if without the swarm or abscess clothes, secure it as it is proper; and if it is malignant abscesses, hasten and cauterize it until the blood is extinguished and all the pus is removed, then pour in water or wine.
And if the nose works and moisture comes as far as the mouth, know that it is sane; and if the moisture does not pierce as it should, know that there is new flesh in the bone above, so the instruments cannot come to cut; therefore it behooves you to put i. a thread of linen somewhat thick, and be wove by hands, and have between each knot a space of i. an inch or less; and place the patient's head with the thread into the nose at its tip, and pull gently until it comes out through the nose inside the mouth; and many times do the children in school this way, and it is easy for whoever wants to do it; then hold the head that comes from the nose with one hand, and the other head that comes from the mouth with the other hand, and feel each one after the other so long as they are which are or thread. Do this until you know that the knots have corroded all of the flesh; then pull out the threads, wipe the blood, and moisten the thread in Egyptian ointment, and place it back into the nose as before; do this for iij days or more, until the ointment corrodes everything that is left of flesh; and then put on the nose a poultice of earth for some days until it is sane; and if there is need of drying medicines, use them; and this is the form of the instrument to purge the head, by which one distills oils and medicines into the nose:
And be it of silver or iron, resembling an open lamp, as a basin, and lead it thusly; and if you see fit, make a closed basin, and have the instruments clean for purging the head; and let it have one handle on the top to hold it when heating the oil or any liquor.
of the bone about the birth
Many times at the head of the bone a malady which is called "telul" is born, and grows and becomes great onwards, until it is visible to behold; and for this you should cut it at the beginning, and pull all out the bone, then put on its place the cautery or the burning medicine; and if one delays to cut it until it is great, then take care if it is hard, of foul color, of poor feeling: if not touch it with iron because it is an infected abscess, for when one cuts it any time, it comes great misfortune to the patient; and if the abscess is of soft touching, not of foul color, and you see that one can cut it all, then empty the patient and cut it without fear, and cure the place with drying and restraining things.
When the bone is cut and closed
Know that when a solution of continuity comes in one of these working cartilages, it does little good, because in some men. Therefore, if this happens to any man, see if the wound is fresh with all its blood; and then join the two lips with a suture, then cure it until it is healed; and if the lips are already separated on one side and the other, you should scrape all parts of their core until they heal, then join the two lips with a suture, and restrain them, and powder over powder of dragon's blood, and ground incense; and put over the powders a piece of plaster of strong or another plaster that adheres, and leave it until it dries by itself, then cure it with ointment until it is healed.
The manner of the suture is that you assemble the solution: either with needles, as we have said in the suturing of the belly; or by thread, as I have told you.
of abscesses of the lips
In men's mouths there happen abscesses hard, resembling grains of sand, and smaller and larger; therefore it is necessary that you turn the lips, and cleave on each knot, and take with pincers and cut in each part; then apply to the place after incision of ground vitriol, until the blood be stanched; and then the ointment of oil, and cure the place with dry things until it be healed.
of the flesh of gums
Many times there is born on the gums flesh attached, which the ancients call "albulus"; therefore it is necessary that you hold it with pliers and cut it at its root, and leave to flow the pus or blood; then put on the place ground vitriol, or other restraining and drying powders; and if that flesh returns after the incision, and many times happens, so cut it a second time, and cauterize it: if it does not return after cauterization; and these are the forms of instruments for cutting.
of deaf people
Sometimes they are assembled at the head of the teeth, inside the mouth between the gums, scabs which are ugly and rough; and sometimes the teeth are black and yellowish and green, as long as the corruption comes to the gum, and the teeth are foul-smelling; so you must make the patient sit between your hands, and his jaws be in your saint, and remove the teeth or scabs appearing, until nothing remains; and thus do with the blackness and greenish color, and yellowness and other spots, as long as they are visible; and if one removes those that are at the first reason, it is good; if those not, then it begins again to scrape the second day and the third, until you have removed everything; and know that teeth need different types of instruments to remove, according to what the work demonstrates to you, because the rasp used to remove outer teeth has other forms than that which removes between the teeth; and these forms and others be with you prepared.
It is necessary when you cure the tooth of its pain that you take care to drain as much as you can, because one must not do otherwise; because it is a very high substance until one has no excuse for scraping. Therefore when the patient is constrained to suck, it behooves you to be certain of the tooth aching. Many times the pain deceives the patient, and he thinks that it is a tooth sound, and draws the healthy tooth; yet nevertheless does not depart the pain from this, until the evil stays, because we have done this many times to our juniors; and when you are well certain of the tooth aching, it behooves you to scrape around the tooth at all its.  a spatula strong for guarding the gums on all sides; then move it with your two or tweezers subtle at the first point and point, until it is well loosened, then firmly affirm the tweezers; and let the head of the patient in your lap between your knees, and hold him well so that he does not move.
After you have extracted the tooth straightly without breaking it, and if it does not jump free, then take any of these instruments and put it inside each side lightly, and move it as you did first. And if the tooth is pierced and mixed, it behooves you to fill it with drapelz, where the perforations are; and restrain it subtly with tweezers, that it does not break when extracting; and it behooveth wisely to work around the gum to dislodge the tooth.
And be careful that you do not break it, and leave a part behind, and return to the patient by the malice of the root greater pains than the first. And beware that you do not do as ignorant elders do, who by their haste and boldness sometimes break any time the chariot, and bring not what we have recounted; but often cause by the excision of this great sickness for the roots that remain there, or for the chariot that they break, as we have often seen; and when the tooth is drawn, wash the place with wine or oil and salt; and if blood comes out, which often happens, then apply to the place vitriol ground; and if this does not work, cauterize it.
The forms of the instruments, to which one must file teeth first, should be with long points and thick handles so that they do not bend when you pull the tooth; and these are the forms:
And be thick members so that they do not bend when pulling, and be well-made iron, and be toothed for grip.
From the root of the teeth When the root remains in the tooth, it is necessary that you put on top of it cotton moistened with butter for one or two days, until the place is softened, then put the pliers called "algefri," so that the head resembles a careful beak; and inside they are made like a file, and this is the form:
And if the roots do not want to come out with all these tongs, it is necessary that you uncover the flesh around the root, and there put the instrument which is called "althali," that is to say a spatula, because of its shape:
And be it strong and thick so that it does not break, and if the root jumps out by those means, it is good; if those do not, then help yourself with all the instruments, of which the forms come after:
And if one helps oneself with this instrument which has two prongs, of which shape comes here:
And other instruments which are before in the direction of the teeth, and of this instrument which resembles a large pair of tongs, of which shape comes here:
And be this instrument so that it may not break, and know that many instruments are of teeth; and also other instruments, which are not mentioned; and the wise masters subtle find by themselves their instrument, according to what their works and the disease show them, for there are such diseases where the ancients do not teach any instrument for the diversity of others and if one breaks not a bone or other bones, or where it can be broken, then search for the instruments that you need, which I have told you, and help yourself with gestures, according to what is here the form: And let them be thick and well holding to hold the bone, so that it does not escape, but it can hold and remove; and then restore its place with medicines suitable for these, and if there is in the bone rot, and it is small, then the king has all this instrument:
When the tooth appears not according to the natural body, and the form is ugly, and especially in virgin women, then it is necessary that you know if the tooth is new after the tooth, and is not in its right place, and one cannot file or smooth it; therefore, the ray; and if it is with the tooth, then take this instrument whose form is here, and is similar to a small beak, and be of sharp iron at its summit:
And the cup is put and put in hands for several days for the hardness of the tooth, and because you do not move the others, and if it appears that it can be filed, then the file of a kind of file as this is its form:
And it is also like the file that one makes needles with; and in filing the tooth little by little in several days lightly, so that it does not move until it falls; then the plane at the end has no trace, and if the tooth is too sharp and it pricks the tongue, then it is necessary to file the roughness until it is equal, so that it does not prick the tongue nor corrupt speech.
When the tooth loosens
When the tooth in front is dislocated, either by percussion or by a fall, and the patient cannot press on it so that it moves without pain, and you have cured it with medicines that restrain it, and this does not work; if this is the case, it is necessary to restrain it with a thread of gold, because the thread of silver becomes green and rotten, but gold never changes; and whether the thread is moderate or too large or too small, according to the quantity of space between the teeth; and if you see the teeth aligned, take the thread and loop it double between the two healthy teeth, then put the chies between the teeth, if there are one or more, as long as you wisely come to the healthy tooth on the other side; then begin the coverage again up to the part where you began, and strain your hand subtly and wisely, so that it does not move; and let your ligature be at the root of the tooth so that it cannot escape. Then cut the chies of the thread with tweezers, and assemble them, and put them back between the healthy tooth, and place it so that it does not touch the tongue; then leave it as tight as it can stay, and if it loosens, or the thread breaks, restrain it with another thread; if it remains, it will serve like this for all its time, and this is the form of the teeth and the figure of aligning the two healthy teeth, and the two dislocated ones, as you see:
And when the tooth falls, then it is put back in its place, from fresh to fresh, as we have said; and let no one interfere who is not wise and experienced, and sometimes the form of a tooth of bone of the vein is made, and it is put in the place where the deficiency is, and it is restrained as we have said, and remains and serves like this for a long time.
to cover the ligament of the tongue
Sometimes this ligament comes from under the tongue or nature; or by accident of a sutured wound; and the work is such that you operate on the mouth of the sick person, and have his head in your hand, and lift the tongue; then cut the nerve ligament wide, until the tongue is displaced from its place, and if there is hardness or knot, and this is due to the suture of a wound, then put the probe and cut widely that ligament; and guard that the incision is not too deep, for the artery that is below; and when you have done so, lift the place with rose water and vinegar, or cold water, then put under the tongue a tent of linen; and apply it to the patient every night, so that the place cannot stitch. And if bleeding occurs, then put on the place powdered vitriol; and if the bleeding does not stop, then cauterize it with the lentiginous cautery, which is good for this; then cure it with other cures until it is healed,
And if you see it of rusty color or black or hard, so that the patient does not feel it, then touch it not, for it is a chancre; and if it is declining to whiten, and there is moisture, then put in the probe, and make it with a fine spatula, and deliver it on one side and the other; and if the bleeding does not stop at your work, then put on powdered vitriol until it is bleached, then return to your work until you extract all pus; then lift the place with vinegar and salt, and cure it with other cures until it is healed.
Of abscesses of the throat
Sometimes comes from within the throat boils that are called «godath», and they call them properly the two almonds, and when you cure them, as we have said in the division, and they are not healed, so take care: if it is abscesses hard of small sense and of fusse color, do not touch it with iron. And if it is red and the root is thick, do not touch it with iron, also for the decorrement of blood; but leave it until it is dead, and then you will part it, or it would break by itself; and if it is of blainche color reont, and the root is subtle, have appeared the instrument for covering, but first look whether the abscess chalz rests and is appeased. Then make the patient sit in front of the sun, and his feet be in your health, and open the mouth and the preigne the serjans between his hands, and press the tongue down on all the instrument, of this is the form; and be of silver or of arrain subtle as a knife:
And you press the tongue on all this instrument, and you see the abscess, so take the oncine and put it in the almond, and push it upwards more than you can; and do nothing of the cloths with, then the cope to the instrument, of this is the form, that seems ones forces; and nevertheless the chief are curved, and one place the other, and are very sharp, and is made of iron inde or d’andainne:
And if you do not have this instrument present, so you cope it with pliers, of this is the form:
And be cutting on one side, and the other side no; and when you have cut one of the almonds, so cut the other according to the same manner, and after the incision gargle the patient hot water, and water and thus, and if a discharge of blood happens, so gargle the patient with water, or peels of pomegranates that are cooked, or leaves of myrtle, and similar things, until the wound be cleansed; then cure it as long as it be healed; and at no time rise in the throat other abscesses than the two almonds, so cut them then just like the two almonds.
And I medicated a woman from an abscess that she had in her throat, which is to say one abscess of small size; and I had well closed the entire throat, so that the woman could not expire through the conduit that was obstructed, and could not eat or drink, and would have died if she remained thus one day or two. And the abscess was so high that it had been put two fingers by the two openings where it came out. So I immediately, and placed in one a lance, then pulled out the pus, and in pulling a large portion of pus; then I refixed another in the other opening where it came out, and I opened the mouth and pressed the tongue; after which I placed the lance into the abscess, and cut a part, and only a little blood came out; and thus was unblocked the conduit of the throat of the woman, and she began to drink water and then wine, and did not cease to cut at this abscess for a long time; and the abscess grew back again, and filled the place that I had evacuated, until it became very large; so I pierced it and cauterized it within the throat: thus remained without growing; and I left these parts, and do not know what God did to her after me.
of the grape
When the grape is ripe and it is long, it is called "perpendicular"; and if it is too large and round, it is called "grape". When it is cured as we have said in the division, and the cure does not help, and you see that the pus of the abscess has subsided, and it is thin, then it is necessary that you cut it; and the one that is rounded assembled and is not long; and it is sanguine or of fusse color or black, then it is necessary that you avoid the incision of it. For there is great danger for the patient. It is therefore, when you see it, according to the manner that I have said, of its whiteness and its length, that you make the patient sit in front of the sun, and press the tongue with the instrument which we have mentioned before; then put the needle in the grape, and pull it out, and cut it at one or two instruments that I have said in the incision of the two almonds. And it is necessary that you do not cut more than the superfluity which is beyond the natural term; for if you cut more, it grieves the voice, and the speech; and after the incision, use what we have said in the incision of the two almonds, and cure it until it is healed. And if the patient has fear to cut, then it is necessary that you use a certain thing to the cauterization of the senses of fear. And the manner of the cautery is acute sharp. And that the patient puts his head on your healthy one, and then presses the tongue with the instrument which we have said or chapter of cautery, and confis with live very hot so that it is not too thick nor too clear; and in using the end of this instrument, from this is the form:
And it has or chief a hair where one puts the medicine, as like the handle of a spoon, and put the instrument to all the medicine on the grape; and the patient be lying on his side, so that the saliva and the muscle correct from his mouth of the medicine inside, so that it does not descend to the throat, and the palate; then hold your hand to all the medicine and press it on the grape, the quantity of half an hour, as long as you see it burning and the irritations of the medicine are appeased; and if you see it, take cotton and envelop it on any instrument, and moisten the cotton in the medicine, and put the instrument to all the cotton in the cavity above, until the cotton dries on the grape; and do this often, as long as the cauterization is perfect, then leave it dry, and lie after four or five. And if you have need to restart the cautery of the medicine, start it again, and after the cautery wipe around the grape, with cotton buttered, and purify what is around the medicine; and be rinsed with cold water, and be cured by gargles as long as it is healed.
This cure is safer than incision, nor the cautery; if it is cured by fumigation according to this manner, take calament and ysope and origanum and rue and camomille and avronne and similar herbs, and assemble all or some of them in one pot, and put it therein, and make boil; and let the pot be well glued with strong earth, and inside the pot have one instrument hollowed according to this manner: And let it be of silver or iron, and let one of the heads be put in the mouth of the sick person as long as the vapor rises to the ulcer through the pipe, until the ulcer is mortified; afterward resume often, until the ulcer dries, and guard that you do not make this at the beginning of the coming of the hot abscess, for many things happen; and do not make this unless at the declination of the hot abscess. And if this instrument is not present, then take a pipe and put inside its head a piece of egg shell, so that the mouth of the sick person does not have too much heat; for the egg shell does not let the vapor heavily burden the mouth, and it is a good cure altogether healthy.
Many times a thorn or fish spine gets lodged in the throat, or something else; so it behooves you to draw out what you can see, and press the tongue to the sun with all the instrument, so that you see move the thing. And what does not appear to you and is returned to the throat, it behooves you to make the sick person vomit thus as the food is cooked in the stomach; perhaps then the thing will be released by vomiting; or the sick person swallows a piece of sponge, or a piece of navel, or a root of lettuce, or one morsel of dry bread; and tie to the sponge one thread, and then swallow it; and when it comes to the place, it will lodge itself, and then draw it out further; and if it does not come out through what we have said, then take one instrument of wood according to this form:
And let the instruments be curved at the head so that it can more easily enter into the throat, and have the head lifted high; and guard that you do not touch the epiglottis, lest all come undone, nor put the bone inside; and it is better that the patient puts out the instrument, for he will know if the thing is blocked; so he pushes down, or he draws back the whole instrument equally until it is out.
Of the bleeding of the throat
At no time is medicine used for bleeding as I have said in the division by the cure of medicines; and when these do not help, then look into the throat of the patient in the sun, after you press his tongue with the instrument that I told you. And if you see the bleeding, so treat it with all i. small tweezers, or fine forceps that are suited for this. And if these do not work, take a heated sheep's wool and put it into the throat of the patient, then put in the end of the sheep’s wool i. hot iron, and do this often. And if the patient stays with thirst all day; then take full i. cup of cold water, and open the mouth, and pour it inside without swallowing, and move it with his hand often; and as soon as the bleeding feels the water, it will fall.
And if it does not fall as we have said, then fumigate the patient with asafoetida, using the instrument that I have mentioned in the fumigation of the grape; do this many times because it will fall without suffering harm. And the manner of fumigation is that you take one pot where there are burning coals, and let the bottom be covered with a thin cloth in the middle, and in that pierce the head of the instrument; then put your fumigation in, and the patient puts the head of the cane in his mouth, and closes his mouth so that the smoke does not escape, but comes to his gums; and the gums will now fall, and if it does not fall, begin the fumigation again many times; and let the patient suffer thirst, and eat salty things and others, and do not drink water; and then it will be necessary that it will be cured by this treatment.
And the form of the instrument with which one treats the gums is, when one can see it, like tongs bent so as to enter into the throat; and it has the appearance of a bird's beak, and it has asperities of lime, so that when it takes hold, it cannot let go; and behold here the form:
The chapters on abscesses
Many similarities of abscesses are, according to what the memory comes here after from one and another in this book, and they are diverse in perforation and size; and it is in .ij. manners which one is in its own semblance, and of those that it holds moisture. And the second manner is for the places where they are on the body. Because the abscesses of the head are other than those of the foundation, and the abscesses of the flesh are other than those that come in joints, and each has its judgment in the work.
And if abscesses one should not pierce, as long as the body is mature according to its completion; and if some such that it is necessary to pierce when they are ripe, and do not die according to their completion, like abscesses which are near joints. Because when abscesses come near joints, and one leaves it as long as it is full of pus, perhaps the ligament and nerve of the joint are corrupted, by which reason it is a cause of contraction in that limb. Or the abscess is near the principal member, and if you delay the perforation until it is mature, it will harm the principal member; or if it is near the foundation, then pierce it thus when it is ripe; and it is not necessary that you pierce an abscess ripe without digestion completed, except for that which is near the foundation, lest it should grow too wide, and be lengthened within, and there comes a fistula; and cannot heal in a long time.
And it is necessary that you know the time of the perforation of the abscess which is mature according to its completion, and this is when the pain has subsided, and the fever has decreased, and the lessening of the pain and redness, and of the swelling and softening of the head of the abscess, and the other signs; and it is necessary that you make the perforation where more depends the place of the abscess, and where it opens pus; and be the perforation long in the body, and whether the abscess is on the hands or feet, or in joints and nerves and arteries, and in all their equal places where there is no fold.
In these that are swollen, according to the member itself. And when an abscess is in its place charnel, it is worth while you leave the perforation until it is confirmed in completed digestion, as we have said. For if you pierce it before then, it will lengthen the body of the venom from it, and it will be full of much filth; and by chance harden the lips and the depths of it. And if an abscess that is pierced according to the breadth of the body, according to what the member has need for. And it befits you to bring in small abscesses, small perforations; and in large abscesses, large perforations, and many incisions according to the semblance of the greatness of the abscess; and if an abscess that it befits to cover the heart, and to cover; when it is become as .i. drapelets, and is softened, then it befits to do as one does with buboes: and if there are those that are cut in .iij. angles, and if there are those that are covered like the leaf of myrtle, as abscesses of the angres; and if there are those where one makes a round incision, and other incisions and semblance cuts.
Those who have no chief, as a superficial abscess, it befits you to pierce it plainly; and it befits when the abscess is large, and it has collected much pus, and you pierce it, do not draw out all the pus in that hour, but draw out a part; then plug the abscess until the other day, then draw out nothing directly; do this many times of great to great, until the pus is all gone; also if the patient is of feeble virtue, or a woman carrying, or a small child, or old men decrepit. For the spirits are put in danger at every time with the issue of the pus, that by chance the patient might die, and you should not be concerned about it. Therefore, avoid this chapter with great caution, and when you have pierced your abscess, wipe the wound, and see if the wound of the abscess is small; and if it is a plain incision, then bring tents of linen or old cotton; and if it is a large abscess, and there are many perforations, it befits that you put in each one a tent so that it comes against the other; and if you have covered part of the skin in the abscess, and you have covered it around, then it befits that you fill it with old cotton or shavings of linen rags without moisture, and tie it until the third day; then remove the plug, and cure it with ointment until it is healed.
And if bleeding occurs in your work, bring cold and sharp water, and moisten one drapelet, and put it on the bleeding place many times. And if the bleeding persists, then bring governance and cure, and the powders that I have said in this book; and if it is in winter's time, and the place where the abscess is is very nervous, then it befits that you put on tents and drapelets moistened in wine and hot oil; and if it is in summer, and the place is charnel, then it befits that you put on drapelets moistened in water and oil, or in cold wine and oil, until the third day, as we have said; and then unbind the abscess and wipe it and cure it, as it befits, until it is healed.
And this is what one must know universally in the treatment of abscesses: I have told you how one should proceed before treating abscesses, and see here the chapter.
of sores
Of sores
And the boil on the pus-filled abscess and moist one is lighter because it has little blood. And in some of these abscesses or chief where there is no moisture, and from these I ones that I opened on a woman's head; and found the abscess as hard as a stone, rough and white, and cannot break; and if one had made any of it, one would have done to it as well as a wound like a stone. In other abscesses coming or chief, which come at the root of children and ears, the opening should always be at its lowest point so that the pus may flow out easily; and the cure as is proper.
Of the scrofulous
Many times these abscesses occur in the neck, and under the armpits, and in the groin, and sometimes they come from other parts or of the body, and are many, and are joined together one with another. And each scrofulous is properly within its own part, as well as the boil and abscess of the head, as we have said; and the appearances of these scrophules are many. There are some that contain moisture, and some which are malignant who do not want to obey health. In that one therefore that you see of good disposition upon touching, and is similar in color to the flesh, and mute from each part and is not at all near to the nerves of the neck nor to the artery nor to the conduit, and is not deep; then it behooves you to open it from above, and to scrape it from each side, and make the two lips of the heart as one, if you have need for it, as we have said in abscesses of the head; and treat it little by little, and be sure that you do not cut the nerve nor the vein, and do not be too much with the spatula or trenching, so that your hand escapes, and do not look too far ahead, lest you cut what you should not.
And if you cut the vein or artery, and it does not let you work, so put in the wound powdered vitriol, or some powders that restrain blood, and hold the wound; and leave it until the abscess is appeased, and the wound is softened, and begins to purr. And when the bleeding is restrained, then return to your work, as long as you accomplish it; then check with your index finger if there are any small pimples remaining, so cut them and clean them. And if there is a large vein at the root of the pimple, it is not necessary that you cut that pimple at its root, but tie it with a strong double thread, and let it hang by it, without annoyance; then apply the wound of old cotton soaked in Egyptian ointment, then cure.
And if you cut the whole pimple, then it is necessary that you assemble the two lips of the wound, and stitch them now, then when there are no more superfluities for the size of the pimple. It is necessary that you intend to cut the root of it, and drain out pus, and stitch it as we have said. Those pimples that hold superfluity, pierce where it appears better; and pierce it thus as the one before mentioned, in dependence, then administer tents with ointment and similar things, so that it corrupts what remains of the corruption; and when the wound is well cleaned, cure it with ointment promoting flesh, until it is healed.
Of squinting
The ancients said and spoke of the cutting of the throat; but I have never seen in our land who did it, and this is the scripture of their word.
For those who have squinance, it is necessary that the slit of the throat which is called "epiglottis" be cut; and one should not help them with this because all the veins and arteries of the patient are hot at those who have an abscess in the mouth, or in the throat or in two almonds. When the disease is in the channel of the artery, it is necessary to cover the epiglottis to avoid the perdition that comes from strangulation.
It is therefore necessary, when we want to cut the epiglottis, that we cut it below three circles or four, a small slit across, between the two circles or by the quantity of the slit of the sphygmomanometer, not in the cartilage.
and those parts are comparable to the section of the epiglottis that there is no flesh, and the vessels are long and thin.
And if the master is fearful, it is necessary that he extends the skin of the throat to all of the opening, then splits the keel as far as it comes to the channel; and avoid the vessels of blood, if you see nothing, and then cut the syfac, as we have said;
and it is demonstrated by the section of the phlegm of the channel that flows from where it is broken, and by the lack of voice;
and leave the wound open for a while.
And when the hour is past because one doubts the strangulation, assemble the .ij. lips of the wound of the heart, and sew all alone sense the cartilage; then administer medicines that make flesh grow, as long as it is healthy.
Albucasim says that one should not do this juice until the throat is completely stopped up and the patient is judged to be dead and the lack is in the wing. Therefore cut open the epiglottis for those who cannot breathe, and he breathes through the wound, and thus is guarded from death.
And for this the ancients commanded to leave the wound open until the malice of the disease has passed, and it passes in 3 days or 4. And therefore they command to sew the wound and care for it, until it is healed.
and I will tell you what I see. I see that a young lady took i. a knife, and plunged it into her throat, and cut part of the channels of the windpipe;
and I was called by her to cure her, and found her as dead.
I discovered the wound, and found the blood that was coming from it, and I well know that it had not been cut to a vein nor led anywhere but to the throat, and the veins were passing through the wound.
I stitched it up, and thus I closed the wound, and I treated it until it was healed;
and it did not happen to the young lady except that she became hoarse of voice, and returned afterwards to her disposition;
for which I say that in cutting into the epiglottis there is no fear.
of the large throat
These abscesses are called "goiter hernia," and it is a large abscess in the color of a bruise, and it is much in women;
and it is according to two manners: natural, and accidental; where natural has no cause.
And the accidental is according to two manners, where one is similar to fat us, and the other manner is similar to an abscess that comes from our artery; and he has fear, and it is not proper to operate with force except in the one that is small, and he probes and searches all the intromitter. if you find it as our fat, and cannot at any vein, if you cut it, like we cut the ours, and the tract to its whole edge, if there is any. and encircle well everything, and cure it as is proper, until it is perfectly healed.
of ours
Many ways there are to us, of which I will say all the appearances;
and or it is necessary that I say all the difference that is between us and others.
I say that others is sometimes and fever-holding, as long as the boils are passed, and is completed the corruption; therefore rests the fever and the heat.
With the others there is neither heat nor fever nor pain, and contains one abscess, which is its own sac and is according to the color of the body, and begins also like a pimple, and becomes large;
and are according to two appearances, or dry, or moist, and very colored as I said in the division.
It is necessary, when you come to the cure of the wound, that you first examine and inquire about all the instrument which is called "intropositor," according to its form or chapter which is after.
And the manner of the inquiry of abscesses is that you prick or the moistest part that you find in the abscess, and turn your two points and points until you know that the instrument has pierced the core, then according to the size of the abscess.
then withdraw the intropositor, and take care in those that jump out.
If moisture runs short, whatever its color, treat it as I have said of other abscesses.
And if after the opening moisture comes again, know that it is fat, so treat it crosswise, and take it with pincers, and gently scrape each side and ward off the coat where it lies that you may draw it healthy with the new;
And if you cannot draw it healthy, then drain it in pieces so that nothing remains.
For if anything remains, it will return many times.
and if it remains a little, and the wound grieves you, so apply to the wound some sharp corrosive powders, and restrain the wound, and put on top soothing things for an abscess hot, and cure it with other cures until it is healed.
and if the wound is large, so cut the two lips of the wound, and cure it with those who cause flesh to grow.
and if the vein pulsating is against you or otherwise hurry and apply the place of pulverized vitriol, and let it lie for two days or three, until the wound festers, and repose the boiling of blood; then return to copper what is remaining of the out.
See here the forms of the intromittent instruments, and there are three manners: large, medium, and small; and there are three squares which are called "albaret," and one which is called "breb," and there are three manners: large, medium, and small, to encircle abscesses of fistula.
and they are also like needles with which one sews the sorceresses, and they are of citrine iron, or silver, and the most valuable are those that are yellow, and are more proven to be black pitch for encircling the borders of fistulas;
and they are in three ways: large, medium, and small, according to the quantity of the width of the openings.
The shapes of the probes are of many resemblances, as you see here: large, medium, and small; and so to probes that have two borders in three ways also;
and so to probes that have three borders, and are also in three ways; and so to probes that have two borders, and probes of one border only, and are in three ways; and all these are necessary in their place.
The head of these [tools] is made to cut, and there are some that do not cut more than one side, which we use to remove the veins, for this reason one does not cut the vein or the nerve.
and of these instruments are the probes put back in handles, so that the patient does not feel it at the opening of abscesses.
and they are in three ways: large, small, and medium, as you see.
and one should only use them in fleshy places, such as legs, arms, breasts, and armpits, and similar places.
and sometimes one makes i.e. another instrument small, resembling a fist's splints, according to this form, for which one drains blood
and one puts it sometimes in the place that heals with incision of veins, and arteries, and sometimes re-enters according to this great form:
Sometimes the breasts of some men swell when they begin to be corrupted, until they seem like the breasts of a woman;
and remain misshapen and swollen, and whoever wants to cure them, it is necessary to be according to this form of this line from b. up to .g.: then scrape the fat, and apply medicine to the wound preventing flesh, then join the .ij. lips of the wound with suture, and treat until it is healed
and if the mammary gland is inclined downwards and is softened because of its size as it happens to women, then make a cut in .ij. ribs above, with .ij. similar incisions so that one holds to the other at the end of one and the other, so that the larger line contains the smaller according to this form, from this line .b. up to the line .g. then scrape the skin that is between the two lips, and remove the fat, and there administer what we have said of suture and powders, and what is necessary in the cure, until it is healed
and if it is not healed, or the incision is not fully made, because the patient does not want to rest, or for the loss of blood, it is necessary that you fill the wound with cotton moistened in corrosive ointment; and leave it until it absorbs the remaining and grease, then treat it until it is healed.
of abscesses of the buttocks
These abscesses that come under the buttocks are types of hard scrofulous ulcers or boils and some contain moisture.
Therefore those who contain moisture it is necessary that they be cut according to this form, from the line b. up to the line .g. And when all the pus that is in the abscess is emptied, then apply to the wound old cotton, and leave it until the next day, then remove all the cotton, and care with ointment following this until it is healed.
And if the abscess is similar to boils, then treat it as we have said for incisions of boils, and if the wound returns with pus, then apply cautery as we have said before.
of the rupture of the artery
When the artery is cut and the skin that is above is joined together, it often comes to abscesses, and this also happens to the vein inflamed and an abscess.
and if the one who knows about it then knows as well concerning the artery, then the abscesses are long and they are caused by it. and when you feel it at your hands, that is to say, it is strangeness; and when it is concerning the vein, then it appears red fire beyond all else.
and it is folly to cover this abscess, and even when it is under the armpits and at the groin and neck and in many other places, and it is very large. It is therefore necessary to avoid the iron treatment, and in that which is at the head it is necessary to avoid it also, and in that which is swollen of artery felt from above the skin long;
It is therefore necessary to avoid the iron treatment, and in that which is at the head it is necessary to avoid it also, and in that which is swollen of artery felt from above the skin long; Then operate on the waist as quickly as possible, and beautifully separate the artery from the tissues, until it is uncovered;
Then insert a needle under it, and make it pierce until the other side, and extract the artery with a double thread in two lengths, according to what I have taught you in the extraction of the two arteries that are in the temples;
Then point the place which is between the two ties with an intromittent as long as the blood issuing from it ceases, and let the abscess be ligated;
Then administer the cure that engenders a bow, as long as the ligament holds. Then cure those who have ointment coming after them, as long as it is healed.
And if the abscess is for the size of the vein, then it is necessary that you grab with your hand those who can bring the abscess to all the skin, Then push the needle under the place that you hold in your hand, and let it pierce, and there be i. (one) double thread, so that you draw it from the other side. Then bind the abscess, as I have told you, or tie it from one of two parts with two threads of wool.
And if you doubt that the thread is not strong enough, reinsert another needle through all one thread under the entire abscess at the incision of the first needle, and tighten the threads in four places.
Then cut the abscess until the superfluities exit, then cut away the superfluity from the kernel and leave what is tied.
Then place on one cloth soaked in wine and oil, then administer him treatment of poultices and ointments until he is healed.
of abscesses of the nerves
Also as abscesses come in the artery and in the vein, abscesses come to the nerves when they are injured, or from too much work, and similar things.
And these happen more often in the shoulders and hips, and in all places where there are joints, and this is a very painful abscess, and its color resembles the color of the body, and it is in many positions without pain;
And when one presses it firmly, the patient feels pain, and it is not at all in the front of the body, but below the heart;
And keep it still from all sides, and do not go forward or backward, nor down or up, and the one who is in joints should not be covered with iron: for fear it would go into contraction.
And he who is at the head or forehead, makes the skin to the spatula. If the abscess is small, then take it with tweezers and cut it at its root;
and if it is large, then draw it with the incision, and scrape it, then bone it, and stitch the wound together, and treat it until it is healed.
of great boils hanging Never happen in bellies and nowhere else they are called “fungus” because of the appearance of mushrooms, and is the root subtle, and the head large; and there are some small and very large.
And I saw one man who had two in his belly that were more like mushrooms than anything else, and there was no difference, and they were white, and had fine roots, and they were slightly split, and pus came out of them.
I cut them open and found in one 18 ounces weighing, and in the other 6 ounces, and the work done in incision is that you look at whether the patient is moist, and the color of the artelul is white and moist and has a subtle root;
If the cut at the spatula is wide, and the fire cautery be in your presence. Because at the cutting comes many times too great a flow of blood, and if without you it goes then hasten thus to cauterize.
And if you see the patient fearful and afraid of the incision of iron, then take one thread of wool well made, and tie it to the articulation as we have said, and let it for two days.
And then restrain it, and do not cease to restrain the thread of wool until he heals the articulation, and feel through it without work; and if the roots are large, be afraid to cut even the belly itself, but you may well cut half
then cauterize it that it does not return; then cure the wound, and guard that you do not cut the thread which is of fox color and poor in sense and milk regard.
For it is a boil, inflamed, and I shall come to its treatment later on.
When the blister has become full
If the appearance of the blister comes from cautery of a wound or fissure of the skin, and it is on the belly and there are none of the blisters as there are in other wounds, or of blood which bursts from veins or arteries according to what is before, or of windiness;
And if it is by the rupture of the skin and the emergence of the blister, then the color of the abscess is similar to the color of the body, and it is a light thing without pain, and open from various exits. And if it is for the issue of the intestine, then it is more diverse, and when one presses it at its ends it rises, and then returns, and perhaps it is scarred, and enlarged much at the entrance of the bath and for hard work.
And if it is for moisture, it is a light thing, and opens well when you press it with your hand, nor do you constrain it; and if it is for blood, it opens by these signs the abscesses large and hard, and are filled according to a quantity;
and if it is for windiness, it is puffed up when touched, and the works are that you look whether its appearance is for the blood of the artery, or of the vein, or windiness. So it is necessary that you leave the care. Because there is doubt and fear in it, as I have told you in this chapter of abscesses, for the artery and for the vein.
And if the appearance is for the intestine or the belly, it is necessary that you command the patient to hold his arm and be stretched straight, then feel around all around the belly. then command him to breathe deeply between your hands, then go around the place that you have felt with the whole palm of your hand, Then the half of the abscess above is to all great one-inch.
Then work the half of the abscess extended upon the thread, and put your index finger in it, and seek the interior. If you find it caught by the thread, untie it, and bring the intestine to the outside of the belly.
and if you find the boil, then take it with the  cutting tool, and cut away the excess.
and if the artery opposes you or the vein, then go well around it, then return to your work and take two needles, and put two strong threads through them, and put the two needles around what you have done in a crosswise fashion so that you make it pierce.
then pull the abscess up four fingers above the needles, and if you see it, remove the needles, and leave them there as long as it should rot, and let the dead flesh drop out by itself. or you cut it when it is delicate and rotten, then cure it as it should be, and cover the abscess as we have said.
or you cut it when it is delicate and rotten, then cure it as it should be, and cover the abscess as we have said. And remove the blood or moisture that you find, then cure the place as it is necessary, and bind the place.
Of the ulcer
We have said in the division the likenesses of an ulcer, and how one must work on it by medicines, and how one must avoid the cure of iron; and let us say that the ulcer is generated in the marshes, and great caution should be exercised in its cure, and the ancients said that when a chancre is in a place where one can scrape it away like a chancre that is in the armpits, and in the groin, and similar places, and it must all be removed when it is at the beginning; and when it is large and old, then it does not behoove you to approach it, for I have never been able to heal any of them; nor has anyone ever healed any before me.
And the work, when it is in a place where one can remove it, as we have said, is that you purge the patient once of black bile; then let him bleed if there is manifest repletion, then make the patient's  good place to perform the work; then throw your curette or ulcer, and shave it on all sides, and ossify it on all sides without leaving anything; and allow the blood to flow out completely, and press well on the place with your hand or any thing, and if the bleeding from the incision of the artery or vein is against you, then cauterize it as long as the blood is extinguished; then cure it with another cure until it is healed.
of dropsy We have said in the division the likenesses of dropsy, and in what manner the assembly of water is made, and the signs of each likeness, and the cure which is made by medicines, and that which is cured by iron; so it is only lites; and one must not touch with iron in these two likenesses: namely, tympanites and hyposarche, for it is a mortal thing; therefore when you medicate this likeness of dropsy called “litres” with medicines, and the cure does not benefit, look if the patient is weak, or if he has another illness besides dropsy, such as coughs and solution of the belly and similar things; if you do not touch with iron because there is doubt; and if you see the patient of strong virtue, and he has no other illness besides dropsy alone, and he is neither too young nor too old, then you must thus operate: lift the patient upright with your hands, and the ministers press the belly pushing the water to the lowest part of the stomach, then take the spathule espinous according to this form: And be trenchant of two parts. at the point, and nonetheless be not so entering that it can come just to the intestine when one inserts it, and you cannot pierce it;
Then look if the dropsy is situated towards the intestines: then it behoves that you split below the belly .iii. fingers' breadth above the nipple; and if the dropsy is due to the disease of the liver, then let the incision be on the left side of the belly .iii. fingers' breadth; and if it is due to the spleen, then on the right, and it behoves not that the patient lie upon the incision that the superfluities may not run to that weak place;
Then pierce all the skin with the instrument, and push it, and raise your hand to the spatula between the skin and the syfac as much as when scraping at the quantity of a fingernail or in equal; then pierce the syfac until the spatula comes to the place eight, and that is the place of the water, then the straw for, and put this instrument from this, here is the form: And it seems like a fine silver dog, and it is made of light iron or archaut, and on the bottom part .i. small hole; and it has on one side, .iii. holes; and .ij. on the other side, and .i. on the other; and the head is cut as much as a feather, and that is the form of the incision with which the scribes cut the quill:
At the head above is the alemele, so that when the instrument comes to the water, it descends now on the instrument; empty therefore half or a third part, for if you empty more than it behoves in this hour, perchance the patient will die for the resolution of his spirit from the weapon, or he falls faint, or he approaches death;
but in void according to the quantity of its virtue, and according to those that the dispositions of the virtue of the sick signify, and his pulses; then treat the instrument and retain the liquid, and it is retained now by the heart which stops the passage which is on the syfac, because I have spoken of this, that you pierce according to this manner; then begin again the instrument another day, if you see the sick suffering those, and treat of the liquid a small quantity
do this none day, and keep yourself from following until there remains but a little of liquid. And if you doubt about the sick person, and you let him much liquid, so cure him with burial or hot sand, and with much sweat or bath and in the sun, and he is dyed; and cure him with medicines drying until he is healthy, and cauterize on the stomach and on the liver and on the spleen after the extraction of the liquid, as I have said before.
of the stopping of the penis At no time are born children who have no holes in the penis, or the hole is small, or it is not in its place. If this happens as soon as he cannot feel all .i. spatula very subtle according to this form: then put on the hole .i. clo subtle of planc, and tie it and hold it so .iij. days or iiij. And when he wants to make urine, let it be removed the clos, and make urine, and then put it back; and perhaps it is not necessary, because the urine that comes forward does not leave it closed. Those whose hole is small, if they are medicated with the clo of planc, as we have said, it will widen. Those who do not have the hole in their place are pale, because none are born who have the hole at the head of the penis, which is why they cannot urinate before unless they lift their penis upwards; and they cannot ejaculate because the matter cannot come to the urethra, and this is a bad disease.
And the manner of the work is that the patient lies often on his back, and the head of the penis and the scrotum are extended as long as a feather, so that the hole falls in the middle, as it should; and keep watch for blood loss which often comes, and if it happens, let the stanch who stanches blood do so, and cure the wound until it is healed.
of the pimples of the penis Many times these blemishes come on the penis, and is an appearance of ugly flesh; and there are malignant and non-malignant ones; so it is necessary that you prick them with i. one fine needle, and scrape and clean all, then put cotton moistened in Egyptian ointment; then cure with diafinicon ointment until it is healed. And if the blemish is malignant, of putrid color and odor, so it is necessary that you bring cautery to it. When you have scraped it, and if the blemish is in the bottom of the penis, and has part inside the skin and part outside, then it is necessary that you remove the blemish which is inside first; and when it is healed, then cure the outside. For when you cure it all together, it is not certain that the head of the penis will not be pierced, and blackness and corruption come in its penis and in the groin; so it is necessary to shave off all that is black and corrupted, then apply a plaster of honey and flour which is made of the bark of pomegranate trees and vetiver, then cure with other cures until it is healed.
And if the discharge of blood comes, then administer the lunar cautery according to this form: The cauteries are helpful for two types of situations together: that is, for the discharge of blood and for corruption. And if the head of the penis is corrupt and retracted, it is necessary that you put or lead a cane of wood into the penis, and urinate the patient amongst; and when the skin becomes irritated at the tip of the penis, which happens to those who have not been circumcised, or where there is an ulcer or abscess, then it is necessary that you scrape it with one sharp instrument, until the ligaments are loosened, and the head of the penis is delivered from all sides;
and if it is a grievous thing to consider these, so it behooves you to scar them that is to say with a spatula any point of the top of the member and of the skin; then separate well between two, and put one subtle drape of linen moistened in cold water, that it does not dry up.
of circumcision
Circumcision is not of the healing kind like other wounds; however, when we perform this work by our will and properly on children, it becomes necessary that we do the best work, and the easiest to heal.
I say that the ancients did not speak of circumcision for their children, because they did not practice it in their law, and we have more than what we acquired through experience.
Because I wanted the most part of the masters and surgeons who did circumcisions near .i. dal, and as forces, and with a whole novacule; so fuioit the keurs because there are .ij. cloths, and perhaps if one cuts the above and leaves the below.
Or it is convenient to cut, and the pain is doubled, and to the purification which is due dal it is not assured the point of the member; and to the purification of the angle perhaps the iron escapes, and runs the work, and many times they are born as if they do not need purification and I have wanted.
Of the purification which is done with force to all the line of thread I have found the goodness of the experiment, because the forces cut justly as well above as below.
For when you press your hand, so equally in one all soul tightens; but that the thread be well stretched around the skin; and let the manner of the first work be such that you make the child think, if he understands, that you do not force him only to tie the thread around the phallus just so, and then let him enjoy in all ways that you can. Then let him be held straight between your hands, and place the force between your hands or below your feet that the child does not see them, nor any of the instruments; then put your hand on the phallus and blow where the heart is, and pull it upwards until the head of the phallus is in. Then cleanse well the filth that is assembled there, then tie the place with a double thread, then tie below one pock to another link; and hold it as two fingers by the second link to the pouch and to the index finger, and cut between the two links, then lift the heart upwards gently and pull the head of the phallus.
Then let him be held straight between your hands, and place the force between your hands or below your feet that the child does not see them, nor any of the instruments; then put your hand on the phallus and blow where the heart is, and pull it upwards until the head of the phallus is in. Then cleanse well the filth that is assembled there, then tie the place with a double thread, then tie below one pock to another link; and hold it as two fingers by the second link to the pouch and to the index finger, and cut between the two links, then lift the heart upwards gently and pull the head of the phallus. Then let it clot blood a pock and pock, for that is the way to heal; and put powder on top and on top of the powder one drapelet glued with an omelet of cooked egg tempered with rose water, confited with good rosy oil and fresh, and leave it there until the next day, and cure it with another cure until it is healed.
The form of the forces at the fortification is this: the two shoulders be held and be sharp, and the shoulders also as big as the hands equally.
The error of the fortification is when the kernels inside are at the incision; therefore it behooves you to extend it to your finger, so that the lesions make an abscess; and cut equally, and if you cannot hold it with your finger, then take pliers, and then cut.
And if they pierce .iij. days, and that which is below the shaft is swollen, leave it until the abscess heals, and gently scrape it; then cut it as much as you can move, and guard yourself from the part of the shaft, it will do it no harm.
Cure therefore the place of things suddenly wound with powder, which we have said or treated of powders, and if you cut beyond measure the kernel, and it goes upwards, it will do no harm; cure therefore it, as we have said, until it is healed.
Retention of urine
The retention of urine is from an obstacle in the bladder, or from blood clotted, or from a bowel, or from flesh thickened, or from similar things that we have said in the division.
and if the urine is not discharged, and you see that the retention is due to the stone which is at the neck of the bladder, then it is necessary that the patient be bent on his knees; and his feet be placed on his back, and extend his belly from the part above the back, and restrain the patient's legs as much as he can; and therefore the neck of the bladder is constrained to the expression of the stone upwards, for which reason the urine is discharged.
and if it does not come, as we have said, and the patient feels great pain, then it is necessary that you administer an extraction to all the instrument which is called «siringue», of which this is the form: and let it be a fine silver one, light and feathered, like the feather of a bird; and let the tube be a palm length and a half long, and let it be fine at the top.
And the manner of the issue of urine is that you take one double thread, and tie to the chief one pock of wool or cotton, and put the chief of the thread inside the syringe; and cut the superfluity of the wool and put it until the chief of the syringe, then anoint the syringe with oil or butter and aubin of egg, and make the patient sit upon one seat, and raise the bladder and penis with moist oil and oil of olive and tepid water;
then gently put the syringe in the penis, until it comes to the root of the penis, then double the penis from above towards the bud; then put the syringe forward until the bladder, and feel the patient coming until the empty thing, and this is not done according to this order unless for that the conductor or where it goes is twisted; then is the thread all the wool pock and pock, and the urine follows the wool, then extract it, and make correct the urine;
and recommence the syringe until the bladder is emptied, and the patient be aligned.
of the diseases of the bladder
When sores or blood comes in the bladder, or there is assembled rotting, and you see it distilling sharp waters and medicines, so do to all the instrument which is called "clepsedre", and that is the form:
It is closed, and has .iij. openings: .ij. on one side, and .i. on the other, as you see; and its lips are shaped so that the medicine sits such that it stops the penis well without addition, so that if one can draw the moisture out, and pour out when necessary;
And when you want to put your medicines in the bladder, put the chief [part] of the  "keusteur" into the moisture, and draw with the drawing tube which is within it; so that you will draw the moisture into the "keusteur", and then firmly reinsert the inner tube; so that the moisture will enter inside, and come to the bladder now, so that the patient will feel it;
and this is the form of the clyster which is used to irrigate the bladder: here it is:
And it is made of silver or lead, and the head is higher; and below .i. finger or where the armpit falls; then take a sheep's bladder and put in the moisture with which you want to irrigate the bladder, then tie it between the two breasts formed by a double good thread, and heat .i. pot of that moisture over the fire; then put the head of the clyster into the vagina, then strain your hand on the bladder to all the moisture coming, until the patient feels that that moisture has come to the bladder;
and if you don't have the bladder, take a piece of parchment, and make .i. circle, and pierce it roundly throughout; then put .i. strong thread in these holes, then assemble the circle as one assembles .i. dial, and put inside that which you want of oil and moisture and water, and tie it to the instrument; and do as you have done with the bladder, to press with your hand until the moisture comes to the bladder.
of the stone
We have said in the division the manners of stone, and the extraction together with medicines; and I have said the difference between the stone engendered as rains, and all the signs, and in what stone one must work of size; and in the bladder, and in the penis; and I will tell you it openly and briefly.
I say that the stone which is engendered in the bladder often happens to children, and it is a sign that the water jumps from the bladder seeming like water in its subtlety; and it appears hareng, and hardens the patient's penis, and he can many times, and then urinates; and with many of these jumps the foundations are formed; and it is light the healing of children until they have 4 years, and it is very grievous in old men, and it is as the middle for those who are between childhood and old age; and the cure is lighter from those who have the large stone, than from those who have the small one.
And when we come to the cure, it is necessary first to purify the patient by enema, in order to draw out all the mucus that is in the intestines. Because it sometimes hinders the seeking of the stone.
Then take the patient by the feet and pull them and move them downward so that the stones descend to the front of the bladder, and at no time leave their high place; then make him sit between your hands prepared, and his hands be below his thighs, so that the bladder is all declining down; then the cheek and touch it from within.
If you feel the stone in the space, then hurry now to cut above the stone. And if it does not fall to the touch of all, moisten your index finger with oil from the left hand, if the patient is a child, or your middle finger, if the patient is an accomplished young man; and put it in its base, and touch the stone, and when you feel it with your finger, move it to the neck of the bladder; then press upward with your finger, and put it outward where you want to cut.
And command the minister that he presses the bladder with his hand, and command him to extend with his right hand the testicles upward, and with his left hand remove the skin which is below the testicles in the part where one makes the incision; then put the spatula cutting, for this is its form:
And make between that which is between the buttocks and the foundation, not in the middle but at the side of the left hip; and be straight on the stone, and your two sides are either foundation or bottom, and be the waist double-traversed so that it is wide outside, and inside narrow, according to the quantity of the stone, nor too large.
By chance the press if the two sides which are foundation or bottom, that it leaps forward without work; and know that there is such stone which has angles, and edges: so is it hard to insert; and if it is such which is below, seeming like a gland, and rounded, whose issue is light.
To this one therefore where it has angles and edges, make the waist larger; and if it does not jump forward, then it is necessary that you pull up with tongs which are also like a file at the head, so that moving  you can restrain the stone so that it does not escape; or you put below the .i. instrument subtle curved at the head; and if you cannot engineer it thus, then enlarge .i. pock the opening, and if its sans decorts, then restrain with vitriol;
and if there are more than one stone, first put the largest one at the neck of the bladder, then cut above, then push the tract, and the small ones after if there are more. And if it is very large, it should be soired, and make a bigger wound. Because two things happen to the patient: either he dies, or the urine comes back through where the leak cannot close; but nevertheless, you try to drain it, or to break it with tongs, until you pull it out in pieces.
and when you have finished your work, smear the wound with frankincense and aloe and dragon's blood, and hold it steady, and put a soft cloth on top in oil and wine, or in oil and rose water and cold water, to soothe the hot abscess; then bandage the patient on his neck, and do not loosen the tie until the third day.
And when you loosen it, moisten the place well with oil and water, then treat it with diaphania ointment and basilicon ointment, until it is healed.
And if an abscess comes in the wound and corrosions, and congealing of blood in the bladder, and by this urine is held back, which is known in such a manner that without jumping with the urine: therefore thou shouldst put in the wound, and extract that blood, for if it remains, it will corrupt the bladder, and burn;
then raise the wound of sharp and smooth and soft, and help him in all the ways that you know, until he is healed; and it is necessary that all the hours that you cure him, that you bind his two thighs, and gather the medicines on the place.
And if the stone is small, and it is where the penis is conducted, and fixed within, and the urine cannot issue; so cure of this that I say also, that you cut it many times, it is excused from the cutting by this cure. I have already proven this so.
Take one piece of iron according to this form and have it made with three angles on one stick:
Then take a thread and tie it around the shaft below the stone, so that it cannot come back into the bladder; then push the stick into the shaft lightly until it reaches the stone; and turn the stick in your hand at the stone, poke and poke, until you can feel the stone from the other side; soon the urine will come, then press your hand on what remains of the stone which is inside the shaft. Soon it is broken, and jumps out with the urine, and the patient is healed;
And if you cannot do this for any reason that prevents it, then tie one thread below the stone and another above, then make the shaft straight with the stone between the two threads, then pull it out, untie the threads, and cleanse the congealed blood which is in the wound; and cure it until it is healed.
of the women’s stones
It happens that stones are engendered in women, and if it happens at any time, it is the grief of cure, and it is forbidden for three things: one is that perhaps the woman is a virgin; and the second is that one cannot find a woman well knowing who exposes herself to the mires, especially when she is chaste.
And the third way is that perhaps one cannot find a woman well knowing in this art of hands; and the fourth manner is that the stone of the woman is more profound than the stone of the man, therefore it is necessary to make a deeper incision, and great fear there is.
And if necessity demands this, it is necessary that you take a midwife well knowing, and at pains find one, and if you do not find one, then do not ask for a virgin chaste midwife; and present her a wise woman in the life of women, or a woman who knows part of the art, and command her to do what you command of the incision of the stone.
and look very carefully if the woman is a virgin: then it befits her to push her groin or foundation and seek the stone; and if she finds it, she forces it below her groin, and she recommends that she push her groin or cone with the sick person, and seeks and presses her left hand on the bladder formed.
If she finds it, then it befits her to move it from great to great from the entrance of the bladder until below, as long as it comes to the root of the thigh; then cut on the stone in the root of the thigh against the middle of the cone, where it is seen appearing, and feel the stone in that part; and do not move her groin above the stone or below, and let the waist be at first small;
then push the root in the waist, if you feel the stone so close to the wound as long as the stone can possibly issue forth, and know that many ways of stones are: namely, small and large and rough and soft, long and rounded, and which have reins. Know these resemblances to know the outcome.
And if the stone pains him, put ground vitriol on it and hold it there for an hour until the stone is softened; then return to your work, as long as the stone is weak, and have the instruments that I told you about in the extraction of stones from men to help you in your work.
And if the stone pains him, and it is from the artery that is cut, put powder on the place and restrain it with bandages and splints, and do not restart those again, and leave the stone and do not remove it, except perhaps the patient will die; then treat the wound.
And when the heat of the blood is appeased, and the tissues are healed, then return to your work as long as the stone is weak.
of a fleshy hernia
Ramice aquouse is nothing else than a gathering of moisture or white syfac, which is the substance under the shell of eggs, that contains the egg; and it is called "syfac," and sometimes is properly in the membrane of the egg, if one thinks that it is another egg; and this is the skin of the egg between the white syfac that we have said; and these do not have any other part.
And the generation of this ramice is so weak that it comes from the eggs, and is spread out that matter.
And sometimes it comes from percussion on the eggs, and this moisture has many colors: either it is declining to yellow, or it is without red, or black, or watery white, and this happens more;
And these are the signs to know this assembly, for if it is or white like we have said, then the abscess is ripe, i.e., long like the figure of an egg, and does not open the pores, because it has moisture all around.
And if it has moisture in the proper skin, then the abscess is ripe with part of the egg, and for this reason one thinks that it is another egg.
And if the moisture is between the skin of the pores and the white like that, one feels it well; therefore when you want to know the color of the moisture, you should probe with the whole introducer (tool), from which its shape was described above. According to this therefore which comes after the introducer, judge of this which is within.
According to this therefore which comes after the introducer, judge of this which is within. And when we cure it with iron, it is necessary that the patient be healthy according to his strength and the filling of his body; then lay him on his back, on a thing a little high, and put under him much of cloth;
then sit on his left side, and command the minister to sit on his right, and extend the rod to one of the two ribs near the heart of the sides;
then take the spatula lead, and cut the skin of the sides among them, from long to near the armpit, and let your cut be straight by dividing the skin of the sides up to the white syfac, and gently scrape it according to your strength;
Then pierce the syphus with clear water one [large] opening, and extract all the water, and then put your bandages, and keep the syphus above; and do not touch the heart of the stones, but only the syphus; cut out all or by pieces evenly the costal part of it subtly, that if you do not cut it wisely, the water will return.
And if the sheaf falls to your work, then reset it in its place when you have completed the work of the syphus; then assemble the two leaves of the heart of the stones with a suture, and then cure it like the other wounds, until it is healed.
And if you find the sheaf corrupted by another illness, then it befits that you tie the vessels that are suspended, in doubting the discharge of blood; then cut the stone to all the suspender, and extract the sheaf, and cure it as we have said.
And if the liquid is assembled into two parts together, know that these are two branches; then cut the other part as you did the first equally, then wipe away the blood, and put in the wound a linen cloth moistened in rose oil;
And put another linen cloth moistened in wine and oil, and place the two pads on top, and put doubled cloths on top, and tie it above all the linen according to this form:
Then take two cloths and use them like woolen padding according to this appearance and be assembled by stitching at the waist of the breeches, and one of the arms reaches onto the foundation up to the back, and the other to the armpit; and the other part goes above the two shoulders, and all of it is assembled together in the loop of the breeches;
and sometimes this ramice of cautery is medicined in the place of iron size, and it is that you prick i. a subtle cautery cultellaire, and cut the skin of the genitals, and be scorched as we have said, so that the white syfac containing the water is uncovered;
if you take the cautery according to this form, and pierce that syfac at once, and scorch it with this subtle hot cautery:
And the cut in all ways that you can, as long as you scrape everything; and keep that the fire does not touch the egg; and know that this work is more safe; and move guarding against bleeding, and moves than the works of iron;
and if nothing opposes you, or abscesses or discharge of blood or other things, so treat what opposes you, according to what is said before.
And if the patient is fearful and does not want to endure this work because of its horror, then administer the puncture as I told you, and it is that when you are certain by the signs that we have said that the watery root is there,
then make the patient sit on a raised seat; then pierce the abscess in the part below to the full spatula width, and put the puncture deep into the body; and let the opening be wide, so that all the water flows out;
then put cotton on the place, and tie it, and leave for the remaining water to flow out, then treat it until the wound is healed;
and if the white cloth does not let the water issue from the mouth of the wound, then it is necessary that you put in it a pen or the instrument with which one treats the water of the hydrops, for its form is before; and enlarge i. pock the wound, and know that the water returns, and is assembled after six months or until when it becomes, and when it is assembled as before, and thus will pass the patient his days.
of the abscess of the testicles
Know that in the section of this vein there is fear in more positions, for which it seems to me that one better leaves it;
and I will tell you the work and the appearances of the abscess.
I say therefore that many abscesses come to the body, and also to the joints; and this is by many causes.
That is to say by excess of sour and acrid matter, which is spread to the joints, or by percussion;
and the color of the abscess is according to the color of the body; and does not find any pain, and is a grave abscess;
And by chance there are some abscesses fearsome and hard, and of a reddish color, and at times comes from a vein or an inflammation.
When it is by a vein, then it is known by the disposition of a hot abscess, when you press it with your fingers. and it is not advisable that you touch it.
The one which is caused by an inflammation of a vein is known by its disposition at the expression of the touch of the fingers,
and one can well do surgery on this kind, and on the other wounds; and it is that you cut the heart of the onions, then the leaf is on top, and the root from white side, and deliver the suspension from all sides of the leaf.
If the leaf is already boiled with these new wounds, then it is necessary that you draw out the leaf, and cut it;
and if it is in the air, or in those that are inside the vessels, then you must deliver all of that vein, and cut it roundly.
And if the birth of the flesh is or its rear, then it behooves you to cut it completely, and extract the egg, as we have said.
And when your works are accomplished, then apply the wound with wool soaked in rose oil and wine, then cover it with other dressings until it is healed.
of the abscess of the testicles
This is an abscess enclosed in a covering resembling that of one testicle, with the softening of the testicles, and the patient moves greatly when he goes.
And the cure of this malady is as carefully prescribed as the preceding one.
And nonetheless, we will tell you the work of it, according to what the ancients did.
It is necessary that you make the patient sit on one level seat, then put the suspensory of the loincloth down to his two [legs]. To all the vessels which are near to the penis, and the masters braid them, and they extend;
Then cut with a sharp spatula wide through the vessels, until they are exposed.
And then peel from each side, as we have said in the extraction of arteries which are in the temples;
Then insert an awl where there is one thread double, and tie it at the first place where the vein came, and tie it straight to the other end; then the head is placed directly in the middle, according to the length of the body, and remove the corrupted moisture.
then heal the wound like the others where one avoids a boil, so that no vessel bursts that would nourish one of the corners.
for by these there comes no harm, and to all the vessels comes life, so it is necessary to draw out the corners of all the vessels. so that the flesh does not lose its nourishment because of the incision of the vessels, and dries out and cannot be helped.
of the rupture of the sinew The happenings of this branch are because of the section that comes to or from the sinew, or the stretching over the belly in the part of the ribs, for which the intestines descend from that rupture to one of the corners;
and this rupture is either of the sinew or from the stretching of it, and these two manners of much come from causes: whether by percussion, or jumping, or wrestling, or lifting of heavy loads, and similar things;
and the signs when it's of the stretching of the sinew, are that they have pain and pain, in long lengths, and does not come suddenly; and is the abscess even up to the base, because the pus quickly follows the intestine.
And the signs are when it is of the section of the pus, that it brings at the beginning sudden pain, and the abscess is various appearances, under the skin near, and this because of the issue of the intestine and the body to the outside of the pus.
And sometimes it descends the edges with the pus, and is held in, and causes great pain to suffer the patient, even when it is pressed.
And in these cures of iron there is fear, so it should be avoided.
And the manner of the work is that you command the patient to return the intestine into its place in the wound, if it can enter. then either support it on his neck between your hands, and raise his hips;
then extend the heart upwards, and cut all the skin of the testicles down to their length; then push into the folds of the waist tweezers according to what you need to open the wound, and make it such that the entrails can issue forth.
Then scrape the skin that is below the skin of the groin, until the white skin underneath is uncovered on all sides;
Then put your index finger into that which follows the groin, in that which is between the white skin that is below the skin of the buttock, and between the second skin;
and depart that which is behind the buttock, and between the second skin; and then move with your right hand into the center of the groin, and have the white skin on top in your left hand, and lift the buttock all over the skin towards the waist; and command the minister that he extends the buttock upward, and undoes that which is above behind the ligament;
and if it has a point of the intestine enveloped or white hard thing, and if you find any such thing, send it to the belly below.
Then take a needle or it has one thick thread made of ten threads, and insert it into the back part of the syfac, which is after the skin of the groin; after the waist, then cut the hairs that appear from the threads, as long as there are four threads. then assemble them one above the other in the manner of a cross, and tie the syfac, which we have said is below the skin of the groin, with a strong ligature of two parts. then envelop the hairs of the threads, and tie them together forming two parts, so that none of the vessels that nourish them can enter in, except that an abscess may come. and place the thread directly according to the first thread long two fingers of that one, and after those two threads leave the suture which is below the heart of the cords the length of a finger.
and after all the other according to the roundness that the egg bears; then cut in the part which is below the skin of the cords, as long as the sinew, and the bone, as we have said before.
then administer wool moistened in oil, and put it in the wounds, and place the thread that we have said. And no time is cauterized the white suture that we have said, after the incision, out of fear of blood flow.
For this happens many times, and let the linen be as long as it drips through; and if it delays in dripping, then be raised with hot water, and put on what we have said, until it drips.
then cure the wound with another cure, until it is perfectly healed.
of a fleshy hernia
In this treatise I never saw anyone who dared to cure it with iron.
And the ancients said that it is made like the branch which is assembled with the vein, in such a manner that you tie the vessels, after the cut above or slightly below;
then cut in the middle, and cure the abscess of those who operate, as long as the vessels bleed; and cure it as we have said, until it is healed.
Sometimes a rupture comes in the bowels, as we have said, and opens them; and do not separate any of the intestines from the joints, and if any are separated, it is little, and repair all hours;
and nonetheless if it stays too long in this position, the wound or ulcer grows, as long as the intestine is separated;
and this happens by the extension of the soft part which is in the angles, as we have said, because it is extended, then softened and swollen its limbs and opened;
and the cure of this is by cautery, as we have said before; and sometimes it is cured by iron in this manner:
and it is that the patient lies commonly on his back between your hands, then cut the place of the rupture inflated with a width according to the quantity of three fingers;
and then extract the soft part which is under the skin that follows it, then take the iron and put it over the place appearing of the soft part;
And press at the front of the belly, then count the two apparent eyes of the sifac upon the head of the thigh, and count one and the other.
Then extract the head of the thigh, and do not cut the sifac nor extend any other thing, as I have made you know in the cure of the root of the intestines.
Then cure by the cure of wounds. And when you cut the filaments, then make it clean and cure the wound, as long as it is healed.
The sifac is constrained, and has no appearance in the rupture, and the cautery is moved in this place, and closer to salvation.
of softening of the skin of the testicles
Many times the skin of the testicles softens in some men, because the sacs that are inside are softened, and it is made visible; and it is necessary, when one wants to cure it, that one makes the patient lie on his back, and one cuts the skin that is softened on the natural skin; then assemble the two lips with a suture, and if you see, sew first the superfluity of the softened skin at three sutures or four firmly; then cut between the sutures, and treat the wound as other wounds, until it is healed, and pull out the thread.
of chastisement
Know that chastisement is common in our law, and for this reason I would like that I do not speak of it in this book; and it is necessary only for two manners: one is that the mules know how to respond when they are asked, and know the cure; and the other, because we often have need of chastisement of some beasts to help us, as of goats and sheep and calves and other beasts. I say therefore that chastisement is done in two ways: either by attraction, or by flaying. In the one which we do by attraction, we make our sit the beast in hot water, until the testicles are softened and pendant; then taking them with your hand, as long as they are put back and you no longer feel them.
of the hermaphrodites
Hermaphrodite is according to two manners as men: one if between the two sexes appears as the figure of nature of a woman, or he has hair, and sometimes in short the urine. And the other manner is in women, and has on the groin as a penis and two sexes. And the cure of the man and of the woman is that you cut the hairs attached all, and cure them like other wounds; in the second manner, of men whose urine jumps through the skin of the genitals, there is no cure.
of the tenting
Tenting is a hair attached to the natural part, as long as it is too ugly to see; and some women have it as large as a hand, and that's the cure. It behooves you to pluck the excess of the tenting with your hand or tweezers, and cut it lightly; and don’t pull too much so that bleeding doesn’t come out, then the cure of other cures until it is healed; and at another hair that is born at the mouth of the privy parts, and the employment, and by chance jumps out, and is according to the semblance of a cow, and for this reason they called it the ancients "cow disease". If it behooves you to cut it, as we have said the tenting, and cure it until it is healed.
of erratic
of erratic if is when the nature of the woman is not perceived, or the opening is small; and it is natural by birth, or accident by illness that has come to it; or it is by the joint being joined together, or by subtle or thick mucus, and it is made in the ribs, or in the sides, or below, or wherever; and it prevents conception, and childbirth, and by adventure the flowers to have; and the knowledge of these is by the gaze of the female. If the obstruction is near appearing, if you wish to do it with your two fingers or to the belly. If it is subtle mucus, and it is near the two leaves, then haste, and let it be this way: put your two fingers together, and let the woman lie on her back, spreading her legs; then when the two leaves are formed, as long as the subtle mucus is round, and the obstruction is over; then take wool, and moisten it in oil, and put it on the place, and lay the woman down at home each day, so that it cannot heal. And if the mucus is hard and thick, then you should cut it with a spatula resembling the leaf of myrtle. If the obstruction is of flesh born, then suspend it to the loincloth and cut it; and have medicines that stop blood, such as acaice, dragon's blood, incense, together with an abundance of egg white; then administer a cane of broad plantain, so that the wound cannot heal; and thus be long, and administer a tent of dry linen; then cure them with other cures until it is healed. And when in the ribs comes flesh born, then it should be cut according to this manner, if it is not abscesses festering. Because at the festering abscess that is in the ribs, one must not touch to do.
of hemorrhoids
Hemorrhoids are openings of veins that without court accustomed use, and when hemorrhoids are old they become thick; and we have said in the division the similarities of them, and the signs, and I will say here those that resolve healing. I say that hemorrhoids and the thick, when they are made in the buttocks, and they do not appear to the touch, unless the cure with iron. Those who are at the mouth of the buttocks, one can feel them, are those that one can cure. So it is necessary that you put the woman in a cold house, then the thick as tongs, and the cope at their roots, then powder on medicines restraining blood, such as acaice and dragon's blood and incense, and similar things; then put her feet to the air for an hour, then put her in cold water; and if it decorates of blood comes, so let her sit in a decoction of sumac and bark of pomegranates and galangal and similar things, and then take barley flour, and bind it with honey and aisil, and make .i. plaster on her back. And if it hardens, that is good. If not, then let her put leeches to the back and nipples without iron; then take flax, and soak it in plantain juice or in elderberry juice with old wine, and make it lay there.  And when the abscess rests, cure its place of ointment until it is healed; and the one called "albathir" is red, and is similar to .i. hard head, so it must be covered as I said the thick; and then cure it until it is healed.
Abscesses of the buttocks
Many ways of abscess come in the buttocks, such as chancre and purulent abscesses and herpes and boils and fistulas and hemorrhoids and hot abscesses, and more diseases that I have said in the division. So it is necessary that I say in this treatise the hot abscess that comes in the buttocks, which is not of abscesses that boil over; and if you want to know the work of iron, look at whether the abscess is aggravated at the beginning of its arrival, and full of heat and fever, and if it becomes red you can see it.  Therefore do not haste to pierce, but let it die until the pain is appeased; and then make the patient sit on a stool, and have .ij. small stools where he leans, and support his back and assemble his feet to the sides of the leg; and let his hips be spread out, and put his arms under his knees, and tie them well with a good linen; then suck him down towards the right side, and administer the instrument that is used to open the mouth of the buttocks, so that after comes the form; and it is necessary that when you see to administer this instrument, you first put the tip in order to know the depth of the buttocks, so that what enters into the instrument does not go further than it should, and that it does not blister the patient; and if the instrument is larger, it is necessary to cover the depth of the buttocks with cloths, so that the instrument does not hurt him; and it is necessary that he put the cone of the instrument on top, and hold the instrument. And when the abscess opens, and one holds it in his hand soft, it must be covered at the top, at the spathe leaf; and when the boil is emptied, it is necessary to put in the wound tents soaked in rose oil, or in green oil; and put the tent further from the wound to the bottom of the buttocks, and put outside on the buttocks and on the linen pad soaked in water or malves are cooked; then cure after .ij. days of ointment before this, until it is healed; and some time lift the buttocks and the wound with a clyster of water and honey, and then with water or roots of lily and long arcturus that have been cooked; then return to the ointment. And if the wound is returned in the buttocks, it is necessary that you guard yourself from ironing, but cure it as we have said in the division.
of childbirth
It is first for the midwife to know the figure of natural childbirth, and the signs are when you see the woman pressing down, and desiring to smell the air: then the child hastens to issue forth; then you know that this childbirth is according to the natural figure, and is the head first, and the second with it; and when you see these signs, it is necessary to press lightly on her belly so that the child comes out soon; for when it ascends onto its head, then the second follows with it, and the world is cleansed of its superfluities by good purification; and this which comes otherwise does not come naturally. For it comes sometimes on its feet, and comes forth from the body or the shoulder, or the hands, or it comes on its belly, or on its back, and is converted by chance onto its neck, and by other bad figures; it is necessary for the midwife that she be wise and subtle in these things, and beware of error and deception, and I will show you all the figures how one must aid her.
If the child comes out on its head by natural issue, and the woman giving birth cries loudly, and the virtues of her are weak, then make her sit on a saddle, or the women hold her; and arose her nature d’oile or fenugreic be cooked, and then put the midwife between her thighs the small spatula whose shape is here: and cuts the secondine and clips at its nail until the moisture which is inside comes out; and presses the woman's belly as long as the child descends, and if it does not descend, then it is necessary to cleanse the woman with fenugreek mulch with sesame oil; then make her breathe and sneeze with condiment, and hold her mouth and nose for an hour: thus the child will now be born. And if the two hands come out far, then it is necessary that you gently pull them back and forth; and if they cannot enter, then put the woman on one seat, and lift her feet up; then overturn the seat to the ground, and hold the woman so she does not fall during the overturn; and if the hands cannot enter, and the child dies, then cut the hands at the knife which is before put, and extract the child, and reset it evenly.
of the issue of the child on its feet When the child comes on its feet, then it is necessary to push upwards. And then turn it back and forth, until it is even;
Then pinch one of the parts and extend it back and forth.
It cannot jump as far as the hips, if it is commanded to jump, and make it sneeze from condition; if it jumps, God wills it.
And if it is not healed as we have said, then turn it back and forth until it is according to the natural figure. For therefore it is easily remedied.
And if it does not heal as we have said, then take a sprig of alder, and oil of sesame, and melted wax, and grind all in one mortar; and put upon the woman's nature inside and outside this ointment. then have him sit upright, leaning until beneath the ribs.
and when it is softened underneath, have him placed i.e., a collar of myrrh, and place it underneath, and let him leave it for an hour. then have him sit on i. seat, then have him sneeze and restrain his mouth and nose, and take hold of his belly lightly, for the child is now jumping. from the issue of the child on its knees When the child comes in this form, then the midwife puts her hands here and there.
from the birth of the child coming out with one hand It is necessary to devise bringing back the hand. if one cannot bring it back, then have the woman lie down and go away;
If she cannot walk, put her on a bed, i.e., lying down, and prop up her legs;
then administer the liniment that I have recounted;
and if she does not give birth, put her on a stool, then study how to bring back the hand; and expel the child according to its natural shape, and make her sneeze, and command her to strain until the infant emerges.
of the issue of the child on its neck, and has spread its hands, and its face turned toward the back of its mother It is necessary that the midwife hold his hand then turn it a little bit, and the elbow gently.
and when it is aligned, put it on the muscled natural height and oil, as we have said, then command her that she move it a little bit.
and when you have done this, make her sit on one seat, and command her that she strain herself; and then let her sneeze. in this same manner to all of the spine
in this same manner to all of the spine When it comes to doing in this way to all the spine, so seize the spine at your finger, as long as the moisture is emptied
and if the child can't bear on its face and on its neck, then grasp from the shoulder, so that it doesn't be held back, and let the child die
then put the child inside, as long as you have placed it as it should be, and command the woman to not  get pregnant again
of the separation of the twins Know that twins are born many times, and sometimes three or four; and this is not a strange thing, and it often happens. Two are strange things, and do not live, if they can be named;
I know these, that they are multiplied, and are devised by the syfaci who divides them, which is linked to the bud.
And sometimes they arise as naturally as ones all under, as we have said.
And if they arise grievously, then the cure is as we have said, and let the bailiff be subtle, and make quickly and lightly what she does; and do so as it pertains to salvation. of many children
of many children Never are formed in the marshes i.e. one or two or three or four or five or six or seven, or more up to fifteen, and they are all formed in the shape of a child by the measurement of its wise glory,
and it is necessary that the bailiff knows all these things, because perchance similar things happen. so be done according to what is necessary.
of the dead child
When you treat a woman who has a dead child in her womb, as I said in the division, and it does not come out, and you are constrained to work with your hands; it is necessary that you know if the woman is of sound virtue, and does not have an accident or she has fear of death;
if it is necessary that the woman be supported on her back, and her hips are inclined downwards, and her legs raised;
and the minister takes the plait of two parts, where it is tied to the bed so that it is not moved by the descent of the child.
then rub the mouth of the mare's with moist oils with a poultice of alum and fennel and flaxseed, then anoint the midwife's hands with these oils and these poultices. then put them in the mare lightly, then choose one place where she puts her hind legs that are suitable for this.
and take ward if the child is appearing that it descends on its head. if he places the pins in his eyes or neck or mouth or in his palate or under the beard or in the groin or near the ribs
and if the descent is on the feet, he places it or pricks it and the middle ribs;
and it is necessary that he holds the pin in his right hand, and puts the curve between his two fingers of the left hand, and pushes it gently with all his hand, and places the pin in any of these places that we have said, until it comes to the empty thing;
then set against one other bone, or the third if you need it, so that the extractions be equal
and then set them equally by moving from one side and the other, so that they move smoothly, and let the bones be toothed so that they hold together, as in this form:
And if one part remains, then take some of his oil and put it in that part, and pull the other part.
And if none remain, then put this bone or higher up its place, and do this until it all comes out completely.
And if one hand comes forward of the other, and it cannot be brought back by constriction, then it behooves you to wrap around it that is, a bandage, until it heals entirely;
then the bandage in the joint of the foot or to the knife, and thus it behooves you to do in the other hand, and two feet.
And if the child's head is large and it is protruding in its exit, or it has a sharp top assembled, If it is necessary that you put the pointed spatula between your two, and make the chief and extract the water. Or you take it with the instrument that is called "almidach," because the form comes with the instruments or chapter that is after this one.
And in the same way, do it if the child has a large head naturally. Then pull apart the bones with pliers.
And if the head leaps out and is forced back, it may be split, as long as the moisture which is or worse has issued forth.
And if it cannot issue forth, cut it into pieces as much as you can.
And if it is swollen in the belly or below the ribs, it behooves you to pierce it until the moisture flows.
And if the child is on its feet, the attraction is light, and the application to the mouth of the mare is light.
And if it is strained in the belly or chest, then it behooves you to extract it, that is, envelope it with a cloth wrapped on the hand. and make the belly or chest compress as long as the moisture there is corrected;
and if the other members are set and the head remains, then force the bailiff to thrust his hand into the cavity of the joint, and draw it up to the mouth of the joint; Then he puts one or two, and the wood is cured.
and if the mouth of the abscess is constricted by hot cauteries which have come there, one should not work on it. otherwise, one should administer moist and fatty things; and administer plasters, and soak in softening and moistening water.
And if the child is on its side, and you can put it straight, so administer what we have said in a living child.
and if one cannot do this, then the thigh shall be treated by parts, and nothing of the second part shall be left behind.
And when you have done this, if it comes to an abscess in the groin, administer what we have said about poultices.
And if bleeding occurs, then apply a cold compress and administer other treatments.
And I saw a woman in whose belly one child had been dead, then conceived another on top of it, and refused death to the other. After a long time there came an abscess in the belly, and it swelled so much that it opened, and began to drain profusely.
I was called to treat it, and I pondered for a long time, and could not suture the wound.
I put on a plaster of strong attraction, and from it came a bone, and after some days another. I was greatly amazed, because this one whose belly has no bone.
I thought that it was the bones of a dead child.
I examined the wound, and in my hands bones, as long as the woman was in better condition; and I visited the woman long time thus, and it grew to be a small piece of belly from there;
and I have recorded this chapter for those that, when masters find a strange thing, they know how to help.
to bring the bone back to its place
Here after comes the form of the presser, which we have in the books; and at two turns at two joints of the two limbs. However, the horns should be more subtle of the restrictor, and made of ebony or boxwood;
and let the mouth of the staff be 1. i. two palms wide, and the margin of the trees i. must, and long one palm and a half; and among the two limbs be adjusted by this same staff, which be firm in one and in the other, half palm long or a little more;
and these two adjustments are put into the mouth of the furrow to open when one turns the two horns.
Another form, in its semblance more subtle and lighter, be made of ebony or boxwood staff, according to the likeness of tongs; and have as two shoulders two attachments, as you see, of one palm long, and two fingers wide;
and when you see to open the womb with all the instruments, make the woman sit on one bed, feet apart and legs open; then put the two attachments together in the womb, and hold the head of the instrument below between her hips; then work your hand with the instrument, as you have done with the pliers evenly, according to the quantity that you see to open the mouth of the womb, until the patient does what she wants.
This instrument are all mounted, and are multiplied their likenesses; and when the viewer has seen them appeared, so much is more haste the work, and higher to men for their quantity.
If it does not despise the instrument that you do not have it appeared, because their necessities is not excusable.
When the afterbirth is retained at childbirth, it behoves that you command the woman to retain her breath, and then make her sneeze from condiment, and hold her hands to the mouth and nose; and if she leaps for this, well is it.
If this does not happen, take one pot and make a hole or cover it, and put in herbs that can open the mouth of the marsh, such as calamint, rue, anise, chamomile, cassia, and centaury;
All these herbs, or none of them, be cooked or put in water over the fire; then put a band or hole in the pot and the other end in the mouth of the marsh
and steam it until the vapor comes from within the marsh; then let her sneeze, as we have said. If the second time he sneezes quickly. And if it remains after this cure, and there is no more force, command the lady to wet her left hand in sesame oil or in musk of Altai, and then put it in the vagina.
And seek the second one; and when she has found it, grasp it and extend it little by little straightly, so that the root does not fall out during extraction. But it must be moved gently to the right and left, and then pull; if it comes out and dislodges itself.
And if the mouth of the root is narrow, we have said the cure of sneezing and fumigation with herbs.
and if she is not of all those we have said, so guard that you do not use on milk.
but it is necessary that what is at the mouth of the uterus, you tie it to the hip bone of the woman, then the enema with ointment tetra-pharmacon.
if she will bear it and put it back, and will come forward; but nonetheless, when she bears it so comes a bad smell to the stomach and head, and pales the patient.
Therefore, it is necessary fumigations suitable for this: none of the ancients have experienced fumigation of watercress and dried figs.
The form of the instrument for fumigating the woman at the time of childbirth is this:
And it is shaped like a cage, and one places the fine tip in the body, and the limbs wide over the fire;
and let the fumigation be on the coals, and the tinder as long as it is burning, and begin another one.
to examine the foundation
Many children are born who do not have the foundation perceived, but it is stifled by subtle artifice. Therefore it behooves the midwife that she pierce that artifice to its due, and do not pierce it with a sharp instrument, and guard the opening so that she does not touch it.
Then place upon it half a cloth soaked in wine and oil, then the ointment's cure until it is healed.
And if you doubt that it does not return, then place upon it a piece of plank and leave it for many days, and remove it when the child wants to go into chambers.
And at times this stoppage comes from a scab of a wound or an abscess; so it is necessary to cover that scab; if cured, as we have said of the cautery of lead.
of the fistula of the foundation Fistulas that come from below the foundation are nodules, and larger than those that come from beside the foundation outside, or in the space of the two parts.
If there is a fistula or more; and when that nodule is old, it works, and still moisture mixes with white or subtle pus.
and sometimes these fistulas are passed; and they are known by those who have them or by excretion or flatulence when the patient defecates, and perhaps one jumps towards.
And if fistulas that pierce to the bladder, and to half of the penis; and reach to the junction of the hip, and to the knee.
And thus one knows the fistula piercing to the base, and not piercing: and it is that you insert your thumb or foundation, and insert a subtle needle of iron or steel into the fistula when there is no twisting.
And if there is crookedness, then put a tent of fine lead, or one hair of a horse, as long as you feel the tent or hair at your finger.
And if you do not feel it and there is no emission through the opening or windiness or liquid, as we have said: Know that it does not pierce; so hasten to cure it.
And when the fistula is pierced to the bladder or to the urinary passage, if it leaks urine, and cannot be closed by medicines.
If it is pierced up to the junction of the hip, then the tendon comes up to its place; if there is no twisting and the pain is within the area, then it is that it is bowed in there, and there is no worth of medicine nor healing by ointment;
and in these fistula openings there is no cure but labor, and vanity of the foolish remedies that intervene in them.
In those which are not pierced nor ancient, there is hope of healing by iron, as I have proven.
and it is that the patient lies between your hands on his back; and you raise his legs up to his hips, and have his hips inclined towards his belly. then insert an awl of iron, or of lead if there is twisting, until you know where the awl comes.
If the patient feels it around the base, then you must put your index finger there.
and feel then that the awl has pierced it; and whether discovered or not you feel between your finger the bone or flesh, then you know that it is passed; if one does not work with it, one cannot heal it.
One says nevertheless that one can well heal none, but this happens rarely.
and the aid one makes it, if one carefully heats the subtle cautery according to the width of the fistula, as has been said before. and it is pushed completely hot into the fistula, until it reaches the base; and do this two or three times, as long as you know that these char-like fibers are burned, which resemble an owl's feather.
and then the cure of tents moistened in butter, as long as that char is healed, then the cure of ointment tightening flesh and welding.
If it is thus healed, well. Otherwise, it cannot be healed otherwise;
and if the tent gets in and does not pierce to the bottom which is the foundation, and between your bottom and the tent there is a thick covering of flesh or silk, and you see the fistula according to what follows the covering of the heart; if you cut from the beginning of the fistula, and push forward before the tent, and then cauterize after, as long as it comes to the head of the tent;
and will be delivered the tent, and it will shrink; then cut those parts that seem a feather of an owl, and none remain.
And if the skin pulls out, and goes between you and the work, cauterize it with fire or sharp medicine.
For the cautery of fire joins two good things: namely, the burning of those joined parts, and the stopping of blood and drying of moisture;
then cure with tents soaked in butter or ground herbs, until the wound lies low, and the burned parts are inside the bottom;
Then cure the wound of the eyes by putting on a hard dried bandage, and those are dry medicines.
For when it is restored, it is healed and does not return.
And if a fistula comes all the way down to the bottom and is separated from the body, you put your hand or foundation there and examine it.
If you feel the tendon and between two or the skin or sheath where it is close to piercing, then there is only a way of hope and assurance, by the administration of one of the three ways:
or you cauterize it as we have said, or you cut it to the bottom, or if you can, put tents and dress it like the first
and do not let them go too deep, that you do not cut into the tissue that holds the base, and let the secretions come out by their own will then dress it, as we have said
then dress it, as we have said by chance if it will be healed, or you remove that covering and the wound after it is cut to its base, or by tent or other pointed instrument; then mend the flesh which is in the wound, as much as you can.
then study to restore the wound, and leave the fistula in the part outside the foundation; so it is lighter for the patient.
And sometimes fistulas are this way: and it is when you put the tent in the fistula, and it is or costs near the foundation next to the skin above. If you take a tent pierced at the head according to this form: And he puts one twisted thread into two, and puts the tent on all the thread in the fistula as long as it is at the head.
If it is inserted into the margin of the foundation inside, then extract the thread from that which was pierced, just as you put your finger or foundation;
and treat the head of the thread, and assemble the two ends together, and bind them to each other, and leave it for one or two days;
and restrain it no time, as long as the threads close those gaps that are between them, and stick together;
then cure the wound until it is healed and sound.
If the fistula does not pierce, then make it pierce in all the ways that you can, if it is not too deeply embedded.
For it does not behoove to make by the lacing cover if too deeply embedded, and then cure it, as we have said, until it is healed.
The shape of the spatula spine from which one makes the fistula is very useful, on one part and trenching; and on the other hand no, because of this one does not cut what one should not cut, as you see here:
Hemorrhoids are according to two ways: or they are within the foundation, like grains of resin, and there are small and large ones, and in short they bleed. And there are one or more, and they are outside the foundation and at the top of the foundation; but those that are outside have little moisture
and furthermore adds or a drop of citrine water or a drop of blood, and have the color of the body;
and the cure of those who have them inside the foundation, if it is that you command the patient to stretch so that they go into chambers, as long as the foundations are sore and the threads appear; if you hurry, and can take it with pliers, or hold it with your finger, then cut it at its roots;
and if the forceps cannot hold them because of their moisture, then take them with one drapery, or cotton, or a piece of felt; and the you pull them to your two, then cut them, and powder above some hot powders that are in place of cautery; or you cauterize them as it is said in the chapter of cautery, then treat them with other treatments until they are healed.
and if the foundation cannot issue, then enema the patient with a harsh and biting enema to wash what is in the foundation so that it can issue openly.
and if the patient feels no pain, and if the threads are far from the foundation, then the treatment is light; And it is that you prick them with your finger or pliers, and cut them, then treat them as we have said, until it is healed, and he fears the incision by iron.
It is fitting that you administer the suture in this manner: take one twisted thread, and put it on a needle, and then pull the thread upwards and make the needle pierce through the other side, and turn the two ends of the thread below the needle. And if it be too wide; and tighten the thread firmly, then tie the thread, and remove the needle, and do likewise with all others, and leave one for correcting the superfluity of blood;
then put on the foundation one layer of soft cloth in rose oil or in cerote, and place it on the foundation, and instruct the patient to rest;
And then leave it until they itch, and when they are healed, treat them with ointments and other remedies until they are healthy.
Dryness of the bowels or foundation Many times dryness of the bowels occurs in the intestine, and by constriction of nature, and when the illness is old and medicine is not effective.
Then it is necessary that you scrape to the point of a spatula or your fingernail the bark above, which does not let it get moist. Then cure until it is healed as it should;
and if it cannot heal, begin the scraping again more strongly than before, until it heals well, and is scraped; Then cure until it is healed.
Of trembling A formic is a small appearance false near the body, and goes much into it.
And sometimes it is found cold, and one feels it as much as dead from chill, and comes in the whole body, and more to the hands than elsewhere.
And the cure is that you take a cane of an goose feather, or a feather of a strong vulture, and put that cane on the chill, until the circles purple the chill all around. Then turn your hand to the whole cane until you cover all around the chill, and put it in deep, and scrape the chill from its roots.
And if you see, so do this of a dog of iron or steel according to this form, and be subtle below and trailing above:
do not pierce it, for the two to hold, and move pressed And if you see, so cauterize the frenulum, as it is before or in the chapter of cautery.
of the form of the clister At no time is made a clister of silver or wood, or iron melted or woven; and at no time is made of these instruments small and large, according to those to whom they are administered.
Those therefore who are administered in the care of children and who are weak and painful, are small.
The form of the clyster small and large if it is above wide, or the belly is tied according to this manner:
and there is an opening where the belly is tied, as you see, and the head is inside pierced; and has on one side two pierced, and on the other one;
and the belly is where one puts medicines from a bladder of beast or parchment, and is pierced all around with small holes,
and between each opening one must have space, then put into these openings one strong thread of flax twisted in ten or as much as it enters, and assemble the belly as if it were a sheep's. and when the medicine is inside, then tie it with a strong thread in front of the instrument, then clysterize; and this is the form of the circle.
And let the medicine be neither too hot nor too cold, and anoint the head of the clyster with oil or egg yolk, or something similar, then put it in gently.
then squeeze the minister with his two hands together, until it is all emptied, then extract the clyster, and raise the patient's legs to the side.
and if the medicine wants to work well, let it itch as much as possible; and if it burns one whole night, it is more effective help.
And if you enema the patient with illness of stomach pain, and the medicine works quickly, then repeat it until he is healthy.
And if the hemorrhoids are at the base or an abscess, then the enema should be as subtle as for a child.
And this is the form of the subtle enema on which the skin should be restrained:
of wounds
We have already said in the division the cure of wounds; now we will tell you the cures of hands and medicine, according to accomplishment.
I say that wounds are diverse according to what they are made, and according to the places where the wounds are made, and from what they are made.
The things by which wounds are made are by striking with stone, and cutting with sword and knife, or with spear or staff or arrow, or similar things.
or which are made according to the parts of the body, such as a wound that falls on the neck, or on the head, or the back, or the belly, or the liver, and similar limbs.
and I will tell you the cure of each wound, and I will begin with the wounds of the head, simple ones, because remembrance comes in his chapter.
I say that when a simple wound comes to the head, and the bone is not broken, take care if it is from a stone or similar things, and the skin is entirely torn and the wound is large, and you doubt greatly of a hot abscess: if the one does come forth soon from the head itself even if it comes little blood from the wound, and be the blood on the contrary side of the wounded part;
and avoid the patient from eating wine and thick meats.
And if he does not want to bleed, let his meat be less, and drink no wine, nor eat any flesh.
and put on the wound, if an abscess comes there, a cotton moistened in rose oil only, or in styptic wine;
and if there is no abscess hot, put on the wound, if it is fresh with all its blood, and it is not moved by the air, powder, which I will say a little later.
And if the artist has moved it, put some ointments on it, until it is healed.
And if the wound is large like a sword cut and similar, and the lips cannot be brought together with tents, then assemble them with stitches, as I will say for belly wounds, of stitching.
If the wound is open to the bone, and hangs, and holds only by a bit, then cut it away; then cure the wound with medicine, and restore hard flesh in place of skin. And command the patient to eat large meats, such as testes and cooked barley, also chicken, and similar things.
And if you find rotten skin, and it does not reach the bone, so cut away the rottenness all, and throw out the pus, then cure it;
And if there is an artery in the wound or vein, which does not close on its own, and it cannot be stopped by medicines, then you must stop the artery, and if you find it loose, tie it with a thread; And if this does not help, then cauterize it.
And if these wounds are small and simple, then the cure is light: and it is that you put in this powder which binds as soon as the wound has closed.
And the manner of the powder is this: take incense one part; dragon’s blood two parts; quicklime three parts, and grind the powder finely. And apply it to the wound, and hold it firmly in place until it dries well and joins with all its blood.
And then cover it well, and leave it unbandaged unless it swells; for the medicine is not removed until it is healed.
And at no time is this made with only quicklime when one has neither incense nor dragon’s blood, but that the fire has not moved the wound.
And if the arsenic has healed the wound, even when it is still there, do not put on this powder;
But put on some digested ointment, or poultices of barley flour made with water and honey, as long as it is swollen; then treat it with other treatments until it is healed.
And if the bone fracture comes with the wound, and it is small, then extract it with subtle pincers;
and I will tell you after these fractures of the head.
of the wound of the neck
This wound comes from the neck and it is simple, if there is no difference between this one and that of the head, but if the nerve of the neck or the artery is cut.
If it is the nerve, there is nothing else to do but leave it to heal and put nothing restraining on it, because it harms the nerves and causes them to retract. and do not put on the wound anything cold, because the substance of the nerves is cold, and the continuation of those is with the brain, which is the highest member.
but let it be the medicine soft, such as calx washed in sweet water, and mixed with rose oil, and calcined water also in sweet water. and other ores of this kind, and moist ointments.
And if the wound is large, then stitch it and tie it with bandages, and treat it until it is healed.
And if the wounds are deep and it is covered and full of a swelling, pierce or lower.
And if the artery is cut and there comes a flow of blood, then staunch it, and bind it, and cauterize it if that is necessary.
And if the spine of the throat is cut, or the windpipe, and the conduit is guarded, so that the meat goes, if you cut the heart on the chain of the throat, and do not touch the throat but put it back according to its natural form; And then the strapping happens frequently, and it is left for some days, then it is cured by ointment of drying until it is healed.
And if the wound has made an impression in the bone, so it will. And if there are pieces of bone, then you must treat the ones that you can reach. And as for those that you cannot reach, leave them until the wound dries up. And so it will be cleansed and aligned at the exit;
and if the wound is fresh, apply the powder as I have said. And if there are bones in the wound and it has a fistula, treat it as I have said in my chapter.
of the wound from a spear or knife
If it is a wound from a spear or knife, and the wound is deep, see if there is air escaping from the wound as the patient breathes; you then know that the wound is mortal.
and if it is not deep, and it is fresh in all its blood, then put no powder to it in the first hour, nor bind it at all for the blood that it does not remain in depth. and return to the heart, and close up the wound of the sick person; but put a drawing ointment on it, and bind it two times a day.
and if you have no ointment, put in the wound old cotton to suck out the moisture,
and make the patient sleep on the wound for three days, or four, or more; if there comes no spasm, nor evil trembling of heart nor drawing in of the leg; and when you see the good arrangements, then know that the wound is saved. Heal it therefore with bandages and other dressings, until it be healed;
and if it cannot heal and work, then you know that there is a fistula; so treat it as one must.
And if the wound is from a sword or knife, and it is simple, or worse, or on the back, then treat it as before.
If it is large, stitch it; and if it is small, treat it with powder; and if it is deep in the bone and has broken pieces, clean the wound, and remove the fragments if they are loose. And if they are not loose, let the wound rot, it will lighten the extraction.
And judgments of other wounds on other limbs are as we have said.
Of the displacement of the belly
The displacement of the belly is great and medium and small;
From the great wound jumps no times the intestine, or the nerve of the intestines, because of which the intrusion of others;
and the suture is more troublesome, and sometimes worse the small wound than the great.
for this reason one puts back the intestines into place, if they are not put back hot on hot; because the intestines swell as soon as they feel the cold, so they enter no more into place,
and for this reason the middle wound is worse, for this reason one resets the intestine to its place just like the others.
And know that a rupture of the belly is in four ways:
The two common sutures occur in the suture of the belly,
and the suture of other wounds of the body and two other specific sutures are common to other wounds;
nevertheless they are more proper with the suture of the belly, and I will say one each and explain.
I say that when the wound is small, and nothing from the intestine has emerged, and if it seems something should be returned, then it is done by one of the two ways: or because of the smallness of the wound, as we have said, or because the intestine is swollen due to the cold.
And when it is cold, warm it up in this manner: Dip a sponge or soft cloth in hot water only, or you boil it in water with quince and spice. and apply the intestine as long as the swelling is gone;
and sometimes this wine restraining is done, and it is moved to release air.
And when you see the swelling depart, moisten the intestine with water or ale and herbs be cooked. for by these it is aligned the entry to little thing;
and if it cannot enter, then make an opening in the wound with the instrument with which hemorrhoids are cut;
and the first cure is to move the waist that we should not cut there except with great necessity.
and this is the instrument for splitting it:
if cut inside in the curve and not outside, and see here the shape:
And when the wound is enlarged, and the intestine leaps out if you put it back in its natural form in its proper place, if you are able, because this is worth doing.
When the wound is wide, and it is in the part below the belly, so it is necessary that you make the patient lie on his back and put his legs higher than his head; and if it is below the belly,
and also if the rupture of the belly is in one of the two parts if you set your attention to that the sunken part be higher than the other.
and thus it is necessary to administer what I say in large and small wounds.
For small wounds put that which has appeared to you.
then have between your hands one minister pitiful who holds all the fracture to his hand and assembles the lips; and this is the common manner of sutures,
and this is the common manner of sutures, and that you prick a needle or more, according to the quantity and width of the wound then let space from the head of the wound one finger's width, and put a needle where it has a good strong thread; and pierce the two points of the skin with the two points of the shaft;
then the strain of a double thread around the needle of two parts then assemble the two heads of the wound evenly,
and then leave one to two finger widths, and insert another needle there; then tie the thread just as you did with the first needle, and do not cease doing this according to what you need of needles as long as the entire wound is restrained;
and the needles be medium, between fine and coarse, for the fine needles cut all the flesh, and the too coarse ones cannot enter well: for this reason they should be shortened
and it is not good to push the needles too far into the flesh and skin
that they do not cut and open the wound before the soldering;
and then clip the heads of the needles so that they do not prick the patient while sleeping, and I place tents or cloths on the shoulder of the needles to keep them tight. and I let them be until the wound is closed;
and this manner of suturing with needles is more convenient for small wounds, for one or two needles suffice there.
The second suture is common, and it is that you assemble the two heads of skin and the two heads of fascia together with a needle where there is one strong medium thread; and when you will have pierced these four heads together,
and when you will have pierced these four heads together, then wind the needle to the part where you began, in the manner one sews draps;
and put a space between each seam the thickness of a man's finger.
this seam should be sewn up for the man
and I sew a wound that one had on his belly,
which was slashed with a knife, And the wound was more than a palm wide, and it was two palms wide of the intestines
And the wound was in the middle of the belly. I brought back the intestine after it had been 24 hours,
And was the wound sewn for fifteen days, and I treated it, and it became healed.
And the physicians had judged that he would die, and it was a miracle;
and I did not treat him with ointment, because I was in one place where they found none, nor any medicine; and laid half a cloth on the wound twice a day, and washed it with water of honey until it was healed.
I will tell you the two proper ways of suturing:
Take the needle, and thrust it from the outer part to the inner one;
When it has pierced the core straight through, then lay the tip of the thread or suture where you have thrust the needle;
and make it pierce from the other side, from the inner part to the outer one;
and the understanding of this sewing is that you sew as the furrier does furs. and that you leave once the side of one part, and take it back from the other, as long as the sewing is entirely completed.
The second manner of sewing, which Galen says properly,
is like any one who brings together the two parts naturally, and they support one head of the bone to the other head, in such manner:
insert a needle or head of a trocar near, and make him feel only that side. and let the two heads of the bone then turn the needle, and make him feel from the outside part to the inside one as the two shoulders
then make one and the other feel from the outer part until that inside, in two other shoulders of the miracle that are on the other side
and this is the most usual manner of stitching and the most common
The Gauls say this word, and no one testifies
One must sew the belly with two needles, or there is thread in each one;
and one must push one needle on one side, and the other on the other, in the manner of those who sew corded things;
and know that when the rupture is in the middle of the belly, it is the sewing more serious than the others places of the belly.
The judgment of the wound is such as the judgments of other wounds:
and it is that when you find the wound fresh with all its blood, as if the fire had touched it, then return to sew the intestine and the cut; then put above the powder that is preventing decay
then return to sew the intestine and the cut; then put above the powder that is preventing decay and if the fire had touched it, put above some ointment that is present, until the wound closes; and stitch the thread, and suture the fascia, and the muscle. then treat the wound as you would others, until it is healed;
and if you have no medicine, place on top of it, as soon as it begins to fester, old cotton. and change it two times a day until it is healed.
For you do not need other medicines in many dispositions as long as the wounds are simple;
and if you doubt that the wound does not make community with the principal members, then it is necessary that you moisten the linen lightly in oil of thyme heated, or in rose oil, and place it around the edges, and below the buttocks;
and if he feels pain or rot in the bowels, and it happens many times, if he administers black wine enemas, and even if the rot comes to the intestine;
and pierces it inside, and know that when it is the large intestine, it is easier to heal than the small one.
The intestine called 'young' cannot heal when it is rotted, And it is for the placement of the veins that they are, and for the delicacy of the whole body, and the approximation of its nature to the nerves.
And if the worm jumps from the wound, put it back as if it were an intestine, while it is fresh.
And if it is old and has turned into a worm or black, then you must tie the place that is black so that bleeding does not come from there. for there are veins and arteries there;
then cut what is between the ligaments and put the two heads hanging from the part below the wound until outside to align the extraction when the joint falls and the wound bows.
of the rupture of the boil
When the intestine is round, and the wound is small, If it can be restored in some people,
because I saw that one man was pierced through the belly by a lance;
and the wound was on the right side of the stomach, and it became infected and formed a fistula, and through it there was discharge and wind.
I put care according to what I could, and did not cease to subtilize until it was healed, and the bones joined.
And when I saw it join, I doubted that the patient would have ill in his belly; and there was no ill, but he remained in better dispositions, and ate and drank.
And said any experimentors that when he has a small wound in the intestine, it must be bound in such manner: Take fresh sprigs of herbs, then assemble the lips of the wound. And when the sprig has opened its mouth, place it upon the two lips,
then put one other fream afterward in that manner as before, until the wound is entirely closed;
and stitch up the wound. If the chief one becomes inflamed in the intestine, and no trouble comes to the patient,
and if it is possible to tie the intestine with a fine thread that is cut from the intestine of an animal,
in such manner: take the head of this thread of intestine that be very cleaned and then tie to the head of this thread i. a thread of linen fine twisted, then put the thread in the needle, and sew the intestine, and wind it back in the rupture;
and this manner of suturing of limbs is not different except according to the way of hope and expectation.
and if the wound is great and wide, even when it is in one of the hollow bowels, there is nothing but subtlety.
of fistula or wherever it may be Know that every wound or abscess, when it opens, is universally called "fistula," and also when it is raised and bent back.
And a fistula is according to truth a hard and white knot, in which one feels no pain, and is also raised like the feather of a bird;
and sometimes it appears clear and bent back, and other times thick; Sometimes a little, and other times enough;
and I have spoken of it in the division of wounds, that every wound that is not healed and there is no flesh, it is only due to one of the eight causes:
that is to say, by the smallness of blood or flesh; or for its wickedness; or because there is hard flesh inside it, and on the lips, which does not allow flesh to grow; or where there is too much swelling; or when the matter is corrupted, and the substance is of bad quality; or the medicine is not good in the cure; or because the corruption is manner of pestilence; or because the property in the region is late for digestion, and late for health, and inflated by nature; or there are veins or bones:
And I have already shown all these causes, and the signs, and the cures of medicines in the division.
Therefore it is necessary that I make you know the cure of a fistula which is done by the work of hands.
Know that a fistula occurs in all parts of the body; for there are fistulas that come from large veins, and arteries, and nerves or to the stomach, or to the intestine, or to the bladder, or to any of the ribs. or to the backbone of the back, or to any joint of the hands or feet;
And all the fistulas that are in this manner are of grave healing, and there is only labor, and ignorance;
and if there is any fistula that does not come to the place that I have said, and you have faith in the cure, and if you see it known, then take a tent of iron or of iron, if the fistula is straight, if it is crooked;
and if the fistula is twisted, then circle it with a subtle tent of lead; for the lead bends and molds around the tortuosity;
And if the fistula has been opened by hands and you cannot well search it with probes. then cleanse it through one of the openings.
for moisture spreads from one opening to another, and cleanses it;
then carefully probe its depth, that you know if there are bones or nerves, and whether it is closed off completely;
and ask the patient well of the pain he feels when pressing with your hand, and where he feels it;
and when you will know truly the place where it is, and if it is far from a joint, or nerve, or artery or vein, or in any of the places that I have told you, then strike according to what I have told you,
or in any of the places that I have told you, then strike according to what I have told you, and remove the foulness and corrupt flesh that is within; and then the cure until it is healed,
and if the fistula is deep well in a right place, it is necessary that you cut it as deep as you can. then put moist tents in sharp medicine and insert them to the head of the fistula.
then put moist tents in sharp medicine and insert them to the head of the fistula. until the medicine corrodes the superfluity that is at the bottom.
and then I put ointments to close the sore flesh, until it is healed.
and if it is not healed by those, then cauterize it as we have said
and if the bone is corrupted from the fistula, cut it out. If a vein or nerve strikes your main limbs or principal members as we have said;
and if the bone is uncovered, and there is corruption and blackness, then cut out as much as the corruption is then heal with things to bring flesh until it is healed;
and if it is not healed, and returns crooked like before know that you have not gone far enough
if you uncover and want as long as you are at the bottom, and remove all the corruption, then restore its place;
and if it is thus healed, it is well. If this is not the case, know that the corruption is too deep, that you cannot succeed there; if there is no other thing than to leave to nature;
and if there is a small bone corrupted, and you can pull it out with pliers; if you extract it with an instrument suitable for that,
and if there are many bones, then extract them all, leaving none behind;
and if moisture opposes you, and there is no error or fear, if it copes with moisture and flesh, and delivers the bones.
And if you cannot remove them within an hour, then put upon the wound something preventing decay, and leave it until the flesh is rotten around the bones,
and therefore they will have lighter bones;
and if it is a large bone, such as of the leg or thigh, then remove only the corruption until all blackness is gone, then restore the wound;
and if there is a large part of the corruption, and it comes to the flesh of the bone; if it must be cauterized and covered all the way to the corruption, and then cure it until it is healed;
and I will tell you of a fistula that happened to one man in his leg, so that you may take it as an example and help in your work.
There was a young man around thirty years old who had pain in his leg from a cause that came from inside the body.
as long as the substances came to the leg, and became swollen with a large abscess, and had no external cause to open.
but the surgeon because of his folly opened it so much that the abscess opened. and from it flowed out a great deal of matter, and it became a fistula, and there came much pus that all stank foul and moist from the body;
and many a miracle they cured for two years, and there was no wise man in the art of hands
as long as I was called, and saw his leg and the medicines with which they treated him, and those who ran through the courts with great noise; and became red the body of the youth, and had a citron colour.
I placed a tent in one of these holes, and then I searched all the holes.
and found that some came against each other from all parts of the leg.
I then hastened, and dug into one of the holes until I discovered a part of the bone, and found it rotten and pierced, and the corruption came up to the bone inside;
I was that one who appeared to me of the corrupted bone, and I thought that there was no other corruption except for the one that I removed;
and I began to restore the wound with medicine of boiling water over a long time, and it could not heal;
and then I began again, and discovered the bone as before,
and found the corruption continued in the bone, and I removed it, and then I took out the bone, and I was afraid to sew up the place;
but I could not do more than when I came upon one palm of the bone, and the tract was brought to all its length. then I restored him with remedies; and he was healed and joined firmly.
and it no longer became necessary to begin the work except for the weakness of the patient, who cannot endure and because of the fear of death that I had of him. Because for blood evacuation it often occurs, but he was healed entirely.
Because for blood evacuation it often occurs, but he was healed entirely. and in the place of the bone there grew hard flesh, and he was of good disposition and had no annoyance or contrary to anything at all, neither for walking nor to come.
and extend the head, so that you draw the corrupted flesh outward, and uncover the flesh at the place where you wish to operate, so that the pus does not stain the flesh. and put one coal or a board under the bone so as to cover the corrupted flesh; And it is necessary to be so careful as much as one can see and feel the corruption, and to be even more so another time.
And if the bone is corrupted, and does not open at all, and the corruption is in the middle or in one part, if uncover the flesh entirely; then put one coal underneath,
and then let it move from one side to the other, and let the string of the corruption be long, i.e., a point, as we have said;
and if the corruption is in the joint, cut the corrupted joint, and let the bone on which it rests be on the other side;
And if the corruption is in the continuation of the two joints, there is nothing else to cut;
And if the corruption is in the heel of the hand or in the heel of the foot, then this thing is very strong; but nevertheless it is necessary that you inquire about that corrosion, how it appears to you; and purify it in all the ways that you can, but that the vein or the nerve do not oppose you.
and know that the instruments and threads for covering these bones are many, according to the position of the bones and their appearance, and their thickness and thinness, and their size and smallness, and their hardness. and for this it is necessary to prepare for each kind of work its instrument.
and know that the work will show you the instrument of which you will have need, according to the knowledge of this art. and the testimony of the ways of the illnesses; so think about the instrument of which you have need according to what is fitting.
of fire The shoulder can dislocate from within or from outside.
and when you have treated that corrosion with the cures of medicines, and they do not help at all. then it is necessary to cover that limb until the place where the corrosion comes from, so that the patient escapes by these of death, or by the malice, which is greater, of the fault of the limb;
so that the patient escapes by these of death, or by the malice, which is greater, of the fault of the limb; and the signs are that the limb becomes black, so that it seems to be burned by fire, and  it blisters after the blackness, then goes that corrosion of limb to limb, and takes hold throughout the body; so you hasten to cut,
and if it is from the percussion of some venomous beasts, such as a sea scorpion and viper and similar.
if the corrosion is at the head of the thigh, then cut it, and do not give him any space to come as far as the hand.
And if it comes as far as the hand, then cut it at the joint, so that the corrosion does not come as far as the arm.
And if it comes to the arm, then cut it with a knife; and if it passes the knife, then it is death. and there is no worth of treatment stronger than the quantity of its virtue;
and thus do it when the corrosion comes to one point: if it comes in the first joint, then cover after the other joint;
and if it comes on a point, then cover the whole point; and if it goes up the leg, then cover at the knee joint;
and if it comes from above the knee, there is no other remedy than to leave the patient to die;
And the manner of cutting or sewing the limb is that you bind it above and below. and extend one minister on the lower ligature, and another minister on the other ligature above, and you shall sever the flesh that is between the two ligatures about one spatule width wide, as far as the bone is uncovered;
Then cover or so, and put on each side one drape of linen, so that the sore does not touch the healthy place. And may another injury and abscess come to the patient's leg.
And if bleeding comes when you work, then cauterize the place thoroughly, or where you put any powders restraining; then return to your medicine until it is completed,
then bind the limb with a suitable bandage, and treat it until it is healed
and I will tell you that it happened to one man in his foot:
he had a blackness that seemed burned by fire,
and that corrosion first came in his heel of the foot, until it encompassed the whole foot;
and when the man felt the corrosion, he raised himself up to cover his foot, and was healed.
and long after that the corrosion returned him in the hand, and he came to me,
and I put on him things  rebounding after the purification of the body, and cannot cease the corrosion.
and he wished that I would cut off his hand, and I did not want, because I had hope of rebounding the matter; and fear also if he cuts his hand, that it will not fester, because the virtues of man were weak; and he despaired of all, and returned to his land, and he set about covering his hand, and was healed;
and I have recounted this tale for the purpose that if one needs it, they may do otherwise.
Sometimes an abscess comes to its fleshy place and remains so long that it makes a great gathering of flesh. and then it bursts and pierces, and the flesh jumps out, and it remains there like a vessel; and the skin which is above is as fine as one thin veil and it does not reach down to the bone or the nerve, and such a malady is called 'healthy'
but if it is so long that it comes to the bone and perfects, then it is called "fistula";
and the treatment for this is that you cut all around the skin, and also when it is thin, like a sheet of cloth; and it will not be able to rot from there.
And if you believe that the skin has hardened, and the corruption is not yet complete. and the skin is thickened with flesh, then treat it with a clyster like this:
look if the breasts are large, and the bowel within them is of foul stench, then clysterize with Egyptian medicine which is made like this: Take thus, and oil, and lead, equally, and put to cook in 1 vessel over the fire, until the medicine is red, and becomes as thick as honey;
and then take of this according to your need, and make it in water and honey, and in a clyster the belly, and hold the anus shut; and let the medicine rest for two hours, then remove it by pressing.
Do this many times until the chest is calmed and the fear is removed;
and at no time are they to be given a clyster of ash water, when this medicine is not present and you take ashes from grapevine wood and pour water on top,
then the flow, and in a cloth, as long as you know that the chest is well-cleansed.
and if the patient cannot bear it, neither the Egyptian medicine nor the water of ashes, if he is cleansed with water and honey or where there is a bit of litharge ground. or you cleanse him with honey and mulled wine, for honey has the property to purify and wash, and wine makes the skin dry;
and when you have done this, and you are assured that the breast is well purified, if the clyster of those that causes flesh to be born in it,
and you are to prepare a diaphanous plaster, and make it with rose oil and wine; or you cauterize it with some medicines and ointments, of which I have said the properties or how to treat ointments.
and if the opening in the chest is small and the cannula of the enema cannot enter it then enlarge it with an iron a little, and put inside a tent of Egyptian ointment. or basil ointment, until it is enlarged;
and if the wound is too wide, so the cloth and leave it only as much where the clyster may enter,
and if the opening that lies above is lower, then cover or more below where it is. Because when the bowel is in its proper place, do not allow any flesh to enter; and if you cannot cover the breast below as you see fit, if it is arranged in such a manner that the bow goes to the lowest place that it is
and if you are not able to cover the breast below as you see. if it is arranged in such a manner: that the bow goes gently downward, and nothing of the bow remains; and take solidifying medicines to put upon the chest,
and be upon it, that is, a linen cloth covering the whole chest; then cover with force the opening of the chest, that is, a bit larger than the first, then put ointment of sulfur upon another cloth according to the quantity of the opening, and put it over the opening of the chest to align the ribcage, and do not remove the large cloth outside except after many days once.
And he who is on the opening of the chest, often remove to remove the ribcage, and know those that flows from the ribcage, if it's venom or pus or enough, or digestible, or indigestible.
and take guard if the patient feels pain or no, and if there is an abscess or not
And when your medicine is spread in such a manner and you see the nature that leaps on the wound of the breast, if you know that the breast is healed already, and approaches health;
and then unbind it in the morning, or on the third day, and when you unbind the wound, if you change one other bandage, and renew the ointment.
And if the breast remains bowed undigested after many days, know that the breast does not heal well. And if subtle venoms cut after a long time, so do not despair of health.
for health approaches. For there are men whose healing in their wounds is delayed, and some who do the opposite.
And if the breast remains undigested after many days, know that the breast does not heal well;
and if the breasts are slow to heal, and are swollen, apply drying medicines both in substance and in virtue. as for example diaphinite ointment, because it contains a great part of vitriol, and that is the last medicine;
take diaphinite ointment, and make it with rose oil, and the rose of old wine equal in substance;
then cook it and use it; and the same thing made honey cooked mixed; when inflammation has ended
and you take mire and aloe and incense, and grind it, and powder it on honey when it is over the fire and then you glue it onto a cloth, and place it on the chest, and every time administer an aromatic herb long and roots of lilies of heaven, which is also like flour from vetiver and wormwood
and roots of lilies of heaven, which is also like flour from vetiver and wormwood and in the use of simples or composites: grind them, and make it into powder, and put it on the honey that I have said, and use it. and if the wound is long and is not healed by this treatment,
and if the wound is long and is not healed by this treatment, then know that corruption has gone too far, and it makes an impression in the bone, or hard members, or limbs; if the wound of the fistula, as we have said before.
of the abscess of the angle
Panaritium is an abscess that arises under the fingernail of the hand. or of the foot, or perhaps arises in other places;
and when it is neglected and care is not taken, then one comes to have another abscess nearby. and they rub and push the bone as long as it rubs against the root of the angle, and by chance they rub it all over.
and comes the corrosion to the bone, as long as it comes pain pungent, and is the shoulder two large, and is the color  fused.
When you treat it as we have said in the division, and the treatment does not help at all, then it is necessary that you cut away with iron all the superfluity which is remaining from the bone, Then cauterize the wound after. The cautery is a great help if the bone is healthy and the joint is healthy;
and if the joint presses against the flesh, and it begins to prick, and to bleed, then it is necessary that you put a rag under the joint that pricks the flesh, and the bump on top, and cut this flesh subtly and lightly, and put over the remaining flesh medicinal substances hot and corrosive to remove all of it;
And if the corrosion is in the bone, then cut it out and treat it properly, because as long as the bone is corrupted, it cannot heal.
And if you see the two bones corrupt, cut them in one as it has been said before. Then treat it until it is healed;
And if it is broken and bruised, and it feels great pain, then you must heal it first; Then cut the angle of the spatula sharply by cutting across from above,
and guard so that the waist does not come near the flesh which is below the angle, because the patient would feel too much pain.
And if it happens, put something on top that soothes.
The two joints which are born in the hands of some men by chance are all fleshy. and by chance there is some where there are bones, and sometimes there is a nail,
and none of them come out at the base of the joint, where the birth is in no one of the two. He who is born in neither of the two parts does not move. and he who is born at the joint of the two, by chance moves;
The waist of one who is fleshy is light, in such manner: cut it at its root with a wide spatula.
He who is born in the root of the joint, that is grievous to cure; so hold you to cut.
In he who is born or lies at the back of the buttock, it behooves you to first cut the round flesh until the bone, then set the bone to a suitable thread for this, then treat it until it is healed.
The solderings that come to the two assemblies come from birth, or from the welding of a wound, or from the burning of fire, or from similar things.
If it is necessary that you solder that soldering, so that the parts return according to their natural forms; then put between two tents or cloths moistened in rose oil, that they do not solder together; And you put between two pieces of subtle planks until the joints are united, as it is fitting.
If the joint comes to any of its two with the palm, then strike that solder as it is fitting.
Of vile
Veins are large swells full of melancholic superfluities, that come in more than a few members of the body;
And more often happens in the legs of those who go on foot and work and carry, than to others.
Therefore it is necessary that you administer to him once expurgation of honey, and then the ointment of the basilica.
The cure of iron is thus in .ij. ways: one is with the cup, and draw forth black blood; and the other manner is that you lift the vein, and draw it entirely outward.
The waist is thus according to this manner:  first rise the leg with hot water very strong, until the large sinew be softened. then constrain the leg of the patient from above the hip to the part below the knee; then cut the vein in one place, or in two, or in three, of a wide size,
then elevate and draw forth the black blood with your hand, from one end to the other, as much as the strength of the patient can endure.
and then the wound, and command him to poultice it with meats preventing black mold;
and begin the evacuation and bloodletting when the veins are full, and harm the patient.
The elevation of the leg is done in this manner: raise the leg of the patient, if there are many hairs, then put it in a bath, and raise the leg with hot water until it becomes red, and the veins swell;
and if you have no bath, then heat it over the fire, and then apply it to the vein long from the armpit to the knee, or in the part below the ankle;
then work the leather against the skin, and scrape the vein from each side, until it appears when you feel it;
and it can be seen red and black, and when it enters or gets into the leather, it seems like a white cord;
then push the edge underneath, until it is lifted from the leather, and then place it on the skin lightly;
Then the cut is made in another place above three fingers; then scrape the skin above the vein until it appears then hold the vein at its source, as you have done, and bend it to another incision, as you did first;
Then make another cut where more is needed, then hold the vein, and cut it at the foot of the two fingers
then pull and hold it up to the second incision; then extract it from incision to incision until it is completely free, then cut it;
and if you cannot draw it out and raise it, then put a needle to all its one strong double thread and the tie and draw it out, and put it below one-half of its length, and turn your hand this way and that until it comes out and guard that she does not break, for if she breaks, then one cannot draw it or raise it, and comes to annoyance for the patient;
and when you have it all drawn out, then put upon the place of the wound wool soaked in wine and rose oil; and cure it until it is healed
And if the vein is constricted and twisted and wrapped together, and it is not straight, as we have said. If it is necessary that you cut it tortuously, but do not cover it; and treat it as we have said before.
If it is necessary that you cut it tortuously, but do not cover it; and treat it as we have said before. The shape of the iron with which one cuts the vein is curved, and does not cut deeply so that it does not cut the vein.
And is of thick curvature, for if it were subtle, it would cut the vein, but be thick as we have said, and this is the shape.
Of the civil vein
This vein is situated in legs, in warm places where no herbs nor trees grow, and in land that has no moisture;
and by chance it may be born elsewhere than in legs, and this happens because of rot that comes from under the skin,
just as it comes from inside the body, serpents and worms, lodged between skin and flesh.
And if the signs of the beginning of this vein are that a very great inflammation comes in the leg, then its color changes, and the vein begins to protrude outward, like the root of a plant.
When the shoulder opens up, then it behooves you to wrap around it a piece of plank from 3 and a half to 2 inches (wide), and bind,
and leave the plank on the leg, and all times that it is painful to the outside (?), then wrap around the plank, and bind. and if it is too long, then cut a portion of it, and wrap the remaining part, and do not cut it at its root, until it is all out. for if you cut it, then it enters into the flesh, and brings forth abscess and rot there, and bad sickness;
therefore for that reason it is necessary that it be treated carefully, little by little, until the head, and that nothing remains in the body.
and sometimes this vein when it is treated is five palms long, or ten; and a bone came to me once, which was  10 palms long, and when you cut it, it emits 1 ray or hole, and pierces to the bottom
so that all of it emerges; and empty the material which is within, and administer to the place medicines preventing putrefaction any day, then treat it like abscesses.
And at times to this vein main veins, and also when it opens at the joint of the foot, or foot, and much blood comes out from there, and from which they jump veins; treat it then as we have said before.
Of worms that are born between skin and flesh
This disease is called in our land "ox's disease", because it often happens to oxen.
and is a small worm that is born between skin and flesh, and goes throughout the body going up and down, and one feels it well by the movement from limb to limb, as long as it moves under the skin where it goes, and jumps out.
and is caused by rot of some humors, such as those which come to the belly from serpents and worms and ascarids;
and one doubts its evil nature, because when it travels through the body and goes up to the head, and comes to the eye, by chance it enters, and destroys the eye; and this happens many times.
When you see it being cured and drained, one can only flee when it goes:
so therefore you must bind the place above and below with a strong linen tightly.
then cut above it and the flesh will follow, and if the vein is pierced into the skin and you don't find it, if you cauterize it with fire above until it dies.
and the greatest harm that it does is when it inflames the eye, as we have said;
and if you see it coming or chief near the eye, hold below him the eyebrow form, then cut above, and treat the further.
And it is necessary to use the patient of purification of body of medicinal solutions for the corrupted humid humors,
and if worse of meat causing putrefaction.
Of the pain that comes from windiness This sickness is called “wakiring” in our land, and is a pain that comes in some limbs. and then it moves from limb to limb; and I have seen this which I tell you.
I was called to a sick woman, and she uncovered her arm, and I saw a small swelling in the vein of the arm;
and then shortly after, I saw it rise as if a worm to the shoulder, More quickly than anything else, just as living silver when it cuts from its place to another.
The pain departs from that place and settles in the shoulder.
And then a little while after, it spreads throughout the body until it reaches the other arm;
Then she told me that it returned to the middle of her body, as I saw it.
I was greatly amazed how she moved thus from limb to limb, for I never wished this illness in this manner. Nevertheless, I had wished many that they well would move pain from one place to another, but I did not wish it so, as I see it in the woman;
and I thought that this was because the woman had a dry body and exposed veins, and for this reason appears that constraint of windiness;
and do not appear so according to this reason to those who are delicious and who have moist bodies and veins full.
And when you see curing this illness, and the patient feels that pain, if it appears to you as we have said, if it lies above and below evenly, and then cut above until that constraint of windiness at its place is gone; and cauterize the place; and if you cannot see it with your eyes,
if the cure of those who bring forth wind, such as foul pills, and pills of serpentaria, and similar others.
Of arrows
Arrows are diverse, according to their appearances and according to the places in the body where they lodge.
The variety of them is that some have large points, and small, and hairy, and smooth; and some that have two angles, and those that have tongues, and those that have parts; and those that fall in any member, they fall in two ways: either in the principal member it falls,
such as the brain, heart, liver, stomach, lungs, intestines, bladder, and similar members. When it falls therefore in any place of these limbs, and the sign of death, which I will tell you after, appear to you: If it is necessary that you take care of the extraction of this arrow, because death comes after in many situations; And when this bad sign does not appear to you, and the arrow is not deeply embedded, then treat it, and care for the wound.
And the sign of the brain when the arrow falls and pierces the bone, and leaps out the sfeacus which is above the brain, It is when there is scotoma and soot and vertigo and redness in the eyes, and inflammation and redness of the tongue, and spasms and confusion of mind, and vomiting of phlegm. And perhaps it is without power from the nostrils or ears; and perhaps he loses speech and voice; And jumping from the wound white moisture resembling pus, and also jumping like charcoal ash;
And if this sign appears to you, then hold back from the treatment, and treat the wound if it is not yet closed;
The sign of the seventh when it falls or heart, are that it is near the left breast, and feels as if it were fixed in a hard thing, not empty. and by chance the seventh moves as well as the arm, and in court black blood, and comes coldness and cold sweat, and syncope: so know without doubt that death is present.
And the sign of the seventh that does not move is that without plain foam jumping from the wound, and the throat swells, and the patient changes color, and gasps loudly and shivers with cold.
And if the arrow falls into the covering of the hip, it is near the ribs; and it gives great pain and much sorrow and sighing; and they move all the members of the shoulders.
And if the arrow falls into the stomach, by chance it jumps from the wound some thing of undigested flesh.
And if the arrow falls into the belly, and jumps a point of fiber through the intestine root, there is no hope in the cure, nor in the extraction of the arrow.
And if the arrow falls into the bladder, and the urine jumps out and comes forth, and the patient feels great pain: know that the wound is mortal.
The other members, like the face and neck and throat and shoulder and arm and spine of the back and thigh and hip and legs, and the seeming member, are safe according to more dispostitions. When the arrow is in the nerve or artery, and it is not venomous, as I will tell you that it happened to me, for that you do otherwise.
It happened to one man with an arrow lodged or stuck in the root of the nose: I attempted it, and drew it out from the other side below the fat of the ear, and was healed without any feeling at all.
And treat with a tool an arrow that fell into the fat of the eye under the skin. and the arrow was replaced, and one could only reach the point towards the shaft, and the arrow was large as a turquoise bow, all one iron without ears; the tool was sound, and he had no bad accidents from it.
And treated an arrow in the throat of a Christian, and the arrow was Arabic with ears:
I was the barber, and skillfully as I treated him, he was healed for the Christians.
And treated an arrow in a man, that it was in his belly or stomach, and thought he would die.
and then after he had passed thirty days, he did not change his condition. I cut on the arrow, and I removed it, and treated the wound, and there was no bad accident.
And if you wish a man whose arrow fell or to the back, and the wound was sewn up;
and the arrow remained inside him, and did not change its natural positions, nor find annoyance in any of his natural works.
And if you wish another man, whose arrow fell into his face, and the wound was sewn up;
and remain thus suffering great pain; and many other similar things.
And treat an arrow in i.e.  a man of the princes the king, that it was lodged among his ribs. and was a little declining to the right side; and the arrow was completely turned around.
I was called to the cure after it had been lodged three days. So I found the wound very narrow.
I felt her with a whole subtle tent, and did not feel her at all; And she felt pricking and pain below her right ear. I thought it was from the tip of the arrow
I put on the spot a cataplasm atramentous and digestive, for that the place did not inflame. and appeared to me the wound of the arrow.
and appeared to me the wound of the arrow. I put the plaster on for a few days, and sewed up the wound directly, and so the patient remained for a long time.
until he felt the arrow still inside his flesh; and he told me this. I put on the wound a medicine of acrid corrosion for several days, until it was open,
and try it, and feel the head of the arrow that is situated in place; then adjust it in the opening of the wound with that sharp medicine, until the head of the arrow appeared visibly to me;
and it penetrated well the ends for four months,
and then widened so the wound that I put pliers on it, and mine from one side and the other, and it could not issue out;
therefore do not cease to subtly work and devise instruments, until I took one day pliers well made according to what its form will come at the end of this chapter, as long as I treated it, and restored the wound.
And the masters judge that the cartilage of the nose cannot be restored: I restored it therefore, and the wound was sutured, and the patient was healed entirely.
Or I have told you the quality of extracting some arrows. so that you put your care on those things which I do not say, because the books cannot encompass everything;
but the wise masters compare well very few things, and on those which are present and lacking, find new works, and nine instruments, in the descent of strange things that happen in this art.
I say that arrows are not from members where they are lodged except according to two manners: or by the place where they enter, or by another part;
and that which shoots beyond being in the flesh, it is an arrow entering into the flesh, and shooting no more at any time now.
And if it does not shoot anymore, then leave it as long as the flesh is sore and inflamed around it,  and make the exit
and also if it is caught in the bone, and it cannot be moved, then leave it thus for several days, and move it each day.
and then it will jump, and if it does not jump, pierce around all that is to say a fine forest, until the skin around is enlarged, and then treat it.
And if the arrow is placed back in its place in the body, but it cannot be seen, then try all the ways to remove it. And if you feel it, then try to remove it with no suitable instrument.
And if you cannot because of the narrowness of the wound, and the depth of the arrow, and there are no bones, or nerves, or veins, then widen as much as the wound is large. and treat the arrow if you can, and if it has ears at its base by which it holds.
and treat the arrow if you can, and if it has ears at its base by which it holds. if bone is caught that is fixed in two parts as much as you can. and then break or bend the ears of the arrow, as much as you can pull it out;
and then break or bend the ears of the arrow, as much as you can pull it out; and do it carefully so that you don't break the arrow, but rather extract it more easily.
And if you cannot do it at once, then lay him down until his limbs are relaxed, then treat him, for the extraction is easier. And if the flow of blood goes against you, then administer what we have said of the cure in its chapter;
and guard yourself from cutting the nerve and the vein, and put everything as you can to safely extract the arrow without risk,
whether quickly or slowly, whether firmly or gently; and position the patient according to the form he was in when the arrow hit him, for this is the greatest help that there is, and if you cannot, place it according to what the signs show you.
The arrow that comes from elsewhere, where one sees or feels nothing of it, or the skin is swollen in the place if it can be seen.
cut then upwards, as long as the pliers can take hold, and then extract it; if it jumps out now.
And if it is held in the bone, then turn your hand roundly, until it enters the bone, and enlarge the bone, then remove it.
And if it cannot come out, leave it still, and then begin the extraction again until it comes out.
and if the arrow shaft is in it, drive it out with the whole shaft;
and if the shaft has fallen, and you see administering thrust, administer one instrument pointed; so that the point of the arrow enters the head of the instrument; and then drive it out,
and if the arrow is lodged, put one instrument with a point entering it, to facilitate extraction.
And if the arrow is surrounded, you should cut all the flesh around where the poison is, if you can. then treat the wound as it is necessary.
And if the arrow falls in the hip or belly or bladder or rib, and it is near the surface, and you can cut into it, then cut into it;
And keep from cutting the vein and nerve, and then extract it, and then sew up the wound, if need be. And care for it until it is healed.
The shape of the forceps used to treat arrows resembles that of an eye, and behold here the form:
And there are many ways: large, medium, and small, according to the size of the arrow.
Of veins of the common body Of veins from which one heals are xxxi., of which it has or head xvi.
that is to say: ij. bats that are after the ears, that are called the two "herbech"; and the ij. arteries that are in ij. temples appearing; and ij. veins that are in ij. tear ducts of the ij. eyes, that are called "aspires"; and the vein that is on the forehead; and the vein that is at the top of the nose; and the two veins which are on the neck; and the two veins that are in the upper lips above the mouth, and these are the veins called "augeherich"; and two veins that are under the tongue.
The veins from which one commonly heals are .v. in each arm:
one is the cephalic and is on the left side of the chest, and the common people call it "vein of the head"; and the middle one is called "fast" and is composed of the cephalic and basilica, and the common people call it "vein of the heart"; and the basilica is on the right side of the chest, and the common people call it "vein of the belly," and it is on the bone and it is the one from which blood is drawn, which opens manifestly over the pouch.
And the saphenous vein is the vein between the ring finger and the little finger, and it has two branches;
And in the leg and where the foot is there are three veins: one of which is below the curve of the pouch on the left side; and the second saphenous vein which is at the ankle of the right side; and the vein which is called «ness», that is in the ankle of the other side;
and in the other leg are three veins under those.
The vein of the veins that are after the ears so helps with old catarrhs, and migraines; and the qualities of the vein, as I tell you, and it is that you raise the head of the patient,
and the qualities of the vein, as I tell you, and it is that you raise the head of the patient, and rub the place where the veins are with a rough cloth; then tighten the patient's neck to a vise, until the two veins appear behind the ears in two places depending from the head: which you then grasp with your hand, and where you feel the pulse under your back, tighten it;
then take the lancet, and thrust it below the vein until the bone, then lift your hand along the whole vein upwards, and cover the skin and the vein well two fingers wide, and make blood flow as much as you see
then restrain and bind it, until it is healed.
and I have already said incision and cautery in the first book.
The draining of the two arteries that are in the two temples, is good for an old headache, and quickly, and habitual ophthalmia, and to the body of the sharp tears to the eyes;
And the qualities of the blood if it is as I say: And that the patient strains his neck so that the two veins appear openly; and feels the pulsations under his jawbone, and then takes it in hand;
Then gently place the heart above the vein toward your index finger, and push the lancet below. And gently lift the vein upwards, and the cup, as you have done in 2 other veins, and make a correct flow of blood according to your need.
Then untie the patient, and put your hand over the vein for an hour, then place cotton on top.
And then form the bandage, and leave it there until it is healed; and we have already spoken about their coping and extraction, as at the beginning of the book.
The blood of the vein of the forehead is worth as much as the blood of the cephalic in old facial diseases, and for migraine, and for redness.
and its quality is that the patient strains his neck twisting it, until the vein appears; then take the instrument which is called "fosseur", whose form is here:
And place the point on the vein, and steady with your hand, or something else, and let the blood flow according to the quantity that you see; Then bind the patient's neck, and tie the vein until it is healed and no time the work of a wide flame.
However, it does not suit that the flames are too thick; and the healing across, because the bone is near, and by chance breaks the flame when it is subtle.
The healing of the two veins that are in two tear ducts helps the eyes, and to the ridge, and to the redness, and to the origin in the eye, and to diseases of the face;
and the qualities of their healing are that the patient strains his neck by twisting with a certain linen, as before;
then the healthy, and let the wound be through the, a piece of the length of the flame a piece wide, because there is no flesh.
And if the flame is subtle, by chance it breaks; then make a correction of the blood, as much as you need, and then tie up cotton, and tie it well.
The wound of the vein of the knee is good for fever, and for sore eyes, and for diseases of the face as for migraine and redness that comes in the face, and even when it is old;
and the qualities of the bloodletting are such that the patient tightens his neck, then strains his nose towards your left hand and takes a subtle long flame, and inserts it between the lips in the space that is between the two nostrils, because the vein does not open well by itself, and the blood will now begin to flow;
and do not let it go too far in depth, and make the blood flow according to your need, then tie it up at night because it is very quickly restored;
The blood of the .ij. guindeges helps in the treatment of the spleen, and at the beginning of measles, and many diseases, and itching, and corrosions, and herpes, and scabies;
and the qualities of the blood are that the patient should extract his neck from below both sides as we have said; and let the master be standing above the head of the patient, and the patient sit on one seat,
then open the vein of long one a little widely, then draw blood temperately, or as much as is necessary.
then do the other side in the other vein, then untie the ligature, and draw all the veins moderately. so that the patient does not strangle; and let him lie until morning, so that the wound is healed.
Of the bleeding of the livers The blood of the veins of the upper lips helps in collection in the mouth, and corruption of gums, and fissures of lips, and sores and inflammation.
And the qualities of the blood is to make the sick person sit in front of you, and restrain his neck as I said; Then turn the lip, and look at the two veins, one of which is on the right lip and the other on the left; and you recognize them by this that they are black, and by this that around them there are small black veins: Therefore, do both, and if you do not know them, and you are in doubt
Therefore, do both, and if you do not know them, and you are in doubt if you cut the larger of each side, and also make two veins that are above and below, because it is the same manner.
Of the vein below the tongue The vein below the tongue helps after the cephalic vein, and it is at the constriction of the throat, and the diseases of the eye, and the diseases of the mouth;
and the qualities of the veins are that the patient lies between your hands in front of the sun, and raise the tongue, and look under each side a black vein.
then prick one and the other, and do not go too deep, for below are the arteries.
The veins of the arm which are commonly bled are pricked according to two manners:
either they are pricked at one flame  about as wide as a finger, or with a subtle olive like a sharp cutter, and it is called "aneasil"; and they are wide and fine according to the wideness and narrowness of the veins. The shape of the flame mirror is very well-known, and is as wide as you see:
And it is necessary for opening the veins that are full of thick blood that appears on the surface and that contain thick and troubled blood. and this is the shape of the olive flame:
And is more subtle pointed, and is for healing veins subtly, where there is subtle yellow blood.
The vein of the basilica, which is one of these veins, so helps with ailments that are below the throat, and the neck, and the chest, and the belly;
and it is necessary for the healer to heal wisely, and that he should take care of the artery that is below. And if he cuts the artery, and a flow of blood comes, then it behooves him to stanch it, as I have said; and must not be piercing flame, but cutting as a knife.
And if the basil does not clearly open, then you should restrain it and change another one. or you want no vein of it, or you open the vein in its place in the arm: it clearly opens; and the cauterize with the knife-like flame, as we have said.
And if you see to know the place of the joint, then it is fitting thus that you pull out the arm, so that you touch the place as long as you know the pulse; then sign the place with a mark, and then tie the arm, and cut the vein of the flame aniseed;
and guard that you do not wound in the artery when you see the place inflamed, for it is of the artery: therefore avoid it.
And if you see it rise up high like the urine of a child, and the blood is red and fine, know that it is blood from the artery: Hasten yourself then, and put your foot upon lengthening, then remove your foot if it is without stretching, which many times happens.
Tie his arm up, and leave it so, and do not let the patient move it; and be on guard, and do not let him move it until it is healed.
And if the wound is not stretched and it aches, and the medicine is not present, then close the artery if it opens, because the head of the retraction; and stretch the wound.
And take a bark of fig, and make it into paste, and take one of the halves and tie it well until the next day.
if the wound is clean, that is good; if not, treat it, as we have said, with powders that stop bleeding;
and the stopping of bleeding is not always done in more positions because of the small size of the wound and the possibility of the arm's ligature.
The vein in the middle helps to draw blood from above the head and from below the body, because it is composed of the basilica and cephalic veins, as we have said;
and it is necessary for the physician to lay himself across for the nerve that is below, and if they are not too deeply embedded, and he finds the nerve, and it swells and the saints be grievers, and by chance cannot heal;
and this nerve opens many times, and if it does not open in any men for its subtlety, then it is necessary that you heal it with the anesthetic instrument; and  escape the nerve to your power.
And if it has a vein between the two nerves, then make it long.
The blood of the cephalic vein helps, that it draws blood from the head, and aids the eyes;
and it is necessary to bleed by pricking at the olive vein or the myrtle vein, because it is the safest of all veins, for it has neither nerve nor artery.
However, it is necessary to seek the lightest place and it does not harm if the first time one fails, and one begins again. and by chance inflates the veins in some men, when one fails the first time, but it does not harm. The quality of the blood is according to your thoughts.
The first thing you must know about bleeding is that it is only administered to preserve health,
and to ward off future diseases; and let the bleeding be done in one of the three veins that are or cut: namely, cephalic, femoral, and basilica; and one must bleed at the beginning of prayers in spring, and in autumn and in winter after eating, when the sign of repletion appears.
and one must bleed the first day or the third, after two hours or three days.
The bleeding which is administered to illnesses has no set hour, but when need is of day or of night, at all hours and at all times;
and one should not bleed children until fourteen years old, nor a woman carrying fruit from the fourth month until the seventh. Do not bleed those who are over sixty years old.
And when anyone wants to be bled, in whatever manner, it is necessary that they cleanse the bowels with a light enema, if they have a lot of feces retained, so that the veins do not attract impurities from the bowels harmful to the principal members;
Do not bleed those who are too full of meat, nor who are drunk, until they are sober, nor the dropsy-stricken;
and if one worsens after colic passion, and vomiting, and diarrhea of the belly, and multiplication of labor in women, and labor, watching, and fasting, and all that the virtue, or by thing of the arm or of the body;
then subtly reduce the humors, if it is thick, by meats and drinks and medicines, if you have their power.
then go into a bath, if nothing prevents it, to subtly thin the blood;
and vein yourself from the lower leg towards the groin, as we have said.
and keep yourself free from labor, and from points, and from lust, and from similar things;
and be bound and joyful, and let the hands of the healer be higher than those who are healed, and rub the arm two or three times.
then straighten the linen in the middle, because when it is too tight or loose, it cannot heal without;
and then rub the place with your hands, until the veins swell and you can feel them;
then moisten the veins with a bit of old oil, then place his finger from his left hand on that vein below its level a bit where he wants to bleed that the vein be not cut and fail to bleed. For there are veins that bleed as thick as cords, and some that are filled with windiness so that when one puts the cautery on it, it retracts like a flame and cannot open the vein, and this is how it is with these
And if he opens the vein, if the wound is too tight, for that it is necessary that the surgeon be advised in these things.
And if the vein is opened for the first time, it is good; if not, he begins again a little below where it was or above, if the place is not inflamed.
And if the place is inflamed and the patient fears, let him leave it for one or two days, and bind not the arm: for perchance an abscess will come; nor let him enter water, then begin again the vein if he wishes.
and if the opening is small, or the vein is short and subtle, and you doubt that it is not as much blood as you see, then fire in that same opening directly to the whole flame;
and work a little carefully, so that the eyes be inflamed; for this happens many times when the wound is small.
If you see the place inflamed, then do not begin the bloodletting again, and put on a little bit of olive oil, for it calms the body of blood, and is mixed in this place with the oil;
and thus administer the olive oil in every bloodletting that you open the veins, to stop the course of the blood;
and the same thing happens threefold and bows of it when it is placed in its place; so subtle the sinew and it splits when it is too large.
And if there comes an abscess large, which happens often, even when it is not drained except on that time when the opening of the vein is small. if you hurry, and place on it a sponge moistened in water and some hot oil, and hold it for an hour;
and it is necessary that you do this after the blood from the vein has flowed out, and if it remains in place after a few days without any blackness or greenness, then it will not harm it; And if you see, put on no thing of aloes or myrrh in juice of calamine, ointment, or semblance.
And many times abscesses and appearances at the wound of the basilica happen: put therefore your hand upon it, and if you find the place soft to the compression of the hand, so is that appearance bad. Therefore avoid that you put on anything of those things we have said, for by chance it cuts without the artery; but make  one plaster dry to harden the place, then cure it with another cure, until it is healed.
And treat each according to the quantity of his virtue, and the color of the blood.
For if the wound is black, let it bleed until it is red; and if you see it swollen, let it subside until it becomes thinner; and if it is too hot, let it cool down.
And he who is weak and pale, and needs the extraction of blood, should have a wider wound made, and the flames wide.
And to the one who is weak, do the opposite, and it is necessary to bleed him often and little, and one should bleed him by cutting across, not by pricking.
And this way of bleeding is safe from a decrease in blood and nerve damage, and it is better than bleeding from the long or wide.
And to one whose body needs bloodletting, it is necessary to give softened bread in pomegranate juice; if he is faint, treat him with blood three or four times.
And if he is of cold complexion, give him softened bread before bloodletting in a syrup of figs, or in a syrup of honey aromatic with spices like pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and chickpeas, and a well-smelling syrup.
And if he faints during bloodletting, after the issue of some blood, it is necessary that he suck broth of meat, and a subtle aromatic syrup.
and use other things that we have said in the division or chapter on fainting, for the evacuation of veins.
And if he wants to bleed his arm, and bleed another time, if it is necessary, when he is weakened by much bleeding, that he bleeds little by little, according to the quantity of his virtue continuously.
And who wants to bleed his arm after the first bleeding, and he has a strong body, then he bleeds seven hours after the first bleeding, or after the ninth hour.
And who wants to bleed from another place, then he must bleed on the second day or the third.
Because he has much blood within the body that is already exhausted, and brings fever; so in this case, it is necessary to draw a large quantity, and widen the opening until it flows in streams. since you have rewarded all the conditions of health, and put your hand upon his wrists when he is healthy, that death may not come in place of a parsimonious. and this happens many times, when the healer is negligent;
and it is not fitting when you see a limb loosened, and draw blood the second time, and the wound is closed, that you press strongly upon it; but if it is curved, let him extend his arm as far as possible, for this would be harmful.
but let it heal until the second time; or you prick it at the tip of the flame, as long as the vein which is frozen will be closed. and put on i. bit of wool moistened in water, and press lightly.
And if the vein is swollen, let it be and do not tighten it at all, until the abscess is calmed.
And if necessity requires bleeding a second time, let it be done in the same place, or in another vein, or in the other arm.
The vein in the arm is bled in place of the vein in the neck because it is composed
And the manner of bleeding is that the patient puts his hand in hot water until the joint is red;
then be bound moderately so that the vein appears well, then bleed now through the middle, neither short nor long;
and be the puncture wide, and bleed well near the joint of the hand, and if it cannot flow out, then put the hand back in hot water, and let the blood run into the water until you have enough;
and if it is in this state, do not plunge the hand into hot water, because one puts it more in winter than in summer.
and the vein of this vein is safer from all other veins, because there are no arteries or nerves.
The vein of the salvation of the right hand is good for all liver diseases, and this is the way:
strain the hand, and put it in hot water until the vein is swollen, if one can see it. and if it is broken crookedly, and if you cut it through completely, it will cause no harm.
and do not make them too wide apart, for the nerves are all uncovered from flesh,
and then put the hand in hot water, if it has frozen in the wound and cannot be pulled out.
And when you have treated the blood as much as is necessary, then put oil and wool on the vein to stop it firmly, and do the same for each wound.
The vein of them in the left hand is equal to the disease of the mouse, and do all as I have told you towards right.
The vein of the sphene is equal to all diseases that are below the body, as well as diseases of the intestines, and retention of flowers, and diseases of the hips, thighs, and old legs, and similar diseases.
And the qualities of this vein are that the patient puts his foot in hot water and rubs over the vein until it throbs, and tie above the ankle joint; and the vein is at the ankle, and above the foot there go many veins;
so take the largest vein then, or at the ankle, that you see it is worth.
And if you bleed it on the foot, ward off the nerves that are below, and make the cut across as when cutting; and let the flame be untied.
And if he cannot feel it, put the foot in water, and leave the vein to bleed well open.
And if the first incision is necessary, then begin again above a little, because the wound is salty. Do not doubt about the nerve, as we have said, and then do the same with the sole of the other foot equally.
The vein of the sciatic nerve is at the ankle, and its incision relieves pain in the hip, when it is hot blood.
And the qualities of its incision are that the patient enters or bathes in water and is strained above the ankle four fingers' width by twisting it.
for otherwise the vein will not open; and if it opens, then close it in all ways that you can, and across and it is better that you cut it, for the flesh is dry, and it is very well supplied by the hands of men.
and it is better that you cut it, for the flesh is dry, and it is very well supplied by the hands of men. And if you do not find it, then close any vein that opens or at the back of the foot, and towards the little toe, and guard against the nerves;
and make as much bloodletting as you see fit, and then untie the bandage, and put cotton on it and restrain it; she is now cured.
Of the suction cups
Suction cups are made of horns, or glass, or wood; and suction is done in two ways: either by pricking and drawing blood, or without pricking.
And this suction which is without pricking, it is done in two ways: either with heat, or without heat;
and two others in two ribs of the neck; and the suction under the chin; and the suction on the two shoulders; and the suction on the hips; and the suctions in the two arms; and the suctions on the two legs; and the suction cups on the two ankles; and suction does not treat blood, except for small veins that are scattered in the flesh
and because of this it does not weaken one as much as from opening a vein; and it should not be administered, neither with hot nor cold fire, in any disease that comes from repletion, until the whole body is emptied.
And if by necessity of disease it is necessary to suction, or for customs, then we administer it each hour at the beginning of the month, or at the end, and in between, and at any time;
For there are some who, when they need to blow, have a heavy head.
and those who bring forth repletion and redness in their face, and in their head, and in their neck, and darkness in their eyes.
and those who bring forth a drop of blood in their mouth, and have swollen tongues, and bleed from the gums. and there are some who dream, and see through blood and fog and death and similar things.
And when we see these signs, and even when it is in the middle of the month, we command them to vomit after 3 hours of the day.
The blood of the vein helps in the greatness of the head ... that comes to the eyes, and it is not fitting that this should be after the evacuation of the whole body.
and this vomiting is in place of the bloodletting of the cephalic.
and it is not fitting for those who are of cold constitution or who have catarrh, because this does great harm to them.
And for this reason, it is not fitting that the elderly use it, nor those who have or chief cold diseases.
And those who recover from it often become oblivious, and for this reason it is necessary to put the suction cup a little lower down due to the fear of oblivion.
Ventosaion in the neck is in place of the vein of the head and of the basilica, and for this reason it is suitable for the treatment of the pain and to the opening of the channel of the peritoneum, and to all kinds of fullness;
and there it is fitting to poke gently, for if it holds too firmly, it obstructs or stomach and or heart.
The ventilations of the two ribs of the neck are worth for pains of the head, and headache and migraine, and in strangulation, and to the pain at the roots of the teeth.
and it is in the place of the vein of the basilica; and it is fitting that you command the patient to express his hand upon putting, that he does not cut the artery, and there comes a hemorrhage.
The ventilations under the chin are worth for mouth disease, and gum decay, and similar diseases that are in the mouth; and it is in the place of the veins of the two lips.
The ventilation of the shoulders is good for the illness that comes from heat and swelling.
The ventilation of the armpits is as good as three veins in the arm. because it draws blood from these large veins;
and instructs the patient not to shave it too much, because the skin is bare of flesh, and shows veins and arteries.
The suction cup which is on the rump is good for hemorrhoids from the foundation, and for diseases below, and it is necessary that the suction cup be large, and be of iron, that it has need to well milk; and perchance, if it was subtle, it would break; and I make great wounds.
The suction cups of the legs are applied openly, because they attract blood from the whole body, and are good for old pains of the reins, and of the thighs, and of the bladder, and soften the flowers; and are in their place of two shins, and of two ankles, and nevertheless they weaken the body after long use, and bring weakness in many dispositions.
The manner of putting on the suction cup is that you put it first empty, and succeed temperately, and put it gently, and move evenly, and do not cease from doing this, until you see the place red and inflamed, and appear the color of blood; then firm, and replace the suction cups, and take care in the disposition of the bodies, because there are such who have tender flesh, and clear pores: so it is necessary to strike only once, and it is necessary to make wide wounds, and a prick deep; and suck lightly.
And if the vein is thick, it is necessary to prick it twice: the first time to make a subtle passage for the thick blood.
And if the vein is very thick, it is necessary to prick it a third time; and when we want to draw blood little by little, we only pierce once.
And if we want a lot of blood, we start again often; and if the vein is thick, we pierce it in the middle, and the end so that the skin be pierced carefully.
And it is necessary for those who have thick and hard skin and whose pores are closed, that you anoint the places of the cupping glasses with oil appetizer and dissolving. if it is in this state, of violet oil, or sweet almond oil, or seed oil of gourd;
and if it is in the spring, of cresson oil, or lily, or chamomile, or something similar.
And if the superfluities are large and cold, then take wormwood oil, or balm oil, or anise oil, and similar things.
And if the one whom one heals has tender flesh and wide pores, then it is not fitting to put any oil on them
But it is necessary to wash after the aeration of rose water, or cold water, or elderberry water, or gourd water, or porcelain water, or any similar thing.
And he who has much moisture, may rise from ash, or myrtle water, and sumac, and similar things.
And those who have large superfluities rise from old wine, or buckthorn water, or a decoction of anise or chamomile, or other similar things.
And it is not necessary to cupping before the bath or in the bath, but after bathing an hour or two; and do not sleep after the cupping.
and it is necessary that he  be warded, when he must be winnowed and when he is winnowed. And ward if the one who is well is choleric, and if his flesh is too much red and inflamed. so it is necessary that he eat cold things, such as pomegranates and endives and lettuces at the  side, and similar things.
and minced pigeons, and roast meat, and moist meats.
And he who has a cold complexion, take syrup of honey, and fragrant wine, which is between old and new, and quince, and quince, and small eels and pigeons;
and on the day that he shall fast, he must drink more than eat;
And it is necessary to give no one at any time garlic or nutmeg before or after the venesection to comfort the main limbs; and be subtle with the wine, but it is not necessary for those who are hot to drink it.
The suction cups that are applied without hurting are those that are put on the liver, and on the mouse, and gout, and on the belly and the bladder and the hips and the groin, because those members do not suffer being hurt on their eyes.
and it is done only to draw blood from limb to limb, as we put on the nipples when they are giving birth; to remove the viscosity that is in the limb, as we put suction cups on the belly and on the bladder to reduce the member;
and remove the pain, when there is an obstruction or stone, as it removes by its attractive virtue perhaps the obstruction, or displaces the stone from its place;
and thus it is done when one puts it upon the liver and upon the mouse when there is wind retained.
and these cupping glasses are administered empty to suck only; and sometimes they are administered together with fire, and sometimes full of tepid water.
as in illnesses of the pleura, and in this manner one fills the cupping glass with hot water alone, or with water to which herbs suitable for it have been boiled.
The form of the cupping glass administered with fire is as follows:
And have 2 fingers wide and half a palm in length, and have or costate around the middle 1 small hole, as for to put a needle
and let it be of iron, soft in front so that it does not burn the patient when putting it on the limb;
and have in the middle a transverse rod of iron or steel, to put a candle enclosed,
and let them be large and small according to the diseases and the age of those who take them;
for the suction cups of children are other than those of old people, and of thin ones than of fat ones
And must one thus place this suction cup on the limb:
take the candle wax or .i. liniment, and put it inside the suction cup across from the stem which is inside the suction cup so that the flame be at the bottom of the suction cup so that it does not burn the patient;
and then put it upon the limb, and these must be on the punctured place that we have said, so that when one wants, so in goes the vapor, and one takes off the suction cup;
and take up the linen as before, and recommence it often, if you have need.
In the suction cup which is administered in the illness of pleuresin, to all acute [conditions], has no rod nor punctured place, and is not administered further than when it is full of water, and is put upon the limb only as much as;
and this is the form:
Suctions are not administered except in members where one cannot place cupping glasses because of their small size, such as lips and gums, and similar. and their denuded flesh, such as two or three, and other similar parts;
and the qualities of the user are that when you find cuppings that are in clear sweet waters without blemish, then take them.
and put them one by one in fresh water until they become accustomed to it and have nothing in their stomachs; and then be cleansed with leeches and cupping, then rub the limb until it is red, and put on the poultices.
and when they are full and softened, if it is their place where one can put a cupping glass, then put it, because this is very helpful after.
If not, lift the place with a little bit of water and then very well, and then sprinkle it;
and if the place heals too much after the poultices, then moisten one linen cloth in cold water, and put it on, until the poultice is extinguished;
and if the abscess is multiplied, put on it powdered vitriol or saltpeter, and similar things, until it is extended.
or you put on the place half of peeled beans, and let them until they are dried on the place, then it will stop now.
and if you need more of it, take other poultices.
And if the poultices do not want to be taken, rub the place with fresh blood, or you stick a needle into it until the pus comes out. and then put them up, and as soon as they feel the blood, they get hot.
and when you see that they are bleeding, powder them with a little bit of aloe and flaxseed ground together, or ashes, and they will now stop.
Here begins the book of fractures
This chapter is many times necessary in the art of medicine, and is the restoring of fracture and dislocation.
Know, dear son, that the fools who read from this chapter will never see any of the ancient books, nor will they ever read them.
And for this reason, knowledge is kept hidden in our land, because I have never found any good one.
And I know nothing else, except through the knowledge of ancient books, which I have studied so much that I have mastered the science, and by experience, and by the custom of my life.
And I have described to you in this chapter what is contained therein, and have abridged it at the end, and have clearly shown the forms of the instruments that are used, as I have done in these two chapters before.
It is therefore necessary that we say in the prologue of this book the sum of words and chapters where the sages put their understanding, and stay on the truth, so that those who are experienced know and learn this noble art, and learn it to others.
I say that when a fracture or dislocation or torsion or sprain comes to anyone, it is necessary that you hasten to heal the patient on one side and the other, if nothing hinders it, such as weakness of body, or infancy, or old age.
or if his limbs are not very warm, or too cold; and avoid cold foods, that is to say, cold meats, and meat of lamb and goat, and do not drink wine, nor consume any fatty foods, and do not overfill yourself with meats that fill the veins with blood, until you have doubt of a hot abscess, or expansion of matter in the limb; then regain the patient to his first state of government that he has used.
And when the broken bone begins to heal, it is necessary that one nourish the patient with meats that make great nourishment, or which have viscosity, such as wheat cooked in water, and rice, and testicles, and pies, and tripe of veal, and eggs, and fresh fish, and red wine, and similar things. For with such nourishment it regains strength and the fracture heals faster.
And know that bones broken in the old and decrepit do not easily mend or join according to their nature due to the dryness of the limbs, nor those who are too tender, such as the bones of little children;
but if there is no cure, reset the broken bone i.e. big splints that support and join the limb together, so that it strengthens as it was before; and to all points of its work, and for this reason, you must nourish with large meats as we have said.
And know that fractures are diverse in many ways.
Because a fracture of the head is different from a fracture of the leg, or foot, and I will tell you in this chapter all kinds of fractures. Because there are fractures that go in a circle, and others in sharpening, like the point of a pen for writing.
Because there are fractures that go in a circle, and others in sharpening, like the point of a pen for writing. And if there is a fracture with a wound, and a fracture all over with a small fissure.
And to each manner has its engine, and its instrument proper in the restoration, according to what memory comes to it;
And is known the fracture of the bone by those that its parts are twisted, and opened well outwardly, and feels to the pressure of the hand;
And when there is no twisting nor feeling upon touching, and the patient feels little pain, then there is no fracture;
but it can have deformity, or fissure, or small fracture. You should not move it by hand, but apply the medicines that come after, and then restrain it carefully.
And know that the fracture that goes in a circle, and which has two parts disjoined, it must now be put together evenly, so that the abscess is brought to a head.
and if an abscess forms there, do not let it go untouched until the abscess subsides; Then put it even in the place that you can gently and wisely, and know that the restoration of this is easier than the restoration of the one where there are pieces; then restrain it, as it is proper later on.
And if the bone is broken into pieces, if it is two parts, whether it be hands or feet, or to your hand if it is a small member, or two cords, or one cord and to your hand;
and put the limb according to its natural figure, so that when the parts of the broken limb are separated, you gently align all the pieces in their places as much as you can, and keep that by your work no injury or pain comes to the patient;
and adjust well the two ends of the bones according to the best forms.
And he feels it well in the hand if it seems to you that it is not well; if it is beautifully straightened, and do not restrain it too much, nor press as those who bring it by their work abscesses hot and contraction to the limb, as we have wanted many times.
And when the limb is in place, so chastise well the patient that he does not move it, neither waking nor sleeping, neither turning, nor in any other way. And guard well that the limb be so assured that he feels no pain at all. For when he feels no pain, then it is not yet in place, and it is necessary to put it in such a disposition that he feels no pain;
For when he feels no pain, then it is not yet in place, and it is necessary to put it in such a disposition that he feels no pain; and keep it so it is set straight, that crookedness does not come when it is restored.
and the qualities of the broken limb are according to what I tell you.
Know that broken limbs are diverse in smallness and largeness and in form.
For there are small limbs, such as arms and legs and similar things: so it is necessary to wrap them in cloths of soft and fine linen;
and those that are large, like the hip and leg: it is necessary to envelop them with a wide and hard bandage, for the wide bandages encompass the whole large limb, and restrain it from all parts equally, so that there is no pressure.
then tie lighter bandages, three or four turns according to the limb, and hold your hand a little on all of the bandage, then go above the fracture and restrain it less, so that the fracture then separates a little from the fracture.
and soften the bandage bit by bit, as much as you grasp a large part of the healthy place, then take another bandage and turn it again directly above the broken place;
Then return to the part below the break, and restrain it moderately, not too strongly nor too weakly, as we have said in the first section above.
Then place between the splints of linen or cloth, until it is all even, then tie everything above with a bandage, and then put your well-made dressings on top, if there is no abscess or swelling.
And if there is a swelling or abscess, put on top something soothing for the abscess and that removes the swelling, and let it remain so for some days.
Then restrain above your dressings, and let them be of half the width of a sturdy cane carefully cut or from wood which is used for making cleavers, or from palm branches, and let them be according to this figure:
but it is necessary that the splint which one puts upon the fracture be a bit larger and wider than the others;
and also as long as is necessary for the limb of smallness or largeness;
then bind upon the splints also as you have done in the first place, then tie above with a thread evenly, just as in the first place on the fracture;
tighter it is above, and looser below; and it is necessary that the thread be medium, neither too thick nor too thin, and be of soft linen;
because if the threads are thick, as I see in the works of fools who make their stitches with linen cords twisted, and it is a great error, because the stitch cannot be even if it is too fine, and it should not have between each star less than two of space.
And if the patient is bruised by the edges of the stitches after the tightening in their flesh, then put under them bandages of linen or wool, so that it does not turn blue.
When the wound is with the breaking, and the sinew is broken, I will say its cure here after.
And know that it is not necessary to set all broken limbs on the first day. Because when the limb is large, it is not necessary to set it immediately but rather after 5 days or 7, or more according to your surety of a hot abscess coming.
And see here the manner of ancient plasters for restoring fractures, dislocations, and torsions: and that you take flour that is kept at the walls of the mill, and it is mixed with plenty of egg, and put this preparation, neither too light nor too thick, and in use, and this is the common manner of the plaster restoring a fracture to many dispositions, and even to women and small children, because it is not too hot nor too cold.
Another manner of plaster restoring a fracture and dislocation and torsion: take 3 parts of  barberries and ladane and euphrasia and asafetida and gum arabic and mugwort, ana .x. З.; myrrh and aloes, ana .v. З.; and alechil .viiij. З.; and make it into powder, and mix it with the white of an egg; if the complexion of the man is hot, use this plaster, because it is of good composition, and restores broken bones well, and it is useful to many men.
Another manner of plaster that is good for torsion: take mugwort and wormwood, ana. x.  gr.; myrrh and aloes, ana. viiij. gr.; acacia vi. gr.; Armenian bole .x. gr., and grind well, and confit with water or the yolk of an egg, and administer it.
Another manner of plaster for joints and bones dislocated from their places, and it soothes the pain that arises, and the use of bone, and the fracture: take fresh linen, and moisten it in oil and cook it, and put it on the place. This plaster does not restore [it] back, but it is good for soothing a hot abscess, and properly removing the pains.
Another manner of plaster that restores broken bones: take dried fig leaves and ground ivy leaves, and grind them together, and make a plaster.
Another way of emplaster for the restoration of the fracture of the bone and to lessen the remaining abscess. Take root of vismalve, chamomile, flowers of violets, flour of veces, of each one part; and grind, and confiture with wine, and if the limb is scalded, confiture it with coriander water moist, or with water, and use it.
Another way of emplaster more forcibly than the first, when a hard abscess comes to the restoration of the limb. Take roots of vismalve, and seed of flax, balm, melilot, and henbane, and flowers of violets and chamomile, of all one part; and grind, and confit with water of salt, or sweet water, or with wine, according to the heat of the limb, and its rest.
Hippocrates says in his book that one should put on the broken limb for restoration only cerate made of wax and oil, and nothing else more, and he says it should be neither too soft nor too hard.
And it seems Galen one must put on the broken limb, to restore, things dry a little warm, such as myrrh and aloes and incense and similar things, as we have said.
Another way of making a plaster that is good for the injury and pain: take mugwort and horsetail of sheep cut up, or feathers of eye, and marsh mallow, and silk equally, and grind them together, and make it into a plaster and apply it.
And then loosen it a little after, and be careful that the patient does not feel any pain, nor are the bones moving out of place; if not, do not loosen it for many days
And if pain comes to the place, or itching, feels no rest, or swelling, then hasten, and loosen it, and remove the plaster now; and take light linen cloth, and sponge of sea moist, and dip in water, and lift the place, until the itching ceases, and the pain is soothed. Then let the limb rest for an hour, then put on a dry cloth, moistened in water or rose oil, and tie it with a bandage, until you are sure of a hot abscess.
And rest the inflammation of the limb, and remove the pain, then recommence the fine dressing, and a little plaster, and do not bind it as tightly as before; and be subtle until it is healed.
And if you see that the abscess is hot and red, and pain and swelling have been removed entirely, and you need plaster and bandage, then recommence it, as you did at first equally.
And if nothing of what we have said comes to the limb, then do not unbind it for less than 3 days or 4 or 5 or 7; and never leave it loose for 20 days, according to what is seen, until the fracture heals, and the joint approaches its proper position.
Therefore he restrains it more than before, and makes his flesh thicker, as I have said before; and if you see him drying more than necessary, know that numbness cannot come there. Therefore from hot water rises, every time that you loosen it, and every third day, and apply a little heat.
Therefore by this work the numbness is cured from the limb, and amends quickly those who do foolishly mire it, that they return the limb crooked: it is bad, and thus are perilous works, and I see nothing else but to leave it and work it straight.
of various ways of fracture Many kinds of fractures are, and diverse shapes, and the causes are destined.
For there are fractures that are made by the percussion of a sword, and the neck bone all the way up to the place which is below the bone, as it is done with an axe or club; and for this reason this manner of fracture is called "haichure".
Where the sword cuts the bone from above without piercing, and this manner of fracture is called "absolute"; and the wound of these two fractures great or small.
And if there is an enclosed percussion, or fissure or of the neck of the bone, or of the cheek on the bone, or similar things.
And if there is a fracture passing through, which approaches near the membrane that is beneath the bone, or it is above the bone, and this wound is large or small.
And if the wound which is put back into the bone as subtly as a hair, and the fissure is small, and for this reason this fracture is called “capillary”;
And if the wound which is made by a blow of stone, or by a fall, or by something similar, and causes a piece of bone to enter inward, and it looks like the bellows when they are heated above the cauldrons; so it enters the bone inside.
And this happens more to those who have soft bones, such as children's heads;
and there are all these manners of fracture that small pieces are dislodged in them like stars; and I will speak of it in its place.
And let us know all the ways of fractures by the traction on them, and the examination of their ends, and by the rotten flesh which is on them.
The appearance of capillary [like] is known by this: when one has uncovered the bone and rubs it above, black fracture appears.
In the cure of the fracture, take heed to the accidents of the patient, and if you see no bad accident, such as vomiting of blood, and loss of understanding, and swelling, and paleness, and fever ague, and eyes red and inflamed, and other similar things in more dispositions, then it cannot heal without doubt.
And if you do not see an inescapable accident, and you hope for salvation, then begin the treatment.
And when the broken bone comes to you first and it is in winter, then it is necessary to remove the bone before the fourteenth day at the time that you can.
And if it is in summer, then hurry to remove the bone before the seventh day, so that the cloth beneath the bone does not rot, and comes the accident that we have said.
And if the bone fracture comes as far as the cloth that covers the brain, then it is necessary that you split the broken part thus: and it is that you grasp the head of the injured person, and uncover above the bone in all the ways that you can, and on the figure of the wound more carefully than you can.
And if the blood comes out when uncovering the bone, or abscess boils, then help them as it is fitting, and that you fill the wound with soft cloths soaked in rose oil. And let the wound rest until the abscess boils are calmed and be sure of the blood flow; then begin to work around the bone removal, and it is done in .ij. ways of work: one way is that you cut at the narrowest point before, and this is the form:
And then put .i. other incision larger than the first.
And the second way is that you have a number of incisions of various kinds, some narrow and others wide, and they are pointed, and made of iron; and in working lightly so that you do not break the head.
And if the bone is hard and stiff, it is necessary that you pierce it inward, so that you administer splints with drills, lest they go beyond the bone of the test, and it must have above the tip a margin or circle, that does not allow the tip to pass beyond the bone; and you should have several, so that each one comes in its place from the thickness of the bone, so that you have drills for all tests; and this is the form of the three kinds of drills:
The qualities for piercing inward the broken bone is that you put one drill on the bone, and turn to your two hands until you know that the bone is pierced; then put the drill elsewhere a bit afterwards, and so do all around, then cut with the incisors the space of the bone that is between the perforations, and do this more subtly than you can, and lightly, as we have said, until you draw the bone to your hand, or to any of the instruments that you have like pliers; and keep that you do not touch the marrow nor the surface.
And when you will have the bone pierced, and treated, it is necessary that you remove the  appetite which is stuck to the bone to any other instrument seeming like an incisor, but it is necessary that it be more strong and more subtle than the other incisor;
and if it remains nothing of the small bones, nor any scales, so gently with instruments, then treat the wound with tents and dressings that we have said.
And the other manner of work is that which Galen says, which is drier; and it is very strong, and this is his word. It is necessary first that you uncover a part of the bone, where the fracture appears open, so that when you have uncovered that part, you will place beneath the head of this lentil-shaped incision, which is the shape:
And do not cut on one side, and is the part sharp in two sides, so that the cutting edge is toward the bone; then strike with a small mallet above, so that you gently cleave the bone all around, and take good care of the cloth that is beneath;
If it is pressed against the bone, gently pull it out, because one pulls it out well without pain, and without fear.
And if the broken bone does not pierce to the skin, and the bone is only cut from above, and there are small pieces, then it is necessary to put this asperity back together, and remove the scales with a fine razor which you must have various quantities of, in order to apply in each place the most suitable one, according to the work and the figure of the fracture.
If you begin with large razors, and afterwards with finer ones, and do not cease to do this until it is well.
In each of the other capillary cuts and subtle fractures, it is necessary that you apply the cause according to its appropriateness; and this is something that is not well-repaired to him who has put his study into this art.
And if the wound is uncovered, then it is necessary that you take i. a strip of linen, according to the quantity of the wound, and moisten it in rose oil, and put it on the wound; Then take another strip doubled in 2 or 3, and moisten it in wine and rose oil, and put it on the first strip; and do this more gently than you can, that you do not wound the wound, then administer above i. other linen, and do not tighten it more than so much that it only holds the wound;
and leave it so for 1 or 2 days, until the abscess is calmed, then untie it, and administer medicines such as roots of lilies, and ground verbena, and incense powder, and aristolochia, and similar things; and of these things make a powder, and put it on the wound, and administer additional medicines softened without mordication;
And guard that the wound be quite clean, that you do not leave there any ointment, nor do you let it come together with a bowe, for when a bowe comes together upon the web of the brain, it rots and purrs, and brings great harm to the patient; for when one puts on top this biting thing, it bites from above.
Take guard therefore, if no bad accidents come to the patient, as we have said, then it is doubtful without doubt.
And if only blackness comes there from the medicine that we have put on, which has virtue, then it is necessary that you take one part of honey, and three parts of rose oil, and glue one bandage, and put it on the wound. then the cure of manners of cures that it is due, until it is healed.
Know that sometimes the two parts of the bone above are broken, or one by itself, because they are two bones; and the lower one is cartilaginous, and does not break, unless it is forced to bend or twist, and then heals.
And if one of the two parts is broken, then it is necessary that you put your little finger or through the hole of the bone, and put each fracture inside your index finger, and with the palm outward, until the bone returns to its natural shape; and do this gently, and guard that the patient does not feel pain from your work.
And if the fracture is in the part above the knees, and it cannot come to its place, then you must put it equal to the head of a rail, a piece thick.
And if the fracture is of two parts, do it again, and hasten to restore it the first day, if you can;
if not, after the seventh or tenth, when the abscess has subsided, then wrap around the head of the knee with ten bandages of linen, if the fracture is in one part.
Or you put one on the other side, if the fracture is there; and let the bandages be so thick that they fill the hollows of the knee.
And certain restorers say that one must moisten the tents with butter, and change them every day. It does not seem to me that this is good, but it is fitting that they be moistened in the confection of yolk of egg, and powder of mill; then leave the tent, as long as the bone is hard, and the cartilages hardened.
And sometimes one puts goose feathers in their place, and if it is i.e., a single sheet of cloth, wrapped around, and the breeze holds it, and blows on the patient; or do as you please.
And if an abscess comes to the boil while you are working on it, put a certain kind of cloth or cotton moistened in rose oil, or in i. p. (one part) of dyacylon.
And if an abscess does not come, apply a plaster from the outside, of sesame flour, and incense powder, mixed with egg white, then put light dressings on top, and do not bind it at all;
And if the fracture of the bone is small and it is broken into small pieces, then extract them with suitable instruments, then sew up the fissure, and treat with things that close flesh, and binding, such as plasters and ointments suitable for this.
And if there is no wound inside the bone, then treat it with bandages and put plenty of splint on it, until it is healed.
Of the fracture of the jawbone.
When the jaw is broken from below and there is no wound outside and the fracture is outside only, and is not broken in two, except for the corner inside, if one knows it lightly.
It is necessary, if the fracture is in the right side, that you put your right index finger into the mouth of the patient; and if the fracture is in the left mandible, then put your right index finger, and push the fracture inward lightly, and hold it with the other hand outside, and make it even.
And if the jaw fracture is separated into two, it is necessary that you administer extension to two parts, until it is even.
And if movement of the teeth occurs, or rupture, then strain with a thread of gold or silver or silk, then put on the broken jaw cerote, and put on i. drapel double; and put on lou drapel a great estele well made, or a piece of leather equal, long and wide according to the mandible, and tie it up as much as you can, and command the patient to rest, and eat light meats.
And if you see that the figure changes, then untie it on the third day, and then put back what is changed; and put a plaster above, of powder from the mill with an abundance of egg or sesame flour, after what you have removed the cerote; and put on the plaster light linen, and if the plasters adhere, and the disposition of the patient does not change, leave it as long as it is healthy; many times is healed in iii. weeks.
And if an abscess comes, then administer what we have said many times.
And if there is a fracture and wound together, reward no piece of the bone in it is removed; so subtle of the remove with instruments suitable to this.
And if the wound is narrow, so enlarge it with flame according to your need.
And when you will have removed all these pieces, and there remains none, then cover the wound, if it is wide, and put upon it one plaster suitable to this, to prevent flesh, until it is healed.
of the forceps The fracture breaks many times before, towards the shoulder, and the fracture is according to .iij. manners: or it is broken and severed in .ij., and there are pieces, and it is the lightest to restore; or there is a fracture with a wound.
And the work is when the fracture is without a wound, that you have .ij. ministers, so that one holds the shoulder which is the fractured bone; and the other extends the neck towards the part; then put equal the fracture to your hands, so that the form is as it should be, and there is no appearance nor blemish.
And if you need to extend it more, put under the shoulder of the patient a round sphere of cloth, or wool, and be thick according to your necessity; and being and lift the fracture, and restrain the sphere in your hand, so that you put equal the fracture, as it should be.
And if you cannot draw the head of the shoulder with force because it comes in front, then it is necessary that the patient lie often on his back and place under the shoulder one hour glass, and put the ministers the shoulder down, until the bone of the shoulder be lifted.
And then direct the fracture to your two hands, and if you find it broken, then it is necessary that you split it up; and treat the pieces gently, and if the bones cannot join for any mounting, then cut it at one of the incisors that you have; but put under the shoulder this instrument, in order to ward off the syfac:
And it seems like a spoon, and is not at all hollowed out, and be as wide as it is necessary, according to the size of the bone and the strength of the work; and have two heads, as you see, and let one be broad, and the other narrow, as is the route of the wound that you made when you treated the bones;
and when you are assured of the abscess hot, if you cut the wound, and if the rupture is small, or you doubt the hot abscess, then apply the wound with bandages and tents, according to its quantity.
And if the hot abscess comes, then moisten one bandage in rose oil and honey and wine, and put it on top.
The tightening of the bone, when it is without wounds and without cutting, is that you put on the bone a plaster of ground flour and egg yolk, and put light bandages on top, and put a stick under the splint, if you need it. Then take a very wide bandage of one palm's width, then put one double bandage on top of the bandages and plaster; then take a subtle splint of three fingers in width and length, and wrap it around the bandaged one, so that the head of the bandage hangs down; And put the splint upon the fracture, and turn the bandage on the neck, and lower the good shoulder, and lower the bad shoulder; and hold each part firmly, and when you see that the ligament holds the fracture well, and you clearly see that the splint does not move above the broken bone, so reward it each day, and when the ligaments slacken, then restrain it.
And make the patient lie on his back, and put him when he sleeps one small pillow under the shoulder, to raise the shoulder upward; so it will lighten the fracture of the collarbone by the alignment of the shoulder, or you tie the arm to the neck, and do not untie it unless a bad accident happens, until twenty days.
Then restart the plastering if you see that he needs it, and restrain it and leave him so, until he is restored; and it is restored in at most twenty-eight days, and in less for some men.
of the breaking of the shoulder
It happens that the shoulder breaks or its large place does not come together in the middle, and it is only felt by touch; so set it according to the figure of the breaking, and reset it according to its natural form, in all the ways you can; then put on the place powder of the mill with an abundance of egg, and light bandages, and put on i. double drape; then put on a broad and fine splint, a little more wide than the shoulder, and if the splint is uneven in any place of the shoulder, so employ that unevenness of lin bandages, so that the splint lies evenly; and then bind it with a very firm bandage tightly, so that the splint does not move from its place, and look at the joint every day; and every time it softens, so restrain it, and put back the splint if it is out of place, and have the sick person lie on his side; and the shoulder is restored in xx. days or xxv., And when this number is fulfilled, then untie it, and be sure, for it is not bone that is set easily.
And if a piece of the bone comes before, and not under the heart, so make it up, and the bone, and do what we have said in the breaking of the collarbone to soothe an abscess hot.
of the fracture of the leg
The leg is sometimes broken in the middle, but this happens little; but it often breaks at the end. And when it is broken in the middle, it leans to one side, and the patient feels great pain, and lack of strength, and thirst, and perhaps vomits blood, and the veins open in the broken bone, and it hurts very much.
And the restoration is that the patient lies often on his back, and one cushion is put between the shoulders, then the shoulders are pressed, and the sides of the two bones are brought together with your hands, and subtly in all ways as you can, until the shape of the bone is as it should be; then bandages and poultices are put on top of a thin layer of salt, or another light plaster, and it is wrapped in one cloth, and laid upon the broken bone, so that it does not move; and the bandage is turned around back and forth, and kept tight, and each hour the bandage is checked, and if it loosens, it is tightened; and if it needs to be loosened for corrosion or itching that comes to the place, or pain or abscess, then hurry, and loosen it, and wipe off what has come out in ways of cures; then reapply the bandage, and keep it tight until it is healed.
of the breaking of the ribs
Know that the breaking of the ribs comes only in their thick parts after the back, and at the head within, and they bend only for this reason because they are glassy; and one feels it well upon inquiry on the sides.
And the restoration is that you put the break equal, as it should. And then put the plaster, and restrict it with a splint, if you need it.
And if the breaking of the ribs is sloping inwards, the patient feels very great pain and stabbing, as well as shortness of breath, because the bone pricks the lung; and also, they have pains, and cough and vomit blood greatly, and this is a serious illness, and the ancients put much importance on it.
And if there are some who say that it is necessary to administer meats which swell the belly, in order to expel the wind outward.
We do not do this, except for abscesses that have come warm. And if it has come, treat it.
And some of you say that one should put suction cups on the spot, to suck out forcefully, and this seems reasonable; however, there is doubt that the suction cup attracts superfluities at the site for the sake of weakness.
And they say none of you should cover the place with wool soaked in hot oil, and put a tent between the ribs to make the area even, then be cured from the treatment of pleurisy, meat, and medicine.
And if the patient feels great pain that he cannot bear from the bone that pricks the skin, and there is doubt for the patient, then it is necessary to split on the place of the broken rib, and it is necessary to put under i. instrument to ward off the syfac; and then one must saw the bone, and draw lightly, and then sew the two lips of the wound, if it is large, and cure it with ointments, until it is healed. And if an abscess comes, then put on moist cloths in rose oil, and put on the place; and cure while the place of that which it should be abscess, and lie flat on his side where it should be, until it is healed.
of the fracture of the neck
Sometimes a fracture comes to the bone of the neck, and sometimes it happens that it bends; and also in the spine of the back. And when this happens to anyone, and you want to know if he will be healed or not, take ward if you see his hands softened and swollen and dead, and cannot move them nor extend them, and when you prick them with a needle, he does not feel it. Know that he is mortal in many dispositions, and if he moves them and feels well when they are strained and pointed, know that the joint of the bone is saved, and that the patient will be cured, if one puts care on him.
And if similar thing comes to the spine of the back, and you want to know if he will be healed or not, take ward if his legs are softened, and if the accident is in his hands, and on his back there is sweating and evacuation without volition; and when one has him lying on his belly, there is evacuation without volition. And when he is lying on his back and wants to sit up, he cannot. Know that he is mortal: if he does not labor in his cure.
And if this accident does not come to him, it is the lighter thing.
And the cure is that you reward if there is an abscess hot, then put on the spine rose oil or the oil of egg yolk, until it be appeased; then put on a comforting and drying plaster, and bind it with a bandage, and command the patient to rest; and let him not sleep on that part where he feels pain, as long as he is sound. And if any bone is broken, it behoves to cover on the heart; and take out the bone, then assemble the two lips of the wound, if it is large, with one suture, then cure it with ointment that promotes flesh, until it is sound; and if the head of the bone is broken, which is called the “head of the cow,” put your left hand pouch into it, and set it equal to the other hand as best you can, then put the plaster and splint on top, if you need it; then restrain it, and if there are bones dislocated, do so again, take them out, and cure the wound until it is sound.
of the fracture of the hip bone
It happens that the bone of the hip is broken, and if it happens, there should not have been much decrease at the top; and making it long, and declining to the side, and comes to the patient pain at the place, and prickling, and swells what breaks.
And the restoration is that you extend your hand above, as long as you are on the fracture; and know which is the fracture and the figure of it; and if the fracture is at the top only, so put equal the fracture, as long as it is to natural figure.
And if the fracture is long, or it declines to the inside, so make the patient lie on their belly, as long as the restoration of that fracture be apparent to you. And when you have put it even, put it on the plaster, then put on a splint of wood or of horn, and restrain the bandage so that it does not move; and apply the place under the ribs, until the ligament is even.
And command the patient to sleep on his healthy rib or on his back.
And if an abscess comes there, do not touch it until the abscess is calmed, and put on what we have said before; and then return to restoration, and restrain it as is proper, if there is no bad accident; and this is the manner.
of the dislocation of the shoulder
The shoulder is that which is between the shoulder and the head of the shoulder, and if it is broken, one must restore it according to one of the two ways: one of which is that you take a single stick of medium thickness, according to this form:
And tie the two heads two strings, and bend them upward, and place the patient on one seat; then lay his broken arm on the stick, as far as it reaches to the armpit, and make a curvature of the stick in the middle, then place on any heavy thing or the ministers extend it downward; then put the mirrors the fracture equal to their hands together, until the fracture returns as it should.
And the other way is that one supports the patient on his back, and ties his hand to his neck, then commands two ministers that one holds that which is above the fracture with their hands, and the other holds below at one length, and extend each to their part.
And if you see that the extraction is more fors, hold (it), that is, a lien below the fracture, and above the fracture, and extend each of the ministers to its part. And if the fracture is near the head of the shoulder, then it is necessary that you put one linen under the armpit, and another towards the side, below the fracture; and also if the fracture is towards the side, it is necessary to put one linen lightly, without labor, until the fracture is equal on top and on the side; then put back the fracture as it is due, and the restraint, if an abscess does not come.
And if an abscess comes, do not restrain it until seven days, and put on a linen cloth moistened in honey and rose oil, until the abscess calms; then restrain (it), and the manner of restraining it is that you place the splint on the fracture, then assemble the arm on the shoulder, and place your hand on the shoulder or on the chest; and put the drape, and restrain on the shoulder, and on the arm, so that the arm is in its right place, unless something prevents you, or if the bone is not moved.
And if you doubt that the bone is not moving, use splints, and place on the fracture a splint larger and stronger than the others, and have between each splint two fingers of space, and be each splint so large that it passes over the fracture three fingers on each side; then restrain on the splints, as I said at the beginning of the chapter on the fracture, more strongly and less in widening.
And if you see the setting of the bones, and the tightening, as we have said, in the hour that you restore the broken limb, and you doubt the abscess is hot, then leave it tied up until the seventh day, as we have said; then look every three days the tie, that itching or swelling does not come to the place, or that the discharges cannot come to the limb because it is too estranged. If it succeeds, as we have said.
And if no such accidents come, then do not untie it before three days or more, and let the patient sleep on his back, and have his hands on his stomach; and put under the shoulder one cushion of wool evenly, and look every hour of the day or of the night that the figure of the broken limb does not move, or that the ties are not softened; if it succeeds by the virtue of medicine, and give him the food that we have before mentioned, in such manner that the food be at first subtle; and when he begins to recover, let it be coarse. And it is customary that the shoulder and leg ought to be taken back in forty days of the whole; and then one must untie it and administer bath and medicines of ointments for the place to heal. And if the constriction is bad and emboldened, then delay untieing for one day or two months.
of the fracture of the arm
The arm is composed of .ij. bones, which are called the two "fossiles," because one is small, and it follows the pocket; and the other is large, and it is below, toward the small toe; perhaps the large fossil breaks alone, or the small one, and perhaps both together.
When the small fossil is broken, the restoration is light, and the healing; and when the large one is broken, its healing is bad, and more painful than when they are broken together. If it is the small fossil that is broken alone, then it is necessary to carefully extend it, and put it straight.
And if it is the large fossil, then it is necessary to constrain more forcefully; and extend it on one cushion, and hold the pocket of the hand higher than the others, and the small toes lower than the other toes, and so that the patient is crossed upon himself, and one cushion in front of him higher, that the patient does not suffer any labor; then extend the ministers on his arm to the underside towards his hand, or on one line, and others ministers on another above. And then put the mirrors straight, according to its best form.
And if in the fracture there are pieces, put each one in its place, and if there is any detached that grasps the heart, and you cannot restore it to its place, then do as above with the bone, as we have said before.
And if with the fracture there is a wound, I have spoken of it in the singular chapter; so take care of it.
And if at the beginning of the restoration abscesses arise, then glue i.e. a bandage of cerote made of rose oil and white wax, that it be neither too hard nor too soft; and tie i.e. bandage over gently, until the abscess is appeased. And then remove the cerote, and put on the plaster of ground powder with abundance of egg yolk, then put the splints, and let the splint for the fracture be closer together and a little wider than the others; and know that it must have six splints or arms in more positions: whether the fracture is in one bone, or two; and keep it tighter above the fracture than elsewhere, and every day less as I have said at the beginning of the chapter; and let the bandages which are over the fracture be soft and moist, and not hard nor rough; and let the thread with which it is bound be linen, neither too thick nor too thin, as we have said. And reward the limb and the binding after some days. And if any bad accidents come to the limb, such as itching that comes to the limb, it is necessary that you raise the member of hot water, until the itch is appeased; and leave the limb not too much rest. And then begin again the constriction, and if the ligaments are broken and the bones dislocated, and similar things, so the address.
And if it happens that the numbing cannot come to the limb, because it is too constricted, then it is necessary that you soften it a little, and leave thus some days, until the numbing comes, and then constrain it.
And if none of these things that we have said come to the patient, then do not unbind him until 20 days, or until when he can put his hands on his neck, and let his necks be equal, and beware of movement and agitation, and sleep on his back; and know that this fracture is restored in 30 days or 35, and perhaps in 20 days, according to the compositions and the complexities of the virtues.
of the fracture of the hand
Know that on the back of the hand and as we have two it comes but little fractures, and there comes only many times a sprain.
And when the palm of the hand is broken or sprained, it befits the patient to sit crossed, and to be straight before him as well; then put his hand on top stretched, and extend the ministers the broken bones, and set them equal the mire, until they are well joined; and put the plaster and bandages, if abscesses do not come, then he puts a splint according to the quantity of the place; and be wrapped in one linen cloth.
And if the fracture is at the bottom towards the belly of the palm, make a sphere of cloth, and command the patient to tighten it to his broken palm; and then strain with a long cloth, and let the splint be of tough stuff as big as the palm of the hand, and strain it, as it befits.
And if the fracture is in the forearm, you must put a splint on top and another underneath in the palm, so that the hand be open and straight, then tie it tightly around the hand, and staunch the connection between the two.
And if the fracture comes to any of the two [arms], if it is the ulna, put it straight as it should be; and restrain it with the palm, and if you see fit put a small straight splint to raise the fracture, so that it does not move; and if the fracture is in the other bones, as in the index or one of the others, put it straight, and tie it with the healthy bone which comes after; or you tie them all together in one holding, whichever is better, or put a splint on top like a sling; and take heed in the restoration and in the disposition of an abscess hot, and secure what comes to it, as I have said.
of the broken hip
The bone of the hip is many times broken, and it can be seen well when it turns forward and backward; and its restoration is done by binding one above the fracture, and one below. And the patient lies on his face, then extend each minister his band to his side equally; and this is when the fracture is between the bones.
And if the fracture is near the root of the hip, then one of the bands should be towards the groin, and the other band below the fracture. And also if it is near the knee, then let the band be near the knee, and let the extension be downward; then place your hands on each side of the bone, as long as it is according to its natural figure, and then put the splint on, and the bandage, if an abscess comes up.
And if there is a hot abscess, let it appease then return to your work and your care; the tie is made in this manner. It is necessary that you envelop on the fracture i.e., bandage hard doubled in two or three, and in remain the superfluities, then turn the leg until the heels come to the root of the thigh, and put one long thread between the hip and the leg, below the knee, and make the head of the thread go up; then turn back on the leg and on the hip the bandage, then put on the fracture splints, and put a splint on the bone of the leg; then employ the space between the leg and the hip of drapes soft to put equal tightening, then begin to tie in the form three or four above the fracture; and as much further you go up above the fracture, and less tighten it; then hold the two heads of the thread that you have put between the leg and the hip, and tie three splints which are above, then return down to the head of the thread, until you come near the foot; and tighten it so that it does not move from its place, then leave it thus, then that it comes neither abscess nor swelling nor any other sign.
And if it happens, untie it, and address what comes, as we have said many times; and if there are pieces of bone that pierce, it is necessary to remove them, if one can; and if one cannot, it is necessary to split the place, and draw out the pus; and cure it as we have said, until it is healed.
And sometimes the hip is broken as one puts splints in it, like in the shoulder and the arm; however, in this restoration done does not ring the patient.
And know that the hip is restored in one day, or a little less or a little more, according to the diversity of temperaments.
of the  knee joint
Know that in the knee joint there are few fractures, but it often bends (or sprains). And if it breaks, it is more a fissure, or one opening, and it has both wound and no wound, and this is felt well by all.
And the restoration is done by putting each thing that is round in its place, as long as it can be assembled and moved; then put the splint on it, and put a rounded stele on it, if you need it, and restrain it as necessary, then return to all the arrangements that we have said in other fractures, such as hot poultices and similar things; so put on each accident what it needs, until it is healed.
Of the fracture of the leg
Know that in the leg there are two bones, for one is called by right "tibia," and the other is called "fibula"; and all fractures come as it comes to the arm, and for this reason the restoration is like that of the arm equally, and the works are all the same.
And if the two bones are broken together, the leg turns in all directions.
And if the small bone is broken, it turns forward.
And if the large bone is broken, one feels great pain, and it is plainly seen; and it turns downwards. Therefore administer an extension, and set it straight, and bind the splints evenly; but nonetheless, it behoves if the fracture is bad, and there are many pieces, that the extension be less and lighter; and the splint according to your virtue.
And when you have completed your work, take two bands of splints that encompass the leg on both sides, and be as long as the leg from the knee down; then wrap in two layers one bandage above and below, and tie it in the middle, also, and at this juncture the leg will not be able to decline to right or left, and thus is well. And none administers a single splint along the length of the leg, and if it is of wood, and it is placed on the leg to ward off movement, and properly one does this in the fracture where there is a wound; and move each day the leg, to see if there is an abscess or other accident; so cure until it is healed.
Of the fracture of the bones of the foot
To the ankle does not come any fracture, but to the bones of the foot comes no time fracture and two parts, and there happen only as much in more positions.
And if there happen the bones of the foot fracture, and you see these bones overlapping each other, put the patient's foot on the ground, as if he would like to walk, and then put your foot on his, where the bones are raised, then press them until they return to their places; then put the splint and bandages on it, and put under the belly of the foot a small board at 2 fingers wide, then restrain the foot firmly, and after that you have wrapped cloths around it, and other things that you need.
And when 3 days or 4 will have passed, you untie the linen, because you will find the bones aligned, whether they are broken or dislocated.
And if there are any of the bones broken, restore them as we have said about the bones of the hand; then put on the broken bone a splint according to the length of the bone, and be one poke more wide, then put under the foot that table that I have said, and restrain well. And if there are .ij. or .iij., or more, broken, put on each bone a splint according to its quantity, wrapped in one cloth of linen, and restrain the table under the foot; and let it be standing on the top of the table outside the belly of the foot, so that it holds it well.
And it is necessary that you do not forget the other things that I have said about the other fractures, as we have said; and cure each accident as it is necessary.
of the fracture of the bone of the hand
When the bone of the woman's nature is broken, so she makes sit enlarged, then incline it to the part of the back, and be held from behind; then fill the hollow of nature with cotton, and put in as much as one stone; then set free the woman, and lift her back little by little, and then jump the cotton, until it comes to the entrance of nature, and returns the bone with the stone; and when she wants to urinate, she removes the cotton, and when she has urinated, she puts it back, and so does .vii. days or around: so will be restored the fracture, and if you see, take a bladder of kid, and tie to the hole a string, and put all the bladder in nature; then blow into the string form, until the bladder is inflated inside: nature will return the fracture; then fill it with cotton, and leave it like this for some days, until it is healed.
And when the bone of the finger of the man is broken, or of the woman, so restore it as we have said in the hip bone; and are not hidden these fractures near to him who puts his study and use into them, and read my book. For the fracture signifies him in more dispositions the right way of restoration: therefore understand.
In the phallus, when it is broken, take a goose's throat and put it into the phallus; then wrap cloths around it, and leave it for .iij. days or around, and it will be healed quickly.
of fracture with wound
It is necessary for one who has a fracture with a wound, even if it is large, such as the bones of the hip or shoulder or similar, that they be treated now, so that the treatments that we have said testify to it.
And if the wound is clean, then retain the vitriol, if you have nothing else, and then begin to restore the fracture in the same hour, or on that day, if there does not come an abscess.
And if an abscess does come, then leave the restoration until the ninth day, as long as the abscess is calmed, and do not touch it neither on the third nor fourth day, for you would bring a bad accident upon it.
And if the broken bone is appearing on the uncovered chest, then it befits that you put it gently in place with your hands, with slight extension.
And if the extension does not suit you to put it straight with your hands, then resort to this instrument which is of iron, which is .vij. or .viij. long, and its width is according to the quantity of the wound; and for this, it is necessary that the maker imprints .iii. or iiij., according to what he needs in each cure of a fracture; and be round and about an inch thick, so that it does not bend under compression on the member during your work, and be tapered at the front, and thicker from the middle forward, like this:
And it is called "palainche", so that the curved part should be put on the head of the visible bone; and push it once, so that it returns, and be aligned one against the other. And if the fracture is subtle, and the instrument cannot well grasp the bone, then it befits that you chop the head of the bone, as long as the instrument has hold.
And if you cannot bring back the bone, as we have said, then cut it with a suitable instrument, either an incisor or a saw, to your power; then clean that which is left in the bone of asperities and small splinters.
And when the bone is brought back, and the patient feels great pain afterwards, know that it is not in its natural place. So do this as long as it is in its place, then moisten one drape in black wine vinegar, and properly if it is on a wound; and do not put above the wound any cerote or other thing where there is oil, so that it may not cause putrefaction and corruption; then administer rest when you have restored the bone, and leave the wound open, and cut the covering all around, according to the quantity of the wound, and take good care that the wound does not get strained with the fracture; and many times have foolish people done this, and have brought upon the patient either death or corrosion at any time; and be the strainings more gentle and more soft than other fractures.
And if the wound is bad or large, and you doubt that bad accidents may come from it, as we have said, and you find pain in the place, then it is not necessary to put above it any rest; but wrap around, instead of rests, hard clothings, and tie them. And when you see after one day or two a boil forming on the wound, remove that which you have put upon the whole wine, and put there ointment healing wounds, such as ointment tetrafarmacon and similar.
And it is necessary that you unbind the member two times a day, in the morning and in the evening, until it is fused and sound.
And it is necessary that the member be pulled apart in such a manner that the bone goes down easily.
And if each day it passes, and it cannot fuse but returns to its place again, know that there are small fragments of bone, which is why it is necessary that you cover the wound with a cloth, and remove all these loose fragments which cause pain.
And if a fistula comes to the place, or another kind of corruption, then it is necessary that you treat it, according to what he says in his chapter before. And when the bone is broken and open on the limb, such as the hip bone or shoulder, and similar ones of the large limbs, do not treat it at all, because many times death comes from it, but leave it until it rots; perhaps it will close by itself after 20 or 30 days, then treat the wound, if you can; and if you cannot, then leave it.
Of burns which come from the burn
We often come after the health of the fracture, even when it's near the joint, and a bad thing is to see the figure of the limb; and by chance it cannot make the limbs its natural works.
Take ward therefore if it is fresh: If you administer medicines astringents, such as aloes, frankincense, and myrrh, and sarcocolla, acacia, and similar others, in the way that you take any of these things, or all together, and mix them with astringent wine or with beaten egg white or with oil; and put it on the wound in poultices, and bind it well, and do not loosen it in hands for days; and then untie it, and begin another one, as long as the swelling is removed; or you bind upon a piece of plank well made; because the properties of wood are that it removes all the swellings from the limbs; and if the swelling has already been converted into hardness like stone, and it is necessary to remove it, then cut above it, and make the superfluity apparent; or you reapply it to any razor, as long as it is removed, and the cure as long as it is healed.
When the bone fracture is restored, and afterwards the limb remains weak and subtle, this happens for many reasons: one reason is because it was bound too tightly, and was not bound as it should; or because there were too many bindings, and it could not come to nursing the member; or for multitude of dressings; or for too great movements, not at its time; or because it has little blood in its body, so it is weak.
And the cure is that you make the patient eat, and make the body supple, until the blood is multiplied in him; and administer bath, and give him joy and lightness; then put poultices on the limb, so that the poultice attracts great nursing, and the dressing often of warm water, until the nursing cures to the member; and returns to its natural figure.
the limb twisted after the healing
When the limb is twisted after restoration, and the broken bones are apart, and the shape of the limb is ugly, nonetheless it does not lose its natural function: so do not believe the fools who say that one must break the limb anew, and many foolish people have done this in our land; and this work is blamed, and comes great harm, and by chance death; nonetheless, if the nodes and the torments are fresh, then it behoves them to be raised with hot water, or softening herbs are cooked, such as leaves of marsh mallow, and roots, and melilot, and similar things; and the make i. a softening plaster, such as diaconium well made, and you take the mash of marsh mallow, and you confit it with fat of geline or oil of sesame, and make a plaster on top; or you take figs fatty, and grind them with hemp of colon, and similar medicines that lessen the swelling.
And no times is the node removed by rubbing continuously and lengthways with wet hands. And let be administered movement to the limb each hour.
And if the torsion is ingrained and hardened, as well as stone, and there is need to remove it with iron, then it behooves to cut up to the bone, with a subtle, light incision; and put care and study into the cure.
Here begins the book of dislocations
Dislocation is from any joint out of its place, for which it cannot move, and the limb is misaligned, and the patient feels great pain and great injury.
When dislocation comes to anyone, now it is necessary to bring back without strapping.
For if one delays, then it swells the limbs, and by chance if one puts it back in place with pains; for this reason it is not necessary to move it before the hour that it is swollen; many times it brings on spasm and other pains;
Nevertheless, when this happens, if you heal the patient, then let him alone until the abscesses are all calmed; then raise the limb with hot water and oil, then gently move it, and treat each member as they come into place.
And I have ordered the chapters of dislocations of the head to the foot.
of the jaws
Sometimes it happens that the jaws are dislocated backwards, and the dislocations of both are according to 2 manners: or they are a little bit removed from their places, and softened a little; or they are dislocated entirely, and hang towards the cheek, and cut off the saliva from the mouth so that he cannot hold it, nor can close his mouth, and encircles his tongue with the word.
When the dislocation is small, it returns by the more dispositions.
And if it is whole and complete, it behooves you to reset it gently, and do not make light of it.
And in such a manner that the ministers hold the head of the patient, and puts their fist into the root of the dislocation of the mandible within the mouth, if the dislocation is in two parts; and the other hand be outside, to put it even; and command the patient to soften, his jaws, and move them in all directions.
And the fist he puts even, until it returns to its place.
And if it is brought back injured, even if they are the two jaws together, apply hot water and oil to them, as long as you gently move them; do not fear to bring it back, as we have said.
And when they are brought back evenly, and the mouth of the patient is closed well without softening it, put on soft cloths in a piece made of rose oil and wax, then tie it lightly with soft ligatures.
And let the patient sleep on their back, and their shoulders be between two cushions, so that he does not move them to the right or left, nor does he try to chew, but eat light food until the pains are gone, and the jaws are numbed.
and then move it gently, and do not work to open the mouth for eating and drinking, until the jawbone is well united and healed.
And if the two jawbones cannot be put back in place within an hour, and are not converted to their places, then fever and accustomed sores come, and perhaps a bellyache, and perhaps pure vomit.
And when you see this, then know that it is a peril; and many times die those who have it, within 8 days.
of the fork
The splinter cannot dislocate from the rib inside the continuity of it and of the hip, and is dislocated no time at the outside, and well it is felt.
And the restoration is that the patient lies often on his back, and extends his arms; and then presses the place firmly with his palm, and it will return; then put upon the plaster and bandage, and restrain.
And the bone which is toward the ribs cannot dislocate; if it can not, and if it dislocates any time, reset it to its place, as we have said; then put upon the plaster and bandage, and restrain, and command the patient that he repose until he be healed;
And thus same is reset the bone of the shoulder, when it is dislocated from its place.
of the dislocation of the shoulder
Know that the shoulder is dislocated in only .iij. ways: one of which is that it dislocates to the part of the socket below; and the second is to the part of the breast; and perhaps it dislocates to the upper part, and this happens rarely;
and it does not dislocate behind the shoulder, and it does not dislocate inside for the nerves; and many times dislocates below towards the socket, especially to those who have little flesh, because at these it goes easily; at those who have enough flesh, it goes with difficulty, and returns with difficulty.
And perhaps it happens to some men a percussion or fracture, and inflames the shoulder with a hot abscess, and thinks that it is dislocated because of this.
Therefore you must feel it, as long as you are certain; and then commence the cure.
And is known the dislocation when it is pulled towards the hip, and puts a difference between the diseased shoulder and the healthy one, and you will find between their diversity manifest. And you will find at the head of the shoulder a hollow, and below the hip touching the head of the shoulder, as if it were one bone; and the patient cannot bring back his hand to its place, nor move by any movements;
and also, if it is dislocated upwards, it is not well hidden, because you find it manifestly touching.
and this manner of dislocation is not otherwise to be brought back, when it is new, or if the child is sick.
And the manner is that the ministers lift the hand of the sick person upward, then put their shoulders under the seat, and lift the joint with force upward to its place; and the ministers lift the hand, and extend it upward, then put it down; so it will come gently.
And if it does not come as we have said in a few days afterward, then it is necessary that the sick person be bathed in hot water; and the minister a soothing and softening ointment, such as decoction of aloe and fenugreek and melilot in water, and let it be administered.
Then the sick person should be laid on their back, and put under the seat a pad of wool equal, neither too soft nor too hard, then place the heel of his foot on the pad, and lift the head of the shoulder gently, and draw the hand of the sick person;
and other ministers hold the head of the patient, so that he does not move down; that shoulder returns all now, and if you see it so reset it according to this manner:
and that you make present one man who is greater than the patient; and be right towards the ribs, and put his shoulder under the seat of the patient, and lift the seat up, so that the patient hangs in the air; and other ministers pull the hand of the patient down towards the belly. And if the patient is too light, so weigh with him some heavy thing, and the dislocation returns now.
And reset it also in another manner: and is one long stick in the earth, whose head be as one pistol, and not too big nor too thin; then the patient should be placed underneath, but that he has cloths soft above, and the patient lies long on the length of the staff; then his hand is stretched down on the other side forming, and the joint will return to its place quickly.
and if it does not want to return for all these things that we have said, then do this cure: take one splint of two arms and four fingers wide, which has the head round so as to enter in through under the shoulder, according to this form:
then tie above the head of the staff cloths soft, that the staff does not bruise the patient, then put it under the shoulder of the patient; and extend his arm on the length of the staff, and tie the shoulder onto the staff, and the arm to the head of the hand, then put the arm on one rung of a ladder wide, and let the hands be stretched down, and let the body hang from the other side: the joint will return now.
And when it is ens, in whatever manner that it may be, so it behoves you to put under the saddle a sphere of wool even, then put the plaster covered with powder of the mill, with incense and auburn of egg, over all the shoulder and around, then strain it under the saddle evenly, and turn the linen upon the plaster, and embrace the hand at its neck, and let the hands remain thus.
And it behoves that he massage little, as long as the limb is fortified, because it will heal more quickly; and then massage later after 5 days or 7, and move it; and if it is hardened and is not softened, then it is healed.
And if the joint is out of place due to moisture that has come or for another cause, so it behoves you to administer cautery to 3 punctures, as it is put before or in the chapter of cauteries.
And if you do all these things, and it loosens after seven days, and the joint does not hold, and cannot lift his arm upwards, then know that the nerve at the head of the shoulder is cut or stretched or softened; and know that the joint will never be fixed in its place.
The dislocation that is toward the hip, and the breasts, or rear, is made by impulse, and stretching of hands, and it is administered in another place; and treatment until it is healed.
And if after healing comes pain to the limb, and slow movements, then the patient uses baths many times, until that pain is alleviated, and returns to its first nature.
of the dislocation of the hinge
Know that the hinge joint is dislocated to points, and to points it returns; and if it has been dislocated from all sides, and even in front and behind, and the dislocation is not set because it can be seen well and felt well; and dislocated according to each figure. And when you join the diseased hinge with the healthy one, if you can see it clearly. Because the hinge is locked, and cannot bend the arm, nor touch its shoulder at all.
And it is necessary that you reset it in the same way as an abscess should come to a head, because if an abscess should come to a head, it would be harmful to bring it back; and perhaps it cannot be brought back completely at all, even when it is in the rear; so it is worse than other dislocations, and is of greater pain, and perhaps death comes from it.
And the restoration is thus, when it is such that one can bring it back, that you extend your hand to its two hands; and his arms be spread, and the hands do move according to the cut around, above and below, and put the joint to its shoulders together, or at the root of its palm, until it returns to its place.
And if the dislocation is in front, it returns when it doubles its hand to its hand, and firm of the root of the palm the cut which is dislocated.
And if it does not want to return to its place, administer strong extension; and it is that two ministers extend the arm, and hold it with two ministers, so that it does not move during the extension; then turn the arm from each side, then that you have enveloped a double cloth long and wide;
and when the hand joins the joint to its place, if it is oil of any oil to soften the joint, then pushes the joint together, until it returns.
and when it is in place, put a dry plaster on with yolk of egg, and strain together, and bend the arm at the neck of the patient, and let it for some days, then untie it.
And if the joint is firm in its place, untie the bandage, and let it be; and if you see that the joint does not tighten well, start the plaster and bandage again, and let it so for some days, until it is firmly set; then untie it.
And if it feels pain after the resetting of the joint, and it moves, bathe it and rub it well, and press until it is soothed; or you put a fleece of fat wool on the joint, then let it be for i. day and one night, then remove it, and make him enter in the bath; and when it sweats, rub the joint moderately, then put the bandage back on, and then enter the bath; and thus do it .ij. times or .iij., until it is healed; and if you see that, put above linen of damp fleece heated with butter, and strain it; it will return to its disposition.
The dislocation of the hand
The joint of the hand is dislocated, and its return is light, more than other joints Nevertheless, it is necessary to bring it back to its place immediately, as soon as it is dislocated, so that the limb does not become swollen or that an abscess comes up hot.
And the putting back is that you put the diseased hand on a table, and extend the minister's hand, and he puts it straight, so that it puts its palm upon the appearance of the joint, and pushes until it returns.
However, it is necessary that you look if it is well in place; therefore put the sick person's back of his hand on a table to extension and to putting back. And if the dislocation is at the back of the hand, put the sick person's back of his hand on the table, and he puts his hand upon that appearance of the joint. If it returns now, it is well.
If not, then apply a poultice of soothing plasters to the abscess, and leave it so without restarting.
And if he cannot endure it, and you cannot put it back in place after some days, the joint remains twisted.
And do not harm the patient further than while his hand is numb, and cannot grasp anything at all: therefore know that the nerves are cut, or the artery; if there is no other remedy but to constrict with a cautery according to the case, and perhaps it is of no other avail.
And when the hand is in place, put on the splint that we have said, then constrain and leave it for five days, then unbind and let it be so.
And if he cannot move it well, and there is no injury, then moisten with hot water, and rub it until it is healed.
Of the dislocation of the wrists of the hand
At no time are the wrists of the hand dislocated on either side, at no time on the back of the palm or on the belly
Thus are the wrists, and push the dislocation to your pouches until it returns, then support the head of the wrist, and bend it towards the part where it is disjointed
and leave it for 2 days, and then make it straight on the day; and do not bind it, as we have said, and unbind it every day, and let him move it, and rebind it tightly; and do this often, until it is straight
and also do the same if it is dislocated in the belly of the hand, and do as you did before, until it is healed; and also do the same when it is dislocated elsewhere.
of the dislocation of the shoulder blade
When the shoulder blade of the back or neck is dislocated, or there are more dislocations, if there is no cure, for death hastens the patient.
And the signs of this are that the  limbs jump and move without will, and cannot hold them, and many times some limbs are softened, or both thighs or both arms or one.
And many times the shoulder moves to four parts; that which moves to the rear is called "gilbositez":
The cure for this is that you reward if the gilbositez comes from childhood; if there is no cure nor healing of the whole.
And that which comes from a fall or percussion or similar things, the ancients said manners of cures by great words, where there is no at all great profit;
but I have abridged it according to my intention, and have formed instruments in various ways.
I say that in the inflammation that comes to the breast before, there is no cure.
And also the one that comes directly in two ribs, and it cannot be cured except for the one that comes properly to the back, as I say;
And it is that the patient be extended on his face in one even place, and have a strain underneath him, so that he does not move;
Then put one twig at the head in earth-formed, and another at the feet, and tie a rope under the armpits of the patient, and another at the hips, knees, and ankles;
and the minister knows the bands, one at the head and the others at the feet, among the two ribs.
and be well closed, the splint as we have said, and the mire puts his palms upon the spine forming, until it returns.
And if it does not return by this cure, then take a board of three arms long, and place it below the [person], and let the patient be on his side, and push the head of the board under the [person], then put the middle of the board upon the spine; and put the mire his feet upon the other head of the board, and press well, until it returns to its place; and if you see, so do it at the turner that turns by hand.
And is that you put two sticks to the head of the sick person's arm of a great one, and toward the feet two others, and have between each stick, open and closed, an palm's width of long.
And have in each stick one pierced, where the turner turns, and be the sticks firmly in earth, so that they do not move; and between two of them have one turning stick, so that the linen turns, and have in two turnings two small sticks of a palm's width long, to turn the turner.
And then tie the linen which is among the axles to the turner toward the head, and the other linen toward the feet to the other turner, and each of the ministers turns his turner to all of the linen, and the master puts the spine even as we have said.
And when it is even, put on a drying plaster with an abundance of egg, and then the bandages, and then the splint of a tablet of .iij. lengths long, that covers the place of the gibbosity and the part of the spine healthy, then tie it with a bandage as we have said, and use the patient of subtle nursing, until it is healed;
And if any thing comes at the end of the healing, it is necessary to administer softening and soothing medicines, with the splint that we have said before; and sometimes one administers a piece of plank,
And sometimes the appearance comes in the back spine of the back, and one thinks that it is dislocation; and it is the bone which opens, for which one should not have presumption: by adventure would come death.
of dislocations of the hip
Know that the joints of the hip and the joints of the shoulder come out only as dislocations, and not like other joints; and the joint of the hip is dislocated according to .iiij. parts: inside and outside, and front and rear; and more inside then, and little dislocated front and rear.
And the knowledge of this dislocation inside is that when one joins the sick leg with the healthy one, it is longer, and opens more the patient's knee than the healthy one, and the patient cannot double his knee to the fire; and is the place which is below inflamed with a hot abscess because the head of the hip comes there.
And the sign of him to whom it comes at the fever, thus is this accident contrary to these before.
And the signs of him to whom it comes at the front, thus is that he is well his leg according to the fulfillment; however, do not double the knee without pain, and if one wants to make him walk, he cannot before, and holds back his urine, and inflames the groin, and when he goes, he passes over the heel.
And the signs of him to whom it comes behind, thus is that he cannot spread his knee, nor double, and is that leg more twisted than the other, and the groin is softened, and is the hip bone in place under the ribs.
The return of this semblance of dislocation is that you watch if the dislocation is old, and it remains according to its disposition, then there is no cure; and it does not behoove him to have presumption.
And in those whose dislocation is fresh, and there are .iiij. manners of dislocation, so haste that you return the joint, and stretch it inside and outside, and move it to the right and left; perchance it will return, and there is no need for other care.
And if it does not return in this manner, then it is necessary that you apply one minister strong, and stretch the leg strongly with two hands, or to one lien that is tied above the knee; and another minister stretches his hand above in such a manner that he pushes his hands below his armpits, then tightens with a linen strip on the hip; and another holds the head of the linen;
And extend upward and downward all at once, as long as the patient is raised from the earth at once, and remains hanging.
This manner of extension is common to four likenesses, and if the dislocation has returned, as we have said, it is good.
If this is not the case, then you must take care with its likeness. When the dislocation is at the side, it is necessary that you support the patient on his healthy hip, then put the strap on the root of the buttock, and the place that is below the groin, then extend the strap upward towards the groin, and towards the hip;
then engage other ministers his arms, and embrace the large area of the diseased buttock, and extend it outwardly in this form: it will now return to its place; and this manner of dislocation is lighter than the others.
And if you cannot tighten it in this manner that we have said, then it is necessary that you tie the two feet of the patient together with a strong linen cloth over the two heels, and over the two knees, and let the sick leg be extended two fingers more than the other.
Then be suspended from the top of a pole, and be two arm lengths above the ground; then command one minister to embrace the head of the pelvis, and let another minister hold the patient, who embraces the form of the pelvis, because the joint now returns quickly.
And when the dislocation is at the back, let the patient lie down, as we have said in the one who has gibbosity, and restrain one linen cloth on the sick leg properly, and on the foot too.
then put two torches, one at the head and one at the foot, then place one torch between the legs of the patient in the form; and have a plant of moist cloths around him so that the patient does not get cold, then extend each minister towards him, and the one who puts it equal to his hand the dislocation.
If it returns, it is good. If not, put him on a table and press him as we have said in the description of the operation, and let the patient lie on his healthy side.
And when the dislocation is in front, it is necessary to extend the diseased leg as far as possible, and according to what I have said; and put the minister's pain on the affected ankle, then press with the other hand, and the extension downward towards the knee.
And if the dislocation is in the back, it is not necessary to stretch the patient down, nor to raise him up on the ground, but rather that he be as if his hip were dislocated at the back, as we have said about lying on the two hips; and be upon his face, and the rope extended as we have said above, and one must press upon the joint to the table;
and it will be in place when the patient extends his legs, and they will be even; therefore adjust the thighs, and put the splint, and the restraint of a bandage, so that the hip does not move;
and rest for three or four days, then untie it, and put the splint on top; and if you see that they are even, restrain them as before, and leave it for three days; then untie it, and let him walk well, until the limb is strengthened.
of the dislocation of the knee
The knee is dislocated in three ways: namely, inside and outside, and behind; and it does not dislocate forward.
And the signs are that you command the patient to bend his leg at his hip, and if he does not stop at his hip, know that it is dislocated;
And the restoration of all this is that you make the patient sit straight, and extend his leg if he can, and put your back on his thigh, and put his foot on your feet;
Then take his knee in your palms, and draw it between your two hands, then bend the two bones of the knee; and one other minister extends his foot, until the knee returns to its place, and the sign is that he will be able to move his leg lightly to his hip.
And put the plaster on top, and make him raise his leg to his hip, and bind them together strongly for three or four days, then untie it; and let the patient not work at all, until his limb is fortified.
And if the limb is not right, administer strong extension, as we have said in the cure of the hip, until it is healed.
of the dislocation of the heel
The heels are sometimes dislocated and sometimes fully dislocated, both inside and outside.
And the signs of this are that the ankle is swollen, and tender before the part where it is dislocated:
The resetting should be gentle, and one must extend it gently with their hands when it is only dislocated.
And when it is dislocated entirely, it is necessary that you make the patient sit upright, and hold him by one minister outside of the leg, above the ankle.
then treat the foot with your right hand, and then with the left twice, then the front on top, and put the foot beautifully up;
and do this twice, as we have said, by pushing and pulling the foot; if it returns, that is well; if not, begin the work again, for it will return;
and if it cannot return like this, then make the patient lie on his back on the ground, and insert one stake firmly in the earth between his hips, and tie bandages around it so that the patient does not bleed;
Then have the ministers hold the thigh, and other ministers extend the leg to their hands or on one side so that it lies upon the neck of the leg Then have each minister extend equally, and the straps be placed between the thighs of the patient to hold the patient when being stretched
Then place the mirrors equally on the dislocation with their hands, and other ministers hold the sound leg at the knee, and the dislocation will return readily
And when it is at point, then place the plaster and dressings on top, and strain the form, and tie the leg to the leg, and guard the nerves which are above the ankle behind, that the ligatures not be too tight
then let him lie for two or three days, and if the ligaments soften, then strap it; then untie it on the third day or the fourth, and forbid the patient to go for four days. and if he goes before this term, it is not certain that he will not dislocate again.
And if an abscess comes to him, then it is necessary that you soothe it, as we have said elsewhere, until it is healed.
of two
When the hips are dislocated, it is well to extend them gently, and this is a light thing.
And if the dislocation is in any of the joints of the back or the foot, it is necessary that you make the patient sit on i.e., a plain or on i.e., a table straight, and put your foot on what opens from these joints, then press with your foot firmly, until it returns;
and when it is equalized, and there is nothing opening, then put under the sole of the foot a table at two spans, then strain it firmly, and leave it for three days, then untie it; and let him rest, until he is healed.
of wound and dislocation together
When a wound comes with dislocation, and it is wanted to restore it, many times the patient dies.
If you are not presumptuous in the cure, if you are not wise in the art and have not used it for a long time, and if you are not compassionate and merciful and patient, nor bold.
And at the beginning of things, use soothing and warm poultices for the abscess, and leave the patient in God's hands, if you do not see hope of health. And when you see hope in it, then reset the limb now, so that the abscess may heal.
and when the limb is in place, administer soothing things to the abscess heat, and treat the wound as it should, with drying unguents.
and if with the dislocation comes a fracture, and small bones are dislocated, set them, and do what we have said in simple ailments.
and keep yourself from entering into the path of fear, according to what I have said, for it will harm you according to your Creator, and for the safety of your weapon and your body. Amen
