Oh you, three dear sons, I have completed this book which is the last of the science of medicine altogether with its fulfillment, and have made an end through its expositions and its declarations. And it came to me in vision that I complete it for you with this treatise, which is part of the work of hands, that is to say surgery.
And because the work of hands is fortified in our region and is strange from all around everywhere, so has its science perished and been cut off, and nothing remains of its force except for the small descriptions in books of the ancients that have been moved by hand. And because of this has come the error and the vanity, and are closed the intentions and is alienated the science.
Or it seems to me that I want to bring it to life together with the arrangement of this treatise according to the way of exposition and declaration and abbreviation; and I will come together with the forms of the instruments of cautery, and of the other tools of the work with the adjustment of the declaration and preparation of them, as it is necessary.
And for the reason of those that no good masters of hands are found in our time, is the art of medicine extended. And it is necessary that he who undertakes it climb in the science of anatomy, as Galen says, until he knows the judgment of the members, and their forms and conjunctions and separations of vessels, and have knowledge of the bones and nerves and veins and the number of them, and the movement and of moving and resting veins, and the place of their issue.
And for this Hippocrates says that the name with the name is much, and with the work little; and similarly in the art of hand.
We tell you at the beginning of this book that whoever is not knowledgeable about things said before, should be careful so as not to fall into error and harm people; just as I have often seen many who meddle in this science and abandon their knowledge and without experience.
For I saw a foolish man cut into an abscess of scrofula or the neck of a woman, and he cut the arteries of the neck; for that reason so much blood came out that the woman fell dead in his hands.
And I saw another surgeon treat a stone from a man's bladder, and the stone was large; so he took out with it a piece of the bladder, and the man died within three days.
And I have been called to treat it, and I see the disposition of the patient and the size of the stone, and I know well if one were to cut it he would die.
And I saw another mire who took care of a duke of our land who had a broken leg, and with the fracture he had a wound; and the ignorant mire forced the fracture onto the wound with strong ligatures, and did not leave any opening for it to heal, and left it like that; and he commanded him that he should not unbind it; and so it remained until the leg was entirely swollen and the foot came to perdition.
I was called to come to him, and I hastened to come to unbind the leg; and when I untied it it was in peace and he felt no pain.
But every way the corruption was already confirmed or member, and it could not heal it; and did not cease the corruption to go through the limb as long as the members was all lost.
And see i. another mire which broke i. abscess inched, and then inflamed by the malice of its lordship.
For ulcer, when it is pure of melancholic humor, it does not suit that one touches it with iron if it is not in such a place where one can entirely remove what is corrupted.
And for this, dear son, it is necessary that you know the work of hands is divided into .ij. divisions: that is to say, work where there is peril in more dispositions; and I will show in each place of this book where there is fear and peril.
For which reason it is necessary that you guard yourself, so that fools may not speak ill of you.
If you take your weapons in caution, and undertake your patients lightly and firmly, and use the best way so that by the grace of God you come to salvation and be praised; and leave the diseases to be expected grief health; and remove your weapons from those who make you doubt, and have done in yourself so that you may come from this world to the other of glory.
Galen says in some of his admonitions: "Do not take care of any bad illness, lest you be called a fool."
I have devised this treatise according to three chapters.
The first chapter is about fire cauteries and medicinal cauteries, and this chapter is ordered from the head to the feet; and the shapes of the instruments, and the workings of the cautery, and all that is necessary in the work.
The second chapter is about cutting and piercing, and about leeches and wounds, and the extraction of arrows, and similar things; and this chapter is ordered and the shapes of the instruments.
The third chapter is about restoring dislocations and twists, and similar things; and it is ordered from the head to the feet, and the shapes of the instruments.
Thus as we remember from the work, it is necessary that I say the quality of the aid and of the nuisance of each complextion.
I say that the qualities of the aid and of the nuisance are the longest speech and subtlest science and the secret answers; and of this speak most of the sages, and agree with this; and I am satisfied with their words, because I fear the length.
I say that cauterization aids universally to every complexion where it has matter, except for two complexions: namely, hot complexion without matter, and dry complexion without matter.
In hot and dry complexion combined with matter, some said that cauterization was of great help; and the others said the contrary: that cauterization is not of use in disease that comes from heat and dryness.
For the nature of fire is so hot, and it ought not to be cured by heat from a hot illness, nor by dryness; and he who says the contrary that cautery helps greatly to hot and dry illnesses that come in the bodies of men. For when you consider the body of man and his moisture to the complexion of fire, you find the body cold.
And I agree with this statement. For I have found it no times by experiment.
And in all ways, let none interfere except he who has proven it and who knows through long usage the chapter of cauteries, and the diversity of complexions of men, and the dispositions and causes of their illnesses, and the occurrences and spaces of time; for other complexions we have no fear, even in cold and moist diseases. And all the masters assembled and agreed to the cautery.
And know, sons, that cautery assembled fire is of the secrets of cures, and of greater goodness than cautery of burning medicine.
For the fire is simple, and does not come forth except to the member that is burned, and does no harm to another member if it is called.
The hot medicines come from one member to another in spreading, and bring to the member maladies of grief healing; and by chance kill the patient.
The fire because of its height and because of the goodness of its substance does not do this, unless there is superfluity.
And this I have found by experiment and through the length of service and study that I have put into the art, and it is upon the truth of things; and for this I excuse myself for the length of the speech, because it does not please me that I would take from you the secret which is contained in fire, and the quality of the work, how it expels the diseases of the body, as the philosopher says in demonstrating; now receive it into your thoughts.
And know, son, that they must agree on when cauteries should be made, and the implements are prepared.
And I say that cauteries are suitable in all times, because the harms arising are minimized by the help of cautery; and also if the cauteries are for necessary pains beyond and until they cannot await the time when greater harm comes to the limb.
And do not ever think like the foolish people; because the illness which is healed by cautery has no return; and they say thus; but it is not as they believe, because cauteries are only medicine that alters the constitution, and dries the humors which are the cause of the pain, and is worth more than medicine for the speed of its power, and for the virtue of its work and its sovereignty.
And the most important thing is that the patient comes at no time according to the complexion of the patient and the place of the illness and its virtue; and they are assembled in him the superfluities by the acquisition of meats and similar things, if it is not cauteries administered in their place where there is little superfluity and moisture, such as cauteries of iron for pain, and similar things, and such pain does not return; but this happens rarely.
And many people do not understand why cauteries are called the last resort of medicine, and it is true; but they do not believe that cauteries are worth after medicine, but their understanding is false, and it is cauteries the last resort of medicine because when we administer manners of cures in any illness and they are not worth, then we administer our cautery, and it is worth. Therefore it appears clearly that cautery is the last resort of medicine, not according to the understanding of foolish people.
The ancient ones said that cautery instruments of gold are better than those of iron, and they said this because of the quality of gold and its high substance; and they said that the cautery burns do not cause rot, but this is not true because I have experienced it, and I have found that this is true in some men; and cauterization with gold is better than with iron, as they say.
And nevertheless when you heat an instrument of gold, you do not know when it is hot by the color of the gold, and it cools very quickly; and if one heats it too much; so it does on the fire; and thus there are enough impediments.
And for this reason we use our cautery of iron that we have found to be useful in our work.
Or I have ordered this chapter of the head down to the feet, so that the vein may be easier to find.
Of the olive cautery
This cautery is good for moisture and coldness on the brain, and there are two kinds of it made because of a sickness called "soda", and because of many humors that descend from the head to the eyes, and ears, and for multitude of dreams and tooth pain and throat pain, and even all illnesses that come from cold such as paralysis and soda and apoplexy and similar sicknesses.
The form of this cautery is that the patient be purged by medicine solutive modifying the head three or four, according to what the virtue and the age and the custom of the patient can endure; and then make a back rub on the head of the patient.
And then make him sit crossed between your hands, and put his hands on your feet; after that, place the root of your palm on the root of his nose between his two eyes; and where your two middle fingers come, if it bleeds then heat the cautery called “olivare,” because this is its form:
And place it on the spot marked with ink, and make a downward and outward pulling motion with your hand back and forth; then raise your hand gently, and look at the spot if you see the bone I. small; and if you do not see it, repeat the cautery until you see the bone as I told you; after take one pinch of wool, put soft and wet cotton inside, and place it on the spot, and leave it for three days; after that put a soft cloth in butter; and leave it until the burn is gone; after cure the wound with the ointment called “tetrafarmaçon,” until it is healed.
And they say the ancients, that when the wound remains open longer, it purges more; and for this reason they helped with movement.
And they say any of these that one must leave the cautery so that part of the bone is burned, and then reset what is burned from the bone, and be cured.
And they say the other one must leave the cautery so long, and press so hard that it lowers the bone as wide as a spindle that women put in their distaffs for those that the humors may come out; and one must leave the wound open for a long time; afterward one must cure and soothe.
And these two ways of cauteries do not seem to me to be good at all in any way, except for some men where there is a way of fear; and I think that I should leave it; because the bone is weakened by the continuous solutions of nature, as we testify in other members; and even when the bone of the patient is weak by nature, and the first semblance of cautery is more salvageable and moister for me, and from this use I work in such a way that there is salvation.
of the old pain of the head
When throughout the whole head comes chronic pain, and lasts long, then the patient must use herbs and pills which are called 'cochie', and of purging of the head and of oils and plasters; and if one does to him the cautery that we have said before, and it is not worth.
Take heed if the head of the sick person is of a strong constitution, and that it be not too cold; then cauterize below that cautery one prick that we have said above.
After make cautery on each horn of the head up to the bone, as we have said before, and make one cautery in the place which is called 'vasselz'; and there are one of these where one puts leeches; and align your hand so that you do not see until the bone: the patient feels much more great pain in this cautery than the others, and I will speak of it later; and it is necessary that the cauteries on the horns be more subtle than those with which one cauterizes the middle of the head, and this is the form:
of the cautery of the head When in one part of the head comes sudden pain, and it extends to the eye, and the joint is cleansed by medicines, and have been done the other cures that I said in the division of diseases, and all these do not profit: then I make cauteries according to .ij. ways, that is to say of medicine acute and of fire.
The cauteries of medicine acute is that you take a slice of garlic, and remove the husk and cut it one finger's width as two fingers' width, and then put it in the temple where the pain holds so that you can place the slice of garlic under the skin; and when it will be placed there bind it and restrain it well and leave it thus for 12 hours; and then untie it and remove the garlic slice, and leave the wound thus for 2 days or 3; then put on a cotton ball dipped in butter as long as it covers it.
After the ointment cure until it is healed; and if you see that I have done this of some burning medicines that I have written or dose to treat burning medicines.
The iron cautery is done according to this manner. Heat the cautery of which this is the form:
And is called “closed” because the head is made in the form of a clo or it has 1 point of curvature, and in the middle a small appearance; and put it on the painful place, and hold your hand and thrust the fire a little lightly, until half of the thickness of the spear of the heart is burned; and lift your hand that the artery does not burn, which is outside, and runs abundance of blood.
After put cotton in awe of silk, and put on the place for 3 days; then I put cotton moistened in butter, and then cure the place with ointment until it is healed; and if you want to cauterize this migraine with the cautery that is called “cultellare”, at the whole point, and keep from covering the artery in this migraine which is not ancient.
of migraine
When you treat migraine as we have said before in the divisions of diseases, and it does not benefit, and you see that the cauteries before mentioned of medicine and of iron do not help, then it is necessary that you heat the cautery which is called "cultellare" until it is white; and then rule on the painful place a line of half a finger long, and withdraw your hand once, and restrain yourself so that you do not touch the artery and that you do not come to the bone; and beware of the jaw that moves when one puts it in, and the nerve does not feel anything but the pain and that spasms does not come to the patient, and beware of bleeding from the artery when it will be cut, or cutting has great fear and even more so to him who does not know about it, and who is not a student and experienced; and leave the work in mid-way; but I will tell you how to restrain blood when the artery is cut, and I will show you where it is explained in this book.
And if you see that this cautery does not help the disease, and the patient is suffering, cauterize him in the middle as we have said, and cure the wound until it is healed; and if you see, administer the cautery that we have said or chapter of the extraction of the artery, with the cautery which has .ij. blades; and this cautery is better than the other and more helpful.
of the pain of the ears from cold
When in the ear comes pain from cold, and one has opened medicines solutives and other cures that we have said in the division, and the pains do not move, then scavenge this cautery which is called "point," for this is the form:
After point all around the sick ear, or between the two if the pain holds in both, and you are distanced a little above the root of the ear after you have marked the place to engrave; and have ten points around each ear; after cure the place until it is sound.
of the torture of the mouth
A torture that must be cured by cautery is not worse than those that are caused by phlegm, as we have said in the divisions of the sickness; and do not make any cautery to likenesses that come from dryness and spams of nerves.
When you cure this semblance of torture that is caused by phlegm of eyes and purges of the head and gargles, and these are not worth it, then it behooves you to cauterize the patient with three cauteries: one at the root of the ear, and the other a point of fire on the temple, and the third in the joining of the two lips; and put the cautery in the part that is healthy, and make cautery from the top of the ear above a little below the horn of the head, and another in the temple as long as a thumb's breadth; and leave the cautery so long until half of the heart be burnt; and this is the form of the cautery:
And it is the semblance of the curette that we have put before, but it is a little more subtle and it behooves the scalpel to be a little larger; after curing its place as I have said before, until it is healthy.
When apoplexy is old and you treat it as we have said, and it does not help, and the patient has no fever, then I make .iiij. cauteries: .ij. on the .ij. horns of the head, and .i. in the middle of the head, and .i. where it is called «vasselz» as we have said before, and the last cautery on the mouth of the stomach; and be cured as we have said before.
of lethargy
For this illness it is necessary to give the patient large doses and pills that stimulate the brain; after which raise the head of the patient completely, and put on the occiput the emplasters of mustard as it is written in the treatise on plasters; and this is the manner of the cautery: do it as I have said.
If it is healthy like this, well is; and if it is not, then you make three cautery to the middle of the head descending until the neck, and have space between each cautery two of big; and cure him as the others, and if you see it join, and the patient is suffering, you make one cautery in the middle; and if it is necessary, two others on the two horns, and cure him until it is healthy; and let the cautery which is called "olivare", as I have said before.
of the cold of the head It is necessary that the head be cleansed of herbs and what we have said before; after wash the head of the patient, then you make cautery in the middle of the head and on each horn, and one behind and three on the spine of the neck; and if you have more need, and the body is moist and the patient is suffering, and the illness is far away, then you make four cauteries on the spine of the back; and leave him until the most of the heart is burned, and lift your hand; after cure him until he is healthy, and let the cautery which is called "olivare" that we have said before.
of the epilepsy
Epileptics should not use fire cautery except for those who are phlegmatic, and it is necessary first to modify the brain with herbs and other treatments that we have mentioned in the division when the patient is large and suffers from much medication.
And if it is a child who cannot bear it, then give them gargles and chewing that modify the brain often with cooked meats; afterward, place the ruler of their head in the middle, and make 1 cautery according to what we have said before, and 1 cautery on the vessel, and on each horn; and if the patient is weak and suffering, then give them cauteries as I have said to one who has paralysis and softening of the body, on the spine of the back and neck, and let the cauteries be olive-shaped according to the manner that I have said.
If the patient is a child, make 1 subtle cautery according to this manner:
When because of melancholy are the superfluities or humidities corrupted and phlegm thick, then these cauterize with cauldrons as we have said to him who has paralysis.
And if because of melancholy are the superfluities declining to melancholy, and the body of the sick person is moist, then give him to drink something by which the brain be purified, according to what it is before in the division.
After wash the head of the sick person; after make .i. tortil of linen well made, as well as .i. circle, so put it within the head; and the sick person sit crossed, and be well held on all sides; after present the liniment, and worth moves of butter of old sheep; and the heat at a fire temperately, so that the two should suffer if he puts it to him; after empty the circle by inside within the head, and let it cool down; and do this to the sick person every week once with other good government, until he be healthy.
If you see the patient being cauterized, make many small pricks all over the cautery. This way of cauterizing moistens the brain greatly; and then put moistened cotton in butter and goose fat.
of the weeping of the eyes When weeping first comes to the eyes by the signs that I have said in the division, then begin and give the patient something purifying for the head, and guard it from all moisture, and make him sweat or bathe many times fasting.
After that command him to raise his head, and make cauteries in the middle of the head, and make two cauteries on the two temples if the weeping comes from both eyes together, or one if it comes from one; and cauterize all veins and arteries that are under the heart, and let the cauteries be long according to the width of the temple; and guard against excessive bleeding, and if you see too much blood issuing, restrain it with as much power as you have.
And I shall teach you in the extraction of arteries and in the incision the caution how you shall stop it; and sometimes one makes cautery or hot iron below the two bones behind.
Of the course of tears
When the tears of the eyes are old and accustomed and are on the veins, or near the arteries that are in the appearance of the head outside; and one sees that it is cold phlegmatic superfluities, then I make the cautery as I said at the beginning of the art descending to the eyes: 1 cautery removing the chief, and 2 cauteries on the 2 temples, and 2 cauteries or hot iron below the 2 bones; and if there is need for more, then one cauterizes skillfully above the eyebrow with all a little cautery.
Of the course of tears from inside the eyes
When you medicate according to what we have said in the division, and it does not profit, then give the patient three cups of wine; after which, cauterize the head, and make a cautery or middle olive cautery; and make two cauteries with the cautery called "clavilis" on the two ribs, one slightly below the shoulders; and guard the artery so that you do not cover it. And this is the form of the cautery called "clavilis":
When the paper of the eye is softened by illness and moisture, then cauterize with this cautery called "olivare."  This is its form:
And if you see so make two cauteries on the two eyebrows as long as the eyebrows are; and do not let go of your hand except until one-third of the paper is burned, according to the manner that I have said.
The hair that prickles the eye It sometimes happens that the hairs of the eyes are converted to the parchment, and prick the eye, and one makes cauteries according to two manners: that is to say, of fire, or of burning medicine.
For the fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
When they are born and are equal, then put the patient on his healthy side; after place upon the paper of the eyes a figure that be as the leaf of the myrtle, and let it be the beginning of the sign near the hairs; then put cotton moistened in egg white and muslin of persillum onto the eye, then heat the cautery of this which is the form:
After cauterize upon the figure that you have signed point and point many times, that the skin be burnt in that place; and the signs of the healthiness of the work is that you see the paper retreated, and the hairs raised to the height of the eye; then lift your hand, and let it so for three days, then put cotton moistened in butter until the burn is removed; after the cure of ointment as long as it is healed.
And if after those the hairs come, and the paper is softened then begin again the cautery upon that same place, as you have done first; and if the hairs are defiant, cauterize until the paper is raised to its natural place, and be even, and do not prick the eyehairs.
The cauteries of medicine burning is that you command the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; then make of parchment the form of the leaf of myrtle; then take of French soap and live coals, of each one third part, and grind together well; and do it hastily, so that it does not cool, then spread on the form that you have made like the leaf of myrtle, and put under the eyes; and if the malady holds in one eye only, so must one work in one, and if in both as well; and put under the eye cotton moistened in yolk of egg; and the head of the patient be in your hand and put your hand showing on the medicine, and press one finger and then the other all times that the patient feels mordication of the medicine, because he feels mordication as much as fire. When you have done this lengthily, so remove the medicine with your hand. And when the mordication will be passed, so raise the eyelid, and reward yourself if you see the parchment raised as if it was raised by constraint of fire or by incision; and if it is so, then it is well. If this is not so, so put back once more of the medicine on the place where the medicine did not work, until your works are equal, and your eyes set in point; then put under cotton moistened in butter as long as the burnt skin is fresh, after cure the place of the ointment that is called "diphthenis" and another, until it is healed.
And if it is necessary that you guard well your work with great care so that it does not fall from the medicine to the eyes. And if the paper becomes soft afterward, and the hairs prick in the eye, then begin the medicine again on that same place which is softened by the paper properly, as you have done before; after the cure until it is healed; and this is the form of the leaf of myrtle:
And know that the eyes of men are diverse in size and smallness, and according to these be your constraints; and let not the right way be returned to him whose is the study of this art.
of the cure of fistula by cautery
When you cure a fistula as we have said in the division of diseases, and your cures do not benefit, then it is necessary that you make cauterize him according to this manner.
Instruct the patient to put his head on your lap; and hold his head between your hands in such a manner that it does not move or move his head; after putting cotton moistened in the white of an egg or in parsley juice on the eye; then heat the cautery which is like: and is shaped at the top like the point of a sparrow’s feather, all alike as if the cautery; if you see, it should be pointed from one end to the other, and if you see, it should also be like a tent; but nonetheless, this one that is shaped is more useful for your work.
After press the fistula if it is open, and clean out the pus, and dry it; and if it is closed, work on it, and remove the pus from inside; then place the hot cautery in shape, and hold your hand on the cautery at the part near the eye that your hands do not make a mistake; and put the cautery in the fat of the eye, and burn it.
If you come to the beginning of the cautery up to the bone, it would be good. If not, begin the cautery again once, and another if you need it, and leave it for three days; after it, put on moistened cotton in butter, and cure with the drying ointment until it is healed, and if forty days pass and it is not healed, put on corrosive medicine until the bone is uncovered; and the king according to what it would come in its chapter.
And there is a manner of cautery of fistula that none of the ancients said. Understand about fistula, and make it in its place; after put in the fissure one camphor subtle of which this is the form: And it is made to the quantity of one-third of an ounce; and hold your hand or camphor firmly, and let the patient not move at all, so that the melted wax does not run into its eye; and it is necessary that upon the eye of the sick put cotton moistened in abin of euphrasia or in awe: the wax so art the place of fistula, and the healing by marvelous health.
And if the fistula is healed by the cautery that we have said, it is good. If not, then it is necessary to administer purgatives to the nose and bring back the fistula to the body near the nose according to what is proper in its own place.
openings in lips Many times, openings in the lips called “hair” happen, and even in children’s lips.
When you cure these openings as we have said in the divisions, and the cure does not benefit, then cauterize i. small surgical knife cautery according to this form:
And he places it carefully into those openings until it comes to the end; afterward, care for the place with a cerote until it is healed.
of the abscess of the throat
When an abscess comes in the root of the throat or in the uvula, or palate, or at the roots of the teeth, after it has rotted and swollen and becomes a fistula; and you cure it as we have said in the divisions, and it does not benefit; therefore it behooves you to have i. cautery according to the quantity of the fistula; after that you boil or puncture the fistula, and hold your hand until the iron heats at the bottom of it, and in the last place; and do this once or twice, afterward care for it as we have said in cures, until it is healed; and if it is cured thus, it is good; and if not, then it behooves to uncover the place and remove the rotten bone, according to what you will find in its chapter.
of the movement of the teeth
When the gums are softened by moisture and the teeth move, and you treat them with medicines and that is not worth it, then put the chief of the patient in your healthy; after heat the cautery whose form will come here after in such manner that you put a chain on the tooth; and put inside the cautery hot cautiously, and hold so long your hand that the patient feels the heat coming to the root of the tooth; after release your hand and begin again the cautery according to your will; after fill the patient his mouth of salt water, and let him keep it one hour and rinse fiercely.
And in such manner the tooth which was moving is so confirmed, and the gum softened restrained, and the moisture corrupted dried.
of the pain of teeth
When pain of teeth comes from cold, or there is cold or wetness, and the treatments of medicine are not worth, then there is need for cautery according to .ij. manners: and cautery of butter and cautery of fire.
Cautery of butter is such that you take butter from a dish, and the end in a spoon of iron or brass; after take cotton and envelop on the tip of a tent, and moisten it in boiling butter, and put on the aching tooth carefully and hold until it is cooled; and thus do often as much as its virtue comes to the root of the tooth, and if you see so moist wool and cotton in cold butter, and put on the aching tooth, and put on .i. hot iron until the heat comes to the edge of the tooth.
The cauteries altogether fire is such that you take a rod of iron or brass, and be so thick that the heat does not come to the mouth of the patient; after heat the cautery, of which its form will come after, and put it on the tooth and hold your hand as long as the cautery is cooled; do this often, because the pain will be removed that same day or the next. And it is proper that the patient fill his mouth with good butter in the haste of this cautery, and then the root must be pulled; and this is the form of the cautery:
When the scrofulas are of phlegm and cold moisture, and are not obedient to digestion by medicines, then cauterize with the iron as follows after comes the form, and has two openings for the fumes to issue from the cautery on the other side; and put the cautery hot upon the abscess once, or twice if it is necessary, until it reaches the bottom of the abscess; and if the abscess is small, put the cautery according to the quantity of the abscess, and leave it so for three days; and put on cotton moistened with butter as long as the burn is removed; after cure the place of ointment and tents until it is healed.
When the moistures prevail upon the channels of the pharynx, and also when this comes from a cold constitution, then it is necessary that the patient be first purged by resolutive medicines; after that, cauterize at the root of the throat, and guard yourself that you do not come even up to the throat, and do not burn more than an inch. After, make one other cautery at the joint of the neck to the head of the spine, and let the cauteries be called "clavile" as we have the form before; and cure the place as we have said before until it is healed.
of the boil When all and sickness of the body are from cold moisture, and the patient has no fever or dry skin, and the disease is old, if you make two cauteries on the forceps in their veins; and one other cautery between the two nipples; and be the cautery which is called "clavile" according to the form which is said before.
And if you see, make cautery in pricking at all the cautery which is called "poins" because its form is before in the disease of the ears; and be the poins up to XXX, or as much as it suits. After cure the place according to what is said before, and be the cauteries to III rains according to this form:
And for these are the cauteries lighter, because you make them three at once.
of the dislocation of the shoulder When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first reset the dislocation. Afterwards, so support the patient on his back and on his ribs; afterward lift the heart which is inside the [space] with your left hand; and if the joint is dislocated inside, then heat the cautery which has two nubs as it is shaped here:
and cauterize the heart as much as it pierces to the rib, and let the shape of the cautery come together with four cauteries; and for this reason is made the cautery with the cautery which has three nubs, so that the figure of cauterization are six cauteries; and the nerves are according to the subtleness of a tent, and this is the shape of the cautery which has three nubs:
And sometimes it is adjusted on this, i.e., nerve for which there are 8 cauteries.
After put on the cautery forceps crush with silk; after make the patient rest, and not be moved the limbs for a long time until it is well fortified.
And if it is dislocated above, which thing happens rarely, then make cautery on the thick of the clavicle cautery, or many cauteries in pricking. Because the jointure is closed, and is removed the moisture and is healed the patient.
of cautery of pleurasin
The ancients said that one should make cauteries with the roots of aristolochia, and in this manner: take a root of aristolochia long, the largest that you will be able to find, and be dry, and as thick and as long as your fingers; and moisten it in oil, and press it onto the fire, and cauterize one cautery between the shoulder and the neck, and two small cauteries a little downwards in the part which is below the beard; and two cauteries between the fifth rib and the sixth, declining backwards a little; and one cautery under the breastbone, and another on the stomach, and one between the two shoulders, and two as two ribs under the fire cautery which is between the two shoulders; and do not press your hand, but make openly as if smelling.
And the ancients said that no man uses a cautery of fire resembling one razor, and they heat it and put it between the ribs, until it comes to the abscess; and go out the pain, as we have said in the abscess of the liver. But in this work there is fear or the patient dies now, or a fistula comes which cannot be healed.
of the mouse
When you treat the disease of mice with what we have said about the divisions of treatments, and it does not benefit, then there are three kinds of cauteries that are all good.
Of which one manner is that you make three or four cauteries, according to the length of the mouse, according to the figure of the cautery of the liver that we have said before; and do not hasten your hand to the whole cautery, and let the patient be lying on his back;
And another manner of cautery is that you heat the cautery which has two nubs, as we have shown it in the dislocation of the shoulder; and raise the heart which is toward the mouse, or the side of the patient comes from the left, and let the elevation by which you lift the heart be according to the heart, according to the length of the body, and the cautery be according to the width of the body.
After it puts the two inflamed nerves until the ears are pierced on the other side, and then draws out the cautery, and thus there will be four. And if you see, so cauterize with the whole cautery to three nerves. After the cure when it has gotten rot for a long time, and this is worth more than the other cures before said.
of dropsy
Cauterization is not good for dropsy, except in the manner called "asclytes." When you cure it according to the manners that we have said in divisions, and your cure does not benefit, then it is necessary that you make four cauterizations around the navel, and one on the stomach, and one on the liver, and one on the spleen, and two behind the back on the spine, and one in the armpit; and let the cauterizations be well near the edge of the heart.
After let the cautery open for long time, and do not leave the cure of the patient after the cautery; and healing would hasten, and will be together the two intentions with the help of God.
The form of the cautery for the belly is the clavicle that we have before showed; and that for the back is olive, according to what it has been put before.
of the swelling of the feet When the feet are swollen in the one who is hydrophic, and are full of  yellowish fluid, it behoves you to cauterize on the back of the foot between the little finger and the ring finger; and lift your hand with the cautery without turning. And do not enter too deeply into the depth, thus the yellowish fluid will be driven out, and let the cautery be according to this form:
After make on .ij. legs .ij. cauteries in each leg at the tip of the cuticle; and let the cauteries be long, one below the knee in front and the other behind, in the middle of the leg; and leave the cauteries uncovered for length, that they may heal themselves; after the cure of the other cures that we have said.
of the house
When solution of belly comes from cold and moisture, so that the retentive and digestive virtues which are in the stomach and in the intestine is emptied, and cannot be cured by means of cures; and you see the patient suffering well and of great virtue, then make .i. great cautery on the stomach according to what has been said here before about the cautery of the stomach, to the circulating cautery; and .iiij. cauteries around the navel subtle to every .i. cautery clavile subtle, and .ij. cauteries on the loins.
And if you see the humors abundant and the patient suffering, make a cautery on the groin, and one cautery on each hip, and two small cauteries on the stomach near the large, because the cure is beneficial when there is good help.
Of the cure of hemorrhoids
When hemorrhoids are either at the base, or one or more, and they are old and large, cold and moist humors corrupted, and have been treated as we have said in divisions, and it does not benefit, if you make cauteries: three on the spine of the back, the one which is outside all below the almedate poc and poc in triangulating, and one cautery under the buttock two fingers.
And if you think that his stomach is cooled, and the meat is not cooked, and one sees the face swell, then to the face one makes i. great cautery on the stomach, as it has been said before, and i. other on the liver, and i. other on the mice to all the cautery clavicle; and let the cautery open long time. After cure the place as long as it is healed.
of the flesh called «thelul»
When you cut thethelul, then sear the cautery which seems i. razor, and then put it all burning on that thethelul cut; and leave it as long as your hand that the cauteries comes to the birth of the vein, so that the blood does not flow; do this once or ii., and if there is much thethelul, cauterize each one as we have said; after the cure of dressings useful as long as they are healed; and if you cauterize with a great cautery on the alchatim, it will have more help.
of a poorly healed wound
When the patient cannot bear cutting or opening, which we will recount in its place, then comes such a sickness that it can be healed only by cautery.
When a fistula comes to any one, and it is filled and  grotty with putridity and corrupt moisture, then do you probe to the very bottom, and guard that you know how deep the probing goes. After that, sharpen the cautery which seems like .i. razor, and insert it into the fistula according to the quantity that the probe went in, and renew the cautery until the putrid and corrupt flesh is burned, once, or .ii., or .iii., according to the quantity of need; and guard yourself from burning the nerves that are within, and the large veins. If the fistula goes to the body of the bladder and intestine, then guard these places, and do not make incisions there except in fleshy tissue, and think that it is not passing through; after cure the place until it is healed, and if the place is sealed up, and the matter is removed for a long time, then know that the place is completely healed; and if the matter is not removed, know that the place is troublesome, and the bones are corrupt at the base; and thus as one of these that we will say in its place.
of the sickness of the kidneys When pain from cold comes to the reins, and of great windiness, and does not take much from woman, then it is necessary that you make cautery on the reins on one side and on the other with the cautery clavicle which we have said before; and if we cauterize it in the middle, it will have three cauteries in line, and they will do more great help.
of the bladder When the bladder is soft and weak from cold and moisture, so that the patient retains urine, then I make cautery in the outer part above the bladder, where the hair of the groin begins, one on the right and one on the left, and each cautery as long as ours of a fist; and I make one cautery outside the back, or two if you have need; and let the cauteries clavicle be according to the form said before.
of the marsh When the marsh is cold and moist, and does not allow for them to conceive, and the flowers are corrupted and their ends are late; and when they come, there is great pain: therefore it behooves one to make three cauteries around the bud, as we have said of the cautery of the bladder, and two cauteries behind the back; and let the cauteries be clavical, as we have said.
of the hip
When the viscous moistures descend to the bone of the hip, and for this cause it moves from its place, and the sign is that the thigh is longer than the other when measured together; and it is found the level of the viscera below, then it behooves you to cauterize the patient on the bone of the hip with one cautery resembling a circle, and place it before the place around the bone as it turns, so that the bone is inside the circle; and let the cautery be such as the one with which the stomach was cauterized.
And if this cautery is not present to you, make three cauteries of the olive tree large, and let the cauteries be as deep as all the others; and treat until it is healed.
Of the pain of the hip When pain comes in the hip joint, and it is from cold and moisture, and the patient has been treated with what we have said in the division and the treatment does not work, and the illness is old: then you must purge the patient of the thick humors with fetid pills, or other good-seeming pills.
After that, make a cautery; and the manner of the cautery is in two ways: namely, together with hot medicines, and fire cautery. The fire cautery is done in many ways, one of which is this: you cauterize on the hip joint three triangular cauteries according to this form, and make them a good depth and width, and let there be between each cautery the space the size of a finger, and let the cauteries be of olive wood; sometimes one makes a cautery in the middle on top of the hip, for which reason there are four according to this form:
And if you see, then cauterize with the cautery of the circle that we have said before in the dislocation of the hip; but do in such a manner that the circle contains the whole hip, and all the spaces of the heart are burned.
And this is the manner in which it is done in sciatica, when the pain holds in the hip, and does not reach to the thigh or leg. And if it comes to the thigh and leg, then one makes two cauteries there where the patient says that the pain holds him, and one cautery above the ankle four fingers, at the left side a little; and whether the cauteries are cuttlefish or burned the thickness of the heart; and if the patient feels that the pain extends to the toes or near them, then he cauterizes where he feels the pain three fingers or four with the cautery which is called "points".
And if it is necessary, then one does more; and if he knows that the pain is below the knee towards the thigh, then one makes a cautery with the cuttlefish or circular cautery, and take good care in all your cauteries that you do not leave the cautery so long that you burn the nerves and the large arteries, and that you do not make more nuisance and contraction for the patient.
And I myself have seen many who had cautery on the ankle of the foot, and they left it so that the leg was all swollen, and the foot also, and was pierced and corrupted all the foot. After a bellyache from which he died.
And if the pain is in two parts together, make cautery in one and the other, according to this manner. // And the wise men said in the cautery of the hip, for this reason is the manner, make one such iron and be at the head also as big as a nutmeg, or a little less, and be by entrechetres and be from one entrechetres to the other with space the quantity of a knuckle; and let the entrechetres be towards two parts, and let them also be like nuts, and there is one hinge of iron well made; and this is the form:
And be heated until it is all red and feels hot, and then put it on the bone of the sick hip, and be turned on the healthy side; and cauterize once one cautery reont and let it for three days; and then make a plaster of butter, and leave the wound uncovered for a long time; after the cure of ointment until it is healed.
Albucasim says that we should use little of this cautery because of the fear of its appearance, and we see few who use it; and nonetheless those are good cauteries, which can endure it, and where it is appropriate.
of the pain in the back
When pain comes to the back, whether from falling or percussion or from too great an evacuation, or from similar cold matter spread, none of these appearances is worthy of cautery, except for that which comes from the infusion of cold matter.
It is necessary after this that the patient is emptied of fetid pills or other similar things, that one makes on his back, where the pain holds, three lines signed with an inch, and in each line five cauteries or more according to the virtue and quantity that the patient can endure; and let the cauteries be made according to the cautery which is called 'point'; and if you see, make three or four cauteries at the clavicle middle cautery according to this form:
Many times this illness comes to young children, and the signs of its beginning are that they have a tight back when they stand up, and fear; and you find in the last spine of the back and in us the appearance which comes above the other spines.
When you see this and you want to cure it, cauterize it with the cautery according to this form.
So that the cautery penetrates each part of the spine equally. And if you see it, cauterize around the spine with the pointed cautery 2 or 3 lines, and let the points be near each other. After curing the place until it is healed according to what we have said, and beware that you do not bring the cautery into a location which is in the nerve's space.
of the pain of the joints
When pain of the joints is from humors which are spread to each limb of the body, and when pain comes in the feet, that the mire call «gout» properly, and when it is of cold cause and cures of medicines can not cure it, then it is cured by cauteries in this manner: make the mouth of cauteries around the joint of the foot, and let the cautery be olive according to this form:
And if there is need that you prick on the face of the foot, then make cautery to the whole cautery which one calls «point». And if the pains come up to the knees and other joints, and this happens many times, then make cautery on each knee three or four cauteries of each side, to all the cautery olive; and if you have need of more, then make more, but do not hold your hand beyond that while the point of the cautery is burned.
And if the pains descend to the knee and back, then administer the cautery which we have said in our chapter. And if the pains are in the hands, make points around the wrist two lines; and if there remains no pain in the arms, then make points on each joint and on the hair of the hand; and if the pains come up to the elbows or shoulders, then cauterize each part, and make good government for the patient and pure medicines. For if you make good government for him and purge phlegm, he shall be healed by the help of God.
of the rupture of the shoulder
When a rupture comes in the arms, and the joints descend to the heels, and this is new, then when you see it cured, let him not move that day; and he uses things which hold the belly, so that the fiber descends from his belly; after that make him sit on his back between your hands, and command him to keep his arm steady as long as the joints are repaired, and move them to your heels, and place a cautery below the rupture on the bone of the elbow, and to all signs that it be similar to half a circle above the body; then heat the cautery
until it is white and that it gives a sensation. Then reset the joints to their place; and the ministers hold his hand above so that they do not return backwards; and work well the thighs on the patient, and put under him i cushion and i bandage on the thighs, and i other one on the leg that holds his hands; then put the cautery on the sign with all your hand, and keep it straight and hold it as long as you reach the bone, and if you do not reach it the first time, repeat it again until you come to the bone; and be careful that the joint does not jump when you do the cautery; so that you don't burn it; and that by this the patient does not die, or any other ailment.
And know that when you do not come just to the bone with the cautery, your works are worth nothing. And it is necessary that the cauteries of children be subtle according to the measure of them, and of great people also great according to their measure; after 3 days cure their wound with butter as long as the burning is removed; after the cure of other ointments until it is healed, and lie the sick .xl. days on his back until the wound is well soldered; and it is necessary that his dressings be laid long, so that the boils do not stick out when he tries to go into rooms.
And after .xl. days, when he wants to rise, if he is given a good splint and wears it for another .xl. days; and have good rest, that he does not work too much and beware of too great repletion of drinking and eating, and too high bragging; and when he does this teaching so is healed entirely. And I will say here after the cure of tailoring in his chapter. of the rupture of the belly
When wounds come in other bellies and are known, and you see that they do not grow anymore, then you make one cautery of the cautery according to its quantity, and let it burn one-third of the heart; after the cure according to what we have said; and none of the ancients have said that it must be cauterized with the cautery at three angles according to this form:
but first mark the place of the incision and make a line across the width above the wound, and another below, and hold your hand in between the entire cautery clamp. But the first cauteries are lighter and more mobile.
of ancient pain in any limb When pain comes in any limb, whether from falling or striking, and this pain lasts long, and the cure of medicine does not work, then it is necessary that it be cauterized with the cautery which is called "poins," and let the cauterization be according to the length of the limb and its smallness and its weakness and its virtue and its location of torsions and of its pain. If it is healed by the first cauterization, it is well; if not, repeat another cautery above that one, for such is the custom that it must mutate into the member which is near it, therefore it is necessary that you make the cauterizations as long as the patient is healed.
of malady
The diseases are helped at times by cautery with great aid, and especially the disease that comes from the putrefaction of phlegm and melancholy. When you see them being cauterized, take care if the disease is at the beginning, and if it is cured according to what we have said in the division, and does not worsen or remain, and you doubt that the corruption will not spread throughout the whole body, then do five cauteries on the head: one between the brow and nine; and another towards the forehead at the end of the hair; and two on the two horns; and one behind on the nape; and leave your hand so that the cauteries come down to the bone, and as long as the bark comes out so that the vapors of the thick humors can escape; and cauterize above the mice according to what it is before.
And if the gangrene is spread everywhere; and it appears manifestly, then it is necessary that you cauterize it with these cauteries that we have said or chief, and one cautery in its neck, and two cauteries on the spine of the neck, and six cauteries on the spine of the back, and one great one on the hip, and another below, and two on the shoulders; and two on the elbows, and two on the tendons of the arms, and one on each joint of the hands and feet, and on the hollows of the hands; and guard yourself from the nerves that are on the heel, so that you do not burn them; and sometimes it is done cautery on the bone of the groin, and one other on the bone of the stomach, and one other on the liver.
And know that when more cauteries are made, the more help is done, and the more it benefits; and know that the patient does not feel any pain from the cautery as the healthy person feels it, because the body is already completely corrupted. And it is necessary that the cauteries be large and small according to the limbs and joints, according to what you will find in the manner of irons. After the cure, apply a dressing of flour of wheat with honey and other dressings until it is healed.
of inflammation
When swelling comes in any limb and is cured by medicines and oils and plasters, and it is not healed, then I make cauteries on the limb according to the size and smallness of the limb; and let the cautery be a point entering into the thickness of the flesh. Then cure with ointment until it is healed. And sometimes one makes cautery and to the hand and foot and back, at the end of the nerve that moves the limb, and thus the swelling is removed; and all the same do not intervene any unless he knows the members and the exits of the nerves moving the body.
of  albaras
When the illness that is called «albaras» is  severe, and the remedies of medicine are of no avail, then cauterize it with a cautery a point deep, according to the quantity of the thickness of the flesh, until the blennorhea is removed, and its color changes; then cure with flour of chickpeas and lentils with rose oil and plantain leaves, and blood of lamb and blood of alondine, of each one part; and let it all be mixed together, and be bound with a cloth, and be left at the place until it is healed.
The cure of chancres by cautery
When a chancre comes at the beginning, and you see it arrested, then cauterize it with a cautery that seems like i.e., circle, all around the edge of the chancre. And nonetheless, the wise say that one should cauterize also in the middle of the chancre; and nonetheless this does not seem good to me, because I fear that it may be ulcerated and corrupted, and I have never seen it happen any time; and more right thing is that it be cauterized around, with the cautery that is called "circle", as we have said in many cauteries.
Of the swelling that cannot die
When someone has a disease that is called "adubelati", and it delays in dying or because of the superfluity that it makes or because of the water of the patient when he is decrepit (that is to say too old) and he has little blood, or because of the heat; and you see it hasten to die: then cauterize it around with many small cauteries pricking; after let it be like that. For it will hasten to die.
And if you see it being applied to the entire cautery, so heat the cautery as this is its form:
And put your hand in the middle of that sickness which is called «adubelati» as long as the cautery has pierced the heart, and let the cautery be such that the patient feels it burning in such a manner that the course of the rot is cleansed. After the cure as long as it is perfectly healed.
The cure of fire by iron
Another manner of sickness there is which is called «corrodens», and it is nothing else than a wasting away of the limb, because it consumes the limbs as if the veins were dry ropes. If you see this sickness in a place that can endure cautery together with fire, then sharpen the cautery, small and large, according to what is fitting for the place where the sickness is; after cauterize all parts until you reach all the corruption, and there remains nothing of it, that all that which is corrupted be removed. And then leave it for three days, and put on the cauterized places a softened ointment with oil as long as the eschar of fire are removed, and all the corruption. After the cure of healing which generates flesh. And if you see after three days that healthy flesh does not arise, it is good; and if this one doesn't, then begin the cautery again on those who remain corrupted from the limbs. And this wasting away has sometimes been cured by a medicinal potion in place of fire cautery; but nonetheless, fire cautery is of greater help, and I have already said the cure of the medicinal potion in the division: take it when you need it.
of the sprouts which come to the feet
Many times it happens that to the feet by fire a disease arises which is called "closed" according to our understanding, and it is a large thing wanting which bleaches the foot. And the cauteries of this sickness are so according to .ij. manners. That is to say cautery of fire, and cautery of hot water. Cautery of fire so is that you sharpen .i. cautery as well as it is a plume of vulture, and be made of good iron to the measure that it can turn the nail on all sides, and that there are subtle margins; after put it all hot on the nail, and turn your hand all around the nail until it comes to the bottom of the nail; and let it so for .iij. days until it begins to give off rot; then I make a plaster of wild mallows crushed with seil, and let the plaster on all night, and the nail will fall and will be uprooted from its roots. Then cure the place with ointment by applying fat as long as it is healed.
And if they are converted by fire the body, and many times happen in hands and feet, then it behooves you that you bring them cautery of hot water; and it is in such manner: take a chain of iron or iron, or a plume of vulture, and put on the nail and the althelul, that is to say sprouts warts; and put the chain so that it wraps all around, then I put a drop of hot water, and hold your hand well, and press your hand turning so that the margin of the chain comes to the root of the nail, and may find the hot water way deep down to the root; and suffer the patient a while the sting of the hot water an hour; then let him be so, and he will be uprooted from all its roots. Thus do one after another, as long as you uproot all those which are in the body, then cure them with ointments that generate fat.
the cure of trembling
When some tremble from cold or fever quartaine or another, so it is fitting that you make him four cauteries or four on the spine of the back, one cautery between each spine; and one cautery or weight, and one on the stomach at the olive cautery; so he will leave trembling, and hasten to health from the cold disease.
of bursting pustules
At some point appearing by fires the body bathes, or bursting pustules, that come from large corrupted matters. So it is fitting at first when they appear that one makes cautery on each head of the pustule: a subtle cautery of myrtle stick, so that its tip be seized in the fire, or of long aristolochia root, or at the lentil cautery. And at some point cauterize them at the beginning when they appear, according to this manner, and they cannot grow from within forward, but are broken the superfluities from which they come, and are healed; but it is fitting that this be done after the evacuation of blood.
when the artery is cut Many times there are great blood spurts from the artery that is cut at the wound that comes to the outside, or in the incision of the abscess, or in the cautery of the limb, and similar things; and it is very grievous thing to extend.
And nevertheless when this happens to anyone, so hurry to put your index finger on the wound of the vein, and strain it very much until the bleeding is appeased under your finger, and no drop comes out anymore; then put in the fire olive cauteries more small and large as long as they are all red; then take one, or large or small according to the wound and its place where the artery is cut, and put the cautery on that vein where you hold your finger, and hold the cautery there as long as the bleeding is restrained.
And if it jumps out when you lift your finger from the vein, and the cautery is extinguished, then take hastily another of the cauteries that are in the fire.
And do not cease to make these one after the other until the vein is stretched; and guard that you do not burn the nerve which is beside it, and that another malice does not come upon the patient; and know that when a vein is cut off from the artery, it cannot be well stretched even if the artery is great, unless by one of the four ways that we have said: or by cautery, or by extraction when it is not treated, or by strong tying of thread, or by medicines put upon which have power to stretch blood; and be bound and strained well.
Who will bring tightening of the bandage tightly or of putting things burning upon it, or other similar things, if it does not profit no more.
And if this happens to anyone and he has no medicine present, then he must put his finger upon the wound of the vein as we have said, and bind it well until it is stretched above the wound and above the vein; and do not move the finger, but moisten it with cold water often that it be very cold until the blood is frozen and thickened and stretched; and make preparations in advance of those things which he needs of cauteries and medicines.
We have told you in the first chapter all diseases for which it is necessary to use fire cautery, or ardent medicines, and their causes and instruments and forms of cauteries; and I put that chapter from head to foot, and I will go in this chapter by the same way for those who find it more easily what they want.
And therefore, as I begin this, it is necessary, dear reader, that you learn that in this chapter there is more danger and fear than in the first of cauteries, and for that reason greater caution is needed.
For in the work of this chapter, there is often the evacuation of blood when opening a vein, and incising an abscess, and in the treatment of wounds, and in the extraction of arrows, and in cutting into stones, and similar things; where there is doubt and fear, and many die.
And I admonish you that you do not undertake folly. And of these there are those who give their sense and say: "Wait, I am cured"; and the illness is treacherous.
Very dear son, Our Lords give you good understanding and uprightness, and if you want to aspire to the holy inspiration of His hand, Amen.
Or I have ordered this chapter to you by chapters, according to that which it is before or chapter of cauteries, that I have devised to you from the head to the feet, for that you may find more easily those which you will need.
The head full of water
Know that this illness comes many times to children at birth, and when the delivery is too strong the child's head; and sometimes it comes from a cause unknown.
And I have never seen this illness outside of children, and of all those that I have seen it hastened death; and for that reason it seems to me that it is better to leave the treatment in such cases.
And I saw one child whose head was full of water, and the head grew larger each day until he could not support it; and believed so much moisture that he died, and this moisture is gathered below the bone on the syphus, between the heart and the bone; and the work is such if the moisture is between the heart and the bone, and the abscess is small, that you cut in the middle of the head a wide fissure; and be also long as two fingers, while the moisture flows; and see here the form of the spatula:
If the moisture is thicker, and the abscess is larger, you make two cuts in the manner of a cross, according to this form:
And if the moisture is below the bone, and the signs that you see the sutures of the head open from each side, and the water jumps out when you press it with your hand inwards, and this does not return to you; then it is necessary that you cut in the middle of the head three cuts according to this manner:
And after the incision take out all the moisture. After take out the fissures of cloths and powders, and put in wine and oil, and let it so until the fifth day; then untie it, and cure the wound with tents and ointments, and let keep the chief bandage tight, and then give the patient dry meat from pocket of moisture as long as the limb be strengthened and healed.
And another manner of incision is that you look where opens the size of the abscess, and its assembly of water; for at times it is in front; at times behind; at times on the right; and at times on the left.
Therefore cut where the abscess opens, and its filling of water, and make the opening according to what you are able; and be careful that you do not cut the artery; and let blood flow, so that the patient does not die from the loss of blood and the evacuation of moisture.
of summary
When it happens to anyone a sickness which is called "catarrh" at the eyes or at the breast, and the sickness is ancient, and the cure of medicine does not help, then the last cure is by cautery with this one on whom they cover the .ij. arteries.
It behooves then, while you see them covered, that the patient make rear his head; after he rubs their place with a rough cloth until the arteries appear, then restrain the patient's neck with one cloth; then look where the vein beats, and the points of each are after the ears, and so they are returned; then sign the points with an incision, then cut both with a sharp spatula of .ij. parts as far as the flesh comes to the bone, and this be by the broad side of the head.
And if you see, thrust the spatula under the artery and cut it above, cutting also as two fingers across.
And when the vein is cut, the blood jumps out from above continuously.
And if the artery does not open at the feeling, then it is necessary that you measure the quantity of the space of three fingers, then sign in and make until the bone; and what it is necessary to put blood out is six parts, and perhaps a little more or less, according to what the patient can suffer, and the fullness of the artery; then look at the wound: if it remains on the bone point without syphac, then cut it so that an abscess does not come, then strain the wound and bind, and the cure of ointment until it is healed.
Of migraine
When old migraine comes, and acute catarrh, because of the moistors of tears and the heats in the temples and ancient soreness and similar things, and it is medicated by manners of cures of medicine and all that does not benefit him, then we extract the arteries of the temples and cauterize them, as we have recounted.
And the manner of their extraction is that the patient makes rear the hairs of his temples, and attends to the artery which opens in the temple, because it opens well by its beating, and is poorly returned outwards than in some men who are too cold; and if it is returned, then strain the neck of the patient with some cloths, then rub the place with some rough cloth, and raise the place with hot water until the artery appears manifestly; then take the spatula whose form is this:
then scrape the skin lightly until you come to the artery, then treat it upwards as pincers, and depart well from the webs that are under each side; and if the artery is subtle, turn it to the point of the probe, then cut it off of that part according to the quantity of two fingers. For if it is not cut, it does not jump out all at once in any way.
And treat the blood of six ounces, up to three; and if the artery is large, it is necessary that you tie it in two lengths with a strong double thread of silk, so that gangrene does not come before the healing of the wound, and there is bleeding; then cut the superfluity which is between the two ligatures in the same hour, and then, if you wish, cauterize it with a hot iron cautery up to the bone until the fingers are cut; and this is the best work, if the patient does not have fever and he is of hot complexion.
For the cautery is aid to finish the moisture: for this reason it is of greater aid to moisture. Where it is necessary for the extraction of arteries that one fills their place with old cotton and puts on tents well made; and when one unties them, let there be cured with dry medicines that make flesh grow, and with tents, until it is healed; and if without cutting of the artery as much as you work it, then hasten to cover by cautery, or you use the place of vitriol and strain it in your hand so that the bleeding is stopped; and if you do not have this present, put on the place your thumb until the bleeding stops, and raise the place of cold water until the bleeding ceases, and be strained as much as is convenient; and what is more moderate and lighter in the extraction of the artery is that you cauterize the vein with this cautery cutting in .ij. parts, but let the cuts be well spaced to preserve longer their heat. For when the instruments are too thick, it holds less heat. And must have between the two knives one must of wide space, and then when you have marked with them the two sides, and you put the hot iron above until it comes to the bone, and cut the vein in two parts; and be separated between the two shoulders because it is not soldered by this cautery at all; and this is the form of the cautery:
of tears
When the tears of the eyes are flowing down the veins that are on the temple of the head of fire, and it does not benefit any medicine if one makes it, and you see the face of the sick person encircling, and feels like the forehead is moving as if from tremors; and where the oil is wet and moist so that the hair of the papers is falling out, and the papers are dry, and scorched by the heat of the tears, then there is a need for this cure.
And they called it "contused cure" by the ancients, and do to the patient who has this sickness, make at his forehead that he has hair, then make .iii. cuts on the forehead evenly according to the length of the forehead; and let one of the cuts be as .ii. should throughout the front going down to the root, and the others .ij. by .ij. ribs above the cheeks, and guard yourself from cutting into the arteries that are as .ii. ribs above the cheeks; and keep your hand away from the continuation of the .ii. mandibles, and let each wound be the quantity of .iii. fingers across the joining.
From the incision that is beneath the temple to the second incision; and scrape all the core which is between the .ii. cuts to all the surface that is on the bone, then make another from the middle incision to the other second one, and then extract this spatula.
If one puts it in the first notch the instrument that is called "cultellaire," and is very sharp on one side, and on the other side is blunt, not sharp, and this is its shape: And put the sharp side towards the fleshy part near the heart, and the blunt side towards the bone, and push it until it reaches the middle notch. And cut all the vessels that descend from the head to the eyes as long as the incision is continuous until it reaches what opens toward the heart, and then on the other side make in the middle notch until the other edge; and then extract blood evenly, and press the place for the blood taken; then put in each notch a tent of old cotton, and put above cloths moistened in wine and oil and ash, and keep that no abscess comes there; and on the third day untie the bandage, and then administer a good amount of boiled water, then cure with ointment basil with rose oil, and other cures for which wounds are cured, as long as it is healed.
of the eyes
When to any comes acute catarrh, and you see the eyes red and small, and the vision weakened, and the papers burned; and the hair falls out, and where it touches causes sharp pain, and the patient sneezes; then know by these accidents that these matters and this catarrh come from many veins, and the cure that is in them, thus is this.
And it is that you command the patient to raise his forehead, then make a great cut between the brow and another of width. I. poc. And begin from the incision of the left temple to the right temple, and let the incision go to the bone; and keep your hand away from the nerves of the temples that move when touched; and when the bone is uncovered, wipe all the blood with a sponge, and then insert between the two lips of the incision old cotton, and linen bandage; then tie above bandages moistened in wine and oil, and guard against a hot abscess; when it is removed, it is necessary that you rub the bone until pus begins to form, then cure it with drying things, which make pus harden.
In this manner: take two parts of wheat flower and four parts of colophony, and make a poultice from them; and administer it in these wounds to harden the pus throughout.
Of the stuffing of the ears
All that which falls into the ears is one of the four things: or grains, or beast, or stone of mine, or similar thing as iron; or seed, such as lentils, beans, peas; or flowing thing such as water and oil and similar things.
When it falls into the ear stone or another manner of thing that does not join with the ear, nor grows in the ear, put the ear to the sun. If you see the stone, instill a drop of violet oil or sesame oil, then administer extraction; and let him sneeze with condus, and stuff his nostrils when the sneezing comes, and put around the ear pieces of cloth or wool; and keep the ear upwards. Many times it comes forth by this cure; and if it does not come forth, administer extraction with fine pincers, which is as follows:
If it comes forth with the pincers, it is good; if not, administer extraction with the fine instrument of small doubleure; and if it does not come forth by this, make a chain of iron and insert the head of the chain or opening into the ear forcefully, and stuff what surrounds the chain with soft wax so that the wind cannot enter with the chain; then pull it forth forcibly, for many times it comes forth as we have said; and if it does not come forth in this manner, take a glutin from what is used to catch birds, and put some on any instrument which is pointed for this purpose, and put a bit of cotton around it; then press the glutin onto the stone or whatever it may be, and pull it forth. And if she does not follow all these things that we have said, then you hasten to cut open the ear so that an abscess may come and spasme; and the manner of the cutting is that you first bleed the patient in the head, and withdraw blood according to the measure of his virtue, then make the patient sit between your hands and turn the ear upwards, and make a small incision at the root of the ear to the fat or where it depends; and let the incision be like a moon, as far as you come to the bone, then cut the bone according to your power, and suck it carefully with your mouth; and care for it until it is healed. And if it is grains that are inside and it swells, then administer extraction; and if it cannot be drawn out, then administer one spatula thin according to this form:
and administer an incision of that grain. But do not do this when you think that the grain is moist due to the moisture of the ear, until you have made many pieces; then extract it with fine pincers and by sucking, as we have said, so that the extraction be aligned.
In the ear when water enters it is necessary that the patient use externally of first condition and widen the ear with old cotton. And lie down on that same ear where the water is. If it goes out for this, it is good. If it does not, take many pebbles according to the length of your finger thin and light, and burn them a little in fire; and put them in the patient's ear one by one, and push it upwards from his feet of the other side, and put another stone on top of the stone that is in the ear; and do not cease to do this of pebble by pebble until the water comes out completely, and so it goes out completely; and if you see, take .i. reed, and put one end in the ear, and the other end in fire until the most soft part of the reed be burned; then redo another piece of reeds until the water is all gone, as we have said in the stone.
In the extraction of the beast, if it is of small body, as a flea and similar thing, cure it as we have said in the division; but if it is of great body that one can feel it, administer the extraction of pincers; and this is the lighter thing to remove that is in the ear.
In the extraction of worms from the ears, when you cure it as we have said in the division and where we treat distillations, and the cure does not benefit, then it is necessary that you look at the ear in the sun: if there appears any worm, then you treat them with subtle pincers, and if they do not appear, take the cauterizing tool of which this is the form:
And be narrow below and wide above. And put the most subtle chief in the ear according to the quantity of the suffering of the patient, then succeed in all the caine; do this often until all the worms come out. And if they do not obey to come out, stop around the caine with cotton as I said in the stone; and if they do not come out further as we have said, administer distillations that the ancients have proven in the excision of worms, and you will find them or treat distillations; and if distill your oils and your medicines in the ear to all this instrument, from which is the form as you see:
And be of silver or copper, narrow below at i. small holes, and above wider for distilling; and for pressing inside the distillation i. instrument of copper well made for this purpose, and if you see take i. razor and wrap around its point conveniently cotton; then put your oil or your juice, and what you see of your medicines in the caine, and the caine be in the ear; then put inside the razor all the cotton, and press your hand moderately until the oil is distilled or at the end of the ear; and the patient feels it inside, and let the distillations i. pock be warmed by the fire and then distilled in the ear; and keep that it is not too cold, because the medicine would not be so good.
Of the stopping of ears
No child is born without a hole in their ears; and this same thing happens to men by the swelling of wounds, or of flesh born inside the ear, and these swellings sometimes come from within the ear, so that one cannot see them; and sometimes there are .i. (one) pore of fur in the ear, and one can see it well.
That which comes from within, so that one cannot see it, is of serious healing in many dispositions, and in this you should put the ear of the sick person to the sun; and look inside: if you see the opening apparent, then the work has all of this spatumile (this form):
And be even and trenchant in front and behind all plain, so that it does not blister the ear; if the opening is of flesh born or core of the ear, then hold it with subtle pincers, and cut it lightly, as long as that flesh is entirely removed.
And if the opilation is in the ear, take one razor fine and light and warm it a little at the fire, then put it into the flesh of the ear. If you feel the opilation which the patient feels greatly in the ear, pierce lightly, and guard that you do not wound the nerves of the ear; then put in the ear a tent according to the width of the hole, and moisten it with Egyptian ointment.
Do this for no day until the wound is healed, or you take a tent and moisten it in rose water, and powder it with powdered vitriol; and if you see the ear inflamed, then it is necessary that you withdraw the tent and put another tent moistened in cerote which is made of rose oil and wax, until the inflammation is removed; then cure it until it is healed.
And if bleeding occurs, dip a sponge and cloth in cold water, and put it on the ear, and use other cures that remove the bleeding which are or treat distillations.
of the skin of the papers
This is the cure that comes in papers for the eyes when they are moist and dry, so it is necessary that you stretch them with tweezers and pincers, and the root of a spatula; then put on its place powdered vitriol.
And if without it decorticate, then cauterize with the lenticular cautery subtle, and the cauterization after incision worths movement; and many times repaire, that nothing remains of their roots; and when they are cauterized by fire, those roots are burned and do not return at all.
of the groin
Many times come in papers of the eyes things that seem glassy in their form and in their hardness, and for this reason is this illness called "hailstone", and it is an assembly of moisture thick in the paper above and below; the work is such: take care if the hailstone moves on one side and the other, and it is a light thing to know; then do the broad, then the skin lightly from each part, then take with pliers, and cut. If you cannot cut without piercing a bit of the paper, so it grieves nothing to the patient; and if the fissure is great, so assemble with stitches, and cure until it is healed; and if it is small, do not make any force, because the eyes restore it soon and makes flesh.
And if the hailstone is descending into the inside of the ear towards the upper part, then turn the paper, and having the hailstone in pliers, cut it and press on one side and the other; and if the paper is separated by the incision, it grieves nothing; and when the hailstone is cut, leave the eye with salty water, and cure the place of that which makes flesh until the patient is healed.
of the fat of the eyes
This is grease that is made in the tissues of the papers above, and this happens more to children than adults, and grieves much their eyes, and they come with catarrh in the mornings, and cannot look at the light of the sun because the tears hasten to their eyes; and for that they lie down on their faces sideways, and sleep like that, and are their papers under their eyebrows moist that the swelling and appearance have covered with the exinach which opens in the eye. And when you press them with your fingers and feel the exinarach between them.
And the manner of the work is that the patient puts his head on your palm; and then take one drapery of linen, and arrange a tent in the manner of a circle according to the quantity that contains exinarach from each part, then put it above; and press with your fingers on one side and the other, so that the exinarach be assembled within the circle; then make in the middle of the moisture at the spatula sharp a fissure of the width, and not more than great as the wound made in the vein; and make the skin in parts until you come to the exinarach; and in many dispositions comes exinarach from the fissure, according to the form of a piece of white fat.
Extract therefore in one piece of cloth between your fingers to the outside, and turn your hand to right and left until it be spread; and guard that you do not add into the fissure, that you do not come to all the spatula up to the eye, that you do not bleach it.
And if the fissure does not open at the beginning of the split, so carefully split the fissure lightly until it opens; then extract as we have said, then moisten drapes in oil and vinegar, and place upon the site, and strap with bandages.
And if to such men who grind grain and place it upon to corrupt the moisture that is stagnant. Then care for it until it is healed. And if an abscess comes to the site hot, then care for it with soothing plasters until it is healed.
of hairs of paper
When in papers hairs are born adjusted other than the nature ones, and are grown old, they harm the eyes, and bring many kinds of illnesses as customary tears and softening of the papers and albuginea, until that is cause of the destruction of the eyes; and is the cure according to .iiij. manners: or by cautery altogether fire, or by medicine ague according to what it is before or chapter of cautery, and is done or by incision and stitching or by canes, according to that which I will say.
It is necessary that you put the head of the patient in your vein, then turn the paper of the eye to your left hand; if it is converted, it is good; if this is not so, there put an awl to all .i. thread above; and let it be below the margin of the paper or where the hair grows near these hairs, and draw .i. thread up to the whole paper, and turn it to the razor; then make in the part below the paper, below the hairs adjusted, to all the spatula cutting, from the great tear to the small one; then extract .i. thread, and put under the paper a small tent of cotton and drape, then sign above the paper a figure of an enche, like the leaf of myrtle, and however it is necessary that the figure be according to the quantity that you see raise the paper which is divided to all.
And if at that which needs one cuts a great quantity of the paper according to what the paper is softened; then make all the spatula above the .ij. lines that you have signed, and begin from the lou greatest tear to the small one; and let it be one of the fissures near the natural hairs in the thickness of a root, then put the oncine in one of the .ij. angles of the heart, then scrape it all; then assemble the .ij. lips to a seam of an awl with all .i. thread of fine wool, and wipe the blood, and make air the superfluity of the threads above the .ij. eyebrows to no sticky things, if you want to do this; and if this is not so, have no care about it, then leave the seam and the threads until .iij. days or .iiij.; then cure the wound without seam with dry and constricting things, because the paper revives by the joining of the wound and the assembly of it, but the seam is moved (as they say the ancients), and this work without fear;
and if in another manner: and it is that you mark the paper with a figure which is as the leaf of myrtle, as we have recounted, to iii ounces uncovers according to the form which is here:
then cut that which ascends as small forces equally according to the form which is here:
And if you do not have power to hold the tongs, and the thing is not quite equal, then take a needle which has i. thread, and put it in the middle of the figure; and put another thread near the large tear, and the second thread near the small one, and assemble between your two threads equally; then raise your hand equally, and raise all the skin above where you have marked, as we have recounted, then assemble the two lips of the wound with stitching, and cure it until it is healed; and if an abscess comes to your incision, then soothe it with cerote and similar soothing ointments;
And sometimes it happens that the hair of the parchment is converted: so it is necessary that you use those that we have said of the incision; but the suture on one and on the other is more artificial.
The cure of the canines is according to this form: and it is that you convert the parchment and make it inside according to those that I have said, and then make two canines by art, and two subtle ligatures as long as the parchment and the width of the spatula is; and cut the two heads from two parts where you hold the threads; then assemble one and the other subtly on what mounts on top of the oil of the parchment, and restrain the two canines from the two parts that are formed; and leave it like this for some days, and the leather which is strained will die and shrink and carry, until it hardens by itself.
If it is slow, then you cut it more forcefully, then cure it until it is healed; and when the wound is sutured, and if the parchment is lifted, and the hairs do not prick anymore; and this is the form of the two canines that you will make according to this figure, and according to this quantity of length and width:
The work is such that you pierce a fine needle, and put into it one thread of silk soft and fine; then assemble the heads and knot them together delicately, and let the length of the threads be a palm long; then order in the chase another fine silk thread brightly, and knot its chief to the other two threads; then place the patient's head on your healthy side; and let it be towards the sun so that the work may be clarified, for this is a subtle and fine work; then put the needle into all the chase at the root of the hair, and make it pierce into the paper carefully until you draw it above the natural hair; then extract the hair up to the chase, and put into the chase that hair, if there are one or two or three or more; then extract your hand so that the hairs come out all from the chase in the paper with the natural hair.
And if the chase is treated and the hairs do not come out with it, then you will draw the chase down to all the thread that you have ordered it, until the chase comes out of the perforation above and you see it by the vision of the eye; then you will draw the chase and the thread, and close the eye and let it closed for two or three days, until the hair hardens in its place and the flesh grows up; and if the hairs are small, accompany one long hair from the natural ones, and raise it with that one or leave it, as long as it is elongated and then lift it.
of the corruption of the eye
When this sickness which is called «aleocrati» or the rotting comes in the eye, there are two ways: one natural, and the other unnatural. And it happens by sudden blow, or cut or cautery, and similar things.
And the manner of the treatment in this is that you split that suture, and loosen the lips of it, and put inside linen tents, and let it stay until it is healed; and it does not befit that you use in the cure of it things that dry and restrain. For if you do those things, then the sickness returns worse than the first; but work with softening things, like fennel; and the rose of water or elder and flax seeds are cooked, and ointment of diachylon melted in any oil, and wrap a tent around it, and cure it from this.
And the treasures of your cure are that you take care that it does not close again according to the form that it was before; and these works that we have said are nothing but addresses to this sickness, so that it does not return according to the form that it was before.
Of the flesh which comes in the eye
This illness which is called "axacrati", and is both natural and accidental. The accident comes from wounds and cuts and cautery and similar things; and the way of the work in it is that you prick an awl, which has 1 double thread, and you put it into the flesh, and you make it pierce from the left tear duct to the right, so that the threads come into 2 parts of the flesh; then the flesh above the whole awl, and the cut at 1 spatula wide.
And if the shape of the paper returns according to what is required, it is good; if not, you take 1 razor and put it in the cut, and turn the paper, and make 2 cuts or slits inside the paper; and let the edges of the two cuts be at the two corners of the incision that you have cut, and make an angle so that when they are assembled, the shape is like the shape of a letter which has the name "j grieve"; then remove that flesh, according to the quantity that it has grown under, from what follows the paper, then join the 2 parts severed, and stitch them with a thread of wool; then cure with those that we have said of softening medicines, and bandages, until it is healed.
And if the malady comes from a fissure or a suture or cautery, it is necessary that you make a plain incision under the hairs of the papers, and according to what is said before; then sew between the two leaves of a tent, as I have said; and one must do the work according to the form of the malady, because it is very diverse in form, and the wise masters equip every thing with all their power how it does return the figure to its natural form; and the patients themselves, according to what is necessary for work and instruments in more dispositions.
Of the binding of the paper
When this binding happens to the hand of a man in such a manner that the paper above is sewn with the white of the egg, and cannot move nor perform its natural works, then it is necessary that you put the point of a razor under the paper, and lift it up; and in the midst of the pinches, as long as you cut what is hard to the spatula fine, which should not be too sharp nor too blunt, so that the patient cannot suffer that the spatula too sharp nor bleaches the eye; and let your incision, by which you remove that assembly, be slightly made, so that the paper returns according to its natural form; and it is healed all of that assembly, and do at no time in the eye salt water, and the lift of fresh water, and of colere; then put between the paper and the eye a tent of linen, and put on top of the eye wool soaked in yolk of an egg; and after the third day use the colere and the things soudans as long as it is healed.
of the angle of the eye
Know that the angle is in .ii. manners: one is nervous and similar to .i. hard silk, and another which is not at all nervous, but is similar to white congealed moisture, that when one touches it with iron and one sears it with pincers, one cannot; and the one and the other semblance begins towards the great tear duct, and crosses little by little until it covers all the view and all the light and the movement of the eye.
And the manner of incision is that the patient puts his head in your hand, then the operator opens the eyes; and lifts the eyelid with his hand, then coils the angle with small pliers, and holds it upwards; then take a needle, and put .i. hair of horse, or cow, or ox, and .i. strong thread; and double the point of the needle a little and insert it into the angle, and pierce it through with the needle, and tie the angle with a thread and hold it upwards, and scar the whole length of the edge of the angle which follows the prunele and silk to the hair up to the head, then cut off the remaining part at the root of the tear duct with all the subtle spatula and small forces, and leave the natural cartilage or tear duct so that by the incision the body of tears does not come as customary; and no times hold the angle only on the one side and the thread, as we have said; then scar it with all the subtle spatula from where this is the form:
And guard that the spatula does not touch the fleshy skin and break it, and that the needle is not pierced; and after the incision put into the eye a bit of ground silk, and with the collar made of litharge, and let it stay until the next day; then cure it as much as it needs until it is healed.
And if the nail is not sensitive, and you cannot put in the needle, and the tweezers cannot enter, many times this appearance of a nail is cured with medicines; and they grow as I have said in the division, and if you see it covered, operate on the eye of the patient, and take the spatula lighter bit sharp according to this form:
And remove the nail carefully, and if you see that it diminishes not and the reason advances quickly, then distill from your mouth into the eye a collar made of litharge and red lead and ground silk, and plug the eye until the next day; then begin the other work according to this same operation, until it is completely removed.
If no thing is contrary to you in the eye, such as an abscess shoe, then milk it, and cure first the abscess hot until it is healthy, then recommence the work as before, until it is healthy.
And if the appearance of the flesh near the tear harms the eye by great annoyance, then suspend it at the one-inch mark, and cut a part and not half, that no body of tears may come; then distill into the eye red collyrium which is made of litharge.
of the flesh which grows upon the pupil
The eyes of some men are born at times with red flesh, and it covers the pupil and restrains upon the eyelids, turning them outward, and it seems like a rose of baluster; and the work is that the patient puts his head on your healthy one, then the worker opens the eyes, and coils all that flesh with suitable tweezers to this, and sustains it by force; then cuts the first flesh, and goes on cutting to the razor until the end, and keep that you do not bleed the eye during the work; and be the incision of the spatula which we have said in the incision of the angle and small forces because of which one removes the sebum, as this chapter after demonstrates.
And when the incision is completed and all the flesh is removed, then apply the oil of silkworm or distill red coral and similar corrosive medicines, and put on top of the oil defuer cotton with a binding of egg white so that it is assured of a hot abscess; and if it remains nothing and the wound does not close, and you doubt a hot abscess, then leave the oil and cure the abscess with things soothing a hot abscess; then return to your work until it is healed, and thus make as long as the flesh is joined in the eye by this semblance.
But nonetheless it behooves you to align the cure of each weak oil of the natural way; and of the accidental way, in the work of iron; and do not put your hand in any of these works until you see that this limb is suffering from that work.
of the veins of the eyes
Veins that are red and covered over the eye are called sebals; they take away from their sight and weaken the eye every day. Therefore, the first thing you should do is look at the eye, whether it is sebale or not, and there is no other disease except for sebale; therefore, the coil in this manner: Instruct the patient to place his head on your shoulder, then suspend those veins with all the force according to your wisdom, and let them be subtle and doubled according to this form:
And let two cords be by degrees in one body according to this form:
Then coil as forces those veins subtly, and wipe the blood hour after another, until you see removing those veins away from the eye; and guard that you do not prick the eye with the points of the spatulas, and make this work at midday before the sun, and be very fervent in your work so that you do not cut further than those veins; and when you will have done this, then distill into the eye a mixture of green and red colophony to corrode what remains of the sebale.
And if you are not able to collect all of these in that hour, so make a plaster on the eye of things soothing the pains of the eyes, and let it for some days until the pain is appeased and it is assured of a hot abscess, then begin again according to this manner which is before as long as it is healed; and this is the form of the forces:
of the fistula of the eye
The mire is called "arissati" fistula: when you cure it by cautery and by medicine burning hot according to those that I have said before, and it is not healed, then there is something in it that you cut on the abscess, where it should die, and treat all the moisture that is there, until the bone is uncovered.
And when the bone is uncovered, and you will see the corruption and the blackness, if the king has all the instrument of which this is the form; and it is called «aspre chief», and be made of fire iron to i. chief reont, and be pointed like a file as it is in the present form:
And put on the place of the corrupted bone, then turn it between your two hands, and press your hand a little so long as you know that this corruption is reset; and do this several times, then restore the place of drying medicines.
If the bone is joined, and flesh grows, and the body of the bow is joined, and remains so for 40 days, and it does not renew and is not at all inflamed, know that it is healed; if this is not the case, if there is no other way than to bring back the fistula to the opening according to this form: And it is that you uncover the bone a second time with iron, and with sharp medicines, and when it is uncovered take one forest according to this form, and let the head of iron be at three angles, and the shaft be attenuated up to the top as you see here:
then place it upon the bone near the tear duct, and move your hand away from the eye one finger's width, then turn to all the forest until it pierces the bone and he feels it through that which comes into it if he holds his hand on his cheek; and then return the place of dry medicines, as I have taught you, and when the flesh has grown and hardened in the places, so goes the matter into the cheek; thus is the thing lighter for the patient.
from the issue of the eye
When the eyes are open and fully clear, and there is no disturbance or lessening, it behooves you to bind the patient; then cleanse, then place suction cups or a hatereel without injuring for sucking, then place upon the eye one ligature made of acacia, aloe, incense, and sarcocolla, and then restrain the eye, and emplaster above with bandages and clothings; and the manner of the clothings is that you take cloths soft enough, and double each into four, and then place one upon another according to the quantity that the eye has need; then bind it from above with a firm bandage, and renew the suction cups for sucking without injuring; then remove the suction cups and leave the eye restrained day and night, and if the ligature softens, it behooves you to restrain it more; then remove the ligature after the day and the night, and if you see the eye repairing, that is good; if not; then renew the emplastering and bandages and ligature and suction cups until it is healed.
of the dislocation of the cloth wrapped
When a disruption comes in the cloth wrapped, then open it, and come out of the papers as .i. grain of resins, and is expectable to see; therefore if you saw it cover, the work is such that you put a needle in the root of the part below until the one above, then put another needle where there is .i. double thread from the part of the tear; and make it pierce, and leave the first needle according to the disposition; then cut the place of the double thread and tie one part of the cloth around, and restrain it well, then remove the needle and put on the other eye half in abundance of an egg; and leave it until the threads fall with the cloth, then cure the eye with comforting things as long as the wound is healed; and sometimes the wound is restrained by the cloth on each side of a circle of cloth, until it is healed.
And if the eyes have a great appearance, then pierce it with a subtle spatula that comes from the eye, and correct the albuminous moisture and lower the eyes, and enter immediately; then remove it until it is healed.
of the eye socket
This disease which is called "alcunnati" is nothing but the socket of the eye which is assembled in the eye, seeming like water descending, and it is not water; and the manner of the appearance of the work is that you make the patient sit on one seat prepared and straight, then take the head between your hands by two parts, and move it until you see the socket coming up to your eyes; then be it fixed, and do not descend and be disarranged the light, and let the patient see things as he used to; and if it does not descend below, know that it is water, and if the descending of the socket is not arranged as we have said. so make the patient sit between your hands, then take the spatula subtle and make on the cornea skin one point by the continuation of the conjunctive with the cornea and the crown, until the socket is issued; and when it is issued, pour in the eye hot water mixed with honey, or water or fenugreek boiled and honey, then be cured with other cure until it is healed.
of the waters of the eye
We have seen the likenesses of the eyes in division, and what is necessary to examine them; so work according to health. It is necessary that you make the patient sit between your hands crossed, away from the light of the sun, and tie his healthy eye and hold it very tightly; then put the paper of the eye in your left hand if his eyes are left, or in your right hand if his eyes are right; then take in your right hand, if his eyes are left, the instrument that is called "almagda", or in your left hand, if his eyes are right; then place the point of the instrument next to the crown by the width of a straw in that whiteness of the eye at the part of the smallest tear, then put the instrument that is called "almagda" virtuously, and restore your hand until it pierces in the whiteness of the eye, and feel that almagda comes to the empty thing; and it is necessary that the measure of the way almagda is at the height of the measure of the space which is from the pimple to the end of the black; and this is the crown of the eye; so you will see the bone in that paper for the clarity of the cornea, and then put the instrument until where the needle is, then squeeze it out under one way after another. If the needle now descends, if the patient sees before him and the instrument in his eye.
After rest a little, and if the eye returns up the second way, put the force with the instrument, and when it is ensconced and it does not come up, withdraw almagda lightly by turning your hand back and forth; and then put back into the eye a bit of silk gem, and leave from those the oil inside. Then put on the outside of the eye a poultice or cloth moistened in rose oil and in white of egg, and tie with the healthy eye.  We, and those who are of our time, put on top a bit of bruised with white of egg.
And if almagda cannot enter the eye because of its hardness, for there are some men who have eyes that are too hard, it is necessary that you prick the instrument that is called "alberit", for this is its form:
And therefore pierce only the conjunctive, and do not go too deep in it, but make .i. subtle one, then put almagd, as we have said; and at the completion of the work equip the patient with .i. dorteur beforehand, in which he sleeps on his back in .j. dark place; and be devoid of all movements, and eat light meats, and do not move his head neither to the right nor to the left, and be tied according to his disposition until the third day; then untie it in that same dark house, and test his sight, and let him see some things, and then put him back on the bandage until the seventh day; and it is not good that you do this at the hour of the cure or after the incision now, but it is necessary that you make this up, for the reason that the water rises quickly.
And if abscesses come, that you untie the eye before the seventh day, and address those who soothe abscesses; and when it is appeased, then untie the sight and put on his face .i. orilliet to cover any day, and be in that dark house. And then go out of the house slowly, and convert yourself into your affairs; and know that no disciples should interfere in this case.
And one came to us who was from the Yrach, who told us that in their country they make almagd pierced, to which one sucks the water, but nonetheless I have never seen any in our land, nor have I ever read it in books of the ancients; and perhaps it is a new thing.
And these are the resemblances of the shapes of almonds, for those who do not know them they see; and be of rain properly.
And let the head of the birds of this same subtlety, and the hind in three angles acute.
of the flesh from the nose
Sometimes noses are born or appear with various fleshy attachments, because of which some resemble scorpions a great deal; and if there is such a one, where the flesh has a foul color, and if it has flesh of good color. In that one therefore of these growths which is healthy, and not foul, it befits you to make the patient sit between your hands against the sun; and open his nostrils, and throw the ointment onto those growths, and drive them outwards; then cut what you can support with a fine sharp spatula from one side, until you know that that growth is completely removed.
And if anything remains that cannot be covered, it opens the whole, that is, of instruments subtle and lightly, so that nothing remains; and if without the swarm or abscess you can’t cover it, then sort it as it is fitting; and if it is a malicious abscess, then haste and cauterize it until the blood is extinguished and all the matter is removed, then put on oil or water.
If the nose works and moisture comes up to the palate, know that it is healthy; and if the moisture does not pierce as it should, know that there is matter in the bone above, so the instruments do not come to cut; therefore it is necessary that you put .i. a thread of linen a bit thick, and be wrung by hands well, and have between each knot a space of .i. finger or less; and put the patient’s head with the thread in his nostril at its base, and pull it smelling until it comes out from the nose into the mouth; and many times do this the children at school, and it is easy for him who wants to do it; then hold one end that comes from the nose with one hand, and the other end that comes from the mouth with the other hand, and feel each one after the other in the way that are the knots. Do this until you know that the knots have corrupted all that matter, then pull out the thread, wipe the blood, and moisten the thread in Egyptian ointment, and put it back in the nostril as before; do this .iij. days or more, until the ointment corrodes everything that remains of matter; and then put on the nose a bandage of wool for some days until it is healthy, and if there is need of drying medicines, use them; and this is the form of the instrument to purge the head, which one distills the oils and medicines into the nose:
And be it of silver or iron, resembling a lamp open, as a vessel, and you lead it thusly; and if you see fit, make a closed vessel, and let the instruments be full for purging the head; and have .i. handle at the top to hold it when one heats the oil or any liquid.
of the flesh over the nerve
Many times at the head of the nerve a disease is born which is called "telul", and grows and becomes great additions, as much as it is a visible thing to see; and for this reason you must cut it at the beginning, and take all the pus out, then put on its place the cautery or burning medicine; and if one delays to cut it until it is large, if one takes warning that it is hard, of bad color, of poor feeling: do not touch it with iron for it is an abscess encrusted, because when one cuts it any time, it brings great malice to the patient; and if the abscess is of soft touch, not of bad color, and you see that one can cover it all, then empty the patient and cut it without fear, and cure the place with dry things and restraining.
when the nerve is cut and sewn
Know that when a solution of continuation comes in one of these operative cartilages, it profits little because in some men. Therefore, when this happens to anyone, first see if the wound is fresh with all its blood; and then join the two lips with a suture, then cure it until it is healed; and if the lips are already separated on both sides, then you must scrape all the parts of their core until they heal, then join the two lips with a suture, and restrain them, and powder on powder of dragon's blood, and powdered incense; and put above the powders a piece of emplasters of strong or another soldering plaster, and leave it until it dries out by itself, then cure it with ointment until it is healed.
The manner of the suture is that you assemble the solution: or by needles, as we have said in the suturing of the belly; or by thread, as I have told you.
of abscesses of the lips
To men's mouths happen within the lips abscesses hard, seeming like grains of times, and smaller and larger; therefore it is necessary that you turn the lips, and cut open on each one, and take with forceps and cut in each part; then put upon the place after the incision of vitriol ground, as long as the blood be extinguished; and then the leave of oil, and cure the place with dry things until it be cured.
of the flesh of the gums
Many times flesh arises on the gums, which the ancients call "albulus"; so it is necessary that you support it with tweezers, and cut it at its root, and leave to run the blood or serum; then put upon the place vitriol ground, or other powders restraining and drying; and if that flesh returns after the incision, and many times happens, then cut it a second time, and cauterize it; if it does not return after the cautery; and these are the forms of instruments for cutting.
of deafness
Sometimes they are assembled at the head of the teeth, inside the mouth between the gums, scabs that are ugly and rough; and sometimes the tooth is black and yellow and green, as long as the corruption comes to the gum, and the tooth is foul-smelling; so you must make the patient sit between your hands, and his jaws be in your saint, and remove the teeth or scabs appear, until nothing remains there; and thus do of the blackness and of the greening, and of the jaundice and other stains, until they are removed; and if one removes those that are at the first reason, it is good; if those not, so begins again on the second day and the third, until you have everything removed; and know that the teeth have need of diverse forms of instruments to remove, according to what the work shows, for the razor with which one removes from outside the teeth have other shapes than those which one removes between the teeth; and these forms and others be with you equipped.
It is necessary when you cure the tooth of its pain that you wait for the drawing as much as you can, because one must not do otherwise; for it is a substance very high until one has no excuse to scrape away. Therefore when the patient is constrained to be treated, it is necessary that you be certain about the tooth aching. Many times the pain of the patient, and thinks that it is a tooth holy, and makes to milk the good tooth; and all the way does not depart the pain by this, as long as the evil is strained, because we have already done this to our elders; and when you are well certain about the aching tooth, it is necessary that you scrape around the tooth at all. A spatula strong to warder the gum from all parts; then moves it to your two or with pliers subtle in the first hole and hole, as long as it is well loosened, then confirms well the pliers; and let the head of the patient in your lap between your knees, and hold it well so that it does not move.
After the tooth is extracted straight without breaking, and if it does not come out for sure, take any of these instruments and put it inside each part lightly, and move it as you did first. And if the tooth is pierced and broken, it is necessary that you fill it with dressings, where the holes are; and if it strains subtly with pliers, that it does not break when extracted; and it is necessary to work very wisely around the gum to dislodge the tooth.
And then be well careful that you do not break it, and remain a part, and return to the patient by the malice of the root greater pains than the first. And guard yourself that you do not do as ignorant elders do, who by their haste and boldness sometimes break the jawbone, and do not bring them what we have recounted; but they bring sometimes by the consequence of this great illness for the roots that remain, or for the jawbone that they break, as we have often seen; and when the tooth is pulled out, wash the place with wine or oil and salt; and if bleeding comes from it, which often happens, apply a dressing of vitriol powder; and if this does not work, cauterize it.
The forms of the instruments, by which one moves the teeth first, should be with long points and thick handles so that they do not double when you pull the tooth; and these are the forms:
And be thick members so that they do not bend when pulling, and be well-made iron, and be toothed for better hold.
from the root of the teeth When the root remains in the pulling, then it is necessary that you put on top of it cotton moistened in butter for one or two days, until the area is softened, then put the tongs which are called "algefri", because the head seems like a beak of care; and be inside made also like a file and this is the form:
And if the roots do not want to come out with all these tweezers, then it is necessary that you uncover the flesh around the root, and there put the instrument which is called "althali," that is to say, a spatula, because of this its form:
And be thick and large so that it does not break, and if the root jumps out with this, it is good; if not, then help yourself with all the instruments, of which the forms come after.
And if one helps oneself with this instrument which has two prongs, of which this is the form:
and other iron tools that are in front in the shape of teeth, and of this instrument which seems like large tweezers, whose form is here:
And this instrument should not be able to break, and know that many instruments of teeth are; and also other instruments, which are not counted; and the wise masters subtle find by himself his instrument, according to what its works and the disease show him, because there are such diseases where the old ones do not teach any instrument for the diversity of others, and if one does not break the bone or other bones, or if he can, then he seeks the instruments that are needed, as I have told you, and helps with gestures, from what is here the form: And they should be thick and well holding to hold the bone, so that it does not escape, but he can hold and remove it; and then restore its place with medicines suited to this, and if there is in the bone rot, and it is small, so the king has all this instrument:
When the tooth appears not according to the body's natural shape, and the form is ugly, and even in virgin women, then it is necessary that you know if the tooth is born after the tooth, and is not in its right place, and one cannot file it or smooth it: therefore the ray; and if it is pierced with the tooth, then take this instrument whose shape is here, and is similar to .i. small beak, and be of sharpened iron at its tip:
And the cope little by little in hands days for the hardness of the tooth, and because you do not move the others, and if it appears that one can be filed, if the file of a certain file as this is the form:
and is also as the file of which one makes the needles; and in file the tooth little by little in hands days lightly, so that it does not move until it falls; then the plane at the end to all no rasp, and if the tooth is too sharp and it bites the tongue, then it is necessary to file the roughness as much as it is equal, so that it does not bite the tongue nor corrupts speech.
when the tooth aches
When the tooth in front is moved, or by percussion or by falling, and the patient cannot press down on it to make it move so that it does not fall, and you have cured it with restraining medicines, and this does not work; if this is the case, it is necessary to restrain it with a gold wire, because the silver wire becomes green and rotten, but gold never changes; and let the wire be medium, neither too thick nor too thin, according to the quantity of space between the teeth; and if you see the teeth aligned, then take the wire and double-knot it between the .ij. healthy teeth, then put the wires between the .i. or more teeth, as far as you come wisely to the healthy tooth on the other side; then begin the covering again up to the place where you started, and strain your hand subtly and wisely, so that it does not move at all; and let your ligature be at the root of the tooth so that it cannot escape. Then cut off the wires of the wire with pliers, and assemble them, and put them back between the healthy tooth, and place it so that it does not touch the tongue; and then leave it like this tightly as long as it can stay, and if it comes undone, or the wires are broken, then bind it with another wire; if it stays, it will serve like this for its entire time, and this is the form of the teeth and the figure of aligning the .ij. healthy teeth, and the .ij. moved ones, as you see:
And when the tooth falls, then it is put back in its place, fresh in fresh, as we have said; and let no one intervene who is not wise and patient, and sometimes one makes the form of a tooth from veal bone, and it is put in the place where the defect is, and it is restrained as we have said, and stays and serves like this for a long time.
to cut the ligament of the tongue
Sometimes this bond comes from under the tongue or nature itself; or by accident of a healed wound; and the work is such that you operate on the mouth of the sick person, and have his head in your lap, and lift the tongue; then cut the nervous cord wide, until the tongue is removed from its place; and if there is hardness or knot, which comes from the soldering of the wound, so put the probe and cut widely that ligament; and keep that the fissure be not too deep, for the artery that is underneath; and when you have done, lift the level with rose water and salt, or cold water, then put under the tongue a tent of linen; and apply this to the sick person every night, so that the places can not solder. And if discharge of blood comes, so put on the place vitriol ground; and if the bleeding does not stop, then cauterize it with the lentiginous cautery, which is good for this; then cure it with other cures until it be healed,
And if you see it of dark color or black or hard, so that the sick person does not feel it, then do not touch it, because it is a chancre; and if it is declining to whiteness, and there is moisture, then put the probe, and make it with a subtle spatula, and deliver it on one side and the other; and if the bleeding does not stop at your work, so put on top vitriol ground until it be stanched, then return to your work as long as you extract all further; then lift the level with salt and silk, and cure it with other cures until it be healed.
of abscesses of the throat
At times there come within the throat boils which are called “godath,” and they are properly called the two almonds, and when you treat them, as we have said in the division, and they are not healed, then take care: if it is a hard abscess of small size and with gray color, do not touch it with iron. And if it is red and the root is thick, do not touch it with iron, also for the discharge of blood; but let it be left until it is ripe, and then you shall split it, or it would break by itself; and if it is of white color, and the root is fine, have an instrument ready to cover it, but first see if the abscess is warm and has subsided. Then make the patient sit in front of the sun, and his shoulders be in your good hands, and open the mouth and put the serjans between your hands, and press the tongue down on all the instrument, from this is the form; and be it of silver or iron as fine as a knife:
And you press the tongue on all this instrument, and you see the abscess, so take the needle and put it into the almond, and pull it upwards as much as you can; and do not move anything from the cloths with it, then cut with the instrument, from this is the form, that seems like a force; and nonetheless the chief are bent, and one place the other, and they are very sharp, and made of iron or lead:
And if you do not have this instrument present, cut with pliers, from this is the form:
And be trenchant on one side, and the other side no; and when you have cut one of the almonds, so cut the other according to that same manner, and after the incision gargle the patient with hot water, and cold and thus, and if discharge of blood occurs, gargle the patient with water, or rind of pomegranate apples be cooked, or leaves of myrtle, and similar things, until the wound is cleansed; then cure it until it is healed; and sometimes there are born in the throat other abscesses than the two almonds, so cut them then just as the two almonds.
And I medicined a woman of an abscess that it was born inside the throat, that is to say one abscess of small size; and I had well closed all the throat so that the woman could not expire through the conduit which was stopped up, and could neither eat nor drink, and would have died if she remained thus one or two days. And the abscess was to me so mounted that it had been forced into two drains by the two openings of birth. I therefore hastened at once, and put in one one incision, then pulled out the pus; and after putting another piece into the other opening of birth, and opening her mouth and pressing on her tongue; afterward I put the incision into the abscess and cut a part, and there issued forth only a little blood; and thus was the conduit of the throat of the woman unstopped, and she began now to drink water and then wine, and did not cease to cut at this abscess for a long time. And the abscess grew back, and filled up the place that I had emptied, until it became very large; therefore I incised it and cauterized it inside the throat: thus it remained without growing; and I departed from these parts, and know not what God did to her after me.
of the grape
When the uvula is swollen and long, it is called "perpendiculaire"; and if it is too thick and round, it is called "uvula". When it is cured as we have said in the division, and the cure does not help, and you see that the abscess of the tonsil is appeased, and it is subtle, then it is necessary that you cut it; and the one which is round assembled and is not long; and it is sanguine or of fusse color or black, then it is necessary that you eschew the incision of it. For there is great peril on the patient. It is therefore, when you see it, according to the manner that I have said, by its whiteness and its length, that you make the patient sit before the sun, and press the tongue with the instrument of which we have made remembrance before; then place the needle in the uvula, and draw it out, and cut it at one or two instruments that I have said in the incision of the two almonds. And it is necessary that you do not cut more than the superfluity that is beyond the natural term; for if you cut more, it grieves the voice, and the speech; and after the incision, use what we have said in the incision of the two almonds, and cure it until it is healed. And if the patient has fear to be cut, then it is necessary that you use him with an engine to the cauterization of the senses of fear. And the manner of the cautery is sharp acute.
And put on the head a hair or one puts the medicine, as like the hairs of a spoon, and place the instrument to all the medicine on the uvula; and let the patient lie on his side, so that the saliva and the muscle move from his mouth of the medicine within, so that it does not descend to the throat, and the palate; then hold your hand to all the medicine and press it on the uvula, the quantity of half an hour, as long as you see it charred and the medications of the medicine are appeased; and if you see, take cotton and wrap it on any instrument, and moisten the cotton in the medicine, and put the instrument to all the cotton in the channel above, as long as the cotton dries on the uvula; and do this often, until the cauterization is perfect, then let it dry, and chiet after four or five days. And if you have need to recommence the cautery of the medicine, then recommence it, and after the cautery wipe around the uvula, with cotton wrapped in butter, and purify what is around the medicine; and be washed with cold water, and be cured with gargles as long as it is healed.
This cure is safer than incision, nor the cautery; if it is cured by fumigation according to this manner, take calament and ysop and origanum and rue and camomille and avronne and similar herbs, and assemble them all or some of them in one pot, and put it therein, and make boil; and the pot shall be well glued with strong earth, and in the middle of the pot have one instrument cheveit according to this manner: And it shall be of silver or of iron, and let one of the heads be put into the mouth of the sick person until the vapor rises to the ulcer by the pipe, as long as the ulcer is mortified; afterwards resume often, as long as the ulcer dries, and guard that you do not do this at the beginning of the coming of the hot abscess, because many things happen; and do not do this unless at the decline of the hot abscess. And if this instrument is not present, then take a pipe and put inside its head a shard of egg, so that the mouth of the sick person does not have too much heat; for the shard of egg does not allow the vapor to bother the mouth, and this is a good cure altogether salutary.
Many times it happens in the throat bones or spines of fish, or any thing; so it behooves you to draw out what you can see, and press the tongue to the sun with all the instrument, so that you see moves the thing; and what does not appear to you and is returned to the throat, it behoves you to make the sick person vomit thus as long as the meat is cooked in the stomach; perhaps by this means the thing will be expelled by vomiting; or the sick person swallows a piece of sponge, or a piece of navel, or a root of lettuce, or one morsel of dry bread; and tie to the sponge one thread, and then swallow it; and when it comes to the place, it shall stick, and then draw out further; and if it does not come out by means of what we have said, then take one instrument of lead according to this form:
And let the instruments be curved at the head so that it can more easily enter the throat, and have the head raised high; and guard that you do not touch the epiglottis, lest all come to them, nor put any bone inside; and move it is better that the patient puts the instrument in, because he will know if the thing is harsh; then put it down or he draws it out equally with all the instrument, as long as it is far.
of the throat lancing
No time is medicine the lancing of the throat, as I have said in the division, by the cure of medicines; and when those do not help, then look at the throat of the patient in the sun, then that you press his tongue to the instrument that I have told you. And if you see the abscess, so treat it with all .i. small pin, or subtle pliers that are good for this. And if those are not worth, then take a hairpin, and put it into the throat of the patient, then put or the tip of the hairpin .i. hot iron, and do this often. And keep the patient's body hydrated all day. Then take full .i. glass of cold water, and open the mouth, and pour it in without swallowing, and move it with his hand often; and as soon as the abscess feels the water, so it falls.
And if it does not fall as we have said, then smoke the patient with asafoetida, using the instrument that I have spoken of in the fumigation of the grape; do this many times, for it will surely fall. And the manner of the fumigation is that you take one pot where there are burning coals, and let the pot be covered with a piece of cloth in the middle, and in it put the head of the instrument; then throw your fumigation, and the patient puts the head of the cane in his mouth, and closes his mouth so that the smoke does not come out, but comes until the windpipe; and the windpipe will now fall, and if it does not fall, then begin the fumigation again many times; and let the patient suffer thirst, and eat salty things and others, and do not drink water; and then it is necessary that it will be cured by this treatment.
And the form of the instrument with which one treats the windpipe is, when it can be seen, similar to curved pliers so that they can enter into the throat; and it has the semblance of a bird's beak, and it has asperities of lime so that what it takes, it cannot let go; and see here the form:
The chapter on abscesses
Many kinds of abscesses are, according to what the remembrance comes after here in this book, and they differ in perforation and size; and it is in .ij. ways one of which is in its same likeness, and of those that it holds moisture. And the second manner is for the places where they are on the body. Because the abscesses of the head are other than those of the foundation, and the abscesses of the fleshy part are other than those that come in joints, and each has its judgment in the work.
And if in abscesses one must not pierce until the boil is ripe according to its completion; and if there are such that it is necessary to pierce when they are mature and do not die according to their completion, such as abscesses near joints. Because when an abscess comes near a joint, and one leaves it as long as it is rotten inside, perhaps the ligament and nerve of the joint are corrupted, so this is a cause of contraction in that limb. Or if the abscess is near the principal member, and if you delay piercing until it is ripe, it will harm the principal member; or if it is near the foundation, pierce it thus when it is ripe; and one must not pierce an immature abscess without complete digestion, except for the one near the foundation, so that it does not ripen too much, and be elongated inside, and there comes a fistula; and cannot heal in a great period.
And it is necessary that you know the hour of piercing the abscess which is ripe according to its completion, and this is when the pain has subsided, and the fever's departure, and the lessening of the pain and redness, and of the swelling and softening of the head of the abscess, and the other signs; and it is necessary that you make the perforation where it is more dependent from the abscess, and where it appears to be opening; and whether the perforation is long or short in the body, and if the abscess is in the hands or feet, or in joints and nerves and arteries, and in all their places equal where there is no furrow.
In these that are festering, according to the member. And when an abscess is in its fleshy place, it is good that you leave the perforation until it is confirmed in digestion accomplished, as we have said. For if you pierce it before this, it will lengthen the body of the venom from it, and it will be full of much filth; and perhaps harden the lips and the depths of it. And if to any abscess that are pierced according to the width of the body, according to what the member has need. And it is necessary that you bring in small abscesses, small openings; and in large abscesses, large openings, and many slits according to the appearance of the size of the abscess; and if to such abscesses where it is necessary to cut the core, and cover; when it is become as .i. drapes, and is dead, then it is necessary to do as one does to buboes: and if to such that are cut in .iij. angles, and if to such ones that are cut like the leaf of myrtle, as abscesses of the angres; and if to such ones where one makes a round size, and other sizes and semblance cuts.
Those who have no chief, as a superficial abscess, it is necessary that you pierce it fully; and it is necessary when the abscess is large, and it has collected a great boil, and you pierce it, then do not drain all the boil in that hour, but drain a part; then stop the abscess until the other day, then drain nothing directly; do this many times from great to great, until the whole boil is gone; also if the patient is of feeble virtue, or a woman carrying, or small children, or old men decrepit. For the spirits tremble sometimes with the issue of the boil, that perhaps death may come upon the patient, and you will not be responsible for it. Therefore, avoid this chapter with great caution, and when you have pierced your abscess, wash the wound, and see if the wound of the abscess is small; and if it is a flat cut, then bring tents of linen or old cotton; and if it is a large abscess, and there are many openings, then it is necessary that you put in each one a tent so that it comes against the other; and if you have cut into the abscess a part of the skin, and you have covered it inside, then it is necessary that you fill it with old cotton or shavings of linen rags without moisture, and tie it until the third day; then remove it, and cure it with ointment until it is healed.
And if bleeding occurs in your work, then bring cold water and a little bowl of water, and put it on the bleeding area many times. And if the bleeding persists, then bring government and care, and the powders that I have said in the hands in this book, and if it is in winter's time, and the place where the abscess is is very nervous, then it is necessary that you put on tents and rags moistened in wine and hot oil; and if it is in summer, and the place is fleshy, then it is necessary that you put on rags moistened in water and oil, or in cold wine and oil, until the third day, as we have said; and then untie the abscess and wipe it, and cure it, as it is necessary, until it is healed.
And this it is necessary to know universally in the treatments of abscesses: now I have told you how one must go before the treatments of abscesses, and see here the chapter.
of sores
Of sores
And the abscess on top of the pus and moisture, so is lighter, because they are a little blood. And if in any of these abscesses or chief where there is no moisture, and from these i. abscesses that I cut or chief of an old woman; and found the abscess as well as a hard stone, rough and white, and cannot break; and if one had made any of them, one would have done to him as well a wound as a stone. In other abscesses coming or chief, so that these who come to the chief of children and the roots of the ears, the opening be always at the lowest point, so that they may easily flow out; and the cure as it is due.
of the scrofulous
Many times these abscesses come to the neck, and under the armpits, and in the groin, and sometimes come elsewhere or on the body, and are bad, and are joined together. And each scrofulous is properly within its own side, like the one and the abscess of the chief, as we have said; and the appearances of these scrofulous are many. There are some that contain moisture, and so there are malignant ones who do not want to obey health. In that one, therefore, which you see well-disposed at the touch, and is similar in color to the body, and mute on every side and is not harmful to the nerves of the neck or to the artery or to the conduit, and is not deep; then it behooves you to cut it from above, and to cauterize it from every part, and make the two lips of the wound as one, if you need them, as we have said in abscesses of the chief; and treat it little by little, and be sure that you do not cut the nerve or vein, and be not too much the spatula or trenching, lest your hands slip, and see too far ahead, that you do not cut what you should not.
And if you cut the vein or artery, and it does not let you work, so put in the wound vitriol ground, or some powders that restrain blood, and hold the wound; and leave it until the abscesses are calmed, and the wound is softened, and begins to rot. And when the bleeding is stopped, then return to your work, as long as you accomplish it; then look with your index finger if there remain any small pustules, so cut them and clean them. And if there is a large vein at the root of the pustule, it does not befit that you cut that pustule at its root, but tie it with a strong double thread, and leave it to hang by it, without annoyance; then apply the wound of old cotton dipped in Egyptian ointment, then cure.
And if you cut the whole pustule, it is necessary that you assemble the two lips of the wound, and sew them now, then when there is no longer any superfluity because of the size of the pustule. It is necessary that you intend to cut at the root of it, and draw out pus, and sew it as we have said. Those pustules that hold superfluity, pierce where it opens more; and pierce it like the one previously mentioned, in dependence, then administer tents with ointment and similar things, so that it decomposes what remains of the corruption; and when the wound is well cleaned, cure it with ointment attracting flesh, until it is healed.
of a squince
The ancients said and spoke of the cutting of the throat; but I never saw in our land who did it, and this is the writing of their word.
For those who have squinance, it is necessary that the throat cut which is called "epiglottis" be shut; and one does not make aid by these, because all the veins and the pores of the sick person are to those who have abscesses hot in the mouth, or in the throat or in 2. almonds. When the sickness is in the channel of the pore, it is necessary to cover the epiglottis to avoid the destruction that comes from strangulation.
It is therefore necessary, when we want to cut the epiglottis, that we cut it below three circles or four a small slit through, between the two circles or by the quantity of the slit of the syfac, not in the cartilage.
and those that are suitable to the section of the epiglottis that there is no flesh, and the vessels are long from it.
And if the master is fearful, it is necessary that he extend the skin of the throat to the whole neck, then split the keel as far as it comes to the channel; and avoid the vessels of blood, if you see nothing, and then cut the syfac, as we have said.
and it is demonstrated by the section of the phlegm of the channel that it comes out from the place that is broken, and by the lack of voice.
and leave the wound open a bit.
And when the hour is passed for which one doubts strangulation, assemble the two lips of the wound near the heart, and stitch them together alone towards the cartilage; then administer medicines which make flesh grow, until it is sound.
Albucasim says one does not do this juice until the throat is completely stopped up, and the patient is judged to be dead, and the defect is in the windpipe. Therefore cut open the epiglottis because the patient cannot breathe, and he breathes through the wound, and thus is kept from death.
And for this reason the ancients commanded to leave the wound open until the evil of the illness has passed, and it passes in three days or four. And therefore they commanded to sew up the wound and care for it, until it was healed.
and I will tell you what I saw. I saw that a young lady took i. knife and stuck it in her throat, and cut part of the channels of the windpipe;
and I was called by them to cure her, and found her as dead.
I discovered the wound, and found the blood that was coming from it, and I well know that it had not hit a vein nor led to anything but the throat, and the blood flowed out through the wound.
I bandaged myself, and sewed up the wound, and I treated it until it was healed;
and nothing happened to the young woman except that she regained her voice, and returned afterwards to her disposition.
For this reason I say that in the cutting of the epiglottis there is no fear.
of the large throat
This abscess is called "hernia of the throat," and it is a large abscess in the color of a bruise, and it is much in women;
and it is according to two manners: natural, and accidental; the natural one has no cause.
And the accidental one is according to two manners, of which one is similar to fat among us, and the other manner is similar to an abscess that comes from our artery; and he has fear, and it does not behoove to work of doing further than in this one which is small, and the prove and searches at all the intromission. if you find it also as .i. our fat, and cannot to any vein, if you cut it, as one cuts the ours, and the train to all its coil, if there is any of it; and surround well soon, and the care as it behoves, until it is perfectly healthy.
of ours
Many ways there are to us, which I will say all the appearances;
And or it is necessary that I say all the difference which is between us and the one who comes out.
I say that the one who comes out is sometimes feverish and hot-having, as long as the fever boils has passed, and the putrefaction is complete; therefore rest the fever and the heat.
With the one who comes out there is neither heat nor fever nor pain, and contains i. a cyst, which is its own sac and is according to the color of the body, and begins also like a blister, and becomes big;
and are according to two appearances, or dry, or moist, and very much of color as I have said in the division.
It is necessary, when you come to the treatment of wounds, that you examine and inquire first about all the instruments which are called "entromissoire", according to what its shape will come or chapter which is afterwards.
And the manner of inquiring into abscesses of wounds is that you prick or moisten their place which you find in the abscess, and turn your two points and points until you know that the instrument has pierced the core, then that it be according to the size of the abscess.
Then extract the entromissoire, and take care in those who jump out.
If moisture is running short, what color it has, treat it as I have said of other abscesses.
And if after the incision moisture does not come, know that it is fat, then treat it in a cross shape, and take with tweezers, and lightly scrape each side and ward the coat where it lies so that you pull it out healthy with your hand;
And if you cannot pull it out healthy, then remove it in pieces so that nothing remains.
For if anything remains, it returns to us many times;
and if it remains for a while and the wound grieves you, apply to the wound some sharp corrosive powders, and tighten the wound, and put upon it soothing things, a hot poultice, and cure it with other cures until it is healed.
and if the wound is large, sew the two lips of the wound together, and cure it with those things that encourage flesh.
and if the vein beating is contrary or otherwise, hasten and apply the place of powdered vitriol, and let it lie for two or three days, as long as the wound weeps, and repose the boiling of blood; then return to copper those that remain from the other.
See here the forms of the intromittent instruments, and they are in three manners: large and medium and small; and there are three squares which are called "albaret," and one which is called "breb," and there are three manners: large, medium, and small, to encircle abscesses of fistula.
and they are also like needles with which one sews the sorceresses, and they are of citrine or iron, or silver, and those that are yellow are most valuable, and they are more proven of black plumb to encircle the curves of fistula.
and they are of three manners: large, medium, and small, according to the quantity of the largeness of the openings.
The shapes of the probes are of many resemblances, as you see here: large, medium, and small; and also there are probes that have two curves of three manners.
And there are probes that have three curves, and they are also of three manners; and there are probes that have two curves, and probes with only one curve, and they are of three manners; and all these are necessary in their place.
The chief of these things to do are cutting, and some of them do not cut further than one side, which we scrape the nerves with, for that reason one does not cut the vein nor the nerve.
And of these instruments are the probes put in sleeves, so that the patient does not perceive them at the opening of abscesses.
And they are in three manners: large, small, and medium, as you see;
And one uses them only in fleshy places, such as legs, arms, breasts, and groins, and similar places;
and at times one makes i.e., another instrument small, seeming to the cords of fistulas, according to this form, to which one stanches blood
and one puts it at times in the place which is healthy for opening of veins, and arteries, and at times return according to this great form:
At times the breasts of some men swell when they begin to be corrupted, so that they seem like the breasts of a woman.
and remain painful and swollen, and whoever wants to cure them, he must be according to this form of this line b. until g.: Then scrape the fat, and apply the wound with medicine hindering flesh, then join the two lips of the wound with sutures, and care for it until it is healed;
and if the nipple leans down and is softened for its size like it happens to women, then make it in two ribs above, by two similar incisions; so that one holds onto the other at the end of one and the other, so that the larger line contains the smaller according to this form, from this line b to line g; Then scrape the skin that is between the two lips, and remove the fat, and administer there what we have said of sutures and powders, and what is necessary in the cure, until it is healed;
And if it is not healed, or the incision is not entirely made, because the patient does not want to rest, or for the flow of blood, then it is necessary that you fill the wound with cotton moistened in corrosive ointment; And leave it until it absorbs the remaining and the fat, then cure it until it is healed.
of abscesses of the buttocks
These abscesses that come from under the buttocks are manners of hard scrofulous lumps or boils, and some contain moisture.
Those then who contain moisture should be cut according to this form, from line b to line g. And when the whole pouch that is in the abscess is emptied, apply the wound with old cotton, and leave it until the next day, then remove all the cotton, and care with ointment until it is healed.
And if the abscess is of a semblance of scrofula, then treat it as we have said for incisions of scrofula, and if the wound goes into a pouch, then administer cautery as we have said before.
of the rupture of the artery
When the artery is severed, and the skin above is sutured, then often come abscesses, and similarly happens with a swollen vein and an abscess.
And if the one knowing [it] then knows this for the artery, then the abscesses are long and drawn out. And when you feel it at your fingertips, that is to say a tightening; and when this is for the vein, then it appears red and inflamed.
And it is folly to cover this abscess, and also when it is under the armpits and around the groin and neck and in many other places, and it is very large. It is therefore necessary to avoid the cure of iron, and that which is at the head it is also necessary to avoid, and in that which is inflamed by artery feeling from above the skin long.
It is therefore necessary to avoid the cure of iron, and that which is at the head it is also necessary to avoid, and in that which is inflamed by artery feeling from above the skin long. then work the groin as quickly as possible, and beautifully separate the artery from the tissues, as long as it is discovered.
then put a needle under it, and make it pierce to the other side, and extract the artery with a double thread in two lengths, according to what I have taught you in the extraction of the two arteries that are in the temples;
then point the place which is between the two links with an introducer until the blood that is there is released, and make it healthy for the abscess;
then administer the cure that prevents bowing, as long as the bone holds. then cure those with ointment coming to them, as long as they are healthy.
and if the abscess is near the size of the vein, then it befits you to grasp with your hand that which you can from the abscess to all the skin. then put the needle under the place you hold in your hand, and make it pierce through, and let there be 3 doubled threads so that you draw it from the other side. then bind the abscess, as I have told you, or thread one of the two arms with a thread from two shoulders
and if you doubt that the thread is not firm enough, reinsert another needle through all the thread under the abscess at the incision of the first needle, and tighten the threads in four places
then cut the abscess until the superfluities come out, then cut away the superfluity from the core and leave what is bound;
then put a cloth moistened in wine and oil on top, then administer poultices and ointments to him until he is healed.
of abscesses of the nerves
Also as abscesses come in the artery and vein, abscesses come to the nerves when they are  broken, or by too much work, and similar things.
And these occur more often as shoulders and hips and in all their places where there are joints, and this is a serious abscess, and its color seems like the color of flesh, and it is in more positions without pain;
And when one holds it firmly, the patient feels pain, and it is not in part of flesh but below the heart;
And move well in all parts, and do not go forward or backward, nor sideways or upwards, and the one that is in joints should not be covered with iron: for fear it would contract.
And he who is on the head or forehead, makes the skin smooth with a spatula. If the abscess is small, then hold it with tweezers and cut it at its root;
And if it is large, then suspend it with the trocar, and flay it, then lance it, and stitch together the wound and treat it until it is healed.
of great boils hanging Never happens in bellies and nowhere else thel, and is a disease which is called “fungus” because of the resemblance of aus, and are the roots subtle, and the head large; and in it there are small and very large.
and I saw .i. man who had .ij. in his belly which were more like fungi than anything else, and there was no difference, and they were white, and had small roots, and they were slightly split, and from them flowed moisture.
I cut them open and found in one .xviij. ounces weighing, and in the other .vj., and the work in the incision is that you look if the patient is moist, and the color of the artelul is white and moist and of subtle root;
if the cut is in the armpit wide, and are in your presence the cautery of fire. For at the cutting comes many times too great a flow of blood, and if it goes without waiting for you, then hasten thus to cauterize;
and if you see the patient frightened and fearful of the incision of iron, then take one thread of linen well made, and bind the limb as we have said, and leave it for two days;
and then restrain it, and do not cease to restrain the thread of linen until it heals the limb, and ceases through it without work; and if the roots are large, then fear to cut even for the belly, but you may well cut half;
Then cauterize so it does not return; then cure the wound, and keep that you do not cover the flesh which is of a reddish color and of poor sensation and milky appearance.
For it is an ulcerated abscess, and I will come to the treatment of ulcers after this.
When the boil has matured
If the appearance of the boil comes from cautery of a wound or split of the skin, and is on the belly and there are none of the boils like those that happen in other locations, or of blood that spurts from veins or arteries according to what is mentioned before, or from wind;
and if it is by the rupture of the skin and the exit of the pus, then the color of the abscess resembles the color of the body, and it is a light thing without pain, and open from diverse exits. And if it is by the exit of the intestine, then it is more diverse, and when pressed with its two sides, it rebounds, and then returns, and perhaps it is closed, and grows greatly at the entrance to the bath and for hard work.
And if it is by moisture, it is a light thing, and opens well when you press it with your hand, not constraining at all; and if it is by blood, it opens by these signs: the abscesses are thick and hard, and are filled according to a quantity;
and if it is due to windiness, then it is swollen at the touch, and the works are that you look if its appearance is for the blood of the artery, or the vein, or windiness. It is necessary that you leave the cure. Because there is doubt and fear in it, as I have told you in the chapter of abscesses, for the artery and for the vein.
And if the appearance is for the intestine or the bowels, it is necessary that you command the patient to keep his arm and be extended straight, then seize all around the bulge; then command him to move gently between your hands, then go around the place that you have marked with all of the spatula. Then extend the half of the abscess above to the entire great incision;
Then operate on the half of the abscess extended upon the thread, and put your index finger in it, and probe the intestines; If you find it caught in the ligament, untie it, and put the intestine outside of the belly.
And if you find it boiled, take it with the spoon, and cut away the excess.
And if the artery goes against you, or the vein, then go gently around it, and return to your work and take two needles, and put two strong threads through them, and put the two needles around what you have done in a crosswise fashion so that you make a piercing.
Then hold the abscess on four points with needles, and if you see it, remove the needles, and leave the place as is until it bursts, and let the dead flesh come out by itself. or you cut it when it is subtle and swollen, then cure it as it is required, and cover the abscess as we have said.
or you cut it when it is subtle and swollen, then cure it as it is required, and cover the abscess as we have said. and extract the blood or moisture that you find, then cure the place as it is required, and close it up.
for the sore
We have said in the division the appearances of a sore, and how one must work on it with medicines, and how one must avoid iron cure; and let us say that sores are dangerous to treat, and great caution should be exercised when curing them, and the ancients said that when sores are in a place where one can scrape it like sores that are in the testicles, and in the buttocks, and similar places, and one must remove it entirely when it is at the beginning; and when it is large and old, it is not advisable that you approach it, because I have never been able to cure any of them; nor has anyone else ever cured any before me.
And the work, when it is in place where one can remove it, as we have said, is that you purge any time the patient of black matter; then make him bleed if he has manifest repletion, then make the patient i.e. a good place to do the work; then put your incisions or ulcers, and the head from all parts, and the bone from all parts without leaving anything; and leave the blood to flow out completely, and support well the place with your hand or any thing, and if the running of blood makes you contrary to the incision of the artery or vein, then cauterize it as long as the blood is extinguished; then cure with another cure until he is healed.
Of dropsy We have said in the division the resemblances of dropsy, and in what manner the assembly of water is made, and the signs of each resemblance, and the cure which is done by medicines, and that which is cured by iron; so it is enlightened solely; and one must not touch iron in these two resemblances: namely, tympanites and hypoarche, because it is a mortal thing; therefore when you medicate this resemblance of dropsy which is called "enlightened" by medicines, and the cure does not profit, see if the patient is weak, or if he has another malady besides dropsy, such as cough and looseness of belly and similar things; if so do not touch iron because there is doubt; and if you see the patient of strong virtue, and he has no other malady but dropsy alone, and he is neither too young nor too old, then you must thus work: Lift the patient upright with your hands, and the ministers press the belly pushing the water to the lowest part of the pit, then take the pointed spatula according to this form: And let it be sharp in .ij. parts at the point, and all the way do not be so deep that it can come to the intestines when you insert it, and do not let it pierce;
then see if the dropsy is located towards the intestines: then it is necessary that you cut into the belly .iij. times straight below the nipple; and if the dropsy is due to the disease of the liver, then let the incision be on the left side of the belly .iij. fingers wide; and if it is due to the spleen, then let it be on the right, and it is not necessary that the patient lie on the cut so that the superfluities do not run to the weak spot;
then pierce all the skin with the instrument and put it in, and lift your hand with the whole spatula between the skin and the syfac as much as when you are scraping at the quantity of a fingernail or in that way; then pierce the syfac until the spatula comes to the place eight, and this is the place of the water, then lead the water out, and put this instrument of which this is the form: And it resembles a silver chain fine, and it is made of iron or archot light, and at the bottom part .i. small hole; and on one side, .iij. holes; and .ij. on the other side, and .i. on another; and the head is cut like a pen, and this is the form of the incision with which the scribes cut the pen:
At the top is the alemele, so that when the instrument comes to the point, it descends now onto the instrument. Leave empty then half or the third part, because if you empty more than what is right in that hour, by chance the patient may die for the resolution of his spirit from the weapon, or he falls faint, or he approaches death.
But empty according to the quantity of its virtue, and according to what the dispositions of the virtue of the patient signify, and his pulses; then treat the instrument and hold the point, and it is held now by the heart that stops the opening which is on the syfac, for this reason I have spoken, that you pierce according to this manner; then begin the instrument again the other day, if you see the patient suffering those things, and treat of the point a small quantity;
Do this none day, and keep yourself from letting too much out until there remains but a little point of blood. And if you doubt about the patient, and you let him out too much blood, cure him with burial or hot sand, and by sweating or bathing and in the sun, and keep him from drinking; and cure him with drying medicines until he is healed, and cauterize on the stomach and on the liver and on the spleen after the extraction of the blood, as I said before.
of the stopping of the penis At no time are children born who have no holes in the penis, or the hole is small, or it is not in its place. If this is so, it is necessary as soon as possible that one can perceive to all i. spatula very subtle according to this form: then put where the hole i. clo subtle of lead, and tie it and hold it thus for iii. days or iv. and when he wants to make urine, let it be removed the clo, and make urine, and then put it back; and perhaps it does not need it, because the urine which comes forth does not leave it closed. Those whose hole is small, if they are medicated with the lead clo, as we have said, it will widen. Those who do not have the hole in their place are blue, because none are born who have the hole at the head of the penis, so that they cannot urinate before they raise their penis; and they cannot copulate for this reason because the matter cannot come to the orifice, and this is a bad disease.
And the manner of the work is that the patient lies often on his back, and there are the head of the rod and the cup as well as the waist of a feather, so that the pierced piece falls in the middle, as it is fitting; and guard against the flow of blood which comes many times, and if it happens, with the sponge of those who sponge blood, and cure the wound until it is healed.
of the pustules of the rod Many times these boils come in the rod, and it is an appearance of foul flesh; and there are malignant and non-malignant; so it behooves you to prick them with one fine needle, and scrape and cleanse all, then put on cotton moistened in Egyptian ointment; then cure it with diafinicon ointment until it is healed. And if the abscess is bad, of putrid color and stench, then it is necessary that you bring a cautery to it. When you have cut it, and if the abscess is in its bottom part, and has part inside the skin and part outside, then it is necessary that you remove the abscess that is inside first; and when it is joined, cure the outside. For when you cure it together, it is not certain that the head of the bone will not be pierced, and blackness and corruption come in its bottom and where it joins; so it is necessary to scrape away all that which is black and corrupted, then put a poultice on the wound made from honey and flour that is made from apple tree bark and herbs, then cure it with other dressings until it is healed.
And if bleeding occurs, administer the lunar cautery according to this form: The cauteries help with two things together: that is to say, for bleeding and for corruption; and if the head of the bone is corrupted and retracted, then it is necessary that you put or conduct a stick of lead in the space between the bone and the skin, and make the patient urinate on it; and when the skin is raised at the head of the bone which happens to those who have not been circumcised, or where there has been a wound or an abscess, then it is necessary that you scrape it with one sharp instrument until the tendons are loosened, and the head of the bone is released from all sides.
And if it is a painful thing to discuss these things, then it is necessary that you scrape it with one spatula from the top of the bone and the skin; then gently separate them between two, and put one fine linen cloth moistened in cold water, so that it does not rise up.
of the circumcision
Circumcision is not the same kind of wound as others; however, when we perform this work by our own will, and properly on children, it is necessary that we do the best work, and the lightest for salvation.
I say that the ancients did not say anything about circumcision of their children, because they did not use it in their law, and we have nothing but what we have acquired by experience.
Because I have seen the greater part of the masters and healers who performed circumcision with one dal (a unit of measurement), and strong tools, and with a whole novacule; so it was theirs because there are two blades, and perhaps if you cut this one above, the lower one remains.
Or the covering is necessary, and the pain is doubled, and in the purification which is of the bone there is not assured the point of the limb; and in the purification of the joint by chance the iron escapes, and runs the work, and many times they are born so that they do not have need of purification and I have wanted it.
Of the purification which is made by force to all the linen of thread I have found the goodness of the experiment, for the forces cut just as well above as below.
Because when you press your hand, they cut equally in one, all soul tightens; but that the threads be well twisted around the skin; and so is the manner of the first work such that you make the child think, if he understands, that you do not force him but to bind the thread around the rod only, and then let him rejoice in all ways as you can. Then make it be between your hands straight and place the forces between your hands or below your feet that the child does not see them, nor any of the instruments; then put your hand to the shaft and blow or heart, and lead it upwards as long as the head of the shaft is within; then purify it well of the filth which is assembled in it, then tie the place signed with a double thread, then tie it below. i. pock at .i. other lien; and hold it as two for the second league to the pouch and the index finger, and cut between the two liens, then lift the heart upwards gently and lead the head of the shaft;
Then make it be between your hands straight and place the forces between your hands or below your feet that the child does not see them, nor any of the instruments; then put your hand to the shaft and blow or heart, and lead it upwards as long as the head of the shaft is within; then purify it well of the filth which is assembled in it, then tie the place signed with a double thread, then tie it below. i. pock at .i. other lien; and hold it as two for the second league to the pouch and the index finger, and cut between the two liens, then lift the heart upwards gently and lead the head of the shaft; Then let the blood flow pock and pock, because it is the cures; and put powder on and on the powder .i. drapeil glued with a yolk of an egg cooked destempreit d’aigue rose, confit with oil rose good and fresh, and let it stay on until the next day, and cure of another cure as long as it is healed.
The form of the forces at the purification is this: the two heads are held and are sharp, and the heads are also as large as the palm equally:
The error of the purification is when the point within is at the incision; therefore it behooves you to extend it with your finger, so that the lead makes an abscess; and cut it equally; and if you cannot hold it with your finger, then you have it held by tweezers, and then cut it.
And if they pierce three days, and what is below the shaft is swollen, let it be left until the abscess has calmed down, and lightly peel away the skin; then cut as much as you can, and keep yourself from the part of the shaft, this will not harm it at all.
Cure then the place of things soundly with a wound powder, which we have said or treated of powders; and if you cut beyond the point excessively, and it goes upwards, it will not harm; cure it then, as we have said, until it is healed.
retention of urine
Urine retention is from stone in the bladder, or blood congealed, or bowel, or new flesh, or similar things that we have said in the division.
And if the urine is not released, and you see that the retention is due to stone in the bladder or neck of the bladder, then it is necessary for the patient to be bent on his knees; and his legs should be placed on his back, and stretch his belly from the upper part onto his back, and restrain the patient's arms as much as he can; and therefore the neck of the bladder is constrained to the expression of the stone upward, so that the urine is released.
And if it does not come, as we have said, and the patient feels great pain, then it is necessary that you administer extraction with all the instrument that is called 'syringe,' of which this is the form: and it should be a thin silver one, light and feathered, like the pen of a bird; and the shaft should be a palm long and a half, and thin at the tip.
And the manner of the issue of urine is that you take one double thread, and tie at the head one pock of wool or cotton, and put the head of the thread inside the syringe; and cut the superfluity of the wool and put it up to the head of the syringe, then anoint the syringe with oil or butter and balm of egg, and make the patient sit on one seat, and raise the bladder and penis with moist oil and olive oil and tepid water;
then gently put the syringe on the penis, until it comes to the root of the penis, then double the penis upwards towards the buttocks; then put the syringe forward up to the bladder, and let the patient feel it coming up to the void thing, and this is not done according to this order unless because that which conducts or where it goes is twisted; then stretch the thread to all the wool pock and pock, and the urine follows the wool, then extract it further, and do correct the urine;
and begin the syringe again until the bladder is emptied, and the patient is aligned.
of diseases of the bladder
When scabs or blood comes in the bladder, or there is rottenness gathered there, and you see it distilling sharp and medicines, do this to all the instrument that is called "clepsidre", and this is its form:
It is closed, and has .iij. openings: .ij. on one side, and .i. on the other, as you see; and the mouth of it should be such that the medicine poured in stops the penis well without addition, so that when necessary, one can draw out the moisture and pour back in;
and when you want to pour your medicines into the bladder, put the chief of the catheter in the moisture, and draw with the tube that is inside; so you will draw the moisture into the catheter, and then firmly reinsert the tube inside; so the moisture will enter inside, and come to the bladder now, so that the patient feels it;
and this is the form of the subtle clyster by which one clysters the bladder: it is here:
And is of silver or of lead, and the head is higher; and under it one inch or the joining of the shoulders; then take a sheep's bladder and put in it the moisture with which you wish to clyster the bladder, then tie it between the two breasts forming a double cord, and heat one pock of that moisture on the fire; then put the head of the clyster into the penis, then hold your hand on the bladder during all the advancement of the moisture, until the patient feels that the moisture has come to the bladder;
and if you do not have the bladder, then take a piece of parchment, and make one circle, and pierce it roundly; then put one strong thread into these holes, then assemble the circle as one assembles a dial, and put inside that which you wish of oil and moisture and water, and tie it in the instrument; and do as you have done with the bladder, to press with your hand until the moisture comes to the bladder.
of the stone
We have said in the division the ways of stone, and the extraction along with medicines; and I said the difference between the stone ingrained as reins, and all the signs, and in what stone one must work from size; and in the bladder, and in the penis; and I will tell it to you clearly and briefly.
I say that the stone which is ingrained in the bladder often happens to children, and it is a sign that the water leaps from the bladder seeming as water in its subtlety; and it opens harene, and grates the patient's penis, and he has many times pain, and then enroidist; and with much of these leaps the foundations; and it is light the healing of children until they have four years, and it is very grievous in elders, and is as much as medium, to those who are between youth and old age; and it is the cure lighter of those who have large stones, than those who have them small.
And when we come to the cure, it is fitting first to purify the patient by enema, to draw out all the phlegm which is in the intestines. Because it sometimes encumbers in seeking the stone.
Then take the patient by the feet, and dislocate them and move them down, so that the stones descend to the bottom of the bladder, and it rises no more from its place; then make him sit between your hands properly, and his hands be below his thighs, so that the bladder be entirely leaning down; then the back and touch it inside.
If you feel the stone in the space, then hasten now to cut above the stone. And if it does not fall at all when touched, moisten your index finger with oil from your left hand, if the patient is a child, or your middle finger, if the patient is an adult; and put it into its foundation, and feel for the stone, and when you feel it on your finger, move it to the neck of the bladder; then press upward on your finger, and push it out outside where you see to cut.
And command the assistant to press the bladder with his hand, and command him to extend his right hand the testicles upwards, and with his left hand remove the skin that is below the testicles in the part where the incision is made; then put the spatula cutting, because this is the form:
And make between those which is between the buttocks and the foundation, not in the middle but at the side of the left hip; and be straight above the stone, and your two sides are either foundation or top, and be the waist with the traverse so that it is wide outside, and inside narrow, according to the quantity of the stone, nor too large;
But by chance the press if the two sides which is or foundation, that it leaps out without work; and know that there are such stones that have angles, and margins: if it is grieved to pass; and if it has one that is buried, seeming like a ball, and round, whose exit is light.
To this one therefore where it has angles and margin, make the waist larger; and if it does not jump out, then you must extract it with pliers which are also like a file at the top, to move extract the stone so that it doesn't escape; or you put below it one instrument subtle curved at the top; and if you cannot manage it this way, widen one inch the opening, and if it is without decortication, then strain with vitriol;
and if there are more than one stones, first put the largest one at the neck of the bladder, then cut above, then remove the stone, and the small ones afterwards if there are more. And if it is very large, you must make a larger wound, for two things happen to the patient: either he dies, or the urine comes back through where the opening cannot close; but nonetheless try to drain it, or to break it with pliers, until you remove it in pieces
and when you have completed your work, smear the wound with incense and aloe and dragon's blood, and bind it, and place a single cloth moistened in oil and wine, or in oil and rose water and cold water, to soothe the hot abscess; then support the patient on his neck, and do not loosen the bandage until the third day.
And when you unbind it, carefully wash the area with oil and water, then treat it with diapharon ointment and basil ointment until it is healed.
And if abscesses come in the wound and corrosions, and blood congealing in the bladder, and by this the urine is retained, which is known in such manner that without leaping with the urine: therefore you must put it in the wound, and extract that blood, for if it remains, then it will corrupt the bladder, and rot it.
Then lift the wound of sharp and easy pain and soft, and help him in all the ways that you know, as long as he be healed; and it is necessary that all the hours that you cure him, that you tie his two thighs, and assemble the medicines on the place.
And if the stone is small, and it is or carried by the penis, and tied in, and the urine cannot issue; so cure him of what I said then, that you cut it many times, it is excused of the cutting by this cure.  I have already proven this thus.
Take one piece of iron shaped like this, and have it with three points stuck into one twig.
Then take a thread and tie it around the shaft below the stone, so that it cannot come back into the bladder; then put the point into the shaft gently, until it reaches the stone; and turn the point in your hand against the stone here and there, as long as you can feel the stone on the other side; then urine will soon come, then press your hand on what remains of the stone which is inside the shaft. Then it is broken, and comes out with the urine, and the patient is healed;
And if you cannot do this for any reason that prevents it, then tie one thread below the stone and another above it, then bend the shaft towards the stone between the two threads, then pull it out, untie the threads, and cleanse the congealed blood which is in the wound; and cure it until it is healed.
of the stone of women
It happens that stones are formed in women, and if it happens at any time, the cure is painful, and it is forbidden for three things: one is that perhaps the woman is a virgin; and the second is that one cannot find a woman well knowing who exposes themselves to the sights, especially when she is chaste.
And the third manner is that perhaps one cannot find a woman well knowing in this art of hands; and the fourth manner is that the stone of the woman is more embedded than the stone of the man, for which it is necessary to make a deeper cut, and great fear there is.
And if necessity demands this, it is necessary that you seek a midwife well knowing, and at pains the one finds, and if you do not find one, then no more than a chaste mire subtle; and present her with a bail well-knowing in the life of women, or a woman who knows part of the art, and command her to do what you command her from the inquiry of the stone;
And look carefully if the woman is a virgin: then it befits her to push her buttock or foundation and seek the stone; and if she finds it, she constricts it below her buttock, and recommends that she push her buttock or cone with the sick person, and seeks and presses her left hand on the bladder.
If she finds it, it befits her to move it from great to great from the entrance of the bladder until below, as long as it comes to the root of the thigh; then cut above the stone at the root of the thigh against the middle of the cone, where it is seen appearing, and feel the stone in that part; and do not move her buttock above or below the stone, and be the tail at first small.
Then push the root in the waist, if you feel the stone so close to the wound as long as the stone can be extracted further, and know that many kinds of stones are: that is to say, small and large and rough and smooth, long and round, and which have roots. If you know the resemblances to know the issue.
And if the sinew fails, put ground vitriol on it, and hold it for an hour until the sinew is stained; then return to your work, as long as the stone is present, and have instruments that I told you in the extraction of stones in men to help you in your work.
And if the sinew fails, and it is an artery that is cut, put the powder on the wound and restrain it with bandages and cloth, and do not begin again this, and leave the stone and do not touch it, lest the patient die; then cure the wound.
And when the heat of the blood is appeased, and the wounds are closed, then return to your work, as long as the stone is present.
of fleshy hernia
Watery ramice is nothing else but an assembly of moisture or white syfac, which is the husk of the eggs, that contains the egg; and it is called "syfac," and sometimes it is properly in the membrane of the egg, if one thinks that it is i.e. another egg; and this is the skin of the egg between the white syfac that we have said; and these have not poc non.
And the generation of this ramice is so weak that it comes from the eggs, and is expanded that matter.
And sometimes it comes from percussion on the eggs, and this moisture has many colors: or it is declining in jaundice, or it is without red, or black, or aqueous white, and this happens more;
And these are the signs to recognize this assembly, because if it is white as we have said, so is the abscess re-formed, that is long like the figure of an egg, and does not open its openings, because it has moisture all around.
And if it has moisture in the proper cloth, so is the abscess re-formed with a part of the egg, and for this reason one thinks that it is another egg.
And if the moisture is between the skin of the openings and the white as such, it feels well; therefore when you want to know the color of the moisture, it proves at all the introducer's quarter, of which the form is before. According to these, then which comes after the introducer, judge of those who are inside.
According to these, then which comes after the introducer, judge of those who are inside. And when we cure it with iron, it is necessary that the patient be healthy according to our power and the replenishment of his body; then the vein above his back, on a thing a little high, and put under him many cloths;
then sit on his left, and command the minister to sit on the right, and extend the rod to one of the two ribs of the chest of the bones;
then take the spatula left, and cut the skin of the bones among them from the long one until near the armpit, and let your fissure be straight by dividing the skin of the bones up to the white flesh, and the eschar (slough) subtly according to your power;
then pierce the syringe full of water i. one large opening, and extract all the water, and then put your oncines, and keep the syringe upwards; and do not touch the heart of the onions, but only the syringe; cut all or by pieces evenly the side of it subtly, that if you do not cut it wisely, the water will return;
and if the egg fell out of your work, then put it back in its place when you have finished the work of the syringe; then assemble the two leaves of the heart of the onions to a suture, and then cure it like other wounds, until it is healed.
And if you find the egg corrupted by another disease, then it is necessary that you tie the vessels that are suspended, fearing the flow of blood; then cut the onion to all the suspender, and extract the egg, and cure it as we have said.
And if the water is assembled in two parts together, know that these are two branches; if you cut the other part as you have done the first equally, then wipe away the blood, and put in the wound a piece of linen moistened in rose oil;
and put another piece of linen moistened in wine and oil, and place the two pieces on top, and put a doubled cloth over them, and tie it above all the linen according to this form:
Then take two cloths, and they employ wool padding according to this semblance and be assembled by stitching in the groin of the breeches, and one of the parts presses on the foundation up to the back, and the other at the armpit; and the other part on top of the two shoulders, and be all assembled the restraint in the buckle of the breeches;
and sometimes this ramification of cautery is medicated in place of an iron scalpel, and it is that you prick .i. a subtle cuticular cautery, and cut the skin of the testicles, and be heated as we have said, so that the white syfac that contains water is uncovered;
if you take the cautery according to this form, and pierce that syfac at once, and scorch it with this subtle hot cautery:
And the cut in all the ways that you can, until you have scraped everything; and keep that the fire does not touch the egg; and know that this work is more safe; and moves guarding from blood loss, and moves that the works of the scalpel;
and if nothing makes you contrary, or abscess or discharge of blood or other thing, so care what makes you contrary, according to what is said before.
And if the patient is fearful, and does not want to await this work because of its horror, then administer perforation, as I have told you, and it is that when you are well certain by the signs that we have said that the watery root is there,
then make the patient sit on .i. raised seat; then pierce the abscess at the part below to all the spatula wide, and put the perforation long in the middle of the body; and let the perforations be wide, so that all the water runs out;
then put cotton on the spot, and bind it, and let the remaining water run out, then cure it until the wound is healed;
and if the white cloth does not allow the water to flow into the mouth of the wound, it is necessary that you pour in a pen or the instrument with which one treats the water of the dropsy, of which the form is before; and enlarge i. poc the wound, and know that the water returns, and is assembled after vi months or until then, and when it is assembled as before, and thus will pass the days of the patient.
of the abscesses of the testicles
Know that in the section of this vein, fear exists in many dispositions, for which it seems to me better to leave it;
and I will tell you the work and similarities of the abscess.
I say therefore that many abscesses come from the body, and also the genitals; and this is by many causes.
That is to say, by excess of sour and acrid fluids, which are spread to the genitals, or from percussion;
and the color of the abscess is according to the color of the body; and does not find any pain, and is a grievous abscess;
And by chance are some abscesses grisly fearful and stony, and of foul color, and sometimes comes from our artery, or from the swelling of a vein.
When it is through an artery, then it is known by the disposition of a hot abscess, when you press it with your fingers. and it is not appropriate that you touch it.
The one that is made from a swelling of a vein is known by its disposition to the feeling of the fingers,
and one can well do the cutting on this resemblance, and on the other parts and it is that you cut the core of the onions, then put the leaf on top, and the tract feels white inside, and deliver the suspender from all sides of the leaf.
If the onion is already boiled with these parts, then it is necessary that you pull the onion, and cut it.
And if it is raw inside, or in what is within the vessels, then it is necessary that you deliver all of that vein, and cut it roundly.
And if the birth of the cartilage is or its rear, then it behoves you to cut it entirely and extract the yolk, as we have said.
And when the works are accomplished, then apply to the wound wool soaked in rose oil and wine, then bandage it with other bandages until it is healed.
of the abscess of the testicles
This is an abscess enveloped in an envelope resembling that of a ... [word missing], with the softening of the testicles, and the patient moves sharply when he goes;
And the cure of this illness is as well-prepared as frightening as the one before.
And nonetheless, we will tell you the work of it, according to what the ancients did.
It is necessary that you make the patient sit on one elevated seat, then put the suspensory of the testicles down to your two feet. To all the vessels which are near to the penis, and the masters braid them, and they stretch.
Then cut with a sharp spatula wide through the vessels, until they are uncovered.
And then peel from each side, as we have said in the extraction of arteries which are in the temples;
Then put a needle where there is one double thread, and tie it to the first place where the vein came from, and tie it straight to the other end. then the cut is made in the middle straightly, according to the length of the body, and treat the corrupted moisture;
then cure the wound like the others where one avoids swelling, so that no vessel is cut which nourishes one of the angles;
for by these [none] comes harm, and if to all the vessels comes life, then it is necessary to treat the angles of all the vessels; so that the ends do not lose their nourishment because of the incision of the vessels, and they dry up and cannot be helped.
of the rupture of the shoulder The happening of this shoulder is thus by the section that comes to the shoulder, or the extension on the belly in the part of the angles, therefore the intestines descend from that rupture to one of the corners;
and this rupture is in the shoulder, or of the extension of it, and these come these 2 ways of bad causes: or by percussion, or by jump, or by falling, or by lifting a heavy load, and by similar things;
and the signs when it is of the extension of the shoulder are that it happens little by little, over a long time, and does not come suddenly; and is the abscess even up to the midpoint, because the pus presses against the intestine.
And the signs are when it is from a section of the pus, that it brings sudden pain at the beginning, and the abscess appears diverse, under the skin near, and it is for the issue of the intestine and the body outward of the pus.
And sometimes it gets caught with the intestine, and is held back, and causes great pain to suffer the patient, even when it is pressed.
And in these cures of iron there is fear, so one must avoid them.
And the manner of the work is that you command the patient to put the intestine back into its place in the wound, if it can enter. Then support it on his neck between your hands, and raise his hips;
Then extend the heart upward, and cut all the skin of the groin lengthwise; Then put between the folds of the waist pins according to what you need to open the wound, and such that the entrails can issue forth;
then scrape away the surface that is under the skin of the groin, until the white surface is exposed on all sides.
then insert your index finger into that which follows the groin, in that which is between the white surface that is under the skin of the thigh, and between the second surface.
and depart that which is behind the thigh, and between the second surface; and then move with your right hand into the kernel of the groin, and hold the white surface in front on your left hand, and raise the thigh to all the surface towards the waist; and command the minister that he extend the thigh upwards, and untie that which is behind the ligament.
and ask of his bowels if he has any point of the intestine wrapped or white and hard there, and if you find any such thing, put it to the belly below.
then take a needle or which has one thick thread made of ten threads, and put it in the back part of the hardened mass, which is after the skin of the buttocks; after the waist, then cut the hairs that appear from the threads until there are four threads. then join them one above the other in the manner of a cross, and bind the hardened mass, which we have said is below the skin of the buttocks, with a strong ligature of two parts. then wrap the hairs of the threads, and bind them forming two parts, so that none of the vessels that nourish them may enter in, except for an abscess coming. and place the ligature straight according to the first ligament long two fingers of that one, and after these two ligaments leave the space which is below the keel of the cones the length of one finger.
and after all the other one according to the roundness that the egg carries; then cut in the part which is below the skin of the cones, as long as the sinew and the bone, as we have said before;
then administer wool moistened in oil, and put it in the wounds, and put in the ligature that we have said. And at no time is cauterized the white space that we have said, after the incision, out of fear of bleeding.
For this happens many times, and let the linen remain as long as it drips through it; and if it tarries at the chair, then be raised of hot water, and put upon it that which we have said, until it drips.
then cure the wound with another cure, until it is perfectly healed.
of fleshy hernia
In this chapter, I never saw anyone dare to cure it with iron.
And the ancient ones said that it is made like the branch which is assembled with the vine, in such a manner that you tie the vessels, after the cut above or slightly below;
then cut it in the middle, and cure the abscess of those who work, as long as the vessels are bleeding; and cure it as we have said, until it is healed.
Sometimes a rupture comes in the bowels, as we have said, and opens them; and do not put any of the intestines into the groin, and if any are put there, it is bad, and repair them immediately;
and nonetheless if it remains too long in this place, the wound or ulcer grows, as long as the intestine protrudes;
and this happens by the extension of the muscle which is in the armpit, as we have said, because it is extended, then it softens and swells its parts and opens.
and the cure of this is by cautery, as we have said before; and sometimes it is cured by iron in this manner:
and it is that the patient lies prone on his back between your hands, then cut the place of the rupture inflated wide according to the quantity of three fingers;
and then extract the muscle which is below the skin that surrounds it, then take the thread and place it on top of the visible part of the muscle;
and the press to the front of the belly, then sew the two appearing ears of the knife on the head of the tail, and sew one and the other
then extract the head of the tail, and do not cut the knife nor extend the one or the other thing, as I have made you know in the treatment of the root of the intestines.
then cure it by the cure of wounds. And when you cut the threads, if the wound is soiled and cure the wound, as long as it is healed.
The knife is constrained, and has no appearance in the rupture, and the cautery is moved in this place, and closer to salvation.
of the softening of the skin of the testicles
Many times the skin of the testicles is softened in certain men, because the sacks that are inside them are softened, and it is visible; and it is necessary when one wants to cure it, one makes the patient lie on his back, and he cuts the skin which is softened on the natural skin; then join the two lips with a seam, and if you see, first sew the superfluity of the softened skin with three or four stitches firmly; then cut between the stitches, and the cure as other wounds, until it is healed, and tighten the thread.
of the strap
Know that strapping is common in our law, and for that reason I would like not to speak of it much in this book; and it is necessary only for two reasons: one is that the healer must be able to answer when asked about it and know how to cure it; and the other because we often need strapping from certain animals to help us, such as goats and sheep and calves and others. I say therefore that strapping is done in two ways: either by attraction or by cutting.  In the one that we do by attraction, make the animal sit in hot water until the testicles are softened and hanging; then take them in your hand, until they are placed and you no longer feel them.
of the hermaphrodites
Hermaphrodite is according to two manners as men: one if it is that between the two sexes appears also like the figure of nature of a woman, where it has hair, and sometimes in short the urine.  And the other manner is in women, and has on the groin like a penis and two sexes.  And the cure of the man and of the woman is that you cut the charred joints all, and cure them like other wounds; in the second manner, of men whose urine jumps through the skin of the genitals, there is no cure.
of the tentage
Tentigene is a wart on the natural part, as long as it is too ugly to see; and some women have it as large as a hand, and that is the cure. It behooves you to singe the superfluity of the tentigene with your hand or tweezers, and cut it lightly; and don’t go too deep, so that bleeding does not come from it, then the cure of other cures until it is healed; and another wart that is born at the mouth of the vagina, and the temple, and perhaps falls out, and according to the resemblance of a cow, and for this reason they call it the ancients “cow disease”. If it behooves you to cut it as we have said about the tentigene, and cure it until it is healed.
of wandering
of wandering if it is when the nature of the woman is not perceived, or the opening is small; and is natural by birth, or accident by disease that has come to it; or it is by a char fastened, or by a subtle or thick syfac, and it is made in the marrow, or in the ribs, or below, or wherever; and prevents conception, and childbirth, and by chance the flowers to have; and the knowledge of this is by the gaze of the bailey. If the stoppage is near apparent, if you wish to your two fingers or to the right. If it is of subtle syfac, and it is near the .ij. livers, then hasten, and the one as follows: put your .ij. fingers together, and let the woman lie on her back, legs spread apart; then are the .ij. livers formed, until the subtle syfac is rounded, and it is over the blockage; then take wool, and soak it in oil, and put it on the place, and make the woman lie at home each day, so that she may not move. And if the syfac is hard and thick, you must cut it with a spatula similar to myrtle leaf. If the stoppage is of born flesh, then suspend it to the incision and cut it; and have medicines that stop blood, such as acaice, dragon's blood, incense, together with an abundance of egg yolk; then administer a wide poultice, so that the wound may not close; and thus for a long time, and administer a tent of dry linen; then be cured of other cures until it is healed. And when in the marrow comes born flesh, you must cover it according to this manner, unless it is inflamed abscesses. For the inflamed abscess that is in the marrow, one must not touch to make.
of hemorrhoids
Hemorrhoids are openings of veins that without court custom, and when hemorrhoids are old they become thickened; and we have said in the division the resemblances of them, and the signs, and I will say here those who resolve healing. I say that hemorrhoids and the thickening, when they are deep within the flesh, and they do not appear to the touch, unless it is cured by iron. Those which are at the mouth of the flesh, one can feel, are those one can cure. It behooves therefore that you put the woman in a cold house, then the thickening with pliers, and the cut in its roots, then powder with medicines restraining blood, such as acaice and dragon's blood and incense, and similar things; then put her feet to the air for an hour, then put her in cold water; and if bleeding comes, then have her sit in a decoction of sumac and bark of pomegranate and galls and similar things, and then take barley flour, and confide it with honey and aisil, and make .i. plaster on her back. And if it heals, that is good. If not, have her suck wind pouches on the back and breasts without iron; then take linen, and moisten it in plantain juice or in elderberry juice with old wine, and apply it to the place. And when the abscess rests, cure its place with ointment until it is healed; and the one called "albathir" is red, and resembles .i. a sharp chief, so you must cut it as I said the thickening; and then cure it until it is healed.
of abscesses of the flesh
Many ways of abscess come in the flesh, such as chancre and purulent abscesses, herpes, estiomenes, fistulas, hemorrhoids, and hot abscesses, and many other diseases that I have said in the division. It behooves therefore that I say in this treatise the hot abscess which comes in the flesh, which is not of abscesses that boil; and if you want to know the work of iron, look at whether the abscess is starting in its beginning, and full of heat and fever, and if it becomes red you can see it. Therefore do not haste to pierce it, but let it die until the pain is appeased; and then have the patient sit on .i. seat, and have .ij. small seats where he leans, and supports his back and brings together his feet from the sides of the leg; and let his hips be spread out, and put his arms under his knees, and bind them well with a good linen; then make him lean towards the right side, and administer the instrument which is used to open the mouth of the flesh, because of what comes after regarding its form; and it behooves that when you see administering this instrument, that you first put the tip in so as to know the depth of the flesh, so that what enters into the instrument does not go deeper than it should, and so that it does not harm the patient; and if the instrument is larger, it behooves to cover the depth of the flesh with cloth, so that the instrument does not grieve it; and it behooves him to put the cone of the instrument on top, and hold the instrument. And when the abscess opens, and one softens it by hand, then it behooves to cut it at the chief, at the spatumile left; and when the boil is emptied, then it behooves that you put in the wound tentes moillies in rose oil, or in green dry oil; and put the tent from the wound to the depth of the flesh, and put above the flesh and on the knife a clean linen cloth moistened in water or malves which are cooked; then cure it after .ij. days with ointment up to that point, until it is healed; and never raise the flesh and the wound by a clyster of water and honey, and then of water or roots of lilies and aristologe long which are cooked; then return to the ointment. And if the wound is returned in the flesh, then it behooves that you keep yourself from burning with iron, but cure it as we have said in the division.
of childbirth
It is first for the midwife to know the figure of natural childbirth, and the signs are when you see the woman pressing down, and desiring to smell [the birth], then she hastens the child to come forth; therefore you know that this childbirth is according to nature, and it is the issue under her head, and the secondine with it; and when you see these signs, it is necessary to press lightly on her belly so that the child comes quickly; for when it descends upon its head, then the secondine comes with it, and it washes away the remnants of its superfluities by good purification; and this which comes otherwise does not come naturally. For it sometimes comes upon its feet, and comes forth further from the body or the shoulder, and the hands, or it comes out on her belly, or behind, and is turned perhaps on its neck, and by other bad figures; therefore it is necessary for the midwife to be wise and subtle in these things, and beware of error and deception, and I will show you all the figures how one must help them.
If the child comes out on its head by natural delivery, and the woman giving birth cries, and her virtue is weak, then make her sit upon a saddle, or the women hold her; and raise her nature of oil or fenugreek that is cooked, and then put the midwife between her thighs, with the little spatula whose form is here: and cut the secondine, and chop at its fingernail until the moisture which is within it goes out; and take the belly of the woman as long as the child descends, and if it does not descend, then it is necessary to give the woman a clyster of fenugrec with sesame oil; then make her eat and sneeze with condiment, and hold her mouth and nose an hour: so now comes the child. And if the two hands come out, then it is necessary that you reset them lightly back and forth; and if they cannot enter, then put the woman on one seat, and raise her feet up high; then turn the seat upside down on the ground, and hold onto the woman, that she does not fall during the turning over; and if the hands cannot enter, and the child dies, then chop the hands at the cutting board which is placed in front, and extract the child, and reset it equally.
of the issue of the child on his feet When the child comes on its feet, then it is necessary to raise it upwards; and then turn it back and forth, until it is even.
then prick it with a needle and stretch it back and forth.
Can he jump up to the hips, if commanded to take hold, and make him sneeze from congestion; if it happens, God willing.
And if it is not like we have said, then turn it back and forth, until it is according to the natural figure. For therefore it is lightly.
And if it does not come like we have said, then take muslin cloth, and oil of sesame, and melted gum, and grind all in one mortar; and put upon the natural area of the woman inside and outside this ointment, then make him sit upright, as far down to below the ribs;
and when it is softened below, make him one coil of myrrh and place it below, and leave it for an hour; then make him sit on one seat, then make him sneeze and hold his mouth and nose, and take his belly lightly, because the child now jumps. from the birth of the child from its knees When the child comes in this form, he puts his hands here and there.
From the issue of the child who comes out with a wide hand It is necessary to contrive to bring back the hand: If it cannot be brought back, then have the woman stand up and leave.
If it cannot move, then place it on a flat surface, and stretch out its legs.
Then administer the ointment that I have described;
And if she does not give birth, then place her on a seat, then try to move the hand; And guide the child according to the natural form, and make her sneeze, and command her to strain until the child is out.
of the issue of the child on its neck, and have its hands spread out, and its face turned toward the back of its mother It is necessary that the midwife holds her hand, then turns it slightly and slightly, and the ewe lightly;
and when it is equal, she puts it on the soft and elevated muscle mass as we have said, then commands her to move slightly and slightly;
and when you have done this, she makes her sit on one seat, and commands her to strain herself; and the child sneezes. in this same manner to all of the second joint
in this same manner to all of the second joint When it comes to being cured in this manner to all of the second joint, so cut the second joint with your finger, until the moisture is emptied;
and if the child can stand on his face and on his neck, so cut from the back of the head, that it is not held back, and kill the child;
then put the child inside, as long as you have put him as it is right, and command to the woman that she does not take any time;
of the separation of the twins Know that twins are born many times, and sometimes three or four; and this is not a strange thing, and it happens. Two are a strange thing, and do not live, if they may be named;
I know these, which they are multiplied, and are severed by the sifac which divides them, which is joined to the bud.
and sometimes they come out as naturally as one under, as we have said.
And if they come out roughly, so the cure as we have said, and let the bail be subtle, and do quickly and lightly what it does; and do thus as it is worth to salvation. of many children
of many children Sometimes they are formed in the marrow, i.e., one or two or three or four or five or six or seven, or more up to fifteen, and all are formed in the shape of a child by the measurement of their sage glory,
and it is necessary for the bailiff to know all this, because by chance it happens sometimes; so that it is done according to what is necessary.
of the dead child
When you treat a woman who has had a stillbirth or womb as I said in the division, and it does not come out, and you are constrained to work with your hands. it is necessary that you know if the woman is of sound virtue, and has no accident or she has fear of death;
if it is necessary that the woman be supported on her back, and her hips inclined downward, and her legs raised;
and the minister the comb of two parts, where it is tied to the bed so that it is not treated in the descent of the child;
then rub the mouth of the mare's with moist oils with mash of aloe and fenugreek and flax seed, then anoint the bailey his hands with these oils and these mash. then put them in the mare lightly, then choose one litter where she puts her hooves that are suitable to these
and take ward if the child is appeared that it descends on its head; If he puts the needles in his eyes or neck or mouth or palate or under the beard or in the armpit or near the ribs.
And if the descent is on the feet, he puts them or thrusts them into the middle of the ribs.
And it is necessary that he hold the needle in his right hand, and put the curve between his fingers of the left hand, and push it with all his hand lightly, and put the needle into any of these places that we have said, until it comes to the void thing.
then put against another one, or the third if you need it, so that the extractions are equal
and then make them equal by moving from one side and the other, so that it goes in smoothly, and let the jaws be toothed so as to hold it securely, like this is the form:
And if a part remains, then apply some of his oil to the bottom and put it into that part, and draw out the other part.
And if none remains, then put this instrument or higher up, and do this until it comes out all the way.
And if one hand comes before the other, and it cannot be brought back for tightening, then it is necessary that you envelop it with a cloth, as long as it is entire;
then cover it at the joint of the palm or on the cut, and thus you should do with the other hand, and for two feet.
And if the child's shoulder is thick and it protrudes at the opening, or if there is a sharp peak assembled, if it is necessary that you put the spatula between your two (things), and make the head and extract the water. or you can do it with the instrument that is called "almidach", because its form comes with the instruments or chapter which follows this one.
and in the same way, do it if the child has a large head naturally. and then pull apart the bones with pliers.
and if the head has jumped and it is forced, it should be split as far as the moisture which is or worse has come out
and if it cannot issue, cut it into pieces as much as you can.
and if it is swollen in the belly or under the ribs, then it is necessary that you pierce it as long as the moisture flows.
And if the child is on its feet, then the traction is light, and the application to the mouth of the mare [perhaps referring to a tool or technique] is light.
And if it is stuck in the belly or chest, then it is necessary that you draw it out, that is, wrapped in cloth on the hand; and make the belly or chest warm until the moisture which is there dries;
and if the other members are removed and the head remains, then push the ball with his hand into the marrow, and lead it up to the mouth of the marrow; then he puts one or two, and the bone is healed.
and if the mouth of the abscess is retracted because of the hot cautery that has come upon it, then it does not need to be worked on. otherwise, things moist and greasy must be administered. and administer plasters, and bathe it in softening and moistening water.
And if the child is on his side, and you can put him straight, administer what we have said in the living child;
And if one has no power, then treat him by parts, and leave nothing of the second part.
And when you have done this, administer what we have said about abscesses that come in the marshes;
And if discharge of blood comes, then it should be put in water restraining, and administer other cures to him.
And I saw a woman in whose belly one child had been stillborn, then conceived another on top of it, and refused the other. After long time it came to her an abscess in the belly, and inflamed so much that it opened, and began to great suppuration.
I was called to the cure, and I thought long time, and could not suture the wound.
I put on a plaster of strong attraction, and out it came some bone, and after some days other bones. I marveled greatly, because this one whose belly has no bones.
If I thought that it was the bones of a dead child.
I examined the wound, and in my hands there were bones, as long as the woman was improving; and I watched the woman for a long time like that, and she became a little bit swollen from there;
and I have recorded this chapter for that reason that when the masters find a strange thing, that they may know how to help.
to bring back the marrow to its place
Here after comes the form of the presser, to what one has the books; and in 2 turns at 2 joints of the 2 limbs. Nevertheless, the horns should be more subtle of the restrictor, and be made of ebony or boxwood;
and let the mouth of the tube be i.e. two of width, and the margin of the trees i.e. one, and long a palm and a half; and in the midst of the two limbs be adjusted from this same tube, which are fixed in one and the other, of half a palm long or one poke more.
and these two adjustments are put in the mouth of the marrow to open when turning the two horns.
Another form, more subtle and lighter in its appearance, be made of ebony or boxwood tube, according to the likeness of pliers; and have two heads two joints, as you see, of one palm long, and two fingers wide.
and when you see to open the mare with all the instrument, so make the woman sit on one bed, the feet extended and the legs open, then put the two joints together in the mare, and hold the head of the instrument below between her hips; then work your hand with all the instrument, as you have done with the pliers evenly, according to the quantity that you see to open the mouth of the mare, until the mare does what she wants.
These instruments are all mounted, and their likenesses are multiplied; and when the one looking at them sees them clearly, the work is more hasty, and higher for men because of their quantity.
Do not despise the instrument that you have not made appear clearly, for their necessity is not excusable.
When the secondine is retained in childbirth, it behooves you to command the woman to retain her breath, and then make her sneeze forcefully, and restrain her hands at her mouth and nose; and if she leaps for this, well is that.
If that does not work, then take one pot, and make a hole or cover in it, and put in herbs that can open the mouth of the marsh, such as calamint, rue, anise, chamomile, cassia, and centaury;
All these herbs, or none of them, be cooked or put in water on the fire; then put one end of a cord or opening into the pot, and the other end in the mouth of the marsh,
And hold it so that the vapor comes from within the marsh; then make it sneeze, as we have said. If the secondine jumps suddenly. And if it remains after this cure and is not better, as instruct the wife to wet her left hand in sesame oil or in ointment of aloe, and then put it in the wound
and grasps the second one; and when she has found it, she grips it and pulls it gently and straightly, so that the root does not come out with it but it must be moved lightly to the right and left, and then pulled; then it will come out and loosen.
And if the mouth of the root is closed, we have said the cure of sneezing, and fumigation of herbs;
and if she is not of all that we have said, so guard that you do not use to the milking.
but it is necessary that he who is at the mouth of the mare, you bind him to the hip of the woman, then the clysterize with oil tetrapharmacon.
if the mare will carry and return, and then come forth; but nevertheless, when she carries, it comes evil odor to the stomach and the head, and pales the woman.
So it is necessary then suitable fumigations to those: none of the ancients have experienced fumigation of watercress and dried figs.
The form of the instrument for fumigating the woman at the time of birth and confinement is this:
And it is shaped like a dog, and one puts the subtle head in the nature, and the shoulders wide over the fire;
and let the fumigation be on the coals, and the wick as long as it is burned, and recommence another one.
To examine the foundation
Many children are born who do not have the foundation perceived, but it is stopped by some subtle sifac. It therefore behoves the midwife to pierce that sifac in its right place, and not pierce it with a sharp spatula, and guard the opening so that she does not touch it.
Then put on a linen cloth moistened in wine and oil, then apply the ointment's cure until it is healed.
And if you doubt that it does not close up again, then put a plug of lead on the opening, and leave it for many days, and remove it when the child wants to go into rooms.
And sometimes this stopping comes from a swelling of a wound or an abscess; so it is necessary to cover that swelling: if it is cured, as we have said of the cauterization of lead.
of the fistula of the fundament Fistulas that come from under the fundament are knotted and thicker than those that come near the outside of the fundament, or in the space between the two parts,
if there is a fistula or more; and when that knotting is old, it works, and still moistures white or subtle bowels,
and sometimes these fistulas are closed; and they are known by those who have them or by ejection or windiness when the patient makes an evacuation, and perhaps some jump out.
And if fistulas that pierce to the bladder, and to the middle of the penis; and reach to the junction of the hip, and to the root of the groin.
And thus one knows the fistula piercing at the base, and not piercing. and it is that you put your two fingers or foundation, and put a subtle needle of iron or steel into the fistula when there is no twisting.
And if it has twisting, then insert a tent of fine lead, or one horse hair, as long as you feel the tent or hair at your finger.
And if you do not feel it, and it does not come out through discharge or windiness nor by way of a tear, as we have said. Know that it does not pierce; therefore hasten to cure it.
And when the fistula is pierced up to the bladder or to the urinary passage, if it leaks urine and cannot be stopped by medicine.
If it is pierced to the junction of the hip, then the tendon comes to the place. If there is no twisting and the pain is within the tendon, then it is that it is bowed there, and there is no use of medicine or treatment by ointment.
And in these fistulas Persians have no cure other than toil, and the vanity of fools who meddle with them.
In that which is neither Persian nor ancient, there is hope of healing by iron, as I have experienced.
and it is that the patient lies between your hands on his back; and raise his legs up to his hips, and have his hips inclined to his belly; then put in a tent of iron, or of lead if there is tortuosity, as long as you know where the tent comes.
If the patient feels it near the foundation, then you should put your index finger on it;
then feel if the tent has pierced it; and be uncovered or you feel between your finger the fascia or the flesh, then you know it is passed; if it is not worked on, one cannot heal it.
One says however that one can well heal none, but this happens rarely;
and the help one makes it, if one is careful with the subtle cautery according to the width of the fistula, as has been said before; and push it all hot into the fistula, until it reaches the base; and do this two or three times, as long as you know that these charred fibers are burned, which resemble an eye feather;
and then the cure of tents moistened in butter, as long as that char is issued, then the cure of ointment inflaming flesh and welding.
If he is thus healed, that is well. If this one, otherwise cannot be healed;
and if the tent enters, and does not pierce to the depth which is the foundation, and between your depth and the tent a thick covering of flesh or suface, and you see the fistula at this which follows the covering of the heart; if you cut from the beginning of the fistula, and thrust forward before the tent, and then the cauterize afterwards, as long as it comes to the head of the tent;
and will be delivered the tent, and will be lowered; then it is commanded those hairs which seem a feather of a bird, and none remain.
And if the wound does not heal well, and it is between you and the work, then cauterize with fire or sharp medicine.
For the fire cauteries assembles two good things: that is to say, the burning of these hairs joined together, and the stopping of blood and the drying of moisture.
then the cure of tents moistened in butter or in crushed herbs, as long as the wound lies open, and if the hairs burned are in the wound.
Then heal the wound of suppurations with hard, dry matter, and these are the medicines.
For when it is restored, it is healed and does not return.
And if a fistula comes as far down to the bottom and is removed from the body, then put it on its back or base, and examine this.
If you feel the tent, and between two or the fabric or syfac or char where it is close to piercing, if there is only a way of faith and hope, through the administration of one of the three ways:
or you cauterize it as we have said, or you cut it to the bottom, or if you can put a tent there and cure as first.
and don't let it go too deep, that you do not cut the tent that holds the foundation, and let the excrement come out by its own will; then cure it, as we have said;
then cure it, as we have said; but by chance it will be healed, or you remove that covering and the wound after it is cut near its base, or by tent or other pointed instrument; Then fend off the foul thing that is in the wound, as much as you can.
Then study to restore the wound, and to stay the fistula in the part outside the foundation; so it is lighter for the patient.
And sometimes fistulas are like this: and it is when you put the tent in the fistula, and it is or lies against the foundation near the skin above, if you take a tent pierced at the top according to this form: And it puts one thread twisted into two, and puts the tent on all the thread in the fistula until it is at the head.
If it is pulled through in the margin of the foundation inside, then extract the thread from that one that is pulled, as you put your two or foundation.
And treat the head of the thread, and assemble the two heads together, and constrain one to another, and let it for one day or two.
And restrain it no times, as long as the threads close their chasms that are between two, and adhere.
Then cure the wound until it is sealed and healed.
If the fistula does not pierce, make it pierce in all the ways that you can, if it is not too deep.
Because it does not behoove to make the incision cover if it is too deep, and then cure it, as we have said, until it is healed.
The form of the spatula used for making the fistula is very good, one part and trenching; and on the other hand no, for this one does not cut what one should not cut, as you see here:
Hemorrhoids are according to two manners: or they are within the fundament, like grains of resin, and there are small and large ones, and in short they bleed. and there are one or more, and they are outside the fundament and at the top of the fundament; but those that are outside have little moisture,
and also there or a bit of clear water or a bit of blood, and they have the color of the body;
and the treatment of those who have them within the foundation, if it is that you command the patient to stretch so as to go into chambers, until the foundations are healed and the threads appear; if you hurry, and can grasp it with pliers, or you hold it with your finger, then cut it at its roots;
and if the tweezers cannot hold them because of their moisture, then take them with one drapel, or cotton, or a piece of felt; and bind them to your two hands, then cut them, and apply hot powder above in place of cautery. or you cauterize them as it is said in the chapter on cautery, then treat them with other treatments until they are healed;
and if the base cannot come out, then enema the patient with a sharp and harsh enema to wash out what is at the base so that it can come out openly;
and if the patient is strong, and if the thread are firm from the base, then the cure is light; and it is that you prick them with your finger or pliers, and cut them, then cure them as we have said, until it is healed, and that it fears the incision by iron.
It is necessary that you administer the suture in this manner: take one twisted thread, and put it into a needle, and then draw the thread upwards and make the needle pass through from the other side, and turn the two ends of the thread below the needle. and if it is wide; and tighten the thread firmly, then knot the thread, and withdraw the needle, and do this with all the others, and leave one to correct the excess of blood;
then place on the foundation one layer of cloth moistened in rose oil or in cerate, and place it on the foundation, and instruct the patient to rest;
And then let him rest until they are healed, and when they are broken, treat them with ointment and other remedies until he is cured.
Of the drying of the wounds or foundation Many times wound-drying occurs in the intestine, and by constriction of nature, and when the illness is old and medicine does not avail.
Then it behooves you to scrape the skin above with the point of a spatula or your fingernail so that it does not moisten. then cure it until it is healed as it should
and if it cannot heal, begin the scraping again stronger than before, until it heals well, and be scraped then cure it until it is healed
of trembling Ant is a small appearance faulted before the body, and goes much by force
And sometimes the one finds it cold, and feels it also like death of fright, and comes throughout the body, and more to the hands than another part
And the cure is that you take a cane of an goose feather, or a feather of vulture strong, and put that cane upon the fright, as long as the circles purpled the fright all around Then turn your hand to all the cane as long as you cope all around the fright, and put it in by force, and root out the fright from its roots
And if you see, so do this of a cautery of iron or steel according to this form, and be subtle below and long above:
do not pierce it, for to hold on the two sides, and move press And if you see, so cauterize the nerve, as it is before or in this chapter of cautery.
of the form of the clyster Never is made a clyster of silver or pewter, or iron melted or woven; and never are made of these instruments small and large, according to those to whom they are administered.
Those therefore which are administered in the care of children and who are weak and painful, are small.
The form of the clyster small and large as it is above wide, or the belly is tied according to this manner.
And there is an opening where the belly is tied, as you see, and the head is inside pierced; and has on one of the sides 2 holes, and on the other 1.;
And let the belly be where one puts the medicines of a beast's bladder or parchment, and be pierced all around with small holes,
and between each hole one must put a space, then put into these holes one strong thread of a twisted thread in ten or as much as it takes, and assemble the belly like it is a sheep. and when the medicine is inside, if the leech has in front of it a strong thread, then sterilize; and this is the form of the circle:
And let the medicine be neither too hot nor too cold, and anoint the head of the clyster with oil or egg yolk, or something similar, then put it in gently;
then the ministers squeeze it with their two hands together, until it is completely full, then remove the clyster, and lift the patient's legs to the side,
And if the medicine wants to work well, then let it be applied as much as possible; and if he sleeps a whole night in this way, then it is greater help.
And if you clysterize him for illness of belly discomfort, and the medicine works quickly, then he recommences it until he is healed.
And if the hemorrhoids are in the foundation or abscess, then be the clyster as subtle as for a child.
And this is the form of the subtle clyster on which the skin should be restrained:
of wounds
We have said in the division the cure of wounds; now we will tell you the cures of hands and of medicine, according to accomplishment.
I say that the wounds are diverse according to what they are made, and according to the places where the wounds are made, and by what they are made.
The things by which wounds are made are by blows of stone, and cuts of sword and knife, or of spear or staff or arrow, or similar things;
or that are made according to the parts of the body, such as a wound that falls on the neck, or on the head, or the chest, or the belly, or the liver, and similar limbs;
and I will tell you the cure of each wound, and I will begin with simple wounds of the head, because remembrance will come in its chapter.
I say that when a simple wound comes to the head and the bone is not broken, if you take care that it is from a stone or similar things, and the skin is entirely broken and the wound is large, and you doubt the elevation of pus: if you make it hot immediately from the cephalic itself even if it comes a little blood from the wound, and the blood is on the contrary from the inflamed part;
And avoid for the patient replenishment of wine and large meats.
And if he does not want to heal, then let his meat be lessened, and let him drink no wine, nor eat flesh.
And put on the wound, if an abscess comes there, cotton moistened in rose oil only, or in boiled wine.
And if there is no abscess, then put on the wound, if it is fresh in all its blood, and it is not dried by the air, powder, that I will say a bit later.
and if the one who has it moved (it), then put upon some ointment, until it is healed.
And if the wound is large as of a sword cut and similar, and the edges cannot be brought together by tents, then assemble them with stitches, as I will say for the wounds of the belly, of the suture.
If the wound is open to bone, and gaping, and holds together only by a thread, then cut it; then cure the wound with medicine, and restore hard flesh in place of skin. And instruct the patient to eat coarse meats, such as testicles and cooked wheat, also pulse, and similar things.
And if you find yourself with rotten flesh, and it does not reach the bone, so cut away all the rot, and throw it out, then cure.
And if there is an artery in the wound or vein, which cannot be stopped without surgery, and it cannot be stemmed by medicines, then seize the artery, and if you find it dislocated, tie it with a thread; And if this does not help, then cauterize it.
And if these wounds are small and simple, then the cure is light: and it is that you put onto them this powder which seizes as soon as the arsenic has been applied.
And the manner of the powder is: take frankincense one part; dragon's blood two parts; quicklime three parts, and grind the powder finely. And apply it to the wound, and restrain it firmly, until it dries well and joins with all its blood.
And then cover it well, and leave it untied, if it does not swell; for do not remove the medicine until it is healed.
And at no time is this made with only quicklime, when one does not have frankincense nor dragon's blood, but that the fire has cauterized the wound.
And if the art has moved the wound, even in its state, do not put any of this powder.
But put on some ointment digested, or poultices made of barley flour with water and honey, as long as it lies bowed; then cure it with other cures until it is healed.
And if the fracture of bone comes with the wound, and it is small, then extract it with subtle pincers;
and I will tell you later about the fractures of the head.
of the wound of the neck
The wound comes at the neck and it is simple, if it has no difference between it and that of the head, but if the nerve of the neck or the artery is cut.
If it's the nerve, there is nothing else to do but leave it to heal, and don't put anything restraining on it, because it harms the nerves and makes them retract; and do not put on the wound anything cold, because the substance of the nerves is cold, and the continuation of them is with the brain, which is the highest member;
but let it be the medicine warm, such as lukewarm water washed and mixed with rose oil, and boiled water also in sweet water; and other stones of mine according to this manner, and moist unguents.
And if the wound is large, sew it and bind it with bandages, then tend to it until it is healed.
And if the wounds are deep and it is shaved and full of hair, then pierce or lower than there.
And if the artery is cut and blood flows from it, then staunch it, apply a bandage, and cauterize if necessary.
And if the spine of the throat is cut, or the gullet, and the windpipe is kept clear so that the meat goes through, then sew the heart on the back of the throat, and do not touch the throat but put it back according to its natural shape. and then the strain occurs frequently, and leave it for some days, then cure of dressings drying until it is healed.
And if the wound has made an impression in the bone, so then desire it; And if there are pieces of bone, so treat them forcefully as much as you can, and those that you cannot have, leave it as long as the wound is rotting, and be careful and align the opening;
and if the wound is fresh, so powder on the powder that I have said. And if it has bone in the wound and there is a fistula, so cure as I have said in my chapter.
of the wound from a lance or a knife
If it's a blow from a lance or a knife, and the wound is deep, so see if from the wound there is windiness as the patient breathes; know then that the wound is mortal.
and if it is not deep, and it is fresh in all its blood, then do not put any powder to it in the first hour, nor bind it so that the blood does not remain in depth, and return to the heart, and instruct the patient; but I put attractive ointment, and bind it two times a day;
and if you do not have ointment, put old cotton into the wound to suck out the moisture,
and make the patient sleep on the wound 3 days, or 4, or more; if there comes no spasm, nor evil trembling of heart nor dragging of the arm; and when you see good arrangements, then know that the wound is saved. Treat it therefore with tents and other dressings, until it is healed;
and if it cannot heal and work, afterwards know that there is a fistula; so treat it as one must.
And if the wound is from a sword or knife incision, and it is simple, or worse, or on the back, so treat it as that which is before.
If it is large, sew it; and if it is small, with powder; and if it is deep in the bone, and has broken pieces, then close the wound, and remove the fragments if they are loose. And if they are not loose, let the wound fester, it will lessen the extractions.
And for other wounds as for other members, judgment is made as we have said.
Of the derangement of the belly
The derangements of the belly are great and medium and small;
Of the great wound there is no time that the intestine, or the nerves of the intestines, by which the introduction of others;
and the suture is more painful, and sometimes a small wound is worse than a large one.
for this reason one should put the bowels back in more carefully, if they are not put back hot and then cold; because the intestines swell as soon as they feel the cold, so they enter more difficultly.
and for this reason it is worse to suture the middle wound, because for that one should reset the intestine to its place like the others, two times.
And know that the rupture of the belly is according to four ways:
The two common sutures occur in the suture of the belly,
and the suture of the other wounds of the body and two other specific sutures are common to other wounds;
Nevertheless, they are more proper with the suture of the belly, and I will say each one and declare it.
I say that when the wound is small, and nothing from the intestine has emerged, and a thing is to put back, those are by one of the two ways: or for the smallness of the wound, as we have said, or because the intestine is swollen due to the cold.
And when it is cold, warm it in this manner: Dip a sponge or linen cloth into lukewarm water only, or you steep it in warm water with cinnamon and cloves, and raise the intestine until the swelling is removed.
and sometimes this thing restraining it is done, and it moves as if it were sole for swelling.
And when you see the swelling depart, moisten the intestine with water or ale and make it well-cooked. For by this is aligned the entrance to a little thing;
And if it cannot enter there, then make a hole in the wound with the instrument used to treat hemorrhoids.
and the first cure is to move the hip that we should not cut into it except with great necessity.
and this is the instrument for splitting it:
If you trench inside the curve and not outside, and see here the form:
And when the wound is enlarged, and the intestine protrudes if it is put back inside according to its natural form in its proper place, if you have the strength for it, because it is worth doing so.
When the wound is wide and it is in the part below the belly, so it befits you to make the patient lie on his back and put his legs higher than his head; and if it is in the lower part of the belly
and also if the rupture of the belly is in one of the two parts if you put your understanding in that the sunken part be higher than the other.
and thus it is fitting to administer what I say in great and small wounds.
For small wounds put that which you have appeared.
then have between your hands i. minister pity who holds all the rupture in his hand and assemble the lips; and this is the common manner of sutures,
and this is the common manner of sutures, and that you pierce a needle or more, according to the quantity and breadth of the wound, Then leave from the head of the wound one finger's width, and place a needle where it has... a good strong thread; and pierce the two points of the skin with the two points of the spatula,
then the strain of a double thread around the needle of two parts then assemble the two heads of the wound evenly,
and then leave one doe of space, and insert another needle; then tie the thread like you did with the first needle, and do not cease to do this according to what you need of needles as long as all the wound is restricted;
and be the needles medium-sized, between subtle and thick for the subtle needles cut all the flesh, and the too thick ones cannot enter well: for this reason they should be shortened
and it is not good to push the needles too far from the flesh and skin
so that they do not cut and open the wound before the soldering;
and then trim the tips of the needles so that they do not prick the patient while sleeping and I put tents or cloths on the shoulder of needles to keep it from moving and let them stay until the wound is closed.
and this manner of suturing with needles is more convenient for small wounds because one or two needles suffice
The second suture is so common, and is that you assemble the two heads of the skin and the two heads of the  syfac together with a needle where there is one strong medium thread; and when you will have pierced these four heads together,
and when you will have pierced these four heads together, then wind the needle to the part where you began, in the manner in which one sews cloth;
and put space between each stitch the thickness of a finger;
This suture should be for the man,
and I sewed a wound that one man had on his belly,
which was slashed by a knife, and was the wound more than a palm in size, and was the intestine well two palms in size,
and was the wound in the middle of the belly. I brought back the intestine after it had been for twenty-four hours,
and the wound was sutured for fifteen days, and I cured it, and it healed.
And the healer had judged that he would die, and it was a miracle;
and I did not cure him with ointment, because I was in one place where none could be found, nor any medicine; and I put half a sponge more on the wound two times a day, and washed it with water of honey until it healed.
Or I will tell you the two proper ways of suturing:
Take the needle and push it from the outside part to the inside part;
When it has pierced the center straight through, then lay the thread of the silk or stitching where you put in the needle;
and make it pierce from the other side from the inside part to the outside part;
and the understanding of this stitching is that you sew as the furrier does skins, and that you leave once the strip on one side, and take it back on the other, until the stitching is entirely finished.
The second manner of stitching, as Galens says properly,
is like how none make, who join the two parts together naturally, and apply one of the chief to the other chief, in such a manner:
Insert a needle or chief of mirrach proximate, and make him feel it only, and leave the two chiefs of syfac; then turn the needle, and make him feel it from the outside part up to the inside, as the two shoulders;
then make them feel one and the other from the outside part until that inside, in two other shoulders of the miracle which are on the other side;
and this is the most common kind of suturing and the most widespread.
The Galicians say this word, and none testify to it,
one must sew the belly with two needles, or it has thread in each
and one should insert one needle on one side, and the other on the other, in the manner of those who sew corsets;
and know that when the rupture is in the middle of the belly, it is the suture more painful than those other parts of the belly.
The judgements of the wound are such as the judgments of other wounds:
and it is that when you find the wound fresh with all its blood, just as the artery has moved. then put back the intestine, and sew it up; then place on top a powder of earth,
then put back the intestine, and sew it up; then place on top a powder of earth, and if the artery has moved, then put on top any ointment that is present, until the wound heals; and tighten the thread, and weld together the skin and the muscle. then cure the wound as you do others, until it is healed.
and if you lack medicines, put upon it, as soon as it begins to fester, old wool; and stir it twice a day until it is healed.
For you need no other medicine in numerous cases than when the wounds are simple;
and if you doubt that the wound does not make unity with the principal members, then it is necessary that you moisten the linen lightly in oil of temperate heat, or rose oil, and place it around the edges, and under the buttocks;
and if he feels pain or rot in his bowels, and this often happens, if black wine enemas are used, and even if the rot comes as far as the intestine;
and pierce it inside, and know that when it is the large intestine, it is easier to heal than the small one.
The intestine which is called "young" cannot heal when it is rotten, and it is for the fineness of the veins that they are, and for the subtlety of the whole body, and the proximity of its nature to the nerves.
And if the worm jumps from the wound, put it back as far as the intestine, while it is fresh;
And if it is old and has become worm or black, then it is necessary that you bind the place which is black, so that bleeding does not come from there. for there are veins and arteries there;
then cut what is between the linen and put the two heads hanging from the part below the wound all the way out to align the extraction when the bone falls and the wound bows.
of the rupture of the boil
When the intestine is round, and the wound is small, if it can one restore in any men
for that I see that some man was wounded or belly of a spear;
and the wound was on the right side of the stomach, and it became inflamed and turned into a fistula, and through it came excrement and flatulence;
I put him to care according to what I could, and did not cease to subtlety until he was healed, and his limbs soldered together.
And when I saw him soldered, I doubted that the patient was ill in his belly; and there was no pain, but he remained in better dispositions, and ate and drank;
and said any experimenters that when he has a small wound in the intestine, it must be bound in such a manner: Take forceps with large jaws, then assemble the lips of the wound, and when the forceps has opened its mouth, place it on the two lips,
Then put one other splint after in the same manner as before, until the wound is completely enclosed
And cover the wound. If this gets heated in the intestine, and no harm comes to the patient,
and if one can tie up the intestine with a fine thread that is cut from an animal's intestine,
in such manner: take the head of this intestinal thread that be very bare, and then tie to the head of this thread i.e., a thread of fine linen twisted, then put the thread in the needle, and sew up the intestine, and pull it through the rupture;
And this manner of suturing of wounds is not harmful except according to the way of faith and hope.
And if the wound is great and wide, even when it is in one of the inner bowels, there is nothing else to be used, except for subtlety.
of fistula or wherever it may be Know that every wound or abscess, when it opens up, is universally called "fistula," and also when it is raised and bent back.
And a fistula is according to truth a knot of flesh hard and white, where one does not feel pain, and it is also raised like the feather of a bird;
and sometimes in appearance clear and bowed, and sometimes thick; sometimes little, and sometimes enough;
and I have spoken of it in the division of wounds, that any wound that is not healed, and there is no flesh, it is only due to one of the eight causes:
that is to say, by the smallness of blood or flesh; or for his evil; or because he has hard flesh inside and on the lips, which does not allow flesh to grow; or there is too much swelling; or the tissues are rotten, and the matter is of bad quality; when the medicine is not good in the cure or because the corruption is a manner of pestilence or because the property in the region is slow the digestion, and slow the health, and bloated by nature; or there are veins or bones
and I have already shown all these causes, and the signs, and the cures of medicines in the division.
It is necessary that I tell you the cure of fistula which is done by handwork.
Know that fistula occurs in all parts of the body; for there are fistulas that come from large veins, and arteries, and nerves, or to the liver, or to the intestine, or to the bladder, or to any of the sides or to the spine of the back, or to any joint of the hands or feet;
And all fistulas that are in this manner are of grievous healing, and there is nothing but labor, and ignorance;
and if there is any fistula that does not come to the place I have said, and you have confidence in the cure, and if you see it [the fistula], then take a tent of linen or iron, if the fistula is straight, if it curves;
and if the fistula is twisted, then surround it with a fine tent of felt, for felt can be bent to follow the twists and turns;
and if the fistula is opened with hands and you cannot well search it by tents, then cleanse it by one of the openings,
because moisture goes from one opening to another, and cleanses it;
then carefully probe with your finger so that you know if there is bone or nerve, and whether it is healed completely;
and ask carefully of the patient the pain he feels when you press with your hand, and where he feels it;
and when you will know truly the place where it is, and if it is far from the joint, or from a nerve, or artery, or vein, or in any of those places that I have told you, if the cut according to what I have told you,
or in any of those places that I have told you, if the cut according to what I have told you, and remove the splinter and the corrupted parts that are inside; and then the cure until it is healed,
and if the fistula is very deep in the right place, you should cut it as deeply as you can then put moistened pads in a medicinal broth, and push them to the head of the fistula,
then put moistened pads in a medicinal broth, and push them to the head of the fistula, until the medicine corrodes the superfluity that is lodged at the bottom
and then I put a poultice of healthy flesh on it, until it is healed.
and if it is not healed by this, cauterize it as we have said.
and if the bone is corrupted from the fistula, cut it out. If a vein or nerve strikes or affects the principal limbs, as we have said;
And if the bone is uncovered, and there is corruption and blackness, then treat it as long as the corruption is entirely removed. Then cure the things coming up flesh until it is sound.
And if it is not sound, and returns bent as before, know that you have not yet gone to the end.
If you uncover and as long as you are at the bottom and remove all corruption, then restore its place;
and if it is thus healed, it is well. If this does not happen, know that the corruption is too deep, that you cannot come to it; If there is no other means than to let nature do its work;
And if there is a small bone corrupted, and you can draw it out with pliers. if the extraction with an instrument suitable for this purpose
and if there are many bones, draw them all out, leaving none behind;
and if moisture acts contrary to you, and there is no error or fear, if it grasps moisture and flesh, and delivers the bones.
And if you cannot remove them within an hour, place something over the wound preventing rotting, and let it remain until the flesh rots around the bones,
and therefore they will have more easily the bones;
and if it is a large bone, such as of the leg or thigh, if you remove only the corruption until the blackening is completely removed, then restore the wound;
and if there is a great part of corruption, and it comes to the flesh of the bone; if it is necessary to be sewn and covered all the way to the corruption, and then cure it until it is soldered together;
and I will tell you of a fistula that happened to one man in his leg, so that you may take him as an example and help in your work.
There was one young man about thirty years old, who had a pain in his leg from a cause that came from within the body,
as long as the materials came to the leg, and was swollen with a large abscess, and had no external cause for opening;
but the surgeons because of their folly opened it so much that the abscess opened, and they corrupted a lot of matter, and it became a fistula, and there came a great deal of pus that was all mixed with wetness and moisture from the body;
and many a year they put care for two years, and there was not a wise man in the art of hands,
until I came to be called, and saw his leg and the medicines with which they cured him, and those who were cured by the percussive force with great effort; and became red the body of youth, and had a citron color.
I put a tent in one of these openings, and then I searched all the openings.
and found that some came against each other from all parts of the leg.
Then I pushed in and felt into one of the openings until I discovered a part of the bone, and found it rotten and pierced, and the corruption came up to the bone inside.
I was this one who appeared to me of the corrupted bone, and I thought that there was no other corruption except this which I removed;
and began to restore the wound with soothing medicines for a long time, and could not join it together;
And then I started again, and uncovered the bone as before,
and found the corruption continued in the bone, and I removed it, and then I placed it back, and tried to join the parts together;
but I could not as much as I pressed around a palm of the bone, and the traitor was at all its whole then I restored him with medicines; and he was healed and sewed hastily,
and it did not need to be restarted except for the weakness of the sick person, who cannot endure, and because of the fear of death that I had of him. Because for the evacuation of blood often happens, but he was healed entirely.
Because for the evacuation of blood often happens, but he was healed entirely. And in the place of the bone, a hard carbuncle was born, and he was of good disposition and had no pain nor contrary from all, neither to walk nor to come.
and stretch the top so that you draw the corrupted flesh downwards; and uncover the flesh in the place where you want to make the incision so that the skin doesn't turn white; and put one tinder or a board under the bone so as to cover the corrupt flesh; and it is necessary to be as much as one can see and feel the corruption, and be even another time.
And if the bone is corrupted, and does not open well, and the corruption is in the middle or in one part, if uncover all the flesh; then put one tinder under,
and then let the corruption go from one part to the other, and let the suture be long on the side of the corruption, i.e., a point, as we have said;
and if the corruption is in the joint, then cut the corrupted joint, and suture the bone where it contains from the other side;
and if the corruption is in the continuation of the two joints, then there is nothing else to be cut;
and if the corruption is in the finger of the hand or in the finger of the foot, then it is a very difficult thing, but nonetheless it is necessary that you inquire about that corrosion, how it opens to you; and purify it in all the ways that you can, but that the vein or nerve do not make you contrary;
and know that the incision tool and the threads for closing these bones are many, according to the position of the bones and the appearance of them; and their thickness and subtlety, and their size and smallness, and their hardness; and for this, it is necessary to prepare each kind of instrument for work;
And know that the work will show you the instrument which you will need, according to the knowledge of this art, and the testimony of the ways of diseases; so consider the instrument which you need according to what is fitting.
of fire The shoulder may be dislocated either due to inside causes or outside causes;
and when you have medicated that corrosion with the treatment of medicines, and they do not benefit at all then it is necessary to cover that limb up to the place where the corrosion comes from so that the patient escapes by these from death, or by the evil, which is greater, of the fault of the limb
so that the patient escapes by these from death, or by the evil, which is greater, of the fault of the limb and the signs are that the limb becomes black, so that it seems as if it were burned by fire and after the blackness, then there goes that corrosion of limb to limb and takes hold throughout the whole body; so hasten with the cauterizing
and if it is by the percussion of some venomous beasts, such as a sea scorpion and viper and similar.
if the corrosion is at the point of the groin, then cut it, and do not give him any space to come up to the hand.
And if it comes up to the hand, then cut it at the joint so that the corrosion does not come up to the arm;
And if it comes to the arm, then cut it with a knife. And if it passes the knife, it is death. and there is no value of treatment beyond the quantity of its virtue;
And thus always do when the corrosion comes or foot: if it comes to the first joint, then cut after the other joint;
and if it comes on the foot, then cut the whole foot; and if it goes up into the leg, then cut at the knee joint;
And if it comes from above the knee, there is no other remedy but to leave the patient to death.
And the manner of covering or sewing the limb is that you bind it above and below, and extend some ministers one of the lower bands, and other ministers the other band above, and you sever the flesh which is between the two bands to one spit's width wide, so that the bone be uncovered;
Then the cup or cloth, and put on each side one drape of linen, so that the sore does not touch the healthy place and there will come to the patient another lesion and abscess shoes.
And if  discharge of blood comes when you work, so cauterize the place well. or you put on some powders restraining; then return to your medicine until it is complete,
Then bind the limb with a suitable bandage, and care for it until it is healed.
And I will tell you that it happened to one man in his foot:
He had a blackening that looked like it was burned by fire,
and this corruption first came in the heel of his foot, until it encompassed the entire foot;
And when the man saw the corrosion, he hastened to cover his foot, and was healed;
And long afterward it returned to him the corrosion on the hand, and he came to me,
and I placed upon him things reverberative after the purification of the body, and could not cease the corrosion;
and he begged that I cover his hand, and I would not, for I had hope of reverberating the matter; and beware also that if he cuts his hand, he does not die. for the virtue of the man was weak; and he despaired altogether, and returned to his land, and took care to cover his hand, and became healthy;
and I recount this story for no other reason than that someone may do something similar if they need it.
At times an abscess comes to a fleshy place, and remains so long that it causes great gathering of flesh. And then bursts and pierces, and in jumping the flesh, remains the place hollow, like vessels; And the skin which is above is as thin as one fine piece of linen; And do not pierce until the bone or nerve, and such a disease is called "clean";
but if it is so elongated that it reaches the bone and perforates it, then it is called "fistula";
and the cure for this is that you cut all around that skin, and also when it is thin, like a veil; and it will not close up again because of its corruption.
And if you believe that the skin is hardened, and the corruption is not fully present. and the skin is thickened with flesh, then treat it with an enema as follows:
look if the breasts are large and the bowels within them are of foul odor, then administer a clyster of Egyptian medicine which is made as follows: Take, therefore, oil, and litharge, equally, and put to cook in one vessel over the fire. until the medicine is red, and becomes as thick as honey;
and then take of this according to your need, and put it in water and honey, and in clysters the womb, and restrain the flow; and let the medicine rest for two hours, then remove it by squeezing;
do this many times, until the swelling is diminished, and the fear is gone;
and sometimes it is cleansed with water of ashes, when this medicine is not present, and you take ashes from a grapevine stick and pour water over it,
Then pour it out, and in a clyster, as long as you know that the breast is well moistened.
and if the patient cannot bear it, neither the Egyptian medicine nor the water of ashes, then clyster with water and honey or in which there is a bit of litharge ground. or you may clyster with honey and mellowed wine, because honey has the property of purifying and washing, and wine makes healthy the sick.
and when you have done this, and you have confidence that the breasts are well purified, if the clyster of those which causes flesh to be born in them,
and it is that you take a plaster definitive, and make it with rose oil and wine; or you will cleanse him with certain medicines and ointments, of which I have spoken of the properties or treating ointments
and if the opening of the chest is small, and the cannula of the enema cannot enter then enlarge it with an iron a bit, and put inside a tent of Egyptian ointment, or  ointment basil, as long as it is enlarged;
And if the wound is too wide, so the cloth and it leaves only as much space as the clyster can enter.
And if the opening that lies bowed is above, so the cup or more below where it is. For when the bow is in perfect form, so do not let it hinder flesh; And if you cannot cover the breast below as you wish, If it is prepared in such a manner that the bow goes to the lowest point that it is at,
and if you cannot cover the breast below as you see fit, if it is prepared in such a manner: that the bow goes lightly downward, and nothing of the bow remains; and take medicine to consolidate it on the chest
and be covered with .i. a linen cloth that covers the whole chest; then cut as forces in place the opening of the chest .i. one finger wider than the first then be anointed with ointment on .i. another cloth according to the quantity of the opening; and put it on the opening of the breast to align the bow, and do not remove the large drapery outside until after many days once.
and that one who is out of the opening of the breast, often remove to remove the bow, and know what runs from the bow, whether it's venom or pus or enough, or digestible, or indigestible
and take care if the patient feels pain or no, and whether there is an abscess or not,
and when your medicine has spread in such manner and you see nature leap upon the wound of the chest, if you know that the breast will close already, and approach health;
and then untie it in the morning, or at midday, and when you untie the wound, if you change one other bandage, and renew the ointment.
And if the breast lies bent improperly after many days, know that the breast does not heal well. And if subtle poisons cut after a long time, do not despair of health.
for health approaches. For there are men whose pains in their wounds heal slowly, and some that do the opposite;
and if the breast lies bent improperly after many days, know that the breast does not heal well;
And if the breasts are slow to heal, and are swollen, then apply drying medicines moist in substance and dry in virtue, such as the ointment diaphinit, because it contains a large part of vitriol, and it is the last remedy;
Take the ointment diaphinit, and make it with rose oil, and the powder of old wine equal in substance;
then refine it and use it; and the same thing is done by mixing honey cooked and well mixed; when inflammation has subsided
or you take myrrh and aloe and incense, and grind it, and powder it on honey when it is over the fire; and then you glue one cloth with it, and place it over the breast, and at times one administers a long rod and roots of lilies of heaven, which is also like the flour of chickpeas and centella;
and roots of lilies of heaven, which is also like the flour of chickpeas and centella; and in use of simples or of composites: grind them, and make a powder, and put on the honey that I have said, and in use; and if the wound is prolonged, and is not cured by this treatment,
and if the wound is prolonged, and is not cured by this treatment, then know that corruption has taken hold, and makes impression in the bone, or the hard members, or the limbs; if the cure of fistula, as we have said before.
of the abscess of the angle
A boil is an abscess that arises below the fingernail of the hand, or of the foot, or by chance arises in other places;
and when it is neglected, and one does not take care of it, then one comes to have one abscess after another, and they rub and throw a bow until it reaches the root of the joint, and perhaps they rub all of it.
and the rubbing comes to the bone, until there is painful aching, and the shoulder is twice as wide, and the color is bruised.
When you treat it as we have said in the division, and the treatment does not help at all. then it behooves you to cut away all of the superfluity that is remaining from the joint, Then cauterize the wound after. The cautery is a great help if the bone is healthy, and the nail is healthy;
and if the nail presses against the flesh, and it begins to prick, and bleed, then it is necessary that you place a rag under the nail that pricks the flesh, and the butt at the top, and cut this thing subtly and lightly and put on the remaining of the medicine hot and corrosive to remove all.
And if the corrosion is in the bone, then cut it and treat it further, because as long as the bone is corrupted there, it cannot heal.
and if you see the bone to be corrupted, cut it in one of the ways as it is said before, then treat it until it is healed.
and if it is broken and swollen, and it causes great pain, then you must first heal it; then cut the bone with a pointed spatula by cutting diagonally upwards,
and guard that the tail does not come up to the flesh which is below the knee, because the patient would feel too great pain.
and if it happens, put something on top that soothes.
The two joints which are born in the hands of some men by chance are all fleshy. and by chance there is some where there are bones, and sometimes there is a nail.
and none of them are born at the root of the joint, where the birth is in no one of our two. He who is born in neither of our two does not move and he who is born at the joint of the two, by chance moves;
The waist of one who is fleshy is light, in such manner: waist it at its root with a wide spatula.
He who is born at the root of the joint, is hard to cure; so you must be careful to cut.
In one who is born or comes out at the hindquarters, it is fitting that you first cut the surrounding flesh up to the bone, Then cover the bone with a suitable cloth then care for it until it is healed.
The wounds that come to two together come by birth, or by the stitching of a wound, or by burning with fire, or by similar things.
Then you must cover that wound so that the two pieces reunite according to their natural forms. then place between two tents or cloths moistened in rose oil so they do not fuse together; and you put between two pieces of thin planks, until the bones are joined, as is necessary.
If the joints come together with the palm of his hand, then join them as it befits.
Of evils
Ailments are large veins enveloped full of melancholic superfluities which come in more than one member of the body.
And more often occurs in legs of those who walk on foot and work and carry, than others.
It is therefore necessary that you administer to him once purging of the gut, and then the salve of the basilica.
The cure of iron is thus in .ii. manners: one is on the cauteries, and draws out the black blood; and the other manner is that you raise the vein, and draw it entirely outward.
The waist is so according to this manner:  first raise the leg of hot water much strong, until the large sinew be softened. then restrain the leg of the patient from above the hip to the part below the knee; then cut open a vein in one place, or in two or in three, of a wide size,
then lift and draw out the black blood with your hand, from one end to the other, until as much sinew as the virtue of the patient can bear be drawn out.
and then the lye, and command him to bathe himself in black fig poultice;
and resume evacuation and bloodletting when the veins are full, and harm the patient.
The elevation of the leg is as follows: raise the leg of the patient, if there are many hairs, then put him in a bath, and raise the leg from hot water until it becomes red and the veins swell;
and if you have no bath, heat it by the fire, and then cut the place of the vein long at the top of the knee, or in the part below the ankle;
then work the skin with the knife, and scrape the vein from each side, until it appears when you touch it;
and it is seen red and black, and when it enters the skin it seems like a white cord;
then push the vein underneath, until it is lifted from the skin, and then cut it lightly with the knife;
then place it in another location three fingers above; then scrape the skin over the vein until it appears then lift it at the point, just as you did, and place it on another incision, just as you did first.
then make another cut, or more if you need them, then lift it and cut at the two points of the foot
then pull and lift it up to the second cut; then extract it piece by piece, until it is all pulled out, then make a cut.
and if you cannot draw it out and raise it, then put a needle on one end very strong double. and tie it and pull it, and put it under one root, and turn your hand this way and that until it comes out; and keep it from breaking, because if it breaks, then you cannot draw it out or raise it, and the patient suffers pain;
and when you have drawn it out completely, put on the wound's place wool soaked in wine and rose oil; and treat it until it is healed.
And if the vein is contracted and twisted and wrapped together, and it is not straight, as we have said, if it is necessary that you split it awkwardly, but do not cover it; and treat it as we have said before.
if it is necessary that you split it awkwardly, but do not cover it; and treat it as we have said before. The shape of the iron used to cut the vein is curved, and does not cut, so that it does not cut the vein;
and is of a large curve, for if it were subtle, it would cut the vein, but let it be thick as we have said, and this is the shape:
Of the civil vein
This vein is located in legs, in warm parts where no herbs nor trees grow, and in land where there is no moisture;
and perhaps it appears elsewhere than in legs, and this happens because of rot that comes from under the skin,
as it comes from within the body of serpents and worms, located between the skin and flesh.
And if the signs of the beginning of this vein are that there is a very great inflammation in the leg then its color changes, and the vein begins to swell outwards, like the root of a plant.
When the shoulder opens, then you must wrap around it a piece of plank from three and a half up to two, and tie it
and leave the plank attached to the leg, and every time it has pain, then you wrap around the plank, and tie it And if it is too long, cut a part of it, and envelop the remaining part, and do not cut it at its root, until it is all issued. For if you cut it, it will go back into the flesh and bring about an abscess and rot there, and a bad illness.
Therefore for this reason it is necessary that it be treated little by little until the end, and nothing remain on the body;
And sometimes this vein when it is treated is  five palms long, or ten; and a certain man came to me, who had one [bone] that was 10 palms long, and when you cut it, it yields 1 ray or hole, and it pierces until the bottom
so that all comes out; and be empty the matter which is within, and administer to the place medicines preventing putrefaction any day, then the cure as with abscesses
And at times in this vein main veins, and also when it opens in the joint of the foot, or foot, and there comes much of holes, and from which it jumps veins; cure therefore as we have said before.
Of worms which are born between skin and flesh
This illness is called in our land "ox disease," because it happens many times to oxen,
and is a small worm which is born between skin and flesh, and goes throughout the body going up and down and one feels it well at the turn of limb to limb, as long as they reach the skin where it goes, and jumps out;
and is brought on by rotting of some humors, such as come from serpents and worms and parasites in the belly;
and one doubts its malice, for when it travels through the body, it ascends to the head and comes to the eye; by chance enters, and destroys the eye; and this happens many times.
When you see it being cured and treated, if one can flee only when it goes:
If it is therefore necessary that you tie the place above and below with a strong bandage tightly.
then cut above and treat the wound, and if the bone is broken into the flesh, and you do not find it, if you cauterize it with fire until it dies.
And the greatest harm that it does is that it inflames the eye, as we have said;
and if you see it coming or near the eye, then restrain under it the eyebrow form, then cut above, and the tract further;
and it is necessary to use the patient of purification of body of medicines solvents for the ills humors corrupted.
and if there is a worse of meats causing putrefaction.
Of the pain that comes from flatulence This illness is called in our land "wakir", and is a pain that comes in certain limbs, and then moves from limb to limb; and I have seen what I tell you.
I was called to a sick woman, and she uncovered her arm, and I saw a small swelling in the vein of the arm;
and a little while after, I saw it rise like a worm to the shoulder, more quickly than anything else, as if living silver when it cuts from one place to another
The pain departs from that spot, and goes into the shoulder.
And then a little after it spreads throughout the whole body, until it reaches the other arm;
then she told me that it returned again around her body, as I saw it.
I was amazed greatly how she moved thus from limb to limb, for I never wanted this illness according to this manner. However, I had seen many who well had pain move from one place to another, but I had never seen it like this, as I saw in the woman;
and I thought that it was because the woman had dry flesh, and her veins were exposed, and for this reason appears that constraint windiness;
and do not appear according to this reason to those who are delicate, and who have moist bodies and veins filled up.
And when you see curing this disease, and the patient feels that pain, if it appears to you as we have said, if the lump above and below evenly, and then cut upon until that constraint windiness in its place is gone; and cauterize the place; and if you do not see it with your eyes,
if the cure of those who expel wind, such as fetid pills, and serpent pills, and similar others.
Of arrows
Arrows are diverse, according to their appearances and according to the places in the body where they lodge.
The diversity of them is that some have large points, and small, and haired, and smooth. and those which have two angles, and those which have tongues, and those which have pieces; and those which fall in any limb so that they fall in two ways: either in the principal member it falls,
such as brain, heart, liver, stomach, lungs, intestines, bladder, and similar members. When it falls therefore into any place of these limbs, and the sign of death, that I will tell you after, appear to you: Then it is necessary that you take care in the extraction of this arrow, for death comes afterwards in many dispositions; And when this bad sign does not appear to you, and the arrow is not deeply embedded, then treat it, and cure the wound.
And the sign of the brain when the arrow falls and pierces the bone, and jumps the dura mater which is above the brain, is when scotomia and sode and esvertin and rubor in the eyes, and inflammation and rubor of the tongue, and spasm and permixtion of understanding, and vomiting of bile; and perhaps it is without force from the nostrils, or ears; and perhaps he loses speech and voice; and leap from the wound moisture white seeming to poultice, and leap also like burn of flesh;
and if this sign appears to you, so hold yourself from the cure, and treat the arrow if it is not within.
The sign of the seventh when it falls or core, are that it is near the left mother, and feels as if it were tied in a hard thing, not empty. And by chance the seventh moves as well as the pulses, and in short black blood, and comes coldness and cold sweat, and syncope: Then know without doubt that death is present.
And the sign of the saiete that never moves is that without plains of foam it jumps from the wound, and the throat swells, and the patient turns color, and gasps loud and seeks the cold air.
And if the arrow falls into the covering of the hip, it is near the ribs; and it gives great pain and great sorrow and sighing; and they move all the members of the shoulders.
And if the arrow falls into the stomach, perhaps it jumps from the wound something undigested from the flesh.
And if the arrow falls into the belly, and it jumps a point of straw through the intestines rout, there is no hope in the cure, nor in the extraction of the arrow.
And if the arrow falls into the bladder, and the urine comes out mixed with it, and the patient feels great pain: know that the wound is mortal.
The other member, such as the arms and neck and throat and shoulder and helper and spine of the back and ribs and hips and legs, and similar members, are safe according to more dispostions. When the arrow is in the nerve or artery, and it is not venomous, as I will tell you that it happened to me, for which you do likewise.
It happened to one man with an arrow lodged in the root of his nose: I attempted it, and withdrew it from another side below the fat of the ear, and he was healed without any feeling.
And treat with a game an arrow that fell in the fat of the eye under the skin. and the arrow was returned, and I could not reach but the point towards the shaft, and the arrow was great in an archer's bow, for three pounds light without ears; the game was safe, and no bad accidents happened to him.
And treat an arrow from the throat of a Christian, and it was an Arabic arrow with ears:
I was the barbers, and I carefully as much as I could the trade, and it was healed to the Christians.
And treated an arrow in one man, which was in his belly, and I thought he would die;
and then when he had passed thirty days, he did not change his condition; I cut on the arrow, and I set it back in place, and I treated it further, and there was no bad accident.
And if you see a man to whom an arrow fell on the back, and the wound was sewn up;
and the arrow remains inside him, and does not change its natural position, nor is there any ailment found in any of his natural works.
And see another man, to whom an arrow fell in his face, and the wound was sewn up;
and endure thus suffering great pain; and many other similar things.
And treat an arrow in i.e., a man of the king's court who had it lodged in his neck, and was slightly leaning to the right side; and the arrow was completely embedded
I was summoned for treatment after three days had passed. I found the wound very narrow.
I touched it with a whole subtle tent, and did not feel it at all. And he felt pricking and pain below his right ear. I thought that it was from the tip of the arrow
I put on its place an atramentum and digestive plaster, for the place did not swell. and the location of the arrow appeared to me.
and the location of the arrow appeared to me. I put the plaster on myself during the days, and closed the wound directly, and left the patient like that for a long time.
until he felt the arrow i.e., one day inside his body; and he told me this. I put on the wound a corrosive medicine for many days, until it was open.
and feel it, and feel the head of the arrow which is hardening in place; then I adjusted it in the opening of the wound by that sharp medicine, until the head of the arrow appeared visibly to me;
and it went well for four months' time ;
and then it opened up so that I  pushed the pliers in and out on both sides of it, and it cannot come out;
therefore do not cease to subtly devise and engineer ways of instruments until I took one day a well-made pair of pliers according to what its form will come at the end of this chapter, until I treated it and restored the wound
And the wise judge that the cartilage of the nose cannot be restored: I restored it therefore, and the wound was sutured, and the patient was healed entirely.
Or I have told you the quality of the extraction of some arrows. so that you put your care on those which I do not say, because the books cannot fully comprehend all things.
but the wise masters compare well upon much little thing, and upon those which are present and lacking find new works, and nine instruments, at the understanding of strange things which happen in this art.
I say that arrows are not lodged in members where they are fixed except according to two ways: or by the place where they enter, or by another part;
And that which shoots further than where it enters is an arrow lodged in the flesh, and does not shoot out any more now.
And if it does not shoot now, let it be left until the flesh is healed and the exit is cleansed;
And also if it is fixed in the bone, and it cannot move, leave it so for some days, and moisten it each day.
And then it will jump out, and if it does not jump out, pierce around to all that is, a fine forest, until the skin around it is enlarged, and then treat it.
And if the arrow is put back in its place in the body so that it cannot be seen, then try all of the tent. And if you feel it, then treat it with no suitable instrument;
and if you cannot by the widening of the wound, and by the depth of the arrow, and there are no bones or nerves or veins, then widen it as much as the wound is large; and treat the arrow if you can, and if it has ears at what it holds,
and treat the arrow if you can, and if it has ears at what it holds, if you remove the bone that is enclosed in two parts as much as you can. and then break or bend the ears of the arrow as much as you can pull it out;
and then break or bend the ears of the arrow as much as you can pull it out; and be subtle so that you do not break the arrow, but that you pull it out more gently.
And if you cannot at once, so let it lie until the limb is set properly, then treat it, because extraction hurts easily. And if the flow of blood goes against you, administer what we have said about the cure in its chapter;
and beware of incision near the nerve and the vein, and put everything you can to withdraw the arrow without danger,
whether quickly or slowly, whether firmly or gently; and place the patient according to the form he was in when the arrow struck him, for it is the greatest help that there be, and if you cannot, put it according to what the signs show you
The arrow that comes from another place, where one sees or feels nothing of it, or the skin is swollen in a place if it can be seen or felt:
Cut then above, as much as the tongs can take, and then extract it: if it has jumped now.
And if it is held in the bone, then turn your hand round and round, until it enters the bone, and enlarge the bone, then extract it.
And if it cannot come out, leave it still, and then begin the extraction again until it comes out;
and if there is an arrow in it, take it out with the whole shaft;
and if the shaft has fallen, and you see administering force, administer one instrument to cut it; so that the tip of the arrow enters the head of the instrument; and then pull it out;
and if the arrow is lodged, one puts .i. instrument with a pointed end into it, to facilitate extraction.
And if the arrow is surrounded, then you must cut all the flesh around where the poison is, if you can. then treat the wound as is fitting.
And if the arrow strikes in the hip or belly or bladder or ribcage and it is close [to vital organs], and you can cut into it, then cut.
And guard yourself from covering the vein and nerve, and then extract it, and then stitch the wound if necessary. And tend to it until it is healed.
The shape of the pliers used for treating arrows is similar to an eye's beak, and see here the shape:
And there are many kinds: large, medium, and small, according to the size of the arrow.
of the veins of the common body Of veins from which one heals there are thirty-one, of which it has or head sixteen.
that is to say: two veins that are after the ears, which are called the two "herbech"; and the two arteries which are in the two temples apparent; and two veins that are in the two tear ducts of the two eyes, which are called "aspirates"; and the vein that is in the forehead; and the vein that is at the top of the nose. and the two veins which are on the neck. and the two veins that are in the lips above the mouth, and these are the veins called "augeherich"; and two veins that are under the tongue.
The veins of which one commonly heals are five in each arm:
one is cephalic and is on the inner side of the left costal area, and the common people call it "vein of the head"; and the middle one is called "fast," and is composed of the cephalic and the basilica, and the common people call it "vein of the heart"; and the basilica is on the right costal area, and they call it “vein of the belly” to the lay people, and is on the bone and it is the one which when opened clearly appears on the pouch.
And the saphenous vein is the one between the ring finger and the little finger, and it has two tributaries;
and in the leg and foot there are three veins: one of which is below the curve of the pouch of the left hip; and the second saphenous vein which is in the ankle of the right leg; and the vein that is called “nerves”, that is in the ankle of the other leg;
And in the other leg there are three veins below those.
The vein of the veins that are after the ears so helps with old catarrh and migraine; and the qualities of the saining, as I tell you, and is that you raise the head of the patient,
and the qualities of the saining, as I tell you, and is that you raise the head of the patient, and rub the place where the veins are with a rough cloth; then bind the patient's neck to a vise until the two veins appear behind the ears in two levels dependent from the head: and where you feel the pulse below your back, if it is throbbing;
then take the lancet, and thrust it below the vein until the bone, then lift your hand to all of the vein above; And cut and the skin and the vein well two fingers to traverse, and make blood flow as much as you see;
then restrain it and tie it, until it is healed;
and I have already said incision and cautery in the first book.
The healing of the two arteries that are in the two temples, if it is good for an ancient migraine, and sore, and habitual blepharitis, and to the eyes of sharp tears.
And the qualities of the veins are as I say: And that the patient strains his neck so that the two veins appear openly. and feels the pulses below the backbone, and then he  should be able to feel them.
then gently raise the heart above the vein on your right index finger, and push the lancet below. and raise the vein upwards, and the cup, just as you have done with .ij. other veins, and make a correction of blood according to your need;
then untie the patient, and put your right hand on the vein for an hour, then put cotton on it;
and then let the wound form, and leave it until it is healed; and we have spoken of this and of their cauterization and their extraction, as the beginning of the book.
The bloodletting of the vein of the forehead is as valuable as the bloodletting of the cephalic for diseases of the face old, and for migraine, and for redness.
and the qualities of it is that the patient strains his neck by twisting, until the vein appears. then take the instrument which is called "fossor", whose form is here:
And place the point on the vein, and hold firm with your hand, or another thing, and let the blood flow according to the quantity that you see; Then bind the patient's neck, and tie the vein until it is healed and never open it with a wide flame.
However, it is not necessary for the flame to be too large; and to heal across because the bone is near, and by chance breaks the flame when it is subtle.
The healing of the two veins that are in the two tear ducts helps the eyes, and the forehead, and the cheek, and the eyelid of the eye, and diseases of the face;
and the qualities of their healing are that the patient strains his neck by twisting with a bandage, as before;
Then heals it, and let the healthy one be through the length of the flame, an inch long, an inch wide, for there is no flesh.
And if the flames are subtle, by adventure it breaks; then make a correction of blood, as much as you need, and then tie on cotton, and bind it well.
The vein's healing is good for the plague, and for sore throats, and for facial illnesses such as migraine and redness that comes in the face, even when it is old.
and the qualities of the vein are that the patient tightens his neck, then presses his nose to your left hand and takes the subtle long flame, and puts it in the space between the two nostrils because the vein does not open well yet, and the blood will now begin to flow;
and do not let it flow too much, and make it bleed according to your need, then tie it up for the night, because it is very quickly restored;
The sap of the two branches helps in the treatment of the ear, and in the beginning of leprosy, and many diseases, and itching, and corrosion, and herpes, and blisters;
and the qualities of the sap are that the patient strains his neck under both, as we have said; and let the master be standing on the head of the sick person, and the sick person sitting on one seat,
Then heal the vein with a long incision, then treat with blood moderately, or as much as is necessary.
Then redo the other part in the other vein, then untie the ligature, and tightly restrain both veins. So that the patient does not strangle; and leave it until morning, that the wound is healed.
Of healing the limbs The blood of the veins above the lips helps to heal in the mouth, and gum disease, and cuts on the lips, and toothaches and swelling.
And the qualities of the blood are to have the patient sit in front of you, and restrain his neck as I said; then turn the lip, and look at the two veins, one of which is on the right lip and the other on the left, and you know them by those that are black, and by those that around them there are small black veins: therefore the one and the other, and if you do not know them, and you are in doubt
therefore the one and the other, and if you do not know them, and you are in doubt if you take the largest of each part, and also make two veins that are above and below, because it is the same manner
From the vein beneath the tongue The vein beneath the tongue helps after the cephalic vein, and it is for the tightening of the throat, and illnesses of the eye, and illnesses of the mouth;
and the qualities of the vein are that the patient lies between your hands in front of the sun, and he lifts his tongue, and looks below on each side a black vein:
then bleed both, and do not go too deep in them, because below are the arteries.
The veins of the arm from which one commonly bleeds are bled in two ways:
or they prick at a whole one finger-width apart, or an olive, as sharp as you can cut it, and it is called 'anusil'; and are wide and subtle according to the width and narrowing of the veins. The form of the flame mirror is very well known, and is wide as you see:
And it is necessary for opening the head veins flat with thick blood appearing, and that contain thick and troubled blood; and this is the form of the olive flame:
and is more subtly pointed, and is for opening veins subtly, where there is subtle yellow blood.
The draining of the basilica, which is one of these veins, helps with illnesses that are in the throat, and neck, and chest, and belly;
and it is necessary for the physician to drain wisely, and that he be wary of the artery which is beneath. And if he cuts the artery, and a flow of blood comes, then it behooves him to staunch it, as I have said; and flame must not be pricking, but cutting like a knife.
And if the basilica does not clearly open, then it is necessary that you restrain it, and change another one. or you want no vein of it, or you cut in its place the vein in the arm: it opens clearly. and the scoop with the knife flame, as we have said.
And if you see to know the place of the sinew, then it is fitting so that you extract the arm, that you touch the place as long as you know the pulse; then mark the place with ink, and then tie the arm, and cut the vein of the flame aneasil;
and guard that you do not wound in the artery when you see the place inflamed, for it is from the artery: avoid it therefore.
And if you see it rise up high as the urine of a child, and the blood is red and subtle, know that it is blood from the artery: Hurry then, and put your knee on length, then remove your knee if it without a  stain, which many times happens;
bind his arm, and let him so, and do not move it the patient; and be afraid, and do not move it until it is healthy.
And if the wound is not clean, and it troubles you, and the medicine is not present, then close the artery if it opens, because the head of the retreat; and clean the wound.
And take a piece of fig bark, and make it, and take one half and tie above well until the other day;
If the wound is unstopping, that's good; if it isn't, then treat it, as we have said, with powders that stop bleeding.
And the stopping up is not grasped in more positions because of the small space of the wound, and the power of the limb of the arm.
The vein opening in the middle helps so that it draws blood from the head above, and from the body below, because it is composed of the basilica [vein] and the cephalic [vein], as we have said.
and it is necessary for the healer that he feel for the nerve which is underneath, and if they are not too much felt, and he finds the nerve, and he swells and the saint be grieved, and perhaps cannot heal;
and this nerve opens many times, and if it does not open in any man because of its subtlety, then it is necessary that you feel it with the instrument anecil; and touch the nerve with your power.
And if it has a vein between the two nerves, then make the incision long.
The sap of the cephalic vein helps, it draws blood from the head, and aids the eyes.
And it is necessary to bleed by pricking at the olive vein or the myrtle vein, because it is the safest of all the veins, for it has neither nerves nor arteries.
However, it is necessary to seek the lightest place, and it doesn't matter if one has to start over the first time, and we begin again. And by chance, some men become swollen in certain places, after pricking for the first time, but it doesn't matter. The quality of the blood is according to your thought.
The first thing you must know about bleeding, is that it's administered only to preserve health,
and to ward off diseases to come; and let the bleeding be done in one of the three veins that are or ought to be: namely, cephalic, femoral, and basilica; and one must bleed at the beginning of Lent at noon, and in autumn and in winter after eating, when the sign of repletion appears.
and one must bleed on the first day or the third, after two or three hours of the day.
The bleeding that is administered to illnesses has no determined hour, but when need is of day or night, at all hours and in all times.
and it does not behoove to bleed children until fourteen years old, nor women carrying  fruit from the fourth month until the seventh. Do not bleed those over sixty years old.
And when anyone wants to be bled, in whatever manner, it is fitting that they cleanse the bowels with a light enema. If he has many impurities retained, so that the veins do not draw out the superfluous filth harmful to the principal members.
Do not bleed those who are too full of meat, nor those who are drunk, until they are sober, nor those who are dropsy-ridden.
And if one is harmed after colic passion, and vomiting, and stomach pain, and multiplication of childbirth in a woman, and labor, vigil, and fasting, and that which all virtue, or by thing of the arm or of the body;
then carefully regulate the humors, if one is fat, through meats and drinks and medicines, if you have their power;
then enter into a bath, if nothing forbids it, in order to regulate the blood;
and bleed from the vein of the lower third, as we have said;
and keep yourself free of work, and of point, and of lust, and of similar things;
and be bound and joined, and let the healthy arm be higher than the one being treated, and rub the arm two or three times.
then restrain the linen halfway, for when it is too tight or loose, it cannot correct itself;
and then rub the place with your hands until the veins swell and you can feel them;
then moisten the vein with a drop of old oil, then place his finger from his left hand on that vein below its place where he wants to bleed, so that the vein does not fail or be harmed by the iron. For there are veins that are as thick as cords when bleeding, and some that are full of windiness, so that when one puts the cautery on them, it retracts like fire, and cannot open the vein, and thus it is with these.
And if he opens the vein, then the wound is too narrow, because of that, it is necessary that the surgeons be warned about these things.
And if the vein is opened for the first time, it is good; if not, it begins again a little below where it was or above by a distance, if the limb is not swollen.
And if the limb is swollen and the patient fears it, then let him leave it for one or two days and not tie up the arm: for it may come to abscesses by chance; nor enter into hot baths, then begin bloodletting again if he pleases.
and if the hole is small, or the vein is too short subtly and you doubt that it does not give as much blood as you see, then fire in that same hole straight all the flame;
and work a point gently, so that the eyes are inflamed; for this happens many times when the wound is small.
If you see the place inflamed, do not begin the bloodletting again, and put on a little bit of oil dressing, for it soothes the body from blood, and is more suitable in this place than oil;
and thus administer the oil dressing in each bloodletting that you bleed the veins, to stop the flow of blood;
and the same thing happens to the head of the arm when it is put back in place; so subtle its skin and separates when it is too thick.
And if there comes an abscess that is large, which happens often, even when it is only drained once and the opening of the vein is small, if you hurry, and put on top a sponge moistened in water and some oil, warm a little, and hold it for an hour;
and it is necessary that you do this after the blood has been drawn from the vein, and if it remains in place after a few days without any blackness or greening, then it does not harm him; And if you see, put on anything of aloe or myrrh mixed with juice of calamine, ointment, or something similar.
And many times abscesses and appearance at the basilica's saintly place: put your hand on it then, and if you find the place soft to the pressure of the hand, so is that appearance evil. Therefore I tell you to not put on anything of those that we have said, because by chance it may cut without the artery; but apply 1 plaster dry for to harden the place, then treat with another treatment until it is healed.
And treat each one's blood according to the quantity of its virtue, and the color of the blood.
For if the wound is black, let it flow until it is red; and if you see it swollen, let it be until it is subtle; and if it is too hot, let it cool.
And it befits him who is pale and weak, and needs the extraction of blood, that one make a wider wound, and let the flames be wide.
And for him who is weak, do the opposite, and it befits him to bleed little and often, and one should bleed him by cutting across, not by pricking.
And this manner of bleeding is safe from a decrease of blood and a severing of nerves, and it is more useful than bleeding from the long or wide [vein].
And to one whose body needs the bloodletting, it is necessary to give moistened bread in pomegranate juice; if he is heated, treat with blood three times or four.
And if he is of cold complexion, anoint before the bloodletting moistened bread in quince syrup, or in honey syrup with spices, such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and chickpeas, and well-scented syrup.
And if he faints at the bloodletting, after the exit of some blood, it is necessary that he smell broth of meat, and subtle scented syrup.
and use other things that we have said in the division or chapter on syncope, for the evacuation of veins.
And if he wishes to drain his arm, and bleed another time, if it is necessary, when he is weakened by much bleeding, that he bleed little by little, according to the quantity of his virtue continuously.
And whoever wishes to drain his arm after the first bleeding, and he has a strong body, bleeds 7 hours after the first bleeding, or after the ninth hour.
And whoever wishes to bleed from another part, he must bleed on the second day or the third.
Because he has much blood within the body that is already exhausted, and it brings fever; so it is necessary to draw a large quantity, and widen the opening as much as it flows in streams. Since you have cured all the conditions of health, and place your hand on his arm when he is healthy, that death does not come in the place of pimples and this happens many times, when the healer is negligent;
and it does not behoove you when you see a limb dislocated, and make blood flow the second time, and the wound is closed, that you press forcefully upon it; nor if it is curved, that he extend his arm completely, for this would be bad;
but let it remain until it heals the second time; or if you prick at the tip of the flame, until the vein which is frozen from the opening is closed. and put above it i. point of soil remitted in water, and press gently upon it.
And if the vein is swollen, let it be and do not constrict it, until the abscess is appeased.
And if necessity requires to draw blood a second time, let it heal in the same place, or in another vein, or in the other arm.
The vein that is opened in the arm is bled in place of the vein of the head for this reason because it is composed.
And the manner of bleeding is that the patient puts his hand in hot water until the bone is red.
then be bound moderately so that the vein appears well, then bleed now through the middle, neither short nor long.
and let the opening be wide, and bleed well near the joint of the hand, and if he cannot draw it out, put the hand back in hot water, and let the blood flow into the water until you have enough.
and if it is in this state, do not put the hand back in hot water, for one puts it in more in winter than in summer;
and the vein of this chapter is safer from all other veins, for there is neither artery nor nerve in it.
The vein of the salvation of the right hand is good for all diseases of the liver, and this is the manner:
stretch the hand, and put it in hot water, until the vein is swollen, if one sees it; and if it is healthy crookedly, and if you cut it through completely, it will not hurt.
and do not move it too much because the nerves are exposed from all flesh,
and then put the hand in hot water, if it has become frozen in the wound, and cannot be withdrawn.
And when you have treated the blood as much as is necessary, then put on the vein oil and wool to stop it tightly, and do the same for each one.
The vein of them in the left hand is good for the disease of the mice, and do all as I have told you towards the right.
The vein of the sophene is good for all the diseases that are below the body. as diseases of the bowels, and retention of flowers, and disease of the hips, and thighs and old legs, and similar diseases.
And the qualities of its vein are that the patient plunges their foot in hot water, and rubs on the vein until it throbs. and tie above the joint of the foot; and the vein is at the ankle, and above the foot go many veins;
so choose the larger vein, or at the ankle, which is better.
And if you drain it on the foot, guard yourself from the nerves that are below, and drain it across as when cutting; and let the flame be gentle.
And if he cannot draw it out, put his foot in water, and let the vein drain well.
And if the wound must be cauterized the first time, begin again a little higher, because the flesh is salty. Do not doubt the nerve, as we have said, and so do the same with the spine of the other leg equally.
The flesh of the sciatic vein is at the ankle to feel, and its cauterization is good for the pain of the hip when it is due to blood.
And the qualities of its cauterization are that the patient enters into a bath and is stretched above the ankle 4 fingers in torsion.
for otherwise it does not open the vein; and if it opens, then you heal it in all the ways that you can, and by crossing over and it is better that you close it, for the blood is dry, and it is very full of red matter.
and it is better that you close it, for the blood is dry, and it is very full of red matter. And if you do not find it, then heal any vein that opens or the wound below the heel, and near the small toe, and guard the nerves;
and make as much blood flow out as you see, and then untie the bandage, and put cotton on it and bind it; it is now healed.
Of the sucking wounds
Sucking wounds are made of horns, or reed, or glass; and suction is done in two ways: either by piercing and drawing blood, or without piercing.
And this suction that is without piercing is done in two ways: either it is applied with heat, or without heat;
and two others in two ribs of the neck; and the suction below the chin; and the suction at the two shoulders; and the suction on the hips; and the suctions in the two arms; and the suctions on the two legs; and the cupping glasses on the two ankles; and cupping does not treat blood, but only the small veins that are scattered in the flesh
and for this reason it weakens them less than if one were to bleed from a vein; and it should not be administered, neither with hot nor cold fire, in any disease that comes from excess, until the whole body is emptied.
And if by necessity of disease it is necessary to cupping, or out of habit, then we administer it every hour at the beginning of the month, or at the end, and sometimes in every time;
for there are some who, when they need to blow air, have a heavy head
and there are those who suffer from bloating and redness in their face, and in their head, and in their neck, and darkness around their eyes
and there are those who suffer from a drop of blood in their mouth, and have a swollen tongue, and spit blood and there are those who dream, and see through blood and haze and death and similar things
And when we see these signs, and even when it is removed from the month, we command to blow after 3 hours of the day.
The blood from the vein helps in the greatness of the head... that comes to the eyes, and it is not proper that it be after the evacuation of the whole body.
and this ventilation is in the place of the bloodletting of the cephalic vein,
and it is not proper that those who are of a cold constitution should use it, or who have catarrh, for this does great harm to them.
And for these reasons it is not fitting that the elderly use them, nor those who have or chief colds diseases.
And those who recover from it often become oblivious, and for this reason it is necessary to place the suction cup a little lower due to the fear of oblivion.
The ventouse applied to the neck is in the place of the vein of the head and basilica, and for these reasons it is good for the treatment of boils. and for fissures of the carbuncle channel, and all sorts, and for swelling;
and then it is necessary to put it carefully, for if it holds too firmly, it can cause obstruction of the stomach or heart.
The ventilations of the two ribs of the neck are good for pains in the head and headache, and migraines, and for strangulation, and for pain at the roots of the teeth.
and it is in the place of the vein of the basilica; and it is necessary that you command the patient to press his hand when he places it, so that he does not cut the artery, and blood does not flow excessively.
The ventilations below the chin are good for mouth ailments, and gum disease, and similar ailments that are in the mouth; and it is in the place of the veins of the two lips.
The ventilation of the shoulders is good for diseases that come from heat and fullness.
The ventilation of the armpits is as good as three veins in the arm. because it draws blood from these large veins;
and instructs the patient not to scratch it too much, because the skin there is thin and lies over nerves and arteries.
The suction cup that is on the rump is good for hemorrhoids of the foundation, and for diseases below, and it is necessary that the suction cup be large, and be of a vein, so that it has need to well draw; and perhaps, if it were subtle, it would break; and I make great wounds.
The suction cups of the legs are applied openly, because they attract blood from all over the body, and are good for old pains of the reins, and of the hips, and of the bladder, and soothe the flowers; and they are in their place of the two shins, and of the two ankles, but nonetheless they weaken the body after long use, and bring weakness in many dispositions.
The manner of putting on the suction cup is that you put it first empty, and succeed moderately, and put it gently, and move it evenly, and do not cease from doing this until you see the place red and inflamed, and appear the redness of blood; then press, and put back the suction cups, and take care in the disposition of the bodies, because there are some who have tender flesh, and clear pores: so it is necessary to strike only once, and it is necessary to make wide wounds, and a poke deep; and suck lightly.
And if the vein is thick, then it is necessary to prick twice: the first time to thin out the way of the thick blood.
And if the vein is very thick, then it is necessary to prick a third time; and when we want to draw blood little by little, then we suffice with a single pricking.
And if we want much blood, then we must repeat often; and if the vein is thick, prick it in a deeper place, and the end is that the veins be pierced strongly.
And it behoves him who has thick and hard skin, and who has large pores, that you anoint the places of the leech from oil that is appetizing and dissolving: if it is in this state, of violet oil, or sweet almond oil, or seed oil of gourd;
and if it is in winter, of cresson oil, or lily, or chamomile, or something similar.
And if the superfluities are large and cold, then take wormwood oil, or balm oil, or anise oil, and similar ones.
And if the one whom you are treating has thin skin and large pores, then it is not appropriate to put any oil there,
but it is necessary to wash after the suction of rose water, or cold water, or mulberry water, or pumpkin water, or porcelain water, or something similar.
And he who has much moisture, rises from rosemary, or myrtle water, and sumac, and similar things.
And those who have large superfluities rise from old wine, or walnut water, or a decoction of anise or chamomile, or similar things;
and it is not right to suck before the bath or in the bath, but after the bath one hour or two; and do not sleep after the suction,
and it is necessary for him to worsen when he is due to be vented and when he is vented. And beware of those who are recovering if they are choleric, and if their veins are too full and inflamed; if it is necessary for them to eat cold things, such as pomegranates and endive and lettuce at the bedside, and similar things;
and minced pears, and roast beef, and moist meats.
And he who has a cold complexion, take syrup of honey, and fragrant wine, which is between old and new, and quince, and quince seeds, and small onions, and pigeons;
and on the day that he will be fasting, he must drink more than eat;
And it is fitting to give no man at any time triacle or musk before the fasting, or after, to comfort the principal limbs; and let the wine be subtle, but it is not fitting that those who are hot should drink it.
The suction cups that are put on without hurting are those that are put on the liver, and on the mouse, and gout, and on the belly and the gut and the hips and the hip, because these members do not suffer to be hurt on their own.
and one does it only for to draw blood from limb to limb as we put on the breasts when they are swollen; to remove the viscosity that is in the limb, as we put suction cups on the belly and the gut to reduce the limb;
and remove the pain when there is an obstruction or stone, as it removes by its attractive virtue perhaps the obstruction, or dislodges the stone from its place;
And thus he does when one puts him upon the liver and upon the mouse when there is retained windy-ness,
And these suction cups are administered empty to suck only thus; and sometimes they are administered together with fire, and sometimes filled with lukewarm water.
as in illnesses of the pleura, and in this manner one fills the suction cup with hot water alone, or with water in which herbs suitable to them have been boiled.
The form of the suction cup administered with fire is here:
And have 2 palms wide and half a palm deep, and have or side around the middle 1 small hole, as for putting in a needle.
And let it be of iron, soft in front so that it doesn't burn the patient when put on the limb;
And have in the middle a crossbar of iron or steel, to put a burning candle inside.
And let them be large and small according to the illnesses and the strength of those who take them;
for the suckers of children are other than the old, and the lean than the fat.
And thus must one place this sucker upon the limb:
grasp the candle of wax or... linen, and place it inside the sucker across from the rod which is inside the sucker, so that the brightness is at the bottom of the sucker that it does not burn the patient;
and then place it on the member, and these must be on the opening that we have said, so that when one wants to, the vapor goes in, and one removes the suction.
and apply the ointment as before, and repeat it often, if you need it.
In the suction used for illnesses of the lungs, in any acute condition, there is no stick nor opening, and it is applied only when it is full of water, and it is placed on the member solely;
and this is the form:
Suckings are administered only in members where one cannot put cupping glasses for their smallness, such as lips and gums, and similar ones. and in their uncovered skin, such as the two or three, and other similar things;
And the quality of the user is that when you find suckings that are in fresh waters without corruption, take them;
and put them one by one in fresh water until they become familiar, and have nothing in their bellies; and then let it be cleansed of vein and leech, then rub the limb until it is red, and put on the bandages;
and when they are flat, and fall, if it is their place where one can put a leech, put it there, for it is very good after.
If those are not there, lift the place of the pain, and then with water, very well, and then wrap it up.
And if the place is cleaned too much after the bandages of linen, put 1 drapel of linen in cold water, and put it on, until the bandages are moistened.
and if the sores are multiplied, put on ground vitriol or saltpetre, and similar things, until it is extended;
or you put on the place half of peeled beans, and let them until they dry out in place, then it will stop now.
and if you need more, take other poultices.
And if the poultices will not be taken, rub the place with fresh blood, or insert a needle into it until the sores issue. and then put them on top, and as soon as they feel the blood, they get hot.
And when you see that they are bleeding, powder some of aloe and wool ground together, or ashes, they will now stop.
Here begins the book of fractures
This chapter is many times necessary in the art of medicine, and it is the restoration of fracture and dislocation.
Know this, dear reader, that the following chapters of this treatise are not found in any ancient books, nor has anyone read them in letters;
and for this reason the knowledge is kept secret in our land, because I have never found any good one;
and I know nothing else, except through the knowledge of ancient books, in which I have studied so much that I have mastered the science, and by experience, and by the habit of my life;
and I have described in this chapter what is contained therein, and have abridged it at the end, and have clearly shown the forms of the instruments that are used, as I have done in these two chapters before.
It behooves us therefore to say or prologue of this book the sum of the word and the chapters where the wise puts his understanding, and dwells on the truth, so that those who are experienced know and learn this noble art, and learn it to others.
I say that when fracture or dislocation or torsion or sprain comes to anyone, it is necessary that you hasten to heal the sick person on one side and the other, if nothing prevents it, such as weakness of body, or child, or old man;
or if their tendons are not very warm, or too cold; and avoid cold things, that is to say, cold meats, and mutton and veal, and do not drink wine, nor eat any fatty meats, and do not overfill yourself with meats which fill the veins with blood, until you have doubt of a hot abscess, or an expansion of matter in the limb; so that the sick person returns to his first state of government that he has used.
And when the broken bone begins to restore itself, it is necessary that one nourishes the patient with meats which make a great nourishment, or which have viscosity, such as wheat cooked in water, and rice, and testicles, and pies, and entrails of veal, and eggs, and fresh fish, and strong wine, and similar things. For with such nourishment it regains muscle and quicker the fracture.
And know that bones broken in the old and the decrepit do not recover well nor join together according to their nature because of the dryness of the limbs, nor those who are too tender, such as the bones of little children;
but if there is no cure, set the broken bone that is, big tendons which are apart and join the limb together, as long as it holds itself as before; and do not leave any point of its work undone, and for this reason it is necessary to nourish them with large meats, as we have said.
And know that fractures are diverse in many ways.
For the fracture of the head is different from the fracture of the leg or thigh, and I will tell you in this chapter all kinds of fractures. For there are fractures that go in a spiral, and others in sharpening, like the nib of a pen for writing.
For there are fractures that go in a spiral, and others in sharpening, like the nib of a pen for writing. And if with fracture and wound, and fracture at all a small crack.
And to each manner has its engine, and its proper instrument in the restoration, according to what the memory comes to it;
And is known the fracture of the bone by those that its end is twisted, and open well outwardly, and one presses with the hand.
And when there is no twisting nor sound at touching, and the patient does not feel much pain, if there is no fracture.
but it can well have tortuosity, or fracture, or small break. If it does not suit that you move it with your hand, but put upon medicines that come here after, and then restrain it now subtly.
And know that the fracture that goes in arc, and are the two parts disjointed, it is necessary now to put them together equally, so that abscesses may come;
and if abscesses come then leave none of it (the joint), until the abscesses are appeased; Then set it equal to the measure that you can lightly and wisely, and know that the restoration of it is lighter than the restorations of those which have pieces; then restrain, as it befits afterward.
And if in the bone has broken pieces, if it is of two parts, whether it is hand or foot, or to your hand if it is a small member, or two cords, or one cord and to your hand;
and set the limb according to its natural figure, so that when the parts of the broken limb are separated, you carefully reset all the pieces in their places as much as you can, and make sure that through your work no injury or pain comes to the patient;
and adjust well the two heads of the bones according to the best forms.
And the feel well with the hand if it seems to you that it is not well; if he arranges well and does not restrain too much, nor press as those who do it come by their work abscess hot and contraction in the member, as we have wanted many times.
And when the limb is at point, so chastise well the patient that he does not move it, neither watching nor sleeping, nor turning, nor in any other way; and guard well that the limb is so secure that he feels no pain at all. For when he feels no pain, then it is not yet at point, and it behooves to put it in such a position that he feels no pain;
For when he feels no pain, then it is not yet at point, and it behooves to put it in such a position that he feels no pain; and guard that it is set straightly, that twisting does not come when it is restored.
and the qualities of the broken limb are according to what I tell you.
Know that broken limbs are diverse in smallness and in greatness and in form.
For there are small members, such as arms and legs and similar things: so it befits to encase them in bandages of soft and fine linen.
And those which are thick, like hips and legs: it is fitting to encircle with a wide and hard linen, because the wide linens embrace the whole large limb, and restrain it on all sides evenly, so that there is no gap.
Then tie around light padding, 3 or 4 turns according to the limb, and restrain your hand a bit to all the linen, then go above the fracture and restrain less, than the fracture is moved a bit away from the fracture.
And soften the linen bit by bit, until you reach a good portion of the healthy side, then take another linen, and turn it around right above the broken side;
Then return to the part below the fracture, and hold it moderately, neither too hard nor too soft, as we have said in the first place above.
Then put between the bandages of linen or cloth, until it is all even, then tie everything on top, that is, bandage it, and then put your well-made dressings on it, if there is no abscess or swelling.
And if there is an abscess or swelling, put on top something soothing for the abscess and that removes the swelling, and leave it so for some days.
Then strain your dressings, and be half a hand's breadth wide, carefully cut, or made of sticks that are used for the shelves, or palm leaves, and be according to this figure:
but it is necessary that the splint that one puts on the fracture be a little larger and wider than the others
and also as long as is necessary for the limb, whether small or large;
then bind it on the splints as you did in the first hour, then tie above with a thread evenly, just as in the first hour on the fracture;
tighter it is above, less below; and it is necessary that the threads be of medium thickness, neither too thick nor too thin, and be made of soft linen;
because if the threads are thick, as I want to see works of fools who make their bindings of linen cords twisted, and it is great error, because the binding cannot be even if it is too subtle, and it is not fitting that it have between each star less than two of space.
And if the patient is sore by the bones of the stars after the strapping in their healthy places, then put underneath them pads of linen, or wool padding, so that it does not become blistered.
When the wound is with the crushing, and the bones are broken, I will say its cure here after.
And know that it is not proper to bind all broken limbs on the first day. For when the limb is large, it is not proper to put splints on it immediately, but after five or seven days, or more according to your certainty of the abscess coming hot.
and see here the manner of ancient plasters for restoring fracture, dislocation, and torsion: and it is that you take flour that is kept on the sides of the mill, and mix it with an abundance of egg, and put this mixture, not too thin nor too thick, and use it, and this is the common manner of the plaster restoring the fracture in many situations, even for women and small children, because it is neither too hot nor too cold.
Another manner of plaster restoring fracture and dislocation and torsion: take  barberries and ladane and enula and asafoetida and gum arabic and mugwort, each 10 parts; myrrh and aloes, each 5 parts; alechil 14 parts; and make a powder of them, and mix it with an abundance of egg. If the complexion of the man is hot, use this plaster because it is of good composition, and restores broken bones quickly, and is good for many men.
Another manner of plaster that is good for torsion: take mugwort and wormwood, ana .x.  grains; myrrh and aloes, ana .viiij. grains; acacia vi. grains; armenian bolus .x. grains, and grind well, and confit with water or white of egg, and administer.
Another manner of plaster for joints and bones dislocated from their places, and it soothes the pain that occurs, and the use of bone splints, and the bruise: take new wool, and soak it in lard and oil cooked, and put it on the place. This plaster does not restore [the joint], but it is good to soothe a hot abscess, and oste properly the pains.
Another manner of plaster that restores broken bones: take dried fig leaves, and ground elder leaves, and grind together, and make a plaster.
Another manner of plaster for the restoration of the fracture of the bone and to lessen the remaining abscess. Take root of wormwood, chamomile, flowers of violets, flour of verbena, of each one part; and grind, and confit with wine, and if the limb is scalded, confit it with coriander water, or water, and use.
Another manner of plaster more powerful than the first, when a hard abscess comes to the restoration of the limb. Take roots of wormwood, and seeds of flax, balm, melilot, and hyssop, and flowers of violets and chamomile, of all one part; and grind, and confit with water of salt, or sweet water, or with wine, according to the heat of the limb, and its rest.
Ipocras states in his book that one should put on the broken limb to restore it with a plaster made of wax and oil, and nothing else, and he says it should be between soft and hard.
And it seems Galen one should put on the broken limb, to restore, things dry and a little warm, such as myrrh and aloes and incense and similar things, as we have said.
Another way of making a plaster that is good for the wound and pain: take mugwort and chaff of oats chopped, or feathers of an ostrich, and wormwood, and flax equally, and grind them together, and make a plaster from it and apply it.
And then loosen the bandage a little after, and take care that the patient does not feel any pain, nor has moved the bone from its place; if he hasn't loosened it by hand for several days.
And if pain comes to the place, or itching, feeling no rest or swelling, then hasten and loosen it, and remove the plaster now; and take a light cloth and sponge of sea moistened, and plunge it in water, and lift the place, until the itching ceases and the pain is soothed; then let the member rest for an hour, then put on dry linen, moistened in water or rose oil, and tie it with a bandage, until you are certain of a hot abscess
and rest the inflammation of the limb, and be removed from pain, then recommence the subtle ligature, and a little plaster, and do not constrain it as strongly as before; and subtly until it is healed.
And if you see that the abscess is hot and red, and pain and swelling are entirely gone, and you need plaster and linen, then recommence it, as you did at first equally.
And if nothing of what we have said comes to the limb, then do not unwrap it until after 3 days or 4 or 5 or 7. And never leave it unwrapped for 20 days, according to what you see, until the fracture heals, and approaches the joining of the bone together;
Therefore, restrain him more than before, and increase his food, as I said before; and if you see the place drying more than necessary, know that no nourishment can come there. Therefore arises the hot water bath, every time you unbind him, and it should be every third day, and remove a little of the plaster.
Therefore by this work the nourishment to the limb is cut off, and it heals slowly those who make the foolish mire, that return the limb distorted: This is bad, and so are these works fearful, and I see nothing else than to leave it alone and operate correctly.
of various ways of fracture Many ways of fractures are, and diverse figures, and the causes are destined;
for there are fractures that are made by the thrust of a sword, and the neck of the bone all the bone up to syfac which is below the bone, as it is done haiche or staff; and for this reason this manner of fracture is called "haichure".
Where the sword cuts through the bone from above without piercing, and this manner of fracture is called "absolute"; and the wound of these two fractures great or small.
And if there is an embedded percussion, or splitting or of the neck of the bone, or of the cheek on bone, or other similar things.
And if he has a fracture penetrating, which approaches up to the membrane that is beneath the bone, or it is above the bone, and this wound is large or small.
And if the wound which is set in the bone also as subtle as a hair, and it is the fissure small, and for this reason this fracture is called "capillary";
And if the wound which is made or by hitting with a stone, or by falling, or by similar thing, and makes enter the piece of bone inward, and it is like the lews being as hot-iron smiths when they forge on the cauldrons; so enters the stone inside.
And this happens more to those who have or chiefs moist bones, such as children's heads;
and it happens to all these types of fractures that small pieces are separated from them as if they were stars; and I will speak of it in its place.
And let us know all the ways to break them by pulling on them, and by examining the tents, and by the rotten flesh that is above.
The appearance of the capillary vessels is known by this: when one has uncovered the bone, and rubs it above, then the fracture appears black.
In the cure of a fracture, take care of the accidents of the patient, and if you see no evil accident, such as vomiting of phlegm, and loss of understanding, and extension, and paleness, and fever with chills, and the eyes being glassy and red, and other similar conditions in more situations, then it cannot heal without doubt.
And if you do not see an untreatable accident, and you hope for salvation, then begin the treatment.
And when the fracture first comes to you, and it is in winter, then it is necessary to remove the bone before the fourteenth day at the pace that you can.
And if it is in summer, then hasten to remove the bone before the seventh day, so that the skin under the bone does not rot, and comes the accident that we have said.
And if the bone fracture comes right up to the skin that covers the brain, then it is necessary that you split the split part like this: and it is that you prick the head of the wounded person, and uncover over the bone in all the ways that you can, and on the shape of the wound more carefully than you can.
and if the bleeding comes to the uncovering of bone, or abscess covering, then help them as it is right, and that you fill the place with cloths moistened in rose oil. and make the wound rest until the abscess covering is appeased, and be assured of bleeding; then begin to work around the bone to remove it, and this is done according to .ij. ways of working: one way is that you cut at a narrow place in front, and this is the form:
And then he puts another incision larger than the first.
And the second manner is that you have a number of incisions of different sizes, some narrow and others wide, and be pointed, and be made of iron; and in working lightly, that you do not cut through the head.
And if the bone is hard and tough, it is necessary that you pierce it through, so that you administer slices with drill bits, so that they do not go beyond the bone of the test, and it must have above the point a margin or a circle, which does not let the point pass beyond the bone; and you must have several, so that each one comes in its place of the width of the bone, so that you have drill bits for all tests; and this is the form of the three kinds of drill bits:
The quality for piercing through the broken bone is that you put one drill bit on the bone, and turn with your two hands until you know that the bone is pierced; then put the drill bit back in another place a little later, and do this all around, then cut with the incisors the space of the bone which is between the holes, and do this more subtly than you can, and lightly, as we have said, until you draw the bone to your hand, or to any of the instruments that you have such as pliers, forceps; and guard that you do not touch the marrow nor the pith.
And when you will have the bone pierced and treated, it is necessary that you remove the debris which is stuck to the bone with all one other instrument resembling an incisor, but it is necessary that it be more hardened and more subtle than the other incisor;
and if it remains nothing of the small bones, or no scales, then lightly set the bones with, i.e., instruments; then care for the wound with tents and dressings as we have said.
And the other manner of work is that which Galien states, which is drier; and the load very much, and it is his word. It is necessary first that you uncover a part of the bone, where the fracture appears moves, so that when you have uncovered that part, then place underneath the head of this lentil-shaped incision tool, because this is its form:
And do not cut on one side, and it is the part sharp in 2 coasts, so that the cutting edge is towards the bone; then strike with a small mallet above, so that you gently chop the bone all around, and take good care of the cloth that is underneath;
If it is stuck to the bone, gently loosen it, because one loosens it well without pain, and without fear.
And if the fracture of the bone does not reach to the skin, and the bone is only broken from above, and there are small pieces, then it is necessary to rere that asperiteit, and remove the scales with a fine razor which you must have various quantities of, in order to administer in each place the most convenient, according to the work and the figure of the fracture.
If there are first large razors, and afterward finer ones, and do not cease to do this until it is well.
In each of the other hairline and subtle fractures, it is necessary that you administer cause according to its location; and this is a thing that is not replied to by anyone who has put his study into this art.
And if the wound is uncovered, it is necessary that you take one cloth of linen, according to the quantity of the wound, and moisten it in rose oil, and put it on the wound; Then take another cloth doubled in two or three, and moisten it in wine and rose oil, and put it on top of the first cloth; and do this more gently than you can, so that you don't harm the wound, then administer above one other linen, and do not restrain it more than to hold the wound only;
and leave it so for one or two days, until the abscess is appeased, then untie it, and administer medicines such as roots of lilies, and powder of chickpeas, and incense powder, and aristolochia, and similar things; and of these things make a powder, and put it on the wound, and administer further medicines unmixed with mordication;
And guard that the wound be properly clean, so that you do not leave any ointment, nor let it gather pus, for when pus gathers on the brain cloth, it will inflame and blister, and it brings great harm to the patient; for when one puts a biting thing on top, it bites through.
Therefore, guard against any bad accidents happening to the patient, as we have said, so there is no doubt about it.
And if nothing else comes out except from the medicine we have put on it, that it has virtue, then you must take a part of honey, and three parts of rose oil and mix one drachm of glue, and put it on the wound; then the cure of manners of cures that it is right, until it is healed
Know that never are broken the two parts of the two above, or one by the sole, because they are two bones; and this below is cartilaginous, and does not break unless forced to bend or twist, and then heals.
And if one of the two parts is broken, then it behooves you to put your little finger or pointed part of the hand into the opening of the nostril, and place the fracture inside your index finger, and on the palm outward, until the nose returns according to its natural shape; and do this gently, and take care that the patient does not feel pain because of your work.
And if the fracture is in the upper part of the nose, and it cannot come to its place, then you must put it even at the head of a rail a little thick.
And if the fracture is in two parts, do the same, and hasten to restore it on the first day, if you can;
if not, after the seventh or the tenth day, when the abscess is calmed, then bind to the head of the nose tents of linen cloth, if the fracture is in one part.
Or you bind one on each side if the fracture is there; and let the tents be so large that they fill the openings of the nose.
And they said any restorer one must moisten the tents in butter and change each day. It does not seem to me that this is good, but it is necessary that they be moistened in the preparation of auburn from an egg, and of flour powder; then leave the tent as long as the bone is hard, and the cartilages are hardened.
And sometimes one puts goose feathers in their place, and if i.e. a thin cloth is draped around, and it holds the fire-holder, and blows on the patient; or do as you see fit.
And if an abscess comes to the new while you are working on it, if you put cerate or cotton moistened in rose oil, or in i. p of aqua dillon.
And if an abscess appears, apply a plaster from the outside, of sesame flour and frankincense powder, cooked with yolk of egg, then put light bandages on top, and do not bind it tightly at all.
And if the fracture of the bone is small, and it is broken into many pieces, then extract it with suitable instruments, then stitch up the fissure, and treat it with appropriate things like flesh-colored patches, and ointments.
And if there is no wound inside the bone, then treat it with bandages, and put on a large bandage of linen until it heals.
Of the jawbone fracture
When the jaw is broken from below and there is no wound outside, and the fracture is outside only, and is not broken in two, except for a spur inside, if one knows it lightly.
It behooves, if the fracture is in the right side, that you put your right index finger into the mouth of the patient; and if the fracture is in the left mandible, then put your right index finger, and gently push the fracture inwards, and fix it with the other hand outwards, and make it even.
And if the jaw fracture is separated into two parts, then it behooves that you administer extension of two parts, until it is even.
And if movement of the teeth occurs, or rupture, then restrain them with a thread of gold or silver or silk, then place on the broken jaw plate, and put on one double cloth; and put on the cloth a large star well made, or a piece of leather equal, long and wide according to the jawbone, and tie it on as much as you can, and command the patient to rest, and eat light meats.
And if you see that the figure changes, then untie it on the third day, and then put back what has changed; and put a poultice on top, of powder from the mill with an abundance of egg or flaxseed flour, after what you have removed the plate; and put on top a light cloth, and if the poultice hardens, and the disposition of the patient does not change, leave it until it is healed; many times it is healed in three weeks.
And if a boil comes, then administer what we have said many times.
And if there is a fracture and wound together, reward no piece of the bone is removed; so subtly of the removing with instruments suitable to this.
And if the wound is narrow, then widen it with flame according to your need.
And when you will have removed all these pieces, and there remains none, then close the wound if it is wide, and put on i. plasters suitable to this, in order to prevent flesh, until it is healed.
of the forceps The fracture breaks more times in front, towards the shoulder, and the fracture is according to three manners: or it is broken and separated into two, and there are pieces, and it is the lightest to restore; or there is a fracture with a wound.
And the work is like this when the fracture is without a wound, that you have two ministers, so that one holds the shoulder that is the broken bone; and the other extends the neck towards the side; then put equal the fracture to your hands, so that the form is as it should be, and there is neither appearance nor deformity.
And if you need to extend it more, so put under the shoulder of the patient a round sphere of cloth, or wool, and be thick according to your necessity; and being and light the bone, and hold the sphere in your hand, so that you put equal the fracture as it should be.
And if you cannot draw the head of the shoulder out with force because it comes back in, then it is necessary that the patient lie down on his back, and place under the shoulder one pillow medium, and put the minister's shoulder down, until the bone of the shoulder is raised.
And then direct the fracture to your two hands, and if you find it shattered, then it is necessary that you cut above it; and gently pull the pieces together, and if the bone cannot join with any pushing, then cut at one of the incisors which you have; but put under the shoulder this instrument, in order to guard the synovium.
And it seems like a spoon, and is not wholly hollowed out, and be as wide as is necessary, according to the size of the bone and the power of the work; and have two heads, as you see, and one be wide, and the other narrow, as is the route of the wound that you made when you treated the bones.
and when you are assured of the heat abscess, so close the wound, and if the rupture is small, or you doubt hot abscess, so apply the wound with bandages and tents, according to its quantity.
And if a hot abscess comes, so soak one bandage in rose oil and in asafoetida and in wine, and put it on top.
The tightening of the bone, when it is without wounds and without incisions, is that you put on the bone plaster made from mill powder and egg yolk, and put light bandages on top, and put a sphere under the seat, if you need it. Then take a very wide bandage of one palm's width, then put one double bandage on top of the bandages and plaster; then take a strip that is subtle of 3 finger widths in length and width, and wrap it around that bandaged one, so that the head of the bandage hangs down. and place the splint on the fracture, and turn the bandage over the neck, and lower the healthy shoulder, and lower the injured shoulder; and straighten each part, and when you see that the ligature holds the fracture well, and you clearly see that the splint does not move above the broken bone, then reward each day, and when the ligatures slacken, then restrain it;
and make the patient lie on his back, and put him when he sleeps one small pillow under the shoulder, to raise the head higher; this will lighten the fracture of the shoulder by relieving the shoulder, or you bind his arm to his neck, and do not untie it unless a bad accident happens, until twenty days;
then begin the splinting again, if you see that he needs it, and restrain him and leave him so, until he is restored; and it is restored in at most twenty-eight days, and in less time for some men.
of the break of the shoulder
There occurs that the shoulder breaks or in the wide place it is not milled, and it knows not if a force; then the apparatus according to the figure of the break, and the reset according to its natural form, in all the ways that you can; then put on the place powder of the mill with abundance of egg, and light poultices, and put upon .i. double drapeil; then put upon a wide and subtle splint, a little wider than the shoulder, and if the splint is uneven in any place of the shoulder, so employ that hair of linen poultices, so that the splint lies evenly; and then restrain it with all a very firm bandage, so that the splint does not move from its place, and watch the ligature each day; and every time that it softens, then restrain it, and put equal the splint if it is out of place, and lie the patient upon his side; and the shoulder is restored in .xx. days or in xxv, And when this number is fulfilled, then untie it, and be sure, for it is not bone which puts itself outside easily.
And if a piece of the bone protrudes before, and not below the heart, then make like that, and the bone, and do what we have said in the break of the collarbone to appease an abscess hot.
of the fracture of the leg
The leg is sometimes broken in the middle, but this happens rarely; but it often breaks at the end. And when it is broken in the middle, it sinks to the side, and the patient feels great pain, and loss of strength, and thirst, and perhaps vomits blood, and the veins open on the broken bone, and they feel warm.
And the restoration is that the patient lies often on his back, and they put one cushion between the shoulder blades, then pressing the shoulders together, they join the sides of the two bones with their hands, and carefully try to align them in every way they can, until the shape of the bone is as it should be; then they put bandages and splints above the thin skin of salt, or some other light cloth, and wrap it in one sheet, and tie it over the broken bone so that it does not move; and turn the bandage around on the back and hold it firmly, and every hour check the splint, and if it loosens, tighten it; and if it needs to be undone, for corrosion or itching that comes to the place, or pain or abscess, then hasten and untie it, and clean what has come up in ways of treatment; then reapply the bandage, and hold it firmly until it is healed.
of the breaking of ribs
Know that the breaking of ribs comes only in their thick part after the back, and at the top inside, and they bend only because they are glassy; and one feels it well upon inquiry to the two sides.
And the restoration is that you put the fracture equal, as it is proper. And then place the splint, and restrain it with a strap, if you need it.
And if the breaking of ribs is slanting inwards, the patient feels very great pain and stabbing, as with pleurisy, because the bone pierces the membrane; and besides that there are pricks, and thirst and vomiting of great quantities of blood, and this is a grievous sickness, and the ancients have placed great effort into it.
And if some say that it is necessary to administer meats which inflate the belly, to drive the fever out.
We do not do this, except if abscesses are warm there, if they have not come. And if they have come, then heal them.
And they say any of us who put suction cups on the place, to suck it out, and that seems reasonable; nonetheless, there is doubt that the suction cup does not draw the superfluities to the place for the disposition of weakness.
And they said any one of us should cover the place with woolen cloth in hot oil, and put a tent between the ribs to make the layer even, then be cured from the cure of pleurisy, flesh, and medicine.
And if the patient feels great pain that he cannot bear because of the bone piercing the cloth, and there is doubt for the patient, then it is necessary to split above the place of the broken rib, and it is necessary to put under one instrument to guard the syfac; and then one must trench the bone, and draw lightly, and then sew the two lips of the wound, if it is large, and cure it with plasters, until it is healed. And if an abscess comes, then put on moist cloths in rose oil, and put on top; and cure while the place where it should be an abscess, and lie supine on the ribs where it should, until it is healed.
of the fracture of the neck
Sometimes comes fracture of the bone of the neck, and sometimes it happens that it bends; and also in the spine of the back. And when this happens to anyone, and you want to know if he will be healed or not, if take warning if you see his hands softened and swollen and dead, and cannot move them nor extend them, and when you prick them with a needle, he feels nothing. Know that he is mortal in many dispositions, and if he moves them and feels well when they are stretched and pricked, know that the joint of the bone is saved, and that the patient will be cured, if one puts care to it.
And if similar things come to the spine of the back, and you want to know if he will be healed or not, take warning if his feet are softened, and if the accidents are in his hands, and on his back there is windiness and emission involuntarily; and when one has him lying on his belly, he emits involuntarily. And when he is laid on his back and wants to sit up, he cannot. Know that he is mortal: if he does not labor in his cure.
And if this accident does not happen to him, then the thing is lighter.
And the cure if there is an abscess hot, then put on the spine oil rose or yolk of egg, until it is appeased; then put on a comforting and drying plaster, and tie it with a bandage, and command the patient to rest; and do not sleep on that part where he feels the pain, until he is healed. And if any bone is dislocated, then it is necessary to cover it over the heart; and remove the bone, then assemble the two lips of the wound, if it is large, with a suture, then cure it with ointment preventing flesh, until it is healed; and if the head of the bone is broken, which is called "the head of the cow", then put your bag of your left hand in there, and make it equal to the other hand to your power, then put the plaster and splint on top, if you need it; then restrain it, and if there are bones dislocated, do the same, remove them, and cure the wound until it is healed.
of the fracture of the hip bone
It happens rarely that the hip bone is broken, and if it happens, there has been a little lessening at the top; and making it long, and declining to the side, and coming to the patient pain in the place, and soreness, and swelling of what breaks.
And the restoration is that you extend your hand on top, so long as you are on the fracture; and know which is the fracture and the figure of it; and if the fracture is at the top only, put equal the fracture, so long as it is to natural figure.
And if the fracture is long, or it declines to the inside, make the patient lie on his belly, so long as the restoration of that fracture be apparent to you. And when you have put it even, put it upon the splint, then put upon a splint of wood or of cork, and restrain the bandage, so that it does not move; and place the splint under the ribs, until the limb is even.
And instruct the patient to sleep on his healthy side, or on his back.
And if an abscess comes to this, do not touch it until the abscess is calmed, and put upon it what we have said before; and then return to restoration, and restrain it as it is proper, if there is no bad accident; and this is the manner.
of the shoulder fracture
The shoulder is that which is between the arm and the head of the shoulder, and if it is broken, one must restore it according to one of the two ways: one of which is that you take one stick of medium thickness, according to this form:
And tie the two ends two knots, and bend them upward, and have the patient sit on one seat; then put his broken arm upon the stick, until it comes to the armpit, and make a bend of the stick in the middle, then put on any heavy thing or the minister stretches it downward; then place the pieces of the fracture together with his hands, as long as the fracture returns as it should.
And the other way is that one supports the patient on his bed, and binds his hand to his neck, then commands two ministers that one holds what is above the fracture with his hands, and the other holds below at all one link, and stretches each to his part.
And if you see that the extraction is more forth, restrain i.e. the linen under the fracture, and above the fracture, and extend each of the ministers to its part. And if the fracture is near the head of the shoulder, it is necessary that you put i.e. linen medium under the seat, and i. other towards the outside, under the fracture; and also if the fracture is towards the outside, it is necessary to put i. linen lightly, without labor, until the fracture is equal on the place, and on the outside; then put equal the fracture, as it is necessary, and restrain it, if a suppurating abscess does not come.
And if a suppurating abscess comes, do not restrain it until vii. days, and put on linen moistened in oil of roses, as long as the suppurating abscess is calmed; then restrain it, and the manner of restraining it is that you put the splint over the fracture, then assemble the arm upon the shoulder, and put your hand upon the shoulder or upon the chest; and put the drape, and restrain upon the shoulder, and upon the arm, so that the arm be in its place of rest, unless any thing prevents you, or if the bone is not moved.
And if you doubt that the bone does not move, use splints, and put upon the fracture one splint wider and stronger than the others, and have between each splint ii. of space, and be each splint so large that it passes over the fracture iii.  of each part; then restrain upon the splints, as I have said at the beginning of the chapter upon the fracture, more strongly and less in widening.
And if you see the setting of the bones, and the tightening, as we have said, in the hour that you restore the broken limb, and you doubt the abscess heat, leave it bound up until the seventh day, as we have said; then look every three days the bandaging, that itching or swelling does not come to the place, or that the dressings cannot come to the limb for what it is too inflamed. If it advances, as we have said.
And if no such accidents come to it, do not unbind it before three days or more, and have the patient sleep on his back, and have his hands on his stomach; and put under the shoulder one cushion plain of wool evenly, and look every hour of the day or of the night that the figure of the broken limb does not move, or that the bindings are not softened; if it advances by the virtue of medicine, and give him the food that we have before placed, in such a manner that the food be at first subtle; and when he begins to recover, let it be coarse. And it is customary that the shoulder and leg ought to be taken back in forty days of the whole; and then one must unbind and administer baths and medicines of ointments for the place to heal. And if the constriction is ugly and encumbered, let it remain unbound for one day or two months.
of the fracture of the arm
The arm is composed of two bones, which are called the two "humerus," because one is small, and that follows the armpit; and the other is large, and it is the one that is below, towards the little hip; perhaps breaks only the large bone, or the small one, and perhaps both together.
When the small bone is broken, the restoration is light, and the healing; and when the large one is broken, the healing is bad, and more painful than when they are broken together. If it is the small bone that is broken alone, then it must be gently extended and set straight.
And if it is the large bone, then it must be pulled more strongly; and set up on one cushion, and hold the armpit of the hand higher than the others, and the little hip lower than the other hips, and let the patient lie crossed on him-self, and one cushion in front of him higher, so that the patient does not suffer any labor; then extend the ministers of his arm to the part below his hand, or at one line, and others ministers to another above. And then put the pieces together evenly, according to its best form.
And if in the fracture there are pieces, put each one back in its place, and if there is any detached that pierces the heart, and you cannot restore it to its place, then do as we said before on the bone.
And if with the fracture there is a wound, I have spoken of it in the singular chapter; so take care of it.
And if at the beginning of restoration abscesses appear, then glue one i.e., bandage of cerote made of rose oil and white wax, that it be neither too hard nor too soft; and tie the i.e., bandage over it subtly, until the abscesses are appeased. Then remove the cerote, and put on a poultice of ground powder with abundance of egg, then put the splints, and let the splint of the fracture be closer to outside, and a bit wider than the others; and know that there must be six splints or more in several arrangements: whether the fracture is in one bone, or two; and keep it tighter over the fracture than elsewhere, and every day less distant, as I said at the beginning of the chapter; and let the bandages that are on the fracture be soft and moist, and not too hard nor rough; and let the thread, with which it is bound, be of linen, neither too thick nor too fine, as we have said. And reward the limb and bandage after a few days. And if any bad accidents come to the limb, such as itching that comes to the limb, it is necessary that you raise the member with hot water, until the itch is appeased; and let the member not be allowed to rest. And then begin again the binding, and if the ligaments are loosened and the bones dislocated, and similar things, so the address.
And if you take care that the numbing cannot come to the limb, because it is too tight, then it is necessary that you soften it a little, and let it so for some days, until the numbing comes right, and then bind it.
And if none of these things that we have said come to the patient, then do not unbind him until twenty days, or until whenever it is right, then let him put his hands on his neck, and be his neck equal, and beware of movement and agitation, and sleep on his back; and know that this fracture is restored in thirty days or thirty-five, and perhaps in twenty days, according to the compositions and the temperaments of virtues.
of the fracture of the hand
Know that on the back of the hand and us two have few fractures, and there comes but many times only bending
And when the palm of the hand is broken or bent, it behooves the patient to sit crossed, and be straight in front of him equally; then put his hand on the board stretched out, and stretch the ministers the broken bones, and put them equal to their aims, until they are well joined; and put the plaster and bandages, if abscesses do not come, then put a splint according to the quantity of the place; and be wrapped in .i. linen cloth.
And if the fracture is at the bottom towards the belly of the palm, make a ball of cloths, and command the patient to tighten it to his broken palm; and then the strain of a long cloth, and let the splint be of thick stuff as large as the palm of the hand, and strain it, as much as is necessary.
And if the fracture is at the forearm, it is necessary that you put a splint above, and another below in the palm, so that the hand be open and straight, then tie tightly around the hand, and bandage the linen between the two.
And if the fracture comes to any of the bones of the two, if it is a splint, set it straight, as it is necessary; and restrain it with the palm, and if you see fit put a small straight splint to raise the fracture, and let it not move; and if the fracture is in the other fingers, such as in the index or one of the others, set it straight, and tie it with the sound finger that is after; or tie them all together in one holding, which is better, or put above a splint, as a pouch; and take care in the restoration and disposition of the hot and dry abscess, and follow what comes, as I have said.
of the broken hip
The bone of the hip is many times broken, and one can see it well when it turns forward and backward; and the restoration is done by joining above the break and one below. And the patient lies on his face, then extend each minister his limb evenly; and this is when the break is within the bone.
And if the break is near the root of the hip, one limb be towards the groin, and the other limb below the break. And also if it is near the knee, then one limb be beside the knee, and the other extension down; then put the mire bone evenly with his two hands, until it is according to its natural form, and then put the plaster, and the tie, if an abscess does not come.
And if there is a hot abscess, let it cool then return to your work and your cure; the ligature is made in this manner. It is necessary that you wrap on the fracture, i.e., a stiff bandage doubled in 2 or 3, and remove the superfluities, then turn the leg so that the heels come to the root of the thigh, and put one long thread between the hip and the leg, below the knee joint, and bring the head of the thread upward; then turn up the leg and up the hip the bandage, then put on the fracture splints, and put a splint on the bone of the leg; then employ the place between the leg and the hip of cloths soft to put equal tension, then begin to bind firmly 3 or 4 above the fracture; and as you go higher up from the fracture, the less you restrain it; then hold the two heads of the thread that you have put between the hip and the leg, and tie 3 splints that are above, then return downward to the head of the thread, until you reach near the foot; and tighten it so that it does not move from its place, then leave it so, then if there comes no abscess or swelling or any other sign.
And if it happens, untie it, and address what comes out, as we have said many times; and if there are pieces of bone that prick, it is necessary to put them together, if one can; and if one cannot, it is necessary to split the place, and drain pus; and cure it as we have said, until it is healed.
And no times a fracture of the hip is set in this way as in the shoulder and arm; however, in the restoration thus made does not hurt the patient.
And know that the broken bone is restored in one day, or a little less or a little more, according to the varieties of complexions.
Of the furrow of the knee
Know that in the furrow of the knee there are few fractures, but it bends many times. And if it breaks, it is merely a fissure, or one opening, and it has both wounds, and no wounds, and this is well known.
And the restoration is this: one puts it even with what is rounded to its ends, as long as it is assembled moved as much as possible; then put the splint on it, and place a round piece of wood over it if you need it, and restrain it as it should be, then follow all the arrangements that we have said in other fractures, such as hot poultices and similar things; apply to each accident what it requires, until it is healed.
of the fracture of the leg
Know that in the leg there are two bones, of which one is called by right "mustelz", and the other is called "foscile"; and they all have a fracture as it comes to the arm, and for this reason the restoration is like that of the arm equally, and the work is all here.
And if the two bones are broken together, the leg turns in every direction.
And if the slender bone is broken, it turns forward.
And if the large bone is broken, one feels great pain, and it is seen well; and turns downwards. Therefore administer extension, and put it even, and tie the bones evenly; but however, it is necessary if the fracture is bad, and there are many pieces, that the extension be less and lighter; and the splint according to your virtue.
And when you have completed your work, take two bands of woven stuff that hold the leg on one side and the other, and be as long as the leg from the knee down below; then wrap in two cloths one above and one below, and tie it in the middle also, and at this binding the leg cannot decline to the right or to the left, and thus it is well; and no one administers one splint along the length of the leg, and if it is of wood, and it is placed on the leg to guard against movement, and properly made it is done in the fracture or where there is a wound; and move each day the leg, to see if there is an abscess hot or another accident; and care for it until it is healthy.
of the bone fracture of the foot
At the ankle there is no fracture, but the bones of the foot come sometimes fractured and the two parts, and there are only those cases in more dispositions.
And if there is a fracture of the bones of the foot, and you see these bones overlapping each other, put the patient's foot on the ground, as if he wanted to go, and then put your foot on his, where the bones are raised, then press it until they return to their places; then put the splint and bandage above, and put under the belly of the foot a small board to .ij. chiés full, then restrain the foot firmly, then when you have wrapped bandages around it, and other things that you need.
And when three or four days have passed, untie the bandage, because you will find the bones equal, whether broken or dislocated.
And if there are any of the two broken, restore them, as we have said to the hands; then put on the broken one a splint according to the length of the leg, and be one finger width wider, then put under the foot that table which I have said, and strain it well; and if there are .ii. or .iij., or more, broken, put on each leg a splint according to its quantity, wrapped in one sheet of linen, and strain the table under the foot; and let it stand on the top of the table above the belly of the foot, so that it holds it well.
And it is necessary that you do not forget the other things that I have said to the other fractures, as we have said; and according to each accident as it befits.
of the fracture of the bone of the forearm
When the bone of the woman's nature is broken, then make her sit enlarged, then incline her to the back part, and be held by behind; then fill the basin of nature with cotton, and put in it as much as one stone; then lift the woman, and little by little raise her back, and then jump the cotton, until it comes to the entrance of nature, and returns the bone with the stone; and when she wants to urinate, take out the cotton, and when she has urinated, put it back, and so do for seven days or there about: thus will be restored the fracture, and if you see, take a bladder of lamb, and tie a pipe to the hole, and put the whole bladder into nature; then blow into the pipe formed, until the bladder is inflated inside: nature will return the fracture; then be filled with cotton, and leave it so for some days, until it is healed.
And when the bone of the arm of the man is broken, or of the woman, then restore it as we have said in the hip bone; and are not hidden these fractures near to him who puts his study and his use in them, and read my book. For the fracture signifies to more dispositions the right way of restoration: therefore listen.
In the member, when it is broken, take a goose neck and put the member in it; then wrap bandages around it, and leave it for three days or until healed, and it will be healed quickly.
of fracture with wound
It is necessary for one who has a fracture with wound, even if it is large, such as the bones of the hip or shoulder or similar, that he be healed now, so that the healings that we have said witness.
And if the wound heals, then retain the vitriol, if you have no other thing, and then begin to restore the fracture in the same hour or that day, if abscess does not come.
And if an abscess comes to it, then leave the restoration until the ninth day, until the abscess is appeased, and do not touch it for the third or fourth day, for you would bring about a bad accident.
And if the broken bone is apparent on the uncovered heart, then it behooves you to gently put it back in place with your hands, with slight extension.
And if the extension is not readily available for you to put it back in place with your hands, then use this instrument which is of iron, that is 7 or 8 finger lengths long, and the width is according to the quantity of the wound; and for this, it is necessary for the worker that he grips 3 or 4, according to what he needs in each cure of a fracture; and be round and a little thick so that it does not bend under compression on the limb during your work, and be wider at the front and thicker from the middle forward, thus:
And it is called "palainche," for which reason the curved head should be placed on top of the apparent bone; and bring it together at once, so that it returns, and be equal to one another. And if the fracture is subtle, and the instrument cannot well take hold of the bone, then it behooves you to cut the head of the bone, as much as the instrument has hold.
And if you cannot bring back the bone, as we have said, then cut it with a suitable instrument, either an incisor or a saw, to your power; then raise that which is remaining in the bone of harshness and small splinters.
And when the bone is brought back, and the patient feels great pain afterward, know that it is not in its natural place. So do as long as it is in its place, then moisten one drape in black spiced wine, and properly if it is in an estate; and do not put on the wound cerote or anything else where it has oil, so that it does not bring corruption; then administer esteles when you have restored the bone, and leave the wound uncovered, and cut the covering all around, according to the quantity of the wound, and give yourself good care that the wound is not strained with the fracture; and many times this foolishly done, and have brought upon the patient either death or corruption at any time; and let the straining be softer and more gentle than other fractures.
And if the wound is bad or large, and you doubt that a bad accident may come to it, as we have said, and you find pain in the place, then it is not necessary to put esteles; but enclose around, instead of esteles, hard drapelz, and tie them. And when you see after one day or two an enjager bowe at the wound, then remove that which you have put on with all wine, and put healing ointment for wounds, such as tetrafarmaçon ointment and similar ones.
And it is necessary for you to loosen the limb two times a day, in the morning and in the evening, as long as it is sound and healed.
And it is necessary for the limb to be supported in such a manner that the bow pulls gently downwards.
And if the next day passes, and it cannot heal more, knowing that there are small pieces of bone, then you must cover the wound with a bandage, and remove all these displaced pieces that cause pain.
And if a fistula comes to the place, or another kind of corruption, then it is necessary for you to treat it according to what is said in his chapter above. And when the bone is broken and exposed on the limb, like the bone of the hip or shoulder, and other similar bones of the large limbs, do not drain it, because many times death comes from it. Instead, leave it until it mends itself; perhaps it will heal after twenty or thirty days, then treat the wound if you can; and if you cannot, then leave it.
of burns which come out from the sore
We often come after the health of the fracture, even when it is near the joint, and it is a sorry thing to see the figure of the limb; and by chance it cannot make the member its natural works.
Take ward then if it is fresh to us: if it has administered stippling medicines like aloes, frankincense, and myrrh, and sarcocolla, acacia, and similar others, as well as you take any of these things or all together, and mix them with stippling wine or with the white of an egg or with honey; and put them on the wound in poultices, and bind it well, and do not loosen it by hand for a while; then loosen it, and begin another one, until the swelling is removed; or you can restrain it on a piece of well-made wood; because the properties of wood are that it removes all the swellings from the limbs; and if the swelling has already become hard like stone, and it is necessary to remove it, so cut it above, making the superfluity appear; or you raise it with any razor until it is removed, and take care of it until it is healed.
When the bone fracture is restored, and afterward the limb remains weak and subtle, this happens for many reasons: one is because it was tied too tight, and was not tied as it should be; or because there were too many bandages, and it could not come to the mending of the member; or for multitude of dressings; or for too great movements, not at the right time; or because it has little blood in its body, so it is weak.
And the cure is that you make the patient eat, and make the body soft, as long as the blood is multiplied in him; and administer baths, and give him joy and lightness; then put poultices on the limb, so that the poultice attracts to great mending, and the dressing often of hot water, until the mending comes to the member; and returns to its natural figure.
of the limb after the healing
When the limb is twisted after restoration, and the broken bones are apart, and the shape of the limb is ugly, nevertheless it does not lose its natural function; so do not believe the fools who say that one must break the limb anew, and many foolish men have done this in our land; and this work is blamed, and brings great evils, and perhaps death; nevertheless, if the knots and torments are fresh, then it behoves them to be raised with hot water, or softening herbs boiled, such as leaves of marsh mallow, and roots, and melilot, and similar things; and make .i. softening plaster, such as dyaquilon well made, and you take the mash of marsh mallow, and cook it with goose fat or sesame oil, and make a plaster on top; or you take fig paste, and grind it with flaxseed, and similar medicines that reduce swelling.
And never is the knot removed by rubbing continuously and lengthwise with wet hands. And be it administered movement to the limb each hour.
And if the twisting is ingrained and hardened, as well as stone, and there is need to remove it with iron, then it should be cut up to the bone, with a subtle and light incision; and put caution and study into the care.
Here begins the book of dislocations
A dislocation comes from a joint moving out of its place, for which it cannot move, and the limb is badly shaped, and the patient feels great pain and great injury.
When dislocation comes to anyone, then it is necessary now to bring back without tarrying.
For if one delays, then it swells the limbs, and perhaps if one puts it back with pains in its place; for that reason it is not fitting to move it at the hour that it is swollen: many times brings pain and other sorrows;
Nevertheless, when this happens, if you have bled the patient, then let him, until the abscess has calmed; then raise the limb in warm water and oil, then gently move it, and treat each member as the wound comes to its place.
And I have ordered the chapters on dislocations of the head down to the feet.
of the jaws
It happens that the jaws are dislocated and in both dislocations they are according to two manners: either they are slightly moved from their places and softened a little; or they are entirely dislocated and hang toward the cheek, and close the saliva of the mouth so that he cannot hold it, nor close his mouth, and envelops his tongue with speech.
When the dislocation is small, it returns by the many dispositions.
And if it is entire and complete, then you must reset it carefully, and do not delay at all.
And in such a manner that the minister holds the head of the patient, and puts his right hand into the root of the dislocation of the jawbone inside the mouth, if the dislocation is of two parts; and the other hand should be outside, to put it straight; and command the patient to soften them, his mandibles, and move them in all directions.
And the minister sets it straight, until it returns to its place.
And if it is painful to reset, even if they are the two jawbones together, then apply hot water and oil, until you gently reset them; do not be afraid to reset, as we have said.
And when they are reset evenly, and the patient's mouth is well closed without softening, then place a cloth moistened in a preparation of rose oil and wax on top, then tie it lightly with soft bandages.
And let the patient sleep on his back, and his shoulders be between two cushions, so that he does not move them to the right or left, nor does he try to chew, but eat light food until the pains are removed, and the jawbones are united.
and then gently move it, and do not try to open the mouth for eating and drinking, until the jaw is well healed and sound.
And if the two jaws cannot be set right within an hour, and are not brought back to their places, then come fevers and accustomed chills, and perhaps a stomach ache, and perhaps pure vomit.
And when you see this, then know that it is a bad omen; and many times those who have it die within 8 days.
of the fork
The lever cannot dislocate from within the rib cage and of the bone, and it is dislocated once to the outside, and one feels it well.
And the restoration is that the patient lies quite on his back, and extends his arms; then presses the place with your palm, and it will return; then put upon the plaster and bandage, and restrain.
And the head which is toward the rib cannot dislocate; if it does not, and if it dislocates once, reset it to its place, as we have said; then put upon the plaster and bandage, and restrain, and command the patient to rest until he is healed.
And in the same way is returned the head of the shoulder when it is dislocated from its place.
Of the dislocation of the shoulder
Know that the shoulder is dislocated in only three ways: one of which is when it is dislocated to the side of the breastbone downwards; and the second is to the side of the hip; and perchance it is dislocated upwards, but this rarely happens.
and it is not dislocated backwards for the shoulder, and it is not dislocated inwards for the nerves; and many times dislocated downwards towards the breastbone, especially to those who have little flesh, because in these it comes out easily; in those who have enough flesh, it comes out with difficulty, and returns with difficulty.
And perchance it happens to some men that they have a percussion or fracture, and the shoulder swells with a hot abscess, and think it is dislocated because of this.
Therefore it behoves you to feel it, until you are certain; and then begin the cure.
And it is known dislocation when it is pulled down towards the hip, and makes a difference between the sick shoulder and the healthy one, and you will find between their diversity manifest. And you will find at the head of the shoulder a hollow, and under the hip touching the head of the shoulder, as if it were one bone; and the patient cannot bring his hand back to its place, nor move in any movements;
And also, if it is dislocated upwards, it is not hidden, for you will find it manifestly upon touching.
and this manner of dislocation is not otherwise than to bring it back, when it is new, or if the child is ill.
And the manner is that the minister lifts the hand of the sick person up, then puts his hands under the seat, and lifts the joint with force upwards into its place; and the minister lifts the hand and extends it upwards, then puts it down; so it will come back gently.
And if it does not come back as we have said in a few days afterwards, then it is necessary that the sick person be bathed in hot water; and the minister apply ointment and soothing, such as decoction of aloe and fennel and marshmallow in water, and administer it.
then be supported the sick person on his back, and put under the seat a cushion of equal wool, neither too soft nor too hard, then put the heel of the foot on the cushion, and raise the head of the shoulder carefully, and pull the hand of the sick person.
And other ministers hold the head of the patient, so that it does not move down; that shoulder returns all now, and if you see so reset it according to this manner:
And that you make present i. man who is greater than the patient; and be right towards the side, and put his shoulder under the seat of the patient, and raise the seat up, so that the patient hangs in the air; And other ministers pull the hand of the patient down towards the belly. And if the patient is too light, so put with him anything heavy, and the dislocation returns now.
And reset it also in another manner: and is one long stick in the ground, whose head is as a i. pistol, and not be too big nor too thin; Then be placed below the patient, but that he have soft cloths above, and the patient be standing upon the long of the staff; then be extended his hand down on the other side, forming, and the joint will return to its place quickly.
And if it does not want to return for all these things that we have said, then do this cure: take one tinder of two arms of great and four fingers wide, which has the head reentrant to enter through the middle below the ass-hole, according to this form.
Then tie on the chief of the staff soft cloths, that the staff does not bruise the patient, then put it below the ass-hole of the patient; and extend his arm on the staff of the long, and tie the shoulder to the staff, and the arm to the chief of the hand, then put the arm upon one step of a ladder of the wide, and let the hands be extended down, and let the body be left hanging on the other side: the joint will return now.
And when it is in place, in whatever manner that may be, it behoves you to put under the strap a sphere of wool even, then put the plaster prepared with powder from the mill, with incense and yolk of egg, on all the shoulder and around, then strain it under the strap carefully, and turn the linen over the plaster, and embrace the hand at its neck, and let the hands remain thus.
And it behoves that he should rest in the meantime, as long as the limb is fortified, for it will heal more quickly; and then after .v. days or .vij., move it; and if it is stiff and not softened, then it is healed.
And if the joint is out of place due to moisture that has come, or for another cause, then it behoves you to administer cauteries to three punctures, as it is shown in the chapter on cautery.
And if you do all of these things, and it dislocates after .vij. days, and the joint does not hold, and cannot raise his arm upward, then know that the nerve at the head of the shoulder is severed or stretched or softened; and know that the joint will never be fixed in its place.
The dislocation that is toward the hip, and the breasts, or behind, it is made by impulse, and stretching of hands, and it administers in another place; and cure until it is healed.
And if after the healing comes pain to the limb, and slowness in movement, then the patient uses baths many times, until that pain is alleviated, and returns to its first nature.
of dislocation due to cost
Know that the joint of the rib is dislocated at points, and at points returns; and if it is dislocated from all parts, even in front and behind, and the dislocation is not put back, because it is clearly seen and felt well; and dislocated according to each figure. And when you join the rib of the patient with the healthy one, then you can see it clearly. Because the joint is dislocated and cannot bend the arm, nor touch his shoulder at all.
And you must reset it so that an abscess does not come there, because if an abscess were to come there, it would be painful to reset it; and perhaps it cannot be fully reset, especially when it is in the back; therefore it is worse than other dislocations, and causes greater pain, and perhaps death comes.
And the restoration is like this, when it can be done, that you extend your hand to its two hands; and his arms be spread out, and the hands do turn according to the knife around, above and below, and put the joint to its armpits together, or to the root of its palm, until it returns to its place.
And if the dislocation is in front, it returns when he doubles his hand to his hand, and firm of the root of the palm the knife that is dislocated.
And if it does not want to return to its place, administer strong extension; and that two ministers extend the arm, and hold it with both hands so that it does not move during extension; then turn the arm from each side, then when you have enveloped a double long and wide cloth;
And when the mire at the joint joins with its hand, if the oil of any oil to soften the joint, then puts the joint together, until it returns;
And when it is in place, put on a dry plaster with the yolk of an egg, and strain it together, and lean the arm to the neck of the patient, and let it for some days, then untie it.
And if the joint is firm in its place, untie the bandage, and leave it; and if you see that the joint isn't well set, put on the plaster and bandage again, and leave it like this for some days, until it is firmly placed; then untie it.
And if he feels pain after the resetting of the joint, and it moves, bathe it and rub it well, and press until it is soothed; or put on the joint a fleece of fat wool, then leave it for i. day and one night, then take it off, and let him enter into a bath; And when he sweats, rub the joint gently, then put the bandage back on, and then go into the bath; and thus do it two or three times, until it is healed; and if you see that it has not returned, put a piece of moistened wool felt with butter on top, and strain it; it will return to its place.
The dislocation of the hand
The joint of the hand is dislocated, and its return is light, more than other joints. Nonetheless, it must be brought back to its place immediately, as soon as it is dislocated, otherwise the place will become inflamed, or an abscess may come.
And the putting back is that you put the diseased hand on a table, and stretch out the minister's hand, and he puts it equal, so that it puts its palm on the appearance of the joint, and thrusts it until it returns.
However, it is necessary that you look to see if it is well in its place; then put the patient's back of his hand on a table at extension and reduction. And if the dislocation is at the back of the hand, then put the patient's back of his hand on the table, and he puts his hand over the appearance of the joint. If it returns now, it is well.
If this does not happen, then strap with soothing ointments poultices around it, and let him thus without recommencing.
And if he cannot endure it, and you cannot put it back in its place after several days, the joint remains twisted.
And does not harm the patient except that as long as the hand is limp and cannot grasp anything: therefore know that the nerves are cut or the artery; if there is no other means except to constrict with a cautery according to the case, and perhaps it is worth nothing else.
And when the hand is in place, put it on the splint that we have said, then constrict and leave it for five days, then unbind it and leave it so.
And if he cannot move it well, and there is no wound, then moisten it with hot water, and rub it until it is healed.
of the dislocation of the fingers of the hand
At no time are the fingers of the hand dislocated on one side or the other, at no time on the back of the palm or on the belly;
Therefore are the fingers, and push the dislocation into your pouches until it returns, then support the head of the finger, and bend it towards the part where it is dislocated;
and leave it for 2 days, and then put it straight on the 3rd day; and do not tie it, as we have said, and untie it every day, and make it move, and tie it again. And do this often, until it is straitened,
and in the same way, do it if it is dislocated in the palm of the hand, and do as you have done before, until it is healed; and in the same way, when it is dislocated from another place.
of the dislocation of the shoulder blade of the back
When the shoulder blade of the back or neck is dislocated, or there are more than one dislocations, if there is no cure, because death hastens the patient.
And the signs are that the body is unable to move without wanting to, and cannot hold itself, and many times the limbs are softened, either both hips or both arms or one.
And many times the spine moves at four parts; the one which moves in the rear is called "gilbositez":
The cure for this is that you reward if the gilbositez came from childhood; there is no cure or healing at all.
And the one that comes from falling or percussion or similar things, said the old ways of cures with great words, but there is no great profit in them at all;
but I have abridged it according to my intention, and have formed instruments in diverse ways.
I say that in the swelling that comes to the breast before, there is nothing that feels.
And also that which comes straight in two sides, and one can cure only that which properly comes to the back, as I say;
and that the patient be stretched on his face in one even place, and have restraint under him, so he does not move;
then place one splint at the head in earth forming, and one other at the feet, and tie a linen strap under the shoulders of the patient, and one other at the hips, and knees, and ankles;
and the minister knows the limbs, one at the head and the other at the feet, among the two bones.
and be well closed, the bones as we have said, and the minister puts his palms on the spine, forming it, until it returns.
And if it does not return by this cure, then take a plank of three arms long, and lay it under the back, and the patient be on his side, and push the head of the plank under the back, then put the middle of the plank on the spine; and put the minister his feet on the other end of the plank, and press well, until it returns to its place; and if you see it, then do it with the turning pin which turns by hand.
And is that you put two sticks to the head of the patient from one arm and towards the feet two others, and there be between each stick, an opening and a closure, a palm's length of long.
And there be in each stick one hole, where the turner comes through, and the sticks be firmly in the earth so that they do not move; and between two sticks there be one turning stick, by which the turn comes, and there be in two turnings two small sticks of a palm's length, to turn the turner.
And then tie the rope that is among the handles to the turner towards the head, and the other rope towards the feet to the other turner, and each of the ministers turns his turner at all the rope, and the master puts the spine even as we have said.
And when it is equalized, put on a drying plaster with an abundance of oil, and then the bandages, and then the strap of a tablet of three finger lengths, which prevents the place of the rib cage and the part of the spine from moving, then bind it with a band, as we have said, and use the patient of subtle nourishment, until he is healed.
And if any thing comes at the end of health, it is necessary to administer softening and soothing medicines, with the strap that we have said before; and sometimes one administers a piece of wood.
And sometimes the appearance comes in the lower part of the spine of the back, and one thinks that it is a dislocation; and it is the bone that opens, so that one should not have presumption; for by chance it might bring death.
of dislocations of the hip
Know that the joints of the hip and the joints of the shoulder come out only as dislocations, and do not come out like other joints; and the joint of the hip is dislocated according to .iiij. parts: inside and outside, and front and back; and more inside then, and less dislocated in front and back.
And the knowledge of this dislocation inside is that when one joins the sick leg with the healthy one, it is longer, and opens more the knee of the sick than the healthy one, and the sick person cannot double his knee to the fire. And it is the swelling which is below inflamed with an abscess hot, for because the head of the pelvis comes there.
And the sign of one to whom it comes to the outside, is that this accident are contrary to these before.
And the sign of one to whom it comes in front, is that he is well his leg according to accomplishment; nonetheless, do not double the knee without pain, and if one wishes him to go, he cannot before, and retains his urine, and swells the groin, and when he goes, he passes over the heel.
And the sign of one to whom it comes behind, is that he cannot spread his knee, nor double it, and that leg is more twisted than the other, and the groin is softened, and is the hip to the place under the ribs.
The returning of this kind of dislocation is that you reward if the dislocation is old, and it remains according to its disposition, there is no cure; and it does not behoove him to have presumption.
And in those whose dislocation is fresh, and there are .iiij. ways of dislocation, so haste that you return the joint, and the extension inside and outside, and the movement to right and left; perchance it will return, and has no need of other cure.
And if it does not return in this manner, then it befits that you prepare one minister strong, and extend the leg strongly with two hands, or with one linen cloth that is tied above the knee; and another minister extends his hand above in such a manner that he thrusts his hands under his armpits, then tightens a linen cloth above the hip; and another holds the head of the linen cloth;
And extend upwards and downwards all at once, as long as the patient is raised from the ground at once, and remains suspended.
This manner of extension is common to four resemblances, and if the dislocation has returned, as we have said, it is well.
If not, then it is necessary to take care with its resemblance. When the dislocation is at the edge, it is necessary that you support the patient on his healthy hip, then place the linen on the root of the hip, and the part which is below the groin, then extend the linen upwards towards the groin, and towards the force;
then take other ministers his arms, and embrace the large part of the diseased hip, and extend it outwards in shape: it will now return to its place; and this manner of dislocation is lighter than others.
And if you cannot bind it in this manner as we have said, then it is necessary that you tie the two feet of the sick person together with a strong cord above the two heels, and above the two knees, and let the sick leg be extended two fingers more than the other.
Then let it be hung from the top of a pole, and let it be two arms' length above the ground; then command one minister to embrace the head of the hip, and let other ministers hold with the sick person, who form the hip, for the joint now returns easily.
And when the dislocation is at the back, let the sick person lie down, as we have said in the one who has gibbosity, and bind one bandage on the sick leg properly, and on the foot also.
then put 2 stakes, 1 at the head and 1 other at the feet, then put 1 stake between the hips of the patient in the shape of and have plant of cloths wet around, that he does not bleed the patient, then extend each minister towards him, and the one who looks put equal to his hand the dislocation.
If it returns, that is good. If not, put on top 1 table, and press him as we have said in the gilbositeit, and lie the patient on the healthy side.
And when the dislocation is in front, it is fitting to extend the bad leg as far as possible, and according to what I have said; and put the one who looks his pain to be on the bad angle, then press with the other hand, and the extending downwards towards the knee.
And if the dislocation is at the rear, it is not necessary to extend the patient down, nor lift him up on the ground, but it is necessary that he be as if his hip had been dislocated at the rear, as we have said about lying on the two hips. And be upon his face, and the limb extended as we have said before, and one must press upon the joint to the table.
And will be in place when the patient extends his legs, and they will be even; therefore adjust the hips, and put the splint, and the strain of a bandage, so that the hip does not move.
And rest for three days or four, then untie it, and put the splint on top; and if you see that they are even, strain it, as before, and leave it for three days; then untie it, and allow him to walk well, until the limb is strengthened.
of the dislocation of the knee
The knee is dislocated in three ways: that is to say, inside and outside, and behind; and it does not dislocate in front.
And the signs are that you command the patient to bend his leg at his hip, and if he cannot bend it at his hip, know that it is dislocated;
and the restoration of all this is that you make the patient sit upright, and extend his leg if he can, and put your back on his thigh, and put his foot on your feet;
Then take his knee in your palms, and withdraw it between your two hands, then bend the two bones that form the knee; and another minister extends his foot, until the knee returns to its place, and the sign is that he will be able to move his leg to his hip lightly.
And put the plaster on top, and make the leg rest against the hip, and tie them together firmly for three or four days, then untie it; and let the patient not try to walk, until the limb is fortified.
And if the limb is not quite right, administer strong extension, as we have said in the treatment of the hip, until it is healed.
of the dislocation of the heel
The heels are sometimes dislocated, and sometimes fully dislocated, both inside and outside.
And the signs of it are that the ankle is swollen, and tender before the part where it is dislocated:
The setting of it is light, and one must extend it gently with his hands when it is only dislocated.
And when it is dislocated completely, it is necessary that you make the patient sit upright, and hold him by one minister except for the leg, above the ankle;
then treat the foot to yourself with your right hand, and then with the left two times, then push it upwards, and put the foot nicely back up;
and do this two times, as we have said, pushing and pulling the foot; if it returns, that's good; if not, begin the work again, because it will return;
and if it cannot return this way, then make the patient lie on his back on the ground, and put one post firmly in the ground between his hips, and tie drapes around it, so that the patient does not feel cold;
Then hold the ministers' hips, and other ministers extend the foot to their hands or at i. linen, that they may bind above the neck of the foot. Then extend each minister equally, and the straps be placed between the hips of the patient to hold the patient when they are extended.
Then place the mirrors equally at the dislocation in their hands, and other ministers hold the sound leg below, and the dislocation will return steadily.
And when it is in place, then put the plaster and bandages on top, and strain it firmly, and bind the foot to the leg, and guard the nerves which are on the ankle behind, so that the bonds are not too tight.
then leave it for 2 or 3 days, and if the ligaments have softened, then restrain; then unbind on the third day or fourth, and forbid to walk the patient for 4 days; and if he goes before this term, it is not certain that he will not dislocate again.
And if an abscess comes to him, then it is necessary that you soothe it, as we have said elsewhere, until it is healed.
of two
When the hip joints are dislocated, it is fitting to extend them well without force, and this is an easy thing.
And if the dislocation is in any of the joints of the back or foot, it is fitting that you make the patient sit on i.e. a flat surface or on ii.e. a table perfectly straight, and put your foot on what is apart from these joints, then press with your foot firmly, until it returns;
and when it is equalized, and there is nothing apart from it, then put under the sole of the foot a table with ii. joints, then restrain it firmly, and let it remain for iii. days, then untie it; and let him rest, until he is healed.
of wounds and dislocations together
When a wound comes with a dislocation, and one wants to restore it, many times it happens that the patient dies.
If you are not presumptuous in the cure, if you are not wise in the art and have not used it for a long time, and if you are not compassionate and merciful and patient, nor too bold;
and use at the beginning of things soothing applications to a hot abscess, and leave the patient in God's hands, if you do not see hope for health. and when you see hope in it, then reset the limb to its place, so that the abscess heals quickly.
and when the limb is in place, administer soothing things to the abscess hot, and treat the wound as it is fitting, with dried dressings.
and if the dislocation occurs with a fracture, and small bones are broken, set them, and do what we have said in simple illnesses.
and guard yourself from entering the path of fear, according to what I have said, because this will harm you according to your Creator, and for the safety of your arm and body. Amen
