O you, three dear sons, I have completed this book which is the last of the science of medicine along with its completion, and have made an end by its explanations and by its declarations. And it came to me in vision that I complete it with this treatise, which is part of the work of hands, namely "surgery".
And because the work of hands is fortified in our region and is strange to all, so the science is lost and cut off, and nothing remains of it except for small descriptions in books of the ancients that have been moved by the hands. And because of this came the error and the vanity, and intentions are closed and the science is estranged.
Or it seems to me that I will revive it together with the arrangement of this treatise according to the way of exposition and declaration and abbreviation; and I will come together the forms of the instruments of cautery, and of the other instruments of the work with the adjustment of the declaration and preparation of them, as it is necessary.
And for the reason of those that no good masters of hands are found in our time, the art of medicine is prolonged. And it is necessary that he who engages in this [medicine], climb up in the science of anatomy, as Galen says, until he knows the judgment of the members, and their forms and conjunctions and separations of vessels, and have knowledge of the bones and nerves and veins and the number of arteries, and the movement and of the moving and resting veins, and their place of emergence.
And for this, Hippocrates says that with the name it is much, and with the work it is little; and also in the art of the hand.
We tell you in the introduction of this book that whoever is not familiar with the things previously said, should guard himself so that he does not fall into error and harms people; just as I have seen many more of those who meddle in this science and abandon their science and sense of experiment.
For I saw a fool who opened, that is to say, an abscess of scrofula or the neck of a woman, and he cut open the arteries of the neck; for this reason so much blood came out that the woman fell dead in his hands.
And I saw another surgeon who treated a stone of a man's kidney, and the stone was large; so he took it out with a piece of the bladder, and the man died within three days.
And I have already been called for the treatment, and I see the disposition of the patient and the size of the stone, and well if one cut it he would die.
And I see another surgeon who took care of a duke from our land who had a broken leg, and with the break he had a wound; and the surgeon full of ignorance forced the break onto the wound as stars by very tight ligature, and did not leave any ointment on the wound at all, and left it like that; and he commanded him that he not loosen it at all; and he remained so long that the leg was all swollen and the foot, and came to perdition.
I was called to come to him, and I hastened to come to loosen the leg; and when I loosened it it was in peace and did not feel any pain.
But every way the corruption was already confirmed in the member, and it could not heal it; and did not cease the corruption to go through the member as long as the member was entirely lost.
And see i. another wound which broke open an abscess and then inflamed by the wickedness of its lord.
For a chancre, when it is pure of melancholic humor, it does not behoove that one touch it with iron unless in such a place where one can entirely remove what is corrupted.
And for this, dear son, it is necessary that you know the work of hands is divided into two divisions: that is to say, works where there is peril in many dispositions; and I will show in each place of this book where there is fear and peril.
For which reason it is necessary that you guard yourselves, so that foolish people may not speak badly of you.
If you take up your arms in caution, and undertake your patients lightly and firmly, and use the best way so that by the grace of God you come to salvation and be praised; and leave the frightful diseases of grievous health; and remove your arms from those who make you doubt, and have done in yourselves so that you may come from this world to the other of glory.
Galen says in some of his admonitions: "Do not take on ill diseases that you are not called a foolish person."
I have devised this treatise according to 3 chapters.
The first chapter is of fire cauteries and of medicine cauteries, and the chapter orders from the head to the feet; and the forms of the instruments, and the preparations for cauterization, and of all that is necessary in the work.
The second chapter is of cutting and piercing, and of leeches and wounds, and the extraction of arrows, and similar things; and the chapter orders the forms of the instruments.
The third chapter is of restoring dislocations and twists, and similar things; and it orders from the head to the feet, and the forms of the instruments.
Thus as we remember from the work, it is necessary that I say the quality of the help and of the nuisance of each constitution.
I say that the qualities of help and nuisance are the longest speech and most subtle science and secret answers; and these speak more sages, and agree to these; and I am satisfied with their words, because I fear the length.
I say that cautery helps universally to every constitution where it has matter, except for two constitutions: namely, hot constitution without matter, and dry constitution without matter.
In hot and dry constitution combined with matter, some said that cautery is great help; and the others said the contrary: that cautery is not worth for illness that comes from heat and dryness.
For the nature of fire is so hot, and it should not be cured by heat from a hot illness, nor by dryness; and he who says the contrary that cautery helps much in a hot and dry illness that comes in the body of men. For when you compare the body of man and his moisture to the complexion of fire, you find the body cold.
And I agree with this saying. For I have found it at no time by experiment.
And in every way, do not interfere except he who has experienced it, and who knows by long usage the chapter of cauteries, and the diversity of complexions of men, and the dispositions and causes of their diseases, and the occurrences and space of time; of other complexions we have no more fear, even in cold and moist diseases. And all the mirrors assembled and agreed on the cautery.
And know, sons, that cautery assembled fire is of the secrets of cures, and of greater goodness than cautery of burning medicine.
For the fire is simple, and does not come out except to the member which is burned, and does not harm another member if it can be named.
The hot medicines come from one member to another when moving, and bring to the member illnesses of grievous healing; and by chance kill the patient.
The fire because of its height and because of the goodness of its substance does not do this, unless there is superfluity.
And this I have found by experiment and through the length of service and study that I have put into the art, and it was upon the truth of things; and for this I excuse myself from the length of speech, because it does not please me that I keep from you the secret which is contained within fire, and the quality of the work, how it expels illnesses from the body, as the philosopher says when demonstrating; now receive this in your thoughts.
And know, son, that it is agreed upon in what time the cauteries should be made and the incisions are performed.
And I say that cautery is convenient in all times, because the nuisances occurring are subdued with the help of cautery; and also if the cauteries are for necessary pains before and until they cannot await the time when greater malice comes to the limb.
And do not ever think, dear son, as the foolish ones do; for the illness that is cured by cautery has no return; and they say so; but it is not as they believe, because cauteries are only medicine that changes the complexion, and dries the humors that are the cause of the pain, and is better than medicine for the speed of its power, and for the virtue of its work and its authority.
And a thing is possible that the illness comes sometimes according to the complexion of the sick person and the place of the illness and its virtue; and are assembled in him the superfluities by the acquisition of meats and similar things, if it is not cauteries administered in their place where it has few superfluities and moisture, as cauteries of teeth for pain, and similar things, and such pain does not return; but this happens little.
And many people do not understand for what reason cauteries is called the last of medicine, and it is true; but they do not believe that cauteries is worth after medicine, but their understanding is false, and it is cauteries the last of medicine for this reason that when we administer manners of cures in any illness and they are not worth, then we administer our cautery, and it is worth. Therefore, it is well seen that cauteries is the last of medicine, not according to the understanding of foolish people.
The ancients said that cauteries of instruments of gold are better than iron, and they said this because of the quality of gold and the height of its substance; and they said that the burns of the cautery do not make rot, but it is not true because I have tried it, and I have found that it is true in some men; and cauteries of gold are worth more than iron, as they say.
And nevertheless when you heat an instrument of gold, you do not know when it is heated by the color of the gold, and it cools too quickly; and if one heats it too much; as one does in the fire; and thus there is enough impediment.
And for this reason we use cauteries of iron which we have found to be more useful in our work.
Or I have ordered this chapter of the head to the feet, for that way the way is easier to find.
For the olive cautery
This cautery is good for moisture and coldness on the brain, and there are two kinds made because of a disease called "soda," and because of many humors that descend from the head to the eyes, ears, and also for multitude of dreams, tooth pain, throat pain, and also all diseases that come from cold such as paralysis, soda, apoplexy, and similar maladies.
The form of this cautery is that the patient be purged by a dissolving medicine, modifying the head 3 or 4 times, according to what their virtues and age and custom can bear; then make a small incision on the head of the patient.
And then make him sit crossed between your hands, and put his hands on your thighs; after that place the root of your palm on the root of his nose between his two eyes; and where will come your two middle fingers, if it bleeds then cauterize with the cautery called "olivare," for this is its form:
And place it on the spot marked with ink, and make a downward and outward movement of your hand, twisting; then lift your hand gently, and look at the spot if you see the bone one little bit; and if you do not see it, repeat the cautery until you see the bone as I have told you; after take one point of silk, and put inside soft cotton, and place it on the spot, and let him leave it for three days; after put a moist cloth in butter; and let it stay until the burn is gone; after cure the wound with ointment called "tetrafarmaçon," until it is healed.
And they say that ancients, that when the wound remains open longer, it purges more; and for this reason they helped with moving it.
And they say any of these that one must leave the cautery so that part of the bone is burned, and then reset what is burned of the bone, and be cured.
And they say the other that one must leave the cautery so long, and press so hard that one lowers the bone as wide as a whorl that women put in their spindles for those that the humors go out; and it is necessary to leave the wound open long; after that, one should cure and suture.
And these two ways of cauteries do not seem to me to be good at all, except in some men where there is fear; and I think that one should leave them; for the bone is weakened by the continued solutions of nature, as we testify in other members; and even when the bone of the patient is weak by nature, and the first semblance of cautery is more safe and more moved for me, and from this I work in such a way as to achieve salvation.
of old pain of the head
When throughout the whole head comes chronic pain, and lasting long, so must the patient use herbs and pills that are called 'cochie,' and of purging of the head and oils and plasters; and if one makes to him the cautery that we have said before, and it is not worth.
Take ward if the head of the patient is of strong nature, and that it be not too cold; therefore cauterize him beneath that cautery a pock as we have said above.
After make cautery upon each horn of the head unto the bone, as we have said before, and make one cautery where it is called 'vasselz'; and there is one there in which on puts ventouses; and align your hand so that you do not see up to the bone: the patient feels much more great pain in this cautery than the others, and I will speak of it later; and it behoves that the cauteries of the horns be more subtle than those with which one cauterizes the middle part of the head, and this is the form:
of the cautery of the head When in one part of the head comes sudden pain, and it extends to the eye, and the shoulder is purged by medicines boiling, and we have done the other cures that I said in the division of illnesses, and all this does not help: then I make cauteries according to .ij. manners, that is to say of medicine sharp and of fire.
The cautery of sharp medicine is that you take a slice of garlic, and remove the husk and cut it 1 pock as 2 fingers wide, and then put the head where the pain holds in such manner that you can place the slice of garlic under the skin; and when it will be placed so, tie it and restrain it well and leave it thus for 12 hours; and then untie it and treat fiercely the slice of garlic, and leave the wound thus 2 days or 3; then put on cotton plunged in butter as long as it covers it.
After the ointment cure until it is healed; and if you see so do any of these burning medicines that I have written or do in the tenth treatise of burning medicines.
The iron cautery is as follows in this manner. Heat the cautery according to its shape.
And it is called "closed" because the head is made in the shape of a clo or a bell with one pock of curvature, and in the middle there is a small appearance; and place it on the painful spot, and hold your hand and stir the fire gently for a little while, until half of the thickness of the heart be burned; and lift your hand that the artery does not burn, which is outside, and flows abundance of blood.
After that, put cotton in awe of seil, and place it on the spot for three days; then put cotton moistened with butter, and then cure the wound with ointment until it is healed; and if you want to cauterize this migraine with the cautery called "cultellare", at its entire point, and keep yourself from covering the artery in this migraine which is not yet old.
of migraine
When you treat migraine as we have said before in divisions of diseases, and it does not benefit, and you see that the cauteries before said of medicine and of iron do not suit him, then it is necessary that you heat the cautery which is called “cultellare” until it is white; and reign so on the place where it hurts a line of half two of long, and remove your hand once, and restrain that you do not touch the artery and that you do not come until the bone; and guard the mandible that it does not move when one sets it, and the nerve does not feel but the numbness and that spasm does not come to the patient, and guard against spillage of blood from the artery when it is cut, or cutting has great fear and even more so to him who does not know about it, and who is not a student and experienced; and leave the work in half way; but I will tell you how one restrains blood when the artery is cut, and I will show you where it appears in this book.
And if you see that this cautery does not suit the disease, and the patient is suffering, cauterize the middle of the head as we have said, and cure the wound until it is healed; and if you see, administer the cautery that we have said or chapter of the extraction of the artery, with the cautery which has .ij. blades; and this cautery is better than that one and more helpful.
of the pain of ears from cold
When in the ear comes pain from cold, and one has opened it with medicines solutives and other cures that we have said in the division, and the pains do not move, then use this cautery which is called "poin", for this is the form:
After puncturing all around the sick ear, or at the two places where the pain holds in both, and you have distanced a bit above the root of the ear once you have marked the place to burn; and make ten poins around each ear; after cure the place until it is healed.
of the torture of the mouth
Burns that must be cured by cautery are not except for those that move from phlegm, as we have said in the divisions of illness; and do not make a cautery on the resemblances that come from dryness and nerve sprain.
When you cure this semblance of burn that moves from phlegm of the eyes and discharges of the head and gargles, and it is not worth, then it is necessary that you cauterize the patient with three cauteries: one at the root of the ear, and the other a point of fire on the temple, and the third in the adjustment of the two lips; and put the cautery in the part that opens healthy, and let him make cautery around the head of the ear above a point below the horn of the head, and another on the temple as long as a finger's width; and leave the cautery so long that half of the heart is burned; and this is the form of the cautery:
And it is the semblance of the curette that we have put in front, but it is a little more subtle and it is necessary that the knife be a little bigger; after curing its place as I have said before, until it is healthy.
When apoplexy is old and you treat it as we have said, and it does not benefit, and the patient does not have fever, then I make .iiij. cauteries: .ij. on the .ij. horns of the head, and .i. in the middle of the head, and .i. where it is called «vessels» as we have said before, and the last cautery on the mouth of the stomach; and be cured as we have said before.
of lethargy
For this illness it is necessary to give the patient large herbs and pills that stimulate the brain; afterwards, raise the head of the patient all up, and place on the nape of the neck the ointment of mustard which is written about or treated in the treatise on plasters; and this is the manner of the cautery: if I make it as I have said.
If he is healthy like this, it is good; and if he is not, to him make .iii. cautery of the  emission of his head down to the neck, and there be distance between each cautery .i. two of gross; and cure it like the others, and if you see it join, and the patient suffers, to him make .i. cautery in the middle; and if need is, .ii. other ones upon the .ij. horns, and cure it until it be healthy; and let the cauteries that are called «olivare», as I have said before.
of the cold of the head It is necessary that the head be purified of herbs and of what we have said before; after wash the head of the patient, then make cautery in the middle of the head and on each horn, and one behind and .iij. on the spine of the neck; and if you need more, and the body is moist and the patient suffers, and the illness is far, to him make .iiij. cauteries on the spine of the back; and leave it until the most of the heart be burned, and lift your hand; after cure it until it be healthy, and let the cauteries that are called «olivare» as we have said before.
of epilepsy
The epileptics should not use fire cautery except for those who are phlegmatic, and it is necessary first to modify the brain with herbs and other treatments that we have said in the division when the patient is great and suffering from painful medicine.
And if it is a child who cannot endure it, make gargarisms and mastication modifying the brain often with cooked meats; after having tied up their head in the middle, and there I place 1 cautery according to what we have said before, and 1 cautery on the vessel, and on each horn; and if the patient is weak and suffering, I make cauteries as I have said to the one who has paralysis and softening of the body, on the spine of the back and neck, and may the cauteries be olive-shaped according to the manner that I have said.
If the patient is a child, make 1 subtle cautery according to this manner:
When due to melancholy are the superfluities or the humors corrupted and phlegm thick, then the cauterize of such cauteries as we have said to him who has paralysis.
And if by the cause of melancholy are the superfluities declining to melancholy, and the body of the sick is moist, then give him something to drink by which the brain may be purified, according to what it is before in the division.
After re-dress the head of the sick person; after make 1 cake of linen well made, as well as 1 circle, so put it in between the head; and the sick person sits crossed, and be held well on all sides; after present the liniment, and is worth mixed with the butter of goat ancient; and the heat at a fire moderately, so that the two should be able to endure it; after empty the circle from within the head, and let it cool; and do this to the sick person every week once with other good governance, as long as he is healthy.
Or if you see yourself cauterizing it by making many points throughout the cautery. This manner of cautery moistens the brain increasingly; and then puts on soft cotton in butter and gelatine grease.
from the awing of the eyes When awe first comes to the eyes by the signs that I have said in the division, then begin and give the patient something purifying for the head, and ward off all moisture, and make him sweat or bathe many times fasting.
After that command him to raise his head back, and make cauteries in the middle of the head, and make two cauteries on the two temples if the descent of the awe is to both eyes together, or one if the descent is to one; and cut all the veins and arteries that are below the heart with a long cautery according to the width of the temple; and ward off the bleeding, and if you see too much blood issuing, staunch it as best you can.
And I will teach you in the extraction of arteries and to the incision the caution how you will stop it; and at times one does cautery or hot iron below the two bones behind.
Of the course of tears
When the tears of the eyes are old and accustomed and are on the veins, or near the arteries that are in the appearance of the head outside; and one sees that it is cold phlegmatic superfluities, then I make the cautery as I said at the beginning of the awe descending to the eyes: one cautery under the head, and two cauteries on the two temples, and two cauteries or hot iron below the two bones; and if there is need for more, one cauterizes it sagely above the eyebrow with a little cautery each.
Of the course of tears from within the eyes
When you treat him according to what we have said in the division, and it does not benefit, then give the patient three nights of broth; after the king (the head), and make the cautery or middle of the olive cautery; and make two cauteries of the cautery called "clavilis" on the two sides, one a little below the temples; and guard the artery so that you do not cover it. And this is the form of the cautery called "clavilis":
When the paper of the eye is softened by disease and moisture, then cauterize with this cautery called "olivar". This is its form:
And if you see so make two cauteries on the two eyebrows as long as the eyebrows are; and do not let go of the hand except while the third part of the paper is burnt, according to the manner that I have said.
And the hair that pricks the eye It happens sometimes that the hairs of the eyes are converted to the eyelid, and prick the eye, and one makes cauteries according to two manners: namely, of fire, or of burning medicine.
For the fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
When they are born and are equal, then place the patient in your care; after, draw on the paper of the eyes a figure that is as if it were the leaf of myrtle, and let its commencement be below the hairs; then put cotton moistened in egg white and musk of Persian on the eye, then heat the cautery which is the shape:
After cauterize on the figure that you have signed little and little many times, so that the hairs be burned in the place; and the signs of the health of the work is that you see the paper retracted, and the hairs raised to the height of the eye; then lift your hand, and leave it thus for 3 days, then put cotton moistened in butter as long as the burning is removed; after the cure of ointment until it is healed.
And if after this the hairs come, and the paper is softened then begin again the cautery on that same place, as you did first; and if the hairs are stiff, then cauterize until the paper is raised to its natural place, and be equal, and do not prick the hairs the eye.
The cauteries of fiery medicine is that you command the patient to let the hairs grow long and even, then make from parchment the shape of the myrtle leaf; then take of French soap and live coals, of each one .3., and grind together well; and do it quickly, so that it does not cool, then spread upon the form that you have made like the myrtle leaf, and put under the eyes; and if the patient holds in 1 eye only, so must one work on 1, and if in both as well; and put under the eye cotton moistened in egg white; and the head of the patient be in your good keeping and put your hand showing upon the medicine, and press 1 peck and the loaf every time that the patient feels the biting of the medicine, for it feels biting as much as fire. When you have done this lengthily, so remove the medicine with your hand. And when the biting will have passed, so raise the place of awe, and reward if you see the parchment raised as if it had been raised by constraint of fire or by incision; and if it is thus, then it is well. If this is not so, so put back once more of the medicine upon the place where the medicine has not worked, until your workings are equal, and your eyes set to point; then put under cotton moistened in butter as long as the burned kerats are dry, after cure the place of unguent that is called "diaphanis" and another, until it be sound.
And if it is necessary that you guard yourself well in your work so that it does not fall from the medicine into the eyes.  And if the paper becomes moist afterwards, and the hair pricks in the eye, then begin the medicine again on that part which is softened by the paper properly, as you have done before; after the cure as long as it is healthy; and this is the form of the leaf of myrtle:
And know that the eyes of men are diverse in size and smallness, and according to these be your constraints; and let it not be returned the right way to him whose study is this art.
of the cure of fistula by cautery
When you treat a fistula as we have said in the divisions of diseases, and your treatments are not helpful, then it is necessary that you make a cautery on him according to this manner.
Instruct the patient to put his head on your hand; and hold the head between your hands in such a way that it does not move, nor does he move his head; after put cotton moistened in egg white or in juice of pearlescent on the eye; after heat the cautery which is like: and it is shaped to the head as the shape of a goose feather, together the way the cautery should be; if you see, so it is pointed from one end to the other, and if you see, so it is also like a tent; but all the same, this which is shaped is good for your work.
After press the fistula if it is open, and treat the rottenness, and dry it; and if it is closed, so work on it, and treat outwards the bowe; after put on the hot cautery form, and hold your hand to the cautery at the part of the nose above the eye, that your hands do not make folly; and put the cautery in the grease of the eye, and the corruption.
If you come to the beginning of the cautery up to the bone, it would be good. If not, restart the cautery once more, and another if you need it, and leave it for three days; after that put on moist cotton in butter, and treat with a drying ointment until it is healed, and if forty days pass and it is not healed, put on a medicine of corrosive vinegar until the bone is uncovered; and treat according to what comes in your chapter.
And there is a way of cauterizing a fistula that none of the ancients said. Attend to the fistula, and make it open; after that put in the opening one small cloth made from this form: and it is made to the quantity of one-third of a plum; and hold your hand or cloth firmly, and do not let the patient move at all, so that the melted lead does not flow into their eye; and it is necessary to put on the patient's eye moist cotton in butter or honey: the lead will close the opening of the fistula, and heal miraculously.
And if the fistula is healed by the cautery that we have said, it is good. If not, then it is necessary to administer pertus to the nostril, and bring the fistula back to the body of the nostril according to what is proper in its own place.
cracks in lips Many times there happen cracks in the lips that are called "hairs," and even on the lips of children.
When you cure these cracks of what we have said in divisions, and the cure does not benefit, then apply i. small surgical cautery according to this form:
And he places it carefully into those crevices until it comes to the point; after curing the place with cerote until it is healed.
of the abscess of the throat
When an abscess comes in the root of the throat or in the uvula, or palate, or at the roots of the teeth, after it has rotted and swelled and becomes a fistula; and you cure it as we have said in divisions, and it does not benefit: therefore, it is necessary that you have one cautery according to the quantity of the fistula; after the boil or pierce of the fistula, and hold your hand until the iron brand comes to the point of it, and where the last place; and do this once or two times, after the cure of what we have said in cures, until it is healed; and if it is cured thus, it is good; and if this is not so, then it is necessary to uncover the place and remove the corrupted bone, according to what you will find in its chapter.
of the movement of teeth
When the gums are softened by moisture and the teeth move, and you treat them with medicines and it is not worthwhile, then put the head of the sick person in your health; afterwards heat the cautery whose form will come here after in such a manner that you put a chain on the tooth; and put inside the hot cautery as much as possible, and hold so long as the sick person feels the heat coming to the root of the tooth; afterward release your hand and re-start the cautery according to your will; afterwards fill the mouth of the sick person with salt water, and let it remain for an hour and rinse thoroughly.
And in such a manner the tooth which was moving is thus confirmed, and the softened gum restrained, and the moisture corrupting dries up.
of the pain of the teeth
When toothache comes from cold, or there is cold or dampness, and the cures of medicine are not worth it, then there is need of cautery according to .ij. manners: and cautery of butter and cautery of fire.
Cautery of butter is such that you take butter of wax, and the end in a spoon of iron or lead; after take cotton and wrap it on the tip of a tent, and moisten it in melted butter, and put it on the aching tooth gently and hold it until it is cooled; and thus do often as long as its virtue comes to the root of the tooth, and if you see that wool and cotton are moistened in cold butter, and put it on the aching tooth, and put on .i. hot iron until the fire comes to the top of the tooth.
The cautery altogether fire is such that you take a rod of iron or lead, and it be thick so that the fire does not come to the mouth of the patient; after heat the cautery, for which its form will come hereafter, and put it on the tooth and hold your hand as long as the cautery is cooled; do this often, because the pain will be removed that same day or the next. And it behoves the patient to fill his mouth with good butter in the haste of this cautery, and then raise the root; and this is the form of the cautery:
When the scrophules are of phlegm and cold moisture, and are not obedient to digestion by medicines, then cauterize with the cautery whose form comes after; and have it have 2 openings for the fumes to issue from one side of the cautery to the other; and place the hot cautery on the abscess once, or twice if necessary, until it comes to the bottom of the abscess; and if the abscess is small, put the cautery according to the quantity of the abscess, and leave it so for 3 days; and put over cotton moistened in butter as long as the burn is removed; after cure the place with ointments and bandages until it is healed.
When the humors prevail over the channels of the throat, and also when this comes from a cold constitution, then it is necessary that the patient be first emptied by solutive medicines; after that make cauterization at the root of the throat, and take care that you do not come near the throat, and do not burn more than one point. After that make one other cautery at the joint of the neck to the head of the spine, and let it be the cautery called “clavile” which we have the form of before; and cure the place as we have said before until it is healed.
of the boil When all and disease of the pore are cold moisture, and the patient has neither fever nor drought, and the illness is ancient, if you make two cautery on the forcele in their veins; and one other cautery between the two nipples; and let the cautery that is called 'clavile' according to the form which is before said.
And if you see, make cautery piercing to all the cautery that is called 'poins' for whose form is before in the illness of the ears; and let the poins up to thirty, or wherever it reaches. After curing the place according to what is said before, and let the cauteries be at three rains according to this form:
And for those are the cauteries lighter, because you make them three in a copy.
of the dislocation of the shoulder When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first reset the dislocation. Afterwards support the patient on his back and on his ribs; after, lift the heart which is inside the small space with your left hand; and if the joint is dislocated inside, then sharpen the cautery which has two points as it is shown here:
and cauterize the heart as much as it penetrates to the ribs, and bring the figure of the cautery together with four cauteries; and for this reason is made cautery with the cautery which has three points, so that the figure of cauterization are six cauteries; and they are nerves according to the subtlety of a tent and it is the form of the cautery which has three points:
And sometimes is adjusted on this nerve for which there are eight cauteries.
After place on the cautery parsley bruised with seal; after make rest the patient, and do not move his limbs by long time until he is well fortified.
And if it is dislocated upwards, which thing happens rarely, then make cautery on the thick of the clavicle cautery, or many cauteries in pricking. For the jointure is closed, and is removed the moisture and is healed the patient.
of cautery of pleuresin
The ancients said that one must make on the pleuresin cauteries of roots of aristologe, and in such manner: take a root of aristologe long, the greatest that you will be able to find, and be dry, and also thick and as long as your fingers; and the moisten it in oil, and the press it at the fire, and cauterize one cautery between the shoulder blade and the neck, and two small cauteries a point downward in the part which is under the beard; and two cauteries between the fifth rib and the sixth, declining back a point; and one cautery in the hip, and another on the stomach, and one between the two shoulders, and two as two ribs near the cautery which is between the two shoulders; and do not press your hand too much, but make it openly as if smelling.
And the ancients said that no man uses cautery of fire resembling one razor, and it is heated and put between the ribs, as long as it comes to this abscess; and jump out the pain, as we have said in the abscess of the liver. But in this work there is fear or the patient dies now, or a fistula comes that cannot be healed.
of the mouse
When you treat the illness of the mouse of those we have said in the divisions of the treatments, and it does not benefit, then there are three ways of cautery that are all good.
Of which one manner is this that you make three or four cauteries, aligned according to the length of the mouse, according to the figure of the cautery of the liver that we have said before; and do not hasten your hand to the entire cautery, and let the patient be lying on his back;
And another manner of cautery is this that you heat the cautery which has two nubs, as we have shown it in the dislocation of the shoulder; and lift the heart which is toward the mouse, or the sides of the patient come from the left, and let the elevation with which you lift the heart be according to the heart, according to the length of the body, and the cauteries be according to the width of the body.
After he sets the two needles aflame until the kernels are pierced on the other side, and then withdraws the cautery, and thus there will be four. And if you see it, then cauterize with the entire cautery to three needles. After the cure when it has gotten rotten for a long time, and this is worth more than the other cures previously mentioned.
Of dropsy
Cauterization is not good for dropsy, except for the manner called "asclytes." When you cure it according to the manners that we have said in divisions, and your cure does not benefit, then it behooves you to make four cauteries around the abdomen, and one on the stomach, and one on the liver, and one on the spleen, and two behind the back on the spine, and one where the hip is; and let the cauteries be well near the edge of the heart.
After leave the cautery open for to get rot long time, and not leave any care of the patient after the cautery; and healing would hasten, and will be together the .ij. intentions with the help of God.
The form of the cautery for the belly is the anvil that we have before shows; and for the back is olive, according to what it is set forth above.
of the swelling of the feet When the feet are swollen in him who is hydrophic, and are full of yellow water, it behooves you to cauterize on the back of the foot between the little finger and the ring finger; and lift your hand with the cautery without turning. And do not enter too deep, thus will flow out the yellow water, and let the cautery be according to this form:
After make on .ij. legs .ij. cauteries in each leg at the point of the cutellaire; and let the cauteries be long, one below the knee in front and the other behind, in the middle of the leg; and leave the cauteries to grow long without curing, that they may be in it; after the cure of the other cures that we have said.
of the house
When solution of belly comes from cold and moisture, so that the retentive and digestive virtues that are in the stomach and intestines are weakened, and cannot be cured by means of cures; and you see the patient suffering greatly and with great strength, then make one large cautery on the stomach according to what has been said before about the cautery of the stomach, at the circulating cautery; and four cauteries around the navel subtle to each cautery clavile subtle, and two cauteries on the loins.
And if you see the moistors abundant and the patient suffering, make a cautery on the groin, and one cautery on each buttock, and two small cauteries on the stomach near the large one, for the cure is profitable when there is good help.
Of the treatment of hemorrhoids
When the hemorrhoids are either at the base, or one or more, and are old and are large humors cold and moist corrupted, and they are treated as we have said in divisions, and it does not profit much, then make cauteries: three on the spine of the back, this which is all outside below the alar bone, point to point in a triangle, and one cautery below the buttock. Two fingers;
and if you think that his stomach is cooled, and the meat does not cook, and one sees the face swell, then one puts a large cautery on the stomach, as it has been said before, and another on the liver, and another on the mice to all the cautery clavicle; and leave the cautery open long time. After cure the place as long as it is healed.
of the fleshiness which is called "thelul"
When you cut thelul, sharpen the cautery which seems like a razor, and then put it all ablaze on that thelul cut; and leave it as long as your hand allows so the cauteries reach the birth of the vein, so that the blood stops; do this once or twice, and if there is much thelul, cauterize each one as we have said; after the cure of ointments beneficial until they are healed; and if you cauterize with a large cautery on alchatim, it will have more help.
of poorly treated wound
When the patient cannot suffer cutting or opening, which we shall recount in its place, there comes such a sickness that can be cured only by cautery.
When a fistula comes to any, and is filled and festering with corruption and dampness, then you must probe it with a fine probe, and make sure you know how deep the probe goes. Afterward, heat the cautery which seems like .i. razor, and insert it into the fistula according to the quantity that the probe went in, and reheat the cautery as many times as the corrupted flesh is burned away, once, or .ij., or .iij., according to the quantity of its need; and guard against burning the nerves which are within, and the large veins. If the fistula goes to the body of the bladder and intestine, then guard those places, and do not make incisions beyond the flesh, and think that it is not pierced; after the cure of the place until it is healed, and if the place is sound, and the materials are removed for a long time, then know that the place is entirely healed; and if the materials are not removed, know that the place is bad, and the bone at the root is corrupted; and thus as one of these which we will say in its place.
of the disease of the kidneys When pain from cold comes as rains, and of great windiness, and does not take to a woman, then it is necessary that you make a cautery on the reins on one side and the other with the cautery clavicle that we have said before; and if we cauterize it in the middle, there will be three cauteries in a line, and they will do more great aid.
of the bladder When the bladder is soft and weak from cold and moisture, so that the patient retains urine, then I make a cautery in the outer part above the bladder, where the hairs of the groin begin, one on the right and one on the left, and each cautery as long as our finger; and I make one cautery outside the back, or two if you need it; and let the cauteries be clavicle according to the form said before.
of the marshes When the marsh is cold and moist, and does not allow for them to conceive, and the flowers are corrupted and their ends late; and when they come, there is great pain: therefore it behooves one to make .iij. cauteries around the groin, as we have said of the cautery of the bladder, and .ij. cauteries on the back; and let the cauteries be sharp, as we have said.
of the hip
When the viscous moistures descend to the bone of the hip, and for this cause it moves from its place, and the sign is that the thigh is longer than the other when measured together; and it is found in the region of the lower back, then it behooves you to cauterize the patient on the bone of the hip with .i. cautery seeming like a circle, and make the mark before the place around the hip as it turns, so that the hip is inside the circle; and let the cautery be such as the one used to cauterize the stomach.
And if this cautery is not present to you, make .iii. cauteries of the olive large, and let the cauteries be as deep as all the others; and cure until it is healed.
of the pain of the hip When pain comes in the hip joint, and it is from cold and moisture, and the patient is cured of these things that we have said in the division and the cure does not work, and the illness is old: then you must purge the patient of thick humors with fetid pills, or other good-seeming pills.
After that, make a cautery; and the manner of the cautery is in two ways: namely, together with burning medicines, and fire cautery. Fire cautery is in many ways, of which one is such: that you cauterize on the hip joint three triangular cauteries according to this form, and make them deep and large, and let there be between each cautery a space the size of a finger, and let the cauteries be olive wood; sometimes it is made cautery in the middle on top of the hip, for which reason there are four according to this form:
And if you see, then cauterize with the cautery of the circle that we have said before in the dislocation of the hip; but do in such a manner that the circles contain the whole hip, and all the spaces of the heart be burned.
And this is the manner in which it is done in sciatica, when the pain holds in the hip, and does not reach to the thigh nor to the leg. And if it comes to the thigh and the leg, then make two cauteries where the patient says that the pain holds him, and one cautery above the ankle four fingers, on the left side a finger; and let the cauteries be cutting, and let the thickness of the heart be burned; and if the patient feels that the pain extends to two fingers of the foot or near it, then cauterize where he feels the pain three fingers or four with the cautery which is called "poins".
And if it is necessary, then do more; and if he knows that the pain is below the knee towards the thigh, then make a cautery with the cutting or circular cautery, and take good care in all your cauteries that you do not leave the cautery there so much that you burn the nerves and the large arteries, and that you do no greater nuisance and contraction to the patient.
And I myself have seen many who have cauterized on the ankle of the foot, and let them until the leg was all swollen, and the foot also, and it was pierced and corrupted all the foot. After a belly solution of which he died.
And if the pain is in 2 parts together, make cautery in one and the other, according to this manner. // And the sage said in the cautery of the hip, for this is the manner, make 1 such iron and be at the chief also as large as a thimble of finger, or a little less, and be by entrechetres and be from one entrechetres to the other with space the quantity of a fist knuckle; and be the entrechetres across two parts, and be also like nuts, and there is 1 handle of iron well made; and this is the form:
And be heated until it is all red and feel it hot, and then put it on the bone of the hip diseased, and be turned on his healthy side; and cauterize once 1 cautery reont and leave it 3 days; and then make a plaster of butter, and leave the wound uncovered long times; after the cure of ointment until it is healed.
Albucasim says that we should use little of this cautery because of the fear of its harm, and rarely do we see those who use it; and nonetheless, these are good cauteries, which can endure it, and where it is needed.
of the pain of the back
When pain comes to the back, whether from falling or percussion or from too great an evacuation, or from similar appearances of cold matter spread, none of these appearances are worth cauteries, except for that which comes from the infusion of cold matter.
It is necessary after this that the patient be cleared of fetid pills or other similar things, that one makes on his back, where the pain holds, three lines marked with a stylus, and in each line five cauteries or more according to the virtue and quantity that the patient can endure; and let the cautery be made according to the cautery which is called "poins"; and if you see it, make three or four cauteries at the clavivial cautery medium according to this form:
Many times this illness comes to little children, and the signs of its beginning are that they have a tight belly when they lie down, and fear; and you find in the last spine of the back and in us the appearance that comes on the other spines.
When you see this and you want to cure it, burn it with the cautery of this according to this form.
So that the cautery scorches each part of the spine equally. And if you see it, burn around the spine with the pointed cautery 2 or 3 lines, and let the points be near each other. After curing the place until it is healed according to what we have said, and beware that you do not bring the cautery in proximity to a nerve bundle.
Of the pain of joints
When pain of joints comes from humors that are spread to each member of the body, and when pain comes in the feet, which the wise call “gout” properly, and when it is from a cold cause and cures with medicines cannot cure it, then it is cured by cauteries in this manner: make the cautery around the joint of the foot, and let the cautery be olive-shaped according to this form:
And if there is need that you prick on the face of the foot, then make the cautery to the whole cautery which one calls “point.” And if the pains come as far as the knees and other joints, and this happens many times, then make cauteries on each knee three or four cauteries from each part, all olive-shaped; and if you have need of more, then make more, but do not hold your hand there longer than when the tip of the heart is burnt.
And if the pains descend to the knee and back, then administer the cautery that we have said in our chapter. And if the pains are in the hands, then make points around the bone two lines; and if there remains no pain in the arms, then make points on each joint and on the hair of the hand; and if the pains come to the elbows or shoulders, then cauterize each part, and do good governance to the sick person and give him medicine. For if you do good governance for him and purge phlegm, he will be healed with the help of God.
of the rupture of the sinew
When a rupture comes in the groin and the testicles descend toward the hips, it is newly done, so when you see it being cured, that he does not move this day; and that he use things which support his belly so that the cord descends from its belly; after making him sit on his back between your hands, and commanding him to hold his arm as long as the testicles are repaired, and move them to your knees, and place a cautery below the rupture upon the bone of the hip, and all a sign that is similar to half a circle above the body; then heat the cautery
until it is white and he feels the heat. Then move the testicles to their place; and the ministers hold his hand so that they do not return back; and work well the thighs of the patient, and put below him one cushion and one bandage on the thighs, and one other on the hip which keeps his hands; then put the cautery on the sign with all your hand, and hold it straight and hold it until you reach the bone, and if you do not reach it the first time, do it again another time until you arrive at the bone; and guard carefully that the testicle does not fall when you do the cautery; that you do not burn it; and that by this the patient does not die, or other misfortune.
And know that when you do not come close to the bone with the cautery, your work is worth nothing. And it is necessary that the cauteries of children be subtle according to the measure of their bones, and of large people also large according to their measure; after three days cure the wound with butter until the heat is gone; after the cure of other ointments until it is healed, and let the patient lie for forty days on his back until the wound is well soldered; and it is necessary that his dressings be left long, so that the boils do not come out when he wants to go into rooms.
And after forty days, when he wants to get up, if he is given a good support, and wear it for another forty days; and have good rest, that he does not work too much and beware of excessive drinking and eating, and of too much braising; and when he follows this teaching he will be healed entirely. And I will say here after the treatment of tailoring in his chapter. of the rupture of the belly
When ruptures come in other bellies and are known, and you see that they do not grow more, then you make one cautery of the cautery reont according to its quantity, and it is burned at one-third of the heart; after the cure according to what we have said; and none of the ancients have said that one should cauterize with the cautery at three angles according to this form:
But first sign the place of the rupture and make a line through the width above the rupture, and another below, and hold your hand in between all the cautery clamp. But the first cauteries are lighter and more mobile.
Of ancient pain in any limb When pain comes in any limb, either from a fall or from hitting, and this pain lasts for a long time, and the cure of medicine doesn't work, then it is necessary that it be cauterized with the cautery which is called "poins", and let the cauteries be according to the length of the limb and its smallness and its weakness and its virtue and its location of twists and of its pain. If it is healed by the first cautery, it's good; if it isn't, begin another cautery on top of that one, for such is the custom that it must move to the limb that it is near, so it is necessary that you make the cauteries as long as the patient is not healed.
of  dislocation
Dislocations are helped at times by cautery with great help, and also the disease that comes from the putrefaction of phlegm and melancholy. When you see it being cauterized, take care if the illness is at the beginning, and if it is cured according to what we have said in the division, and does not worsen or remain, and you doubt that the corruption will spread throughout the patient, then make five cauteries on the head: one at the top of the head, and another towards the forehead at the end of the eyebrows; and two on the two horns, and one behind on the back.  And leave your hand so that the cauteries reach up to the bone, and as long as the scabs come out so that the vapors of the thick humors can escape from them; and cauterize the mice according to what is before.
And if the meshery is spread everywhere; and it shows clearly, it behoves you to cauterize it with these cauteries that we have said or chief, and 1 cautery on top of its veins, and 2 cauteries on the spine of the neck, and 6 cauteries on the spine of the back, and 1 great one on the hip and 1 other below, and 2 on the 2 shoulders; and 2 on the knees, and 2 on the tendons of the chest, and 1 on each joint of the hands and feet, and on the hollows of the hands; and guard the nerves that are on top of the last calf, so that you do not burn them; and once it is done cauterize on the bone of the armpit, and 1 other on the bone of the stomach, and 1 other on the liver.
And know that when more cauteries are made, the more it does help, and it brings him profit; and know that the patient feels no pain from the cautery as the healthy ones feel it, because the body is already all corrupt. And it behoves that the cauteries be great and small according to the limbs and joints, according to what you will find in manners of irons. After cure the place with flour of rice with honey and other cures until it is healed.
of swelling
When swelling comes in any limb and is cured by medicines and oils and plasters, and it is not healed, then I make cauteries on the limb according to the size and smallness of the limb; and let the cautery be a point entering into the thickness of the flesh; then cure with ointments until it is healed. And sometimes one makes cautery and on the hand and on the foot and on the back, at the exit of the nerve that moves the limb, and thus is removed the swelling; and nonetheless let no one intervene unless he is knowledgeable of the members and of the exits of the nerves moving the body.
of albaras
When the sickness called 'albaras' is enfeebling, and the tools of medicine are of no use, then cauterize with a cautery a point in full depth, according to the quantity of the thickness of the flesh, until the discoloration is removed, and its color has changed; then cure with flour of rice and lentils with rose oil and plantain leaves, and blood of colon and blood of alder, each one part; and mix all together, and bind it with a cloth, and apply it to the spot until it is healed.
The cure of a sore by fire cautery
When a sore comes at the beginning, and you see it arrested, if you cauterize it with a cautery that seems .i. circle, all around the circumference of the sore. And nonetheless the wise say that one should make cautery also in the middle of the sore; and nonetheless this does not seem to me good, because I fear that it will be ulcerated and corrupted, and I have never wanted it to happen any time; and more righteous thing is that it be cauterized around, with the cautery which is called "circle," as we have said in a multitude of cauteries.
of the swelling which cannot die
When someone has a disease which is called "adubelati," and it takes time to die, or because of the superfluity that it produces, or because of the water of the sick person when he is decrepit (that is to say too old) and he has little blood, or because of the tension; and you see it hasten to die: then cauterize it around with many small cauteries, piercing it; after leave it as it is. For it will hasten to die.
And if you see it burn with the whole cautery, so heat the cautery of which this is the form:
And place your hand in the middle of this malady called "adubelati" until the cautery has pierced the kernel, and let the cautery be such that the patient feels it burning in such a manner that the course of the rot is alleviated. After the cure as long as it is perfectly healed.
The cure of fire by iron
Another kind of malady there is which is called "corrodens", and it is nothing else than a gangrene of a limb, for it devours the limbs as fire devours dry branches. If you see this malady in a place that can suffer cautery with fire, then sharpen the cauteries small and large, according to what is fitting for the place where the malady is; after cauterize all sides as long as you reach all the corruption, and nothing of it remains, that all which is corrupted be removed. And then leave it for three days, and put on the cauterized places softened broths with oil as long as the scabs of fire are removed, and all the corruption. After the cure with ointments generating flesh. And if you see after three days that healthy flesh does not arise, it is good; and if it is not so, then begin again the cautery on what remains of the corrupted places. And this gangrene has sometimes been cured by medicine aquile in place of fire cautery; but nevertheless fire cautery is of greater help, and I have already said the cure of aquile medicine in the division: take it when you need it.
Of the thorns that come to the feet
Many times it happens that at the feet by fire a sickness arises which is called "clos" according to our understanding, and it is a big thing that blunts the foot. And the cautery of this sickness is in .ij. ways. That is to say cautery of fire, and cautery of hot water. Cautery of fire is that you heat .i. cautery like a feather as well as it is a vulture's plume, and let it be made of good iron to the measure that it may hold the nail on all sides, and that it have subtle margins; after this put it all hot on the nail, and turn your hand all around the nail until it comes to the base of the nail; and let it lie thus for .iij. days as long as it begins to fester; then make a poultice of wild mallows crushed with seil, and leave the poultice on all night, and the nail will fall off and be uprooted from its roots. Then cure the place with ointment rubbing grease until it is healed.
And if they are converted by fire the body, and many times happen in hands and feet, then it is necessary that you bring them cautery of hot water; and is in this manner: take an iron or steel rod, or a vulture's feather, and put it on the nail and the lump, that is to say thorn, wart; and put the rod so that it encircles all around, then pour a pock of hot water onto it, and hold your hand well, and press your hand turning so that the edge of the rod comes to the base of the nail, and can find the hot water way deep down to the root; and suffer the patient a pock the burning of the hot water an hour; then let him lie thus, and he will be uprooted from all its roots. Thus do one after another, as long as you uproot all those that are in the body, then cure them with ointments which generate grease.
The cure of trembling
When some tremble from cold or fever or other, it is necessary that you make to him four cauteries or four on the spine of the back, one cautery between each spine; and one cautery or weight, and one on the stomach at the olive cautery; if he will leave trembling, and hasten the health from the cold sickness.
Of pustules painful
At times, due to fires bathing the body, or painful pustules appear, which come from large corrupted substances. It is necessary at first when they appear that one make a cautery on each head of the pustule: a subtle cautery of myrtle wood, so that its tip be seized by fire, or of long aristolochia root, or at the lenticular cautery. And sometimes they are cauterized at the beginning when they appear, according to this manner, and they cannot grow from them onwards, but are broken the superfluities from which they come, and are healed; but it is necessary that this be done after the evacuation of blood.
when the artery is cut Many times great hemorrhages of blood occur from the artery that is cut at the wound that comes to the outside, or in the incision of the abscess, or at the cautery of the limb, and similar things; and it is a very grave thing to extend.
Yet nevertheless when this happens to anyone, haste to put your finger on the wound of the vein, and restrain it very much until the bleeding is appeased under your finger, and no drop comes out anymore; then put on fire the olive cauteries smaller and larger as many as they are all red; then take one, or a large or small one according to the wound and its place where the artery is cut, and put the cautery on that vein where you hold your finger, and hold the cautery there as long as the bleeding is restrained.
And if it jumps out when you lift your finger from the vein, and the cautery is extinguished, then take hastily another one of the cauteries that are on fire.
And do not cease to do these one after the other until the wound is stretched; and guard that you do not burn the nerve which is beside it, and that another evil does not come upon the sick person; and know that when a vein runs out of an artery, it cannot be well stretched even if the artery is large, unless by one of the four ways that we have said: or by cautery, or by extraction when it is not treated, or by strong tying with thread, or by medicines put upon which have power to stretch blood; and be tied and strained properly.
Who will bring the tightening of ligatures tightly or to put things burning upon it, or other similar things, if it does not profit in any way.
And if this happens to anyone and they do not have any medicine present, then one must put their thumb on the wound of the vein as we have said, and stretch it well until it is tightened above the wound and above the vein; and do not move the thumb, but apply the moist cloth frequently that be very cold until the blood is frozen and thickened and tightened; and make them with the same those who need cautery and medicines.
We have told you in the first chapter all the illnesses for which it is necessary to use fire cautery, or hot medicine, and the incisions and causes and instruments and forms of the cauteries; and I have placed this chapter from head to toe, and I will go in this chapter by the same way for those who find more easily what they want.
And therefore, as I begin this, it is necessary, dear friend, that you learn that in this chapter there is more danger and fear than in the first of the cauteries, and for that reason more great caution is needed.
For in the work of this chapter there is often the evacuation of blood when opening a vein, and incising an abscess, and in the treatment of wounds, and in the extraction of arrows, and in cutting into stones, and similar things; where there is doubt and fear, and many die.
And I warn you that you do not undertake folly. For many kinds of people come to cures. So they come from such who have sickened so much with their illness that they die easily for the foolishness that they find in their illness, and the greatness of their malice; and of these one must have fear. And of these there are who give you their sense, and say: "Wait, I am cured"; and the illness is deceitful. It does not behoove that you consent to those who come to you who have this manner, but put more great caution in your honor than in your covetousness, and do not operate foolishly but wisely of those whom you are certain of, and whom you can have taken and praise; and use prognosis and indication in the cures of your sick so that health may be converted; and this will help you to acquire a good reputation, and glory, and memory of length.
Very dear son, Our Lords give you good understanding and rightness, and if you want to aspire to the holy inspiration of his hand, Amen.
Or I have ordered you this chapter in dividing by chapters, according to those that it is before or chapter of cauteries, that I have devised from the chief until the feet, for those that you may find more easily those that you will have need.
The head full of water
Know that this illness comes many times to children after birth, and when the birth is too strong pulls the child's head; and sometimes it comes from a reason that one does not know.
And I have never seen this illness except in children, and to all that I have seen it has hastened death; and for that reason it seems to me that it is better to leave the work in such cures.
And I saw one child whose shoulder was full of water, and the head grew larger each day until he could not bear it; and he believed so much the moisture that he died, and this moisture is assembled under the bone on the scapula, between the heart and the bone; and the work is such if the moisture is between the heart and the bone, and the abscess is small, that you cut a wide fissure in the middle of the head; and be as long as two thumbs, as long as the moisture runs; and see here the shape of the spatula:
If the moisture is larger, and the abscess is larger, then make two incisions in the manner of a cross, according to this form:
And if the moisture is under the bone, and the signs that you see the commissures of the head open on each side, and the water jumps out when you press it with your hand inside, and this does not return to you: then it behooves you to cut in the middle of the head three incisions according to this manner:
And after the incision remove the moisture entirely. After removing the incisions of fabric and powders, and put wine and oil in it, and let it so until the fifth day; then untie it, and cure the wound with tents and ointments, and leave to tighten the chief bandage, and then feed the patient dry meat from little moisture as long as the limb is fortified and sound.
And another way of incision is that you look where opens the size of the abscess, and its assembly of liquid; because sometimes it is in front; sometimes behind; sometimes on the right; and sometimes on the left.
Therefore cut where the abscess opens, and its filling of liquid, and open it according to what you are able; and guard that you do not sever the artery; and vein blood flowing so that the patient dies from the loss of blood and the evacuation of moisture.
of rheum
When it happens to someone a sickness that is called “catarrh” in the eyes or in the chest, and the sickness is old, and the treatment of medicine does not help, then the last cure is this cautery with which one covers the two arteries.
It then behooves, when you see them to cover, that the patient bend his head backwards; after, rub their place with a rough cloth until the arteries appear, then restrain the patient's neck with one cloth; then look where the vein bites, and their places are after the ears, and there they are placed; then sign their places on each side, then cover both with a sharp spatula of two parts. Until the depth comes up to the bone, and this is done through the wide part of the head.
And if you see, put the spatula under the artery and cut it from above, cutting also like two thumbs across.
And when the vein is cut, it sends blood upwards continuously.
And if the artery does not open to the touch, you must measure the space of three fingers, then dig down to the bone; and what is necessary to put out the blood is six ounces, and perhaps a little more or less according to what the patient can endure, and the repletion of the artery; then look at the wound: if it remains above the bone point with no syphilis, then cut it so that an abscess does not come, then strain the wound and bind it, and care for it with ointment until it is healed.
of migraine
When an old migraine comes, and acute catarrh, due to the moistures of tears and the heats in the temples and the old soreness and similar things, and it is medicated by ways of medicine and all that does not benefit him, then we drain the arteries of the temples and cauterize them, as we have recounted.
And the manner of their extraction is that the patient does back the hairs of his temples, and attends to the artery which opens in the temple, for it opens well by its beating, and is easily found outside than in certain men who are too cold; and if it is found, then restrain his neck the patient of some drapes, then rubs the place with some rough cloth, and raises the place with hot water until the artery appears manifestly; then take the spatula which this is the form:
then scrape the skin lightly until you come to the artery, then hold it up in height with tweezers, and depart well of the tissues that are under each part; and if the artery is subtle, turn it at the tip of the probe, then cut off that part according to the quantity of 2 fingers. For if it is not cut, it does not jump out all whole.
And draw blood of the 6 ounces, up to 3; and if the artery is large, it is necessary that you tie it in 2 lengths with a strong double thread of silk so that corruption does not come before the healing of the wound, and there comes excessive bleeding; then cut off the superfluity which is between the 2 ligatures in the same hour, and then, if you see fit, cauterize it with the cuticular cautery until the bones are reached as long as the fingers are cut; and this is the best work if the patient does not have a fever and he is of a hot complexion.
For the cautery is an aid to finish the humors: for this reason it is of greater help against humors. Where it is necessary for the extraction of arteries that one fills the place with old cotton and puts tents on them well made; and when they are removed, there be careful with dry medicines that cause flesh to grow, and with tents, until it is healed; and if without a cord of the artery as much as you work on it, so hasten to cover by cautery, or you employ the place with vitriol and constrain it with your hand that the blood stops; and if you do not have these present, put on the place your finger until the blood is frozen, and raise the place with cold water until the blood ceases, and be restrained as it is proper; and what is more mature and lighter in the extraction of the artery is that you cauterize the vein of this cautery trenching of two parts, but the trenches be well spaced to keep longer their heat. For when the instruments are too thick, it holds less its heat. And it must have between the two knives one should of width, and then when you have singed in the two ends, and you put the red hot iron until it comes to the bone, and cut the vein in two lengths; and be kept apart between the two shoulders because it is not welded with this cautery at all; and this is the form of the cautery:
of tears
When the tears from the eyes are flowing down the veins that are on the forehead above the head of fury, and it does not profit medicine to be applied, and you see the face of the patient turning, and feels in the forehead a trembling as if of fever; and where oil is held and moist so that the hair of the eyebrows falls out, and the eyebrows are dried up, and scorched by the heat of the tears, then there is need for this cure.
And they call it in the old days "contused cure," and you do to the patient who has this malady on their forehead make them shave so that they have no hair, then make three incisions on the forehead equally according to the length of the forehead; and let one of the incisions be as two should all across the front going down until the nose, and the other two as two ribs above the cheeks, and keep yourself from the incision of the arteries which are as two ribs above the cheeks; and move your hand away from the continuation of the two jaws, and let each wound be the quantity of three fingers across.
of the incision which is from behind the temple until the second incision; and scrape all the kernel that is between the two incisions to all the skin that is on the bone, then make another cut from the middle incision to the other second one, and then pull out this spatula fully.
if it is put in the first cut the instrument which is called "cultellaire," and is very sharp on one side, and on the other side is blunt, not sharp, and this is the form: And place the cutting edge toward the fleshy part towards the heart, and the blunt side towards the bone, and put the point until it reaches the middle cut. And cut all the vessels that descend from the head to the eyes as long as the incision is continuous up to those which open at the heart, and then on the other side make in the middle cut up to the other end; and then drain the blood equally, and express the place for the taken blood; then put in each cut a tent of old cotton, and put over cloths moistened in wine and oil and asium, and keep that an abscess does not come; and on the third day untie the linen, and there administer great planting of tepid water, then the cure of basilicon ointment with rose oil, and other cures with which one cures wounds, until it is healed.
of the eyes
When any come with acute catarrh, and you see the eyes watery and small, and the vision weakened, and the papers burned; and the hair falls out, and where they are parted a sharp pain occurs, and the patient sneezes; therefore know by these accidents that those matters and this catarrh do not come from many veins, and the cure that there is, such is this.
And it is that you command the patient to raise their forehead, then make a deep incision between the eyebrow and another wide one. i. poc. And begin from the left temple incision to the right temple, and let the incision reach the bone; and keep your hand away from the nerves of the temples that move at the touch; and when the bone is uncovered, wipe all the blood with a sponge, and then insert between the two edges of the incision old cotton wool, and linen swabs; then bind above with cloths moistened in wine and oil, and guard against a hot abscess; when it is removed, it is necessary that you rub the bone until cartilage begins to appear, then cure it with drying things, which make cartilage grow.
In this manner: take 2 parts of flower of wheat and 4 parts of colophony, and make a plaster from them; and administer it in these wounds to prevent cartilage growth throughout.
of the plugging of the ears
All that which goes into the ears is one of the four things: or grains, or beast, or stone of mine or something similar as iron; or seeds, such as peas, beans, lentils; or flowing thing such as water and oil and similar things.
When a stone or other manner of thing which does not fit the ear nor grow in the ear falls into the ear, put the ear to the sun. If you see the stone, instill a drop of violet oil or sesame oil, then administer extraction; and let him sneeze with condiment, and plug his nostrils when sneezing comes, and place around the ear pieces of cloth or wool; and keep the ear upwards. Often it comes out by this cure; and if it does not come out, administer extraction with subtle pincers, for that is the form:
If it comes out with the pincers, that is good; if not, administer extraction with a subtle oncine of small doubleure; and if it does not come out by that, make a snare of wire and insert the head of the snare or opening into the ear forcefully, and plug what is around the snare with soft wax so that the wind cannot enter there with the snare; then pull the thing out forcefully, for often it comes out as we have said; and if it does not come out in this manner, take some gut which they use to catch birds, and put on a small instrument which is suitable for doing this, and put a bit of cotton around it; then press the gut upon the stone or whatever thing it is, and pull out forcefully. And if it does not emerge from all these things that we have said, then you hasten to cut the ear as an abscess comes forth, and spasms; and the manner of cutting is that you first make the patient healthy in the head, and extract blood according to the measure of his virtue, then make the patient sit between your hands and turn the ear upwards, and make a small cut at the root of the ear to the fat or where it depends; and let the cut be as a moon, as far as you come to the stone, then the bone according to your power, and suck it diligently with your mouth; and the cure until it is healed. And if it is grains that are inside and it swells, then administer extraction; and if it cannot issue forth, then administer i. spatula thin according to this form:
and administer incision of that grain. But do not do this when you think that the grain is moist for the moisture of the ear, until you have made many pieces of it; then extract with fine pincers and suction, as we have said, so that the extraction be aligned.
In the ear when water falls in it is necessary for the patient to use a first-time condiment of the exterior and wide ear with old cotton. And lie on that same ear where the water is. If it goes out through this, it is good. If not, then take many stones according to the length of your finger thin and light, and scald them a little in fire; and put them into the patient's ear one by one, and pile above with another stone on top of the stone that is in the ear; and do not cease doing this of stone in stone until all the water comes out, and thus it goes out completely; and if you see, take .i. reed, and put one end in the ear, and the other end catch fire until the tip of the reed is burned; then make another reed as before until all the water comes out, as we have said about the stone.
In the extraction of the beast, if it is of small body, as a flea and similar things, cure it as we have said in the division; but if it is of large body which one can feel, then administer extraction with tweezers; and this is the lighter thing to remove that is in the ear.
In the extraction of worms in the ears, when you cure it as we have said in the division and where we treated distillations, and the cure does not help, then you must look at the ear in the sun: if there appears no worms, then you treat them with subtle tweezers, and if they do not appear, then take the canine of which this is the form:
And be narrow below and wide above. And put the most subtle chief into the ear according to the quantity of the suffering of the patient, then succeed them throughout the whole chain; do this so often that all the worms come out. And if they don’t obey to come out, then stuff around the chain with cotton as I said in the stone; and if they don’t come out further as we have said, then administer distillations that the ancients have experienced in the removal of worms, and you will find them or treat the distillations; and if you distill your oils and medicines in the ear to all this instrument, for this is the form as you see:
And be of silver or copper, narrow below to one small holes, and above open for distilling; and for pressing inside the distillation one instrument of copper well made for that, and if you see take one razor and wrap around the tip conveniently cotton; then put your oil or your juice, and what you want of your medicines in the chain, and the chain be in the ear; then put inside the razor to all the cotton, and press your hand moderately until the oil is distilled or finished at the end of the ear; and feel the patient inside, and let the distillations be one pock heated at the fire then when it is distilled in the ear; and guard that it not be too cold, for the medicine would not be so good.
of the stopping of ears
No child is born who does not have a hole in their ears; and this same thing happens to men by wound closure, or by flesh born inside the ear, and these blockages come sometimes in the ear if one cannot see it; and sometimes it happens that there is i.e., a little piece of fur in the ear, and one sees it well.
That one which comes in inside if one cannot see it, is of great healing in more dispositions, and in this one sees that you should put the ear of the sick person to the sun; and look inside: if you see the opening apparent, then the work has all these spatumile from which this is the form:
And be aged and trenchant before and behind all plain, so that it does not bleach the ear; if the opening is of flesh born or core of the ear, then hold it with subtle pincers, and cut it lightly, as long as that flesh is entirely removed.
And if the opilation is in the ear, take one razor subtle light and it heats a little at the fire, then put it where the body of the ear. If you feel the opilation which the patient feels greatly in the ear, pierce gently, and keep that you do not wound the nerves of the ear; then put in the ear a tent according to the width of the hole, and moisten it with Egyptian ointment.
Do this until the wound is healed, or you take a tent and moisten it in rose water, and powder on ground vitriol; and if you see swollen the ear, then it is necessary that you withdraw the tent and move another tent moistened in cerote which is made of rose oil and wax, until the swelling is removed; then cure it until it is healed.
And if bleeding comes, then dip a sponge and wrap it in cold water, and put it on the ear, and use other cures that remove the bleeding which are or treated with distillations.
of the sheet of paper
This treatment that comes on sheets of paper for the eyes when they are moist and dry, so it is necessary to spread them with forceps and tweezers, and scrape off a spatula from their roots; then put on top of them ground vitriol.
And if without it there is no decor, then cauterize it with a subtle lentil cautery, and the cauterization after the incision will be cured; and many times they return, since nothing remains of their roots; and when they are cauterized by fire, those roots are burned and do not return.
of the groin
Many times come in papers the eyes some things that seem like gravel in its shape and in its hardness, and for this reason, this disease is called "hail," and it is an assembly of moisture thick on the paper above and below; the work is such: take care if the hail moves from one side and the other, and it is a light thing to know; then make the wide, then the peel of each part lightly, then take as tweezers, and cut. If you can not cut without feeling a prick the paper, so nothing grieves the patient; and if the fissure is great, so assemble with a suture, and cure until it is healed; and if it is small, do not make any force, because the eyes restore it soon and injures flesh.
And if the hail is descending into the inside of the ear towards the upper part, so turn the paper, and being the hail to tweezers, and cut and press from one side and the other; and if the paper is removed by the incision, it does not grieve anything; and when the hail is cut, leave the eye with salty water, and cure the place of that which injures flesh until the patient is healed.
of the fat of the eyes
This is grease which is made in the tissues of the papers above, and this happens more to children than anyone else, and grieves their eyes very much, and they come with catarrh in the mornings, and cannot see the light of the sun for that the tears hasten to their eyes; and for this reason they lie down on their faces, and sleep on them, and are their papers below their eyebrows moist that the swelling and appearance have covered with the exinach which opens in the eye. And when you press it at your fingers and feel the exirnach between.
And the manner of the work is that the patient puts his head on your thigh; and then take one drape of linen, and prepare a tent in the manner of a circle according to the quantity that contains exirnach of each part, then put it on top; and press with your fingers on both sides, so that the exirnach is assembled within the circle; then make in the middle of the moisture at the spatula sharp a fissure of the wide, and be not more great than the wound one makes at the vein; and make the leather in depth as much as you come to the exirnach; and in many dispositions comes exirnach from the fissure, according to the form of a piece of white fat.
Remove then with one piece of linen cloth between your fingers at the outside, and turn your hand right and left as much as it is spread; and guard that you do not add in the fissure, that you do not come to all the spatula until the eye, that you do not bleach it.
And if the exit does not open at the beginning of the split, then carefully widen the split until it opens; then extract it as we have said, then moisten bandages in warm and cold water, and place on top, and bandage firmly.
And if some men who grind herbs and put them on to corrupt the moisture that is there. Then treat it until it is healed. And if pus comes at the site, hot, then treat with soothing ointments until it is healed.
hairs of the papers
When in papers hairs are born arranged other than the natural ones, and they are aged, they harm the eyes and bring many kinds of diseases like tears accustomed and softening of the papers and albuginea, as much as this is cause of destruction of the eyes; and is the cure according to .iiij. manners: or by cautery together fire, or by medicine ague according to that it is before or chapter of cautery, and is done or by incision and suture or by canes, according to that I shall say.
It behooves you to put the head of the patient on your own, then turn the paper of the eye with your left hand; if it is converted, it is good; if not, then there is brought a needle to .i. thread above; and let this be below the edge of the paper or where the hair grows near these hairs, and carry .i. thread upward to all the paper, and turn it back to the razor; then make in the part below the paper, under the hairs arranged, at all the spatula cutting, from the large tear to the small; then extract .i. thread, and put under the paper a small tent of cotton and drapery, then rule on top of the paper a figure of an arch, like the leaf of myrtle, and nevertheless it behooves that the figure be according to the quantity that you see lift the paper which is divided to all.
And if to him who has need one cuts a great quantity of the paper according to that the paper is softened; then make at all the spatula above the .ij. lines that you have signed, and commence from the large tear to the small; and let one of the slits be near the natural hairs in the width of a root, then put the awl into one of the .ij. corners of the heart, then scrape it completely; then assemble the .ij. lips with a stitch of a needle to .i. thread of fine wool, and wipe the blood, and make airdred the superfluity of the threads on the .ij. eyebrows to no sticky things, if you wish to do so; and if not, have no care about it, then leave the stitch and the threads up to .iij. days or .iiij.; then cure the wound without stitching with dry and constricting things, for the paper revives by the healing of the wound and the gathering together of it, but the stitch is muedre (as the ancients say), and this work without fear;
and if in another manner: and it is that you draw upon the paper a figure which is as the leaf of myrtle, as we have recounted, at .iij. ounces according to the form which is here:
then cut that which ascends with small forces equally according to the form which is here:
And if you cannot hold the pliers, and the thing is not equal, then take a needle which has .i. thread, and put it amidst the figure; and put .i. other thread beside the large tear, and the second thread beside the small one, and assemble between your two threads equally; then lift your hand equally, and lift all the skin above that which you have signed, as we have recounted, then assemble the .ij. lips of the wound by stitching, and cure it until it is healed; and if an abscess comes to your incision, then appease it with cerote and similar soothing ointments;
and sometimes it happens that the hair of the paper are converted: so you must use those that we have said about incision; but the stitching in one and the other is more artificial.
The cure of the canes is according to this form: and that you convert the paper and the felt inside according to what I have said, and then make 2 canes by art, and 2 subtle liens as long as the paper and the width of the spatula is; and cut the two heads of 2 parts where you hold the threads; then assemble one and the other subtly on top of the paper of the eye, and strain the 2 canes of the 2 parts formed; and let it stay like this for several days, and the skin which is strained will die and shrink and carry, as long as it dries by itself.
If it delays, then cut more forces, then cure as long as it is healed; and when the wound is soldered, and if the paper is lifted, and they will no longer prick the hairs; and this is the form of the 2 canes that you will make according to this figure, and according to this quantity of length and width:
The work is such that you prick a fine needle, and put through it one thread of silk soft and fine; then assemble the heads and tie them together subtly, and let the length of the threads be one palm long; then order in the chase another subtle thread of silk neatly, and tie the heads of the threads; then place the patient's head on your healthy; and be so that the work is clear because it is a subtle and fine work, then put the needle into all the chase at the root of the hair adjusted, and make it pierce the paper carefully until you draw it above the natural hair; then extract the hair up to the chase, and put in the chase that hair if there are one or two or three or more; then extract your hand until the hairs come out from all the chase in the paper with the natural hair.
And if the chase is treated and the hairs do not come out with it, then draw the chase down to all the thread that you have ordered it, until the chase comes out of the hole above and you see it by the vision of the eye; then you will draw the chase and the thread, and close the eye and leave it closed for two or three days, until the hair sets in its place and the flesh grows on top; and if the hairs are small, accompany one long hair of the natural hooves, and raise it with that one or where you leave it, as long as it is elongated and then lift it.
of the rot of the eye
When this illness which is called "aleacrati" or rot comes to the eye, there are two ways: one natural and the other unnatural.
And the manner of operating on it is that you cut open that suture and separate its lips, and put inside a tent of linen, and tie it until it is healed; and it is not good that you use in the cure of it things that dry and restrain.
And the treasure of your cure is that you take care that it does not close again according to the form it was before; and these operations that we have said are only addresses for this illness so that it does not return according to the form it was before.
of the flesh which comes to the eye
This illness which is desoz that truly is called “axacrati,” and is natural and accidental. The accidents come from wounds and cuts and cautery and similar things; and the way of the work in it is that you prick an needle, in which it has 1 double thread, and put it into the flesh, and make it pierce from the left tear to the right, so that the threads come in 2 holes of the flesh; then are the flesh above to all the needle, and cut at 1 spatula wide.
And if the figure of the paper returns according to what is fitting, it is good; if those are not, so take 1 razor and put it in the fissure, and turn the paper, and make 2 fissures or cuts inside the paper; and let the holes of the 2 fissures be the 2 angles of the incision that you have cut, and make ones angles so that when they are assembled, that the figure is as the figure of a letter which has no “j. griesche”; then remove that flesh, according to the quantity that its costs is aged desoz, from those who follow the paper, then adjust the 2 parts severed, and the cuts with a thread of linen; then cure with what we have said of softening medicines, and tents, until it is healed.
And if the malady comes from a tear or stitching or cautery, then it is necessary that you make a plain incision under the hairs of the papers, and according to what has been said before; then place between the .ij. leaves of a tent, as I have said; and one must do the work according to the form of the malady, for it is very diverse in form, and the wise masters equip anything of all their power how they make it return the figure to its natural shape; and the patients themselves, according to what is necessary of work and instruments in more dispositions.
of the paper carefully
When this soldering happens to the hand of a man in such a manner that the paper above is soldered with the white of the egg, and cannot move nor perform its natural works, then it is necessary that you put the point of a razor under the paper, and lift it up; and the extent as the pinches, until you cut what is adhered to the spatula subtle, which is not too sharp nor too trenchant, so that the patient may not suffer that the spatula too sharp or they would pierce the eye; and be your incision, by which you scrape that assembly, lightly, so that the paper returns according to its natural form; and it heals all that assembly, and sometimes in the eye salt water, and the rise of fresh water, and of collyrium; then put between the paper and the eye a tent of linen, and put on top of the eye wool moistened in an abundance of egg; and after the third day use the collyrium and the things again as long as it is healed.
of the angle of the eye
Know that the angle is in two manners: one is like .ij. hard, and one other which is not nervous, but is like white frozen moisture, and when you touch it with iron and you cauterize it with pincers, it cannot be moved; and one and the other semblance begins toward the large tear duct, and crosses poc and poc until it covers the entire view and all light and movement of the eye.
And the manner of incision is that the patient puts his head in your hand, then opens his eyes; and lifts the paper with your hand, then coils the angle with small pliers, and the essence above; then take a needle, and put on it .i. hair of horse, or cowhide, or ox, and .i. strong thread; and double the tip of the needle a poc and insert it into the angle, and pierce it through the entire needle, and tie the angle with a thread and lift it above, and strip all the hair along the side of the angle which follows the root and silk to the hair up to the head, then cut the remaining in the root of the tear duct with all the small spatula and as little force as possible, and leave the natural char or tear duct, so that through the incision the body of tears does not come customarily; and at any time extend the angle solely on the needle, and thread, as we have said; then strip it all over the small spatula from this is the form:
And guard that the spatula does not touch the fleshy cloth and break it, and that the needle is not pierced; and after the incision put in the eye a bit of wool crushed, and with the collar made of litharge, and leave it until the next day; then cure it as much as necessary until it is healed.
And if the nail is not yet nerved, and you cannot push the needle, and the awl cannot enter, many times this appearance of a nail is cured with medicines; and they grow as I have recounted in the division, and if you see it covered, operate on the eye of the patient, and take the spatula light bit sharp according to this form:
And raise the nail upwards subtly, and if you see that it diminishes not and the reason is quickened, then distill from your mouth into the eye collar made of litharge and red ointment and crushed wool, and stop the eye until the next day; then begin the other work according to this same work, as long as it is entirely removed.
If nothing is contrary to you in the eye, such as an abscess, then cauterize it and cure the abscess first until it is healed, then resume the work as before, until it is healed.
And if the appearance of the flesh from the tear harms the eye by great annoyance, then suspend it to the incision and cut a part and not half so that no tear fluid comes; then instill into the eye a red colic which is made of lead white.
of the flesh that arises on the pupil
The eyes of some men are born at times with red flesh, and it covers the pupil and restrains upon the eyelids and turns them outward, and it seems like a rose of beauty; and the work for this is that the patient puts his head in good health, then he opens his eyes, and coils all that flesh with incisions suitable to these, and sustains it with force; then cut the first flesh, and go on cutting to the razor until the end, and take care that you do not wound the eye during the work; and be the incision of the spatula as we have said in the incision of the angle and the small forces of which one removes the white of the eye, as how it shapes after this chapter demonstrates.
and when the incision is complete and all the flesh is removed, then apply the oil of silphium or distill red coral and similar corrosive medicines, and place on top the oil of fire cotton with egg white, so that it is assured of a hot abscess; and if there remains nothing, and the skin covers it, and you doubt a hot abscess, then leave the oil and treat the abscess with soothing things for a hot abscess; then return to your work until it is healed, and thus do until flesh is attached to the eye by this manner.
But nonetheless it behooves you to apply the cure of each weak oil of the natural way; and of the accidental way, in the work of iron; and do not put your hand into any of these works until you see that this member is suffering from that work.
of the veins of the eyes
Veins are red that are covered over the eye and take away from sight their work and weaken the eye all days. It is therefore important that you look at the eye, in which it is, whether it is inside or out, and there is no other illness besides the sebel; therefore the coil in this manner: instruct the patient to put his head on your palm, then suspend those veins to the entire line according to his wisdom, and be the lines subtle double according to this form:
And let two lines be by degrees in one body according to this form:
then you coil as forces those veins subtly, and wipe the blood hour after another, until you see removing those veins out of the eye; and guard that you do not prick the eye with the points of spatulas, and do this work at midday before the sun, and be very fervent in your work so that you do not cut other than those veins; and when you will have done this, then distill into the eye collyrium green and red to corrupt what is remaining of the sebel.
And if you do not have power to collect all these in that hour, then make a plaster on the eye of things soothing the pain of the eyes, and leave it for some days until the pain is calmed and is assured of a hot abscess, then begin again according to this manner which is before until it is healed; and this is the form of forces:
of the eye fistula
The mire is called "arissati" fistula: when you treat it with cautery and medicine burning hot according to those that I have said before, and it is not healed, then there is something in it that you cut on the abscess, where it must die, and treat all the moisture that is there, until the bone is uncovered.
And when the bone is uncovered, and you see corruption and blackness, then the king has all the instruments of what here is the form; and it is called "sharp head," and it is made of iron for one head reont, and it is pointed like a file as much as it is in the present form:
And put it on the place of the corrupted bone, then turn it between your two, and press your hand a little so much as you know that that corruption is reset; and do this several times, then restore the place of drying medicines.
If the wound is closed, and flesh grows, and the body of the bow is closed, and it remains thus for 40 days, and it does not renew and is not a fistula, know that it is healthy; if this is not the case, then there is no other remedy than to bring back the fistula to the opening according to this form: and it is that you uncover the bone the second time by iron, and by sharp medicines, and when it is uncovered take one forest according to this form, and let the head of iron be at 3 angles, and the shaft be tapered to the head as much as you see here:
then he places it on the bone near the tear duct, and moves his hand from the eye one palm's breadth away, then turns to the whole forest until it pierces the bone and the patient feels it through what comes in this if he holds his hand on his knee; and then restores the place with dry medicines, as I have taught you, and when the flesh is born and hardens its parts, then goes the matter to the knee; thus it is a lighter thing for the patient.
from the issue of the eye
When the eyes are open entirely throughout, and there is no discharge to the knee, nor diminution, then it is necessary that you bind the patient; then cleanse, then put him on suction cups or a heater without hurting so that it sucks; then place on the eye one sheet made of cotton wool and aloe and incense and sarcocolla, and then strain the eye, and plaster it with bandages and cloths; and the manner of the cloths is that you take cloths soft enough, and double each one by four, and then place one upon the other according to the quantity that the eye has need for; then strain it from above with a hard bandage form, and recommence the suction cups so that they suck without hurting; then remove the suction cups and leave the eye strained day and night, and if the sheets soften, then it is necessary that you strain it very much; then remove the sheet after the day and the night, and if you see the eye healing, it is good; if not; then recommence the plastering and the cloths and the sheet and the suction cups until it is healed.
Of the dislocation of cloth
When a disruption comes in the woven cloth, then open it, and it comes forth full of papers like grains of resin, and it is expectable to see; therefore if you want to cover it, the work is such that you put a needle at the root of the lower part until the upper one, then put another needle where there is a double thread from the lamier part; and make it pierce, and leave the first needle according to the disposition; then cut the place of the double thread and tie a part of the grape around, and restrain it well, then extract the needle and put the other half-eyed oil in abundance of yolk; and let it stay until the threads fall with the grape, then cure the eye with comforting things as long as the wound is healed; and at times the wound is restrained by the grape on each side of a circle of cloth, as long as it is healed.
And if the eyes then give great appearance, pierce them with a subtle spatula which comes from the eye, and correct the albuminous moisture and bring down the eyes, and put them in immediately; then extract it as long as it is healed.
of the eye socket
This disease which is called “alcunnati” is nothing but the socket of the eye assembled, appearing like an arrow descending, and it is not truly an arrow; and the manner of appearance of the operation is that you make the patient sit on a seat well-arranged and straight, then take the head between your hands in two parts, and move it as much as you see the socket coming up to your eyes; then be cautious, and do not let it descend or become dislodged the light, and have the patient see things as he used to; and if it does not descend below, know that it is an arrow, and if the descent of the socket is not arranged as we have said. so make the patient sit between your hands, then take the fine spatula and make on the cornea one prick following the conjunctiva with the cornea and crown, as much as the socket goes up; and when it is out, distill into the eye hot water mixed with honey, or boiling fennel and honey, then be cured of other cures until it is healed.
of the arrows of the eye
We have taken the likenesses of needles in division, and what is fitting to perceive; if in work according to the healthiness. It behooves that you make the patient sit between your hands crossed, away from the light of the sun, and tie the healthy eye and restrain it firmly; then place the paper of the eye to your left hand if the eyes is left, or to your right hand if the eye is right; then take in your right hand, if the eye is left, the instrument which is called "almagda," or in your left hand if the eye is right; then place the point of the instrument beside the cornea by the width of a thread in that white part of the eye to the part toward the lesser tear duct, then thrust the instrument which is called "almagda" virtuously, and restore your hand as long as it pierces into the white of the eye, and feel that almagda comes to the hollow thing; and it behooves that the measure of the way almagda is at the full length of the space which is from the pupil to the end of the blackness; and this is the cornea of the eye; so you will see the bone in that paper for the clarity of the corneal web, and then put the instrument just to where the needle is, then express it below one way after another. If the needle now descends, if the patient sees in front of him and the instrument in his eye.
After rest a little, and if the eye rises the second way, put the force with the instrument, and when it is ensnared and it does not rise, withdraw almagda gently by turning your hand poco a poco; and then put back into the eye a point of seil gemme, and leave from those the oil within. Then put outside the eye the plaster or cloth moistened in rose oil and in yolk of egg, and tie with the healthy eye. Now, and those who are of our time, we put on top as a poultice with yolk of egg.
And if almagda cannot enter into the eye because of its hardness, for there are some men who have their eyes too hard, then it behooves that you prick the instrument which is called "alberit," for this is the shape:
And therefore pierce the conjunctiva alone, and do not go too deep into it, but make one subtle, then put almond paste, as we have said; and at the completion of the work, equip the patient with one bandage coming forward, in which he sleeps on his back in one dark place; and be deprived of all movements, and take light meats, and do not move his head neither to the right nor to the left, and be tied according to his disposition until the third day; then untie it in the same dark house, and test his sight, and let him see some things, and then put the bandage back on until the seventh day; and it is not necessary that you do this at the hour of the cure or after the incision now, but it is necessary that you apply this, because the liquid rises quickly.
And when abscesses come, that you untie the eye before the seventh day, and the address of those who appease abscesses; and when it is appeased, then untie the sight and put on his face one orilliet to cover any day, and be in that dark house. And then go out of the house little by little, and return to his affairs; and know that no disciples should interfere in this case.
And one came to us who was from the Yrach, who told us that in their country they made almond paste pierced, so that one sucks the liquid, but all the same I never saw any in our land, nor did I ever read it in books of the ancients; and perhaps it is a new thing.
And these are the appearances of the forms of almond, because those who do not know them see them; and be of rain properly.
And let the head of each of this same subtlety, and the last one in three angles acute.
from the flesh on the knee
Sometimes knee lumps are born with various shapes, because of which some appear like scorpions with many legs; and if there is such a one that has flesh that is deeply colored and another with good color. Therefore, in those of these lumps that are smooth and not deeply colored, it behooves you to make the patient sit between your hands facing the sun; and open his nostrils, and place the ointment on those lumps, and rub them outwards; then cut what you can hold with a subtle sharp spatula from one side, as long as you know that the lump is completely removed.
And if any thing remains which one cannot cover, then open it completely i.e. with instruments subtle light; so that nothing remains; and if without tear or abscess, cauterize it as is proper; and if it are malignant abscesses, then haste and cauterize them until the blood be extinguished and all the pus is removed, then pour on vinegar or wine.
If the opening works and moisture comes as far as the palate, know that it is clean. And if the moisture does not pierce as it should, know that there is flesh stuck in the bone above, so that instruments cannot come to cut; therefore, it behoves you to put in i.e. thread of linen a little thick, and be moistened with hands ours, and have between each knot an opening i.e., one or less; and put the patient's head of the thread into its nostril at the tip, and pull out feeling until it comes through the nostril inside the mouth; and many times do the children in schools this, and it is a light thing to him who wants to do it; then hold the head which comes from the nostril with one hand, and the other head which comes from the mouth with the other hand, and feel each after the other while those are ours which are or thread. Do this until you know that the knots have corrupted all that flesh, then pull out the threads, wipe the blood, and moisten the thread in Egyptian ointment, and put it back into the nostril as before; do this i.iii days or more, until the ointment corrodes all that remains of flesh; and then put on the nostril a band of felt for some days until it is clean, and if there is need for drying medicines, use them; and this is the form of the instrument to purge the head, as by which they distill the oils and medicines in the nose:
And let it be of silver or iron, resembling a lamp open, as a band, and conduct it thus also; and if you see, then make a closed band, and let the instruments be full to purge the head; and have one handle on the head for holding it when one heats the oil or any liquor.
of the bone upon the birth
Many times a disease is born at the bone of birth called "telul," and it grows and becomes great after, until it is a visible thing to look at; and for this reason it behooves you to cut it at the beginning, and push out all the bone, then put upon its place the cautery or burning medicine; and if one delays to cut it until it is great, one should beware if it is hard, of bad color, of poor feeling: one should not touch it with iron for it is an incured abscess, for when one cuts it any time, there comes great evil to the patient; and if the abscess is of soft touch, not of bad color, and you see that one can cut all of it, then empty the patient and cut it without fear, and cure the place with dry things and restraining.
when the bone is cut and closed
Know that when a solution of continuation comes in one of these worked cartilages, it profits little, for in few men. It behooves therefore that when this happens to any, see if the wound is fresh in all its blood; and then adjust the two lips with a suture, then cure it until it is healed; and if the lips are already separated on one side and the other, then you must scrape all parts of their core until they heal, then assemble the two lips with a suture, and restrain them, and powder upon powder of dragon's blood, and incense ground; and put on the powders a piece of plaster of strong or other plasters, and let it stay until it dries by itself, then cure it with ointment until it is healed.
The manner of the suture is that you assemble the solution: either by needles, as we have said in the suture of the belly; or by thread, as I have told you.
of abscesses of the lips
To men's mouths there come within the lips abscesses hard, seeming to grains of seeds, and smaller and larger; therefore it is necessary that you turn the lips, and cut above each one, and take with pincers and cut in each part; then put in the place after the incision of vitriol ground, until the blood be stanched; and then the leave of ease, and cure the place with dry things until it be healed.
from the root of the gums
Many times there is born on the gums flesh knotted, which the ancients call "albulus"; therefore it is necessary that you hold it with forceps, and cut it at its root, and let the blood run; then put on the place vitriol ground, or other powders restraining and drying; and if that flesh returns after the incision, and many times happens, so cut it a second time, and cauterize it: if it does not return after the cautery; and these are the forms of the instruments for cutting.
of deafness
Sometimes they are gathered at the head of the teeth, inside the mouth between the gums, scabs that are ugly and harsh; and sometimes the tooth is black and yellow and green as long as the corruption comes to the gum, and the tooth is putrid; so you should make the patient sit between your hands, and his jaws be in your saint, and remove the teeth or scabs appearing, until nothing remains; and thus do of blackness and greenish hue, and jaundice and other spots, until they are wiped out; and if one removes what there is at the first attempt, it is good; if those do not, he recommences on the second day and the third, until you have everything removed; and know that teeth need various forms of instruments for removing, according to what the work shows, because the scraper with which one removes outside the teeth has other forms than that with which one removes between the teeth; and these forms and others be with you equipped.
It is necessary when you cure the tooth of its pain that you wait for the drawing as much as you can, because one should not do otherwise; because it is a very high substance until one has no excuse for removing it. Therefore when the patient is constrained to be treated, it is necessary that you be certain of the tooth aching. Many times the pain deceives the patient, and thinks that it is a saint's tooth, and makes him pull the good tooth; and nonetheless does not depart the pain because of this, as long as the evil one remains, for we have already seen it done to these saints; and when you are well certain of the aching tooth, it is necessary that you scrape around the tooth at all its sides; a spatula strong to ward off the gums from all parts; then move it to your two [fingers] or tweezers to the first prick and prick, until it is well loosened, then firmly hold the tweezers; and let the head of the patient be in your lap between your knees, and hold him well so that he does not move.
After you have extracted the tooth straightly without breaking it, and if it does not jump out, then take one of these instruments and put it inside each side gently, and move it as you did first. And if the tooth is pierced and broken, it is necessary that you fill it with a poultice, where the perforations are; and if you extract it subtly with tweezers, so that it does not break when extracting; and it is necessary to work very skillfully around the gum to dislodge the tooth.
And be well aware that you do not break it, and remain a part, and return to the patient by malice of the root greater pains than the first. And be wary that you do not do as the ignorant saints do, who by their haste and their boldness sometimes break the jawbone, and do not bring forth what we have recounted; but they bring about at times by the consequence of this great sickness for the roots that remain there, or for the jawbone that they break, as we have often seen; and when the tooth is pulled, wash the place with wine or aysil and salt; and if any bleeding comes out, which often happens, then apply the place with vitriol powder; and if that does not work, cauterize it.
The shapes of the instruments, as to how one pulls out the teeth first, should be with long points and thick handles, so that they do not bend when you pull out the tooth; and these are the shapes:
And be of thick members so that they do not bend when pulling, and be made of well-forged iron, and be toothed for to grip firmly.
from the roots of the teeth When the root remains in the pulling, then it behooves you to put on the spot a moistened cotton ball in butter, i.e., one or two days, until the sore is softened, then insert tongs that are called "algefri," because of which the jaw seems like a beak of care; and inside they should be made as well as a file and this is the shape:
And if the roots do not want to come out with all these tweezers, it is necessary that you uncover the flesh around the root, and put there the instrument which is called "althali", that is to say a spatula, because of this its shape:
And be strong and thick so that it does not break, and if the root jumps out with those, it is good; if those do not, then help yourself with all the instruments, of which the forms come after:
And if one helps oneself with this instrument which has two prongs, of which this is the shape:
and other iron instruments that are in front in the arrangement of teeth, and this instrument which resembles large pliers, of which here is the shape:
And be this instrument so that it cannot break, and know that many instruments of teeth are; and also other instruments, which are not all counted; and the wise masters subtle find by themselves their instrument, according to what their works and the illness show them, for there are such maladies where the old ones do not teach any instrument for the diversity of others and if one does not break the cartilage or other bones, or he can, then seek the instruments that are needed, which I have told you, and help with gestures, from this is the form: And let them be thick and well-holding to hold the bone, so that it does not escape, but can hold it and remove it; and then restore its place with medicines suitable for this, and if there is in the bone rot, and it is small, then the king has all this instrument:
When the tooth appears not according to the natural body, and the form is ugly, and even in virgins, it behooves that you know if the tooth is new after the tooth, and is not in its right place, and one cannot file it nor trim it; therefore the ray; and if it is pierced with the tooth, then take this instrument whose form is here, and resembles a little beak, and be of sharpened iron at its summit:
And the cope little by little in hands days for the hardness of the tooth, and because you do not move the others, and if it appears that one can be filed, then the file of a certain form like this is.
And it is also like the file of which one makes needles; and in filing the tooth little by little in hands days lightly, so that it does not move until it falls; then the plain at the end to all none razor, and if the tooth is too sharp and it bleeds the tongue, then it is necessary to file the sharpness so that it be equal, so that it does not bleed the tongue nor corrupt speech.
When the tooth loosens
When the tooth in front is loosened, either by percussion or by falling, and the patient cannot press on it so that it moves without pain, and you have cured them with constricting medicines, and this does not work; if they need to be restrained with a gold thread, because the silver thread turns green and corrodes, but gold never changes; and let the thread be neither too small nor too large, according to the quantity of space between the teeth; and if you see the teeth are crooked, then take the thread and tie it double between the two healthy teeth, then place the cheek between the teeth that need fixing, if there is one or more, until you wisely arrive at the healthy tooth on the other side; then begin again the covering up to the part where you began, and pull your hand subtly and wisely, so that it does not move; and let your ligature be at the root of the tooth so that it cannot escape. Then cut the ends of the thread with pliers, and assemble them, and place them between the healthy teeth, and put it so that it does not touch the tongue; and then leave it as tight as it can remain, and if it loosens, or the threads break, tie it again with another thread; if it remains, and serves this way throughout its entire time, and this is the form of the teeth and the figure of the straightening of the two healthy teeth, and the two that need fixing, as you see:
And when the tooth falls out, it is put back in its place, fresh against fresh, as we have said; and no one should intervene unless they are wise and experienced, and sometimes the shape of a tooth is made from a piece of bone, and it is placed in the space where there is a deficiency, and it is restrained as we have said, and it remains and serves this way for a long time.
to close the tongue's ligament
Sometimes this ligament which comes below the tongue or nature itself; or by accident of a suture wound; and the work is such that you operate the mouth of the sick person, and have his head in your hands, and lift the tongue. Then cut the nervous ligament wide, until the tongue is dislocated from its place, and if there is hardness or knotting, and this is from the suturing of a wound, then put the probe and cut wide that ligament; and guard that the fissure be not too deeply made, for the artery which is below. And when you have done, lift the location of warm water and oil, or cold water; then put under the tongue a tent of linen; and the stitch the sick person each night, so that the place may not suture. And if bleeding comes, then put on the spot powdered vitriol; and if the blood does not stop, then cauterize it with the cautery lens-shaped, which is good for this; then cure it with other cures until it is healed.
And if you see it of rotten color or black or hard, so that the sick person does not feel it, then do not touch it, for it is a chancre; and if it is declining to whiteness, and there is moisture, then put in the probe, and make it with a spatula subtle, and deliver it on one side and the other; and if the blood does not stop at your work, then put on top powdered vitriol until it is scorched, then return to your work as long as you draw out all matter; then lift the location of oil and water, and cure it with other cures until it is healed.
of abscesses of the throat
Sometimes there come from inside the throat bumps that are called «godath», and we call them properly the .ij. almonds, and when you cure them, as we have said in the division, and they are not healed, then take care: if it is a hard abscess of small size and reddish color, then do not touch it with iron. And if it is red and the root is thick, then do not touch it with iron, also for the decrease of blood; but let it alone until it is ripe, and then you will divide it, or it would break by itself; and if it is of white color reont, and the root is subtle, then have prepared the instrument to cover, but look first if the abscess is calm and appeased. Then make the patient sit in front of the sun, and his hips be in your good health, and open the mouth and take the serjans between your hands, and press the tongue below to all the instrument, from which this is the form; and be it of silver or arrain subtle as well as a knife:
And you press the tongue to all this instrument, and you see the abscess, then take the oncine and stick it in the almond, and pull it upward as much as you can; and do nothing with the fabrics with it, then cut with the instrument, from which this is the form, that seems like a force; and anyway, the chief are curved, and one place the other, and they are very sharp, and made of iron or steel:
And if you don't have this instrument present, then cut it with pliers, from which this is the form:
And be sharp on one side, and on the other side no; and when you have cut one of the almonds, cut the other according to the same manner, and after the incision gargle the patient with hot water, and cold and thus, and if there is evacuation of blood, gargle the patient with water, or peels of pomegranate fruits be cooked, or myrtle leaves, and similar things, until the blood is stanched; then cure it until it is healed; and sometimes other abscesses arise in the throat than the two almonds, so cut them then like the two almonds accordingly.
And I medicated a woman of an abscess that was born inside her throat, that is to say one abscess of small size; and I had well closed the entire throat so that the woman could not expire through the conduit which was obstructed, and could not eat nor drink, and would have died if she remained thus one or two days. And the abscess was raised so high that it had been put two fingers by the two openings of its birth. Then I forthwith, and placed in one a needle, then drew out the pus; and in another part a large portion of pus; then refixed another in the other opening of its birth, and opened her mouth and pressed her tongue; afterwards I placed the needle into these abscesses, and cut a part, and there came out only a point of blood; and thus was unblocked the conduit of the throat of the woman, and she began now to drink water and then wine, and did not cease to cut this abscess for a long time; and the abscess grew back again, and filled the place that I had emptied, until it became very large; then I incised and cauterized it inside the throat: thus it remained without growing; and I departed from these parts, and know only that God did of her after me.
of the grape
When the grape is ripe and it is long, it is called "perpendicular"; and if it is very large and round, it is called "grape". When it is cured as we have said in the division, and the cure does not help, and you see that the abscess head is calmed, and it is subtle, then it is necessary that you cut it; and the one that is round assembled and is not long; and it is bloody or of yellow color or black, then it is necessary that you make the incision of it. For there is great danger on the patient. It is therefore necessary, when you see it, according to the manner that I have said, of its whiteness and of its length, that you make the patient sit in front of the sun, and press the tongue with the instrument of which we have made remembrance before; then put the needle in the grape, and pull it out, and cut it at .i. of .ij. instruments that I have said in the incision of the .ij. almonds. And it is necessary that you do not cut more than the superfluity that is beyond the natural term; for if you cut more, it grieves to the voice, and to the word; and after the incision, use what we have said in the incision of the .ij. almonds, and cure until it is healed. And if the patient is afraid to be cut, then it is necessary that you use him of something for the cauterization of the sense fear. And the manner of the cautery is sharp acute. And it is that the patient puts his head on your hand, and then presses the tongue with the instrument that we have said or chapter of cautery, and confis with very live coal, so that it is not too thick nor too clear; and in employing the end of this instrument, of which this is the form:
And has or chief a hair where one puts the medicine, as the handle of a spoon, and puts the instrument to all the medicine on the grape; and the patient lies on his side, so that the saliva and the mucus come from his mouth of the medicine inside, so that it does not descend to the throat, and the breast; then hold your hand to all the medicine and press it on the grape, the quantity of half an hour, as long as you see it being nursed and the stings of the medicine are calmed; and if you see, take cotton and wrap it around any instrument, and moisten the cotton in the medicine, and put the instrument to all the cotton in the vein above, as long as the cotton dries on the grape; and do this often, until the cauterization is perfect, then leave it dry, and wait after .iiij. days or .v.. And if you have need to restart the cautery of the medicine, start it again, and after the cautery wipe around the grape, with cotton wrapped in butter, and purify what is around the medicine; and be rinsed with cold water, and be cured by gargarismes until it is healed.
This cure is safer than incision, nor the cautery; if it is cured by fumigation according to this manner, take calament and ysope and origanum and rue and camomille and avronne and similar herbs, and assemble them all or any of them in one pot, and put them therein, and boil; and the pot should be well glued with firm earth, and inside the pot has one instrument shaped according to this manner: And let it be of silver or iron, and let one of the heads be put into the mouth of the patient as long as the vapor mounts to the boil through the tube, until the boil is mortified; after that, begin again, until the boil dries, and keep that you do not make this at the beginning of the coming of the hot abscess, for many things happen; and do not make this except at the decline of the hot abscess. And if this instrument is not present, then take a tube and put inside its head a bit of egg shell, so that the mouth of the patient does not feel too hot; for the egg shell does not let the vapor irritate the mouth, and this is a good cure altogether safe.
Many times it happens to the throat bone or spine of fish, or anything else; so therefore it is necessary that you draw out what you can see, and press the tongue to the sun with all the instrument, so that you see move the thing; and those that do not appear to you and are returned to the throat, it is necessary that you make the patient vomit so that the food is cooked in the stomach; by chance if it will throw out the thing dry through vomiting; or the patient swallows a piece of sponge, or a piece of navel, or a root of lettuce, or one mouthful of dry bread; and tie to the sponge one thread, and then swallow it; and when it comes to its place, it will be felt, and then you will draw out further; and if it does not come out through what we have said, then take one instrument of lead according to this form:
And let the instruments be curved at the head so that it may more easily enter into the throat, and have the head high lifted; and guard that you do not touch the epiglottis, lest all come to it, nor thrust in the bone; and it is better that the patient thrusts the instrument, because he shall know if the thing is hoarse; if then he thrusts down, or he draws it forth equally throughout the instrument, as long as it is forth.
of the throat cutting
No times is the throat cutting medicined, as I have said in the division, by the cure of medicines; and when those do not profit, then look into the throat of the patient in the sun, then that you press his tongue to the instrument that I have told you. And if you see the throat cutting, so treat it with all .i. a small probe, or subtle pincers that are good for that. And if those don't work, so take a heated hair-pointed stick, and put it into the throat of the patient, then thrust or tip of the stick .i. hot iron, and do this often. And if the patient remains feverish all day. Then take full .i. glass of cold water, and open his mouth, and pour it in without swallowing, and move it with his hand often; and as soon as the throat cutting feels the water, so it falls.
And if it does not fall as we have said, then fumigate the patient with asafoetida, with the instrument that I have said in the fumigation of the grape; do this many times, because it will come down without harming. And the manner of fumigation is that you take one pot where there are burning coals, and the bottom be covered with a veil pierced in the middle, and in that pierce the head of the instrument; then put your fumigation there, and the patient puts the head of the cane in his mouth, and closes his mouth so that the smoke does not come out, but comes until the sinus; and the sinus will now come down, and if it does not fall, then begin the fumigation again many times; and let the patient suffer thirst, and eat salty things and others, and do not drink water; and thus the matter is necessary that it comes down by this governance.
And the form of the instrument with which one treats the sinus is, when one can see it, like tongs curved to enter into the throat; and it has the semblance of a bird's beak, and there is roughness from lime so that what it takes, it cannot leave; and here is the form:
The chapter on abscesses
Many resemblances of abscesses are, according to those that remembrance comes after in this book, and they are diverse in perforation and in size; and it is in two ways, one being in its own semblance, and from what moisture it holds. And the second manner so is for the places where they are on the body. Because the abscesses of the head are other than those of the foundation, and the abscesses of the fleshy part are other than those that come in joints, and each has its judgment in the work.
And if abscesses one must not pierce, as long as the boil is mature according to its accomplishment; and if there are some that it is necessary to pierce when they are ripe, and do not die according to their accomplishment, like abscesses near joints. Because when abscesses comes near joints, and one lets it be so for too long, perhaps the ligament and the nerve of the joint are corrupted, which is a cause of contraction in that limb. Or if the abscess is near the principal member, and you delay the piercing until it is mature, it will harm the principal member; or if it is near the foundation, pierce it then as soon as it is mature; and do not pierce an abscess ripe without complete digestion accomplished, except for those near the foundation, so that it does not pour out too much, and be lengthened inside, and a fistula comes; and cannot heal in a long time.
And it is necessary that you know the time of the piercing of the abscess which is mature according to its accomplishment, and this is when the pain is appeased, and the fever departs, and the lessening of the pain and redness, and the swelling and the softening of the head of the abscess, and the other signs; and it is necessary that you make the piercing where most dependent the location of the abscess, and where it opens more; and whether the piercing is long in the body, and if the abscess is on the hands or feet, or in joints and nerves and arteries, and in all places equal where there is no pleurisy.
In these that swell, according to the member. And when an abscess is in its fleshy place, it is good that you let the perforation until it is confirmed in digestion completed, as we have said. For if you pierce it before this, the body of the pus will be elongated from it, and it is full of much filth; and perhaps the lips and the depth of it will harden. And if any abscess which are pierced according to the width of the body, according to what the member needs. And it is necessary that you bring small incisions in small abscesses, and in large abscesses, large incisions, and many cuts according to the appearance of the size of the abscess; and if there are such abscesses where it is necessary to cut out the core, and cover; when it has become as one cloth, and is deadened, it is necessary to do as with buboes: and if there are any that are cut in three angles, and if there are any that are cut like the leaf of myrtle, like abscesses of angers; and if there are any where a round cut is made, and other sizes and appearing cuts.
Those who have no head, like a superficial abscess, it is necessary that you pierce it plainly; and it is necessary when the abscess is large, and it has collected a great bulge, and you pierce it, do not drain all the pus in that hour, but drain one part; then stop the abscess until the next day, then drain nothing straight away; do this many times of great to great, until the pus is all gone; similarly if the patient is of weak virtue, or a woman carrying, or a small child, or an old man decrepit. For the spirit trembles at any time with the exit of the pus, that perhaps the patient dies, and you do not take care. Therefore, avoid this chapter with great caution, and when you have pierced your abscess, wipe the wound, and see if the wound of the abscess is small; and if it is a plain cut, put tents of linen or old cotton; and if it is a large abscess, and there are many incisions, it is necessary that you put a tent in each one so that it comes against the other; and if you have cut out part of the skin in the abscess, and you have covered it up, then it is necessary that you fill it with old cotton or shavings of linen cloth without moisture, and tie it until the third day; then remove it, and cure it with ointment until it is healed.
And if bleeding occurs in your work, put cold water and easily, and wet one cloth, and put it on the bleeding place many times. And if the bleeding persists, then administer governance and care, and the powders that I have said in this book; and if it is in winter's time, and the area where the abscess is is very nervous, then it is necessary that you put tents and cloths moistened in wine and hot oil; and if it is in summer, and the area is fleshy, it is necessary that you put cloths moistened in water and oil, or in cold wine and oil, until the third day, as we have said; and then untie the abscess and wipe it and cure it, as it is necessary, until it is healed.
And this it behoves to know universally in cures of abscesses: Or I have said how one must go before the cures of abscesses, and see here the chapter.
Of sores
Of sores
And the cutting on the pus-filled abscess and moist one, it is lighter because they are of little blood. And if in some of these abscesses or chief where there is no moisture, and of these fut i. abscesses that I saw or chief of an old woman; and found the abscess as a hard, rough and white stone, and cannot be broken; and if one had done any of them, one would have done to it as well as a wound with a stone. In other abscesses coming or chief, were those which come from the chief of children and from the roots of the ears, let the opening be always at the lowest point, so that pus can issue; and cure them as it is necessary.
of scrofulas
Many times these abscesses appear at the neck, and under the armpits, and in the groin, and sometimes they come from other parts or body, and are numerous, and are interweaved with each other. And each scrofulous is properly within its own place, as the one and the abscess of the chief, as we have said; and the appearances of these scrofulas are many. There are some that contain moisture, and others that are malignant who do not want to obey health. Therefore, in the one that you see of good disposition at the touch, and is similar to the color of the body, and moves from each part and is not harmful to the nerves of the neck or to the artery or to the conduit, and is not too deep; then you must cut it from above, and cauterize it on each side, and open the two lips of the heart as one's needs, as we have said in abscesses of the chief; and treat it little by little, and be sure that you do not cut the nerve or vein, and let the spatula and knife not be too deep, so that the hand does not slip, and look too far ahead, so that you do not cut what you should not.
And if you cut the vein or artery, and it does not let you work, then put in the wound powdered vitriol, or any powders that stop blood, and hold the wound. And leave it until the abscess is calmed, and the wound is softened, and begins to rot. And when the bleeding is stopped, return to your work, as long as you complete it; then check with your index finger if there are any small scabs left, if so, cut them and clean them. And if there is a vein in the root of the scab, it is not fitting that you cut that scab at its root, but tie it with a strong double thread, and let it hang by itself, without annoyance; then apply the wound with old cotton soaked in Egyptian ointment, then cover it.
And if you cut the whole scab, it is necessary that you assemble the two lips of the wound, and sew them now, then when there is no remaining superfluity because of the size of the scab. It is necessary that you intend to cut at the root of it, and draw out pus, and sew it as we have said. Those scabs that hold superfluity, pierce where it appears more; and pierce it thus as the one before mentioned, depending, then administer poultices with ointment and similar things, so that it corrupts what remains of the corruption; and when the wound is well cleaned, cover it with ointment encouraging flesh, as long as it is healed.
of squint
The ancients said and spoke of the cutting of the throat; but I have never seen in our land who did it, and this is the scripture of their word.
To those who have squinance, it is necessary that the cut of the throat which is called "epiglottis" be opened; and one should not help them because all the veins and the prominences of the sick person are at those who have an abscess hot in the mouth, or in the throat or in two almonds. When the sickness is in the channel of the prominence, it is necessary to cover the epiglottis to avoid the destruction that comes from strangulation.
Therefore, when we want to cut the epiglottis, it is necessary that we cut it below three circles or four with a small incision across, between the two circles or by the quantity of the incision of the syfac, not in the cartilage.
and their throats are suitable for the section of the epiglottis that there is no flesh, and the vessels are long from within.
And if the master is fearful, it is necessary that he extend the skin of the throat to all the opening, then fends the skin as far as it comes to the channel; and avoid the vessels of blood, if you see nothing, and then cut the syfac, as we have said.
and it is demonstrated by the section of the phlegm from the channel that escapes by the place that is broken, and by the defect of the voice.
and leave the wound open a while.
And when the hour is passed of which one doubts strangulation, assemble the two lips of the wound of the heart, and cut all alone sense the cartilage; then administer medicines that make flesh grow, so long as it be healthy.
Albucasim said that one should not do this until the throat is completely constricted, and the patient is judged to be dead, and the failure of the lung. Therefore, cut the epiglottis because the patient cannot breathe, and he breathes through the wound, and thus is kept from death.
And for this, the ancients commanded to leave the wound open until the evil of the illness has passed, and it passes in three days or four. And therefore they commanded to sew up the wound and cure it, until it was healed.
And I will tell you what I saw. I saw that a young woman took one knife, and plunged it into her throat, and cut part of the channels of the windpipe.
and I was called to cure her, and found her as dead.
I discovered the wound, and found the blood that had come from it, and well that it had not been opened a vein nor led further than the throat, and the veins were flowing through the wound.
I bandaged it, and thus I closed the wound, and I treated it until it was healed.
and did not happen to the maiden but that she recovered her voice, and returned afterwards to her usual state;
for this reason I say that in cutting into the epiglottis there is no fear.
of the large throat
This abscess is called “throat hernia”, and it is a large abscess in the color of a bruise, and it is much in women;
and it is according to .ii. manners: natural, and accidental; where natural has no cause.
And the accidental is according to .ii. manners, where one is similar to fat us, and the other manner is similar to an abscess that comes from our artery; and there is fear, and it does not behoove to work of fire except in this one which is small, and the prove and seeks throughout the intromittory if you find it also as our fat, and cannot to any vein, if you cut it, as we cut the others, and the train at all its edge, if there is any of it and encircle well throughout, and treat it as it behooves, until it be perfectly healed
of our (ones)
Many ways are ours, of which I will say all the appearances;
And or it is necessary that I say all the difference that is between us and them.
I say that an issue is sometimes feverish and hot, as long as the boiling has not passed, and is complete the rottenness; therefore, rest the fever and heat.
With ours there is neither heat nor fever nor pain, and it contains one cyst, which is its own sac and is according to the color of the body, and begins as a blister, and becomes large.
And they are according to two appearances, or fat, or moist, and very colored as I said in the division.
It is necessary, when you come to the cure of wounds, that you first examine and inquire about all the instruments that are called "entromissoire," according to what its form will come or chapter which is after.
And the manner of the incision of abscesses is that you prick or moisten the place that you find in the abscess, and turn your two points and points, until you know that the instrument has pierced the core, then that it be according to the size of the abscess;
then withdraw the entromissoire, and take care in those that jump out.
If moisture runs short, whatever color it has, treat it as I have said for other abscesses.
And if after the introduction moisture comes, know that it is greasy, so treat it in a cross and take it with forceps, and gently scrape it on each side and ward the cloth where it lies that you may draw it healthy with the new;
And if you cannot draw it healthy, then draw it out in pieces so that nothing remains.
For if anything remains, it returns to us many times.
and if it remains for a while, and the wound does not grieve, then apply to the wound some powders corrosive sharp, and tighten the wound, and put above soothing things an abscess hot, and cure with other cures until it is healed;
and if the wound is large, then cut the two lips of the wound, and cure it with those who prevent flesh.
and if the vein beating is contrary to you or otherwise hurry and apply the place of powdered vitriol, and let it lie two days or three, as long as the wound rots, and rest the boiling of blood; then return to cover those that are remaining of the new.
See here the forms of the instruments inserted, and they are of three manners: large and medium and small; and there are three squares which are called "albaret," and one which is called "breb," and there are three manners: large, medium, and small, to surround the abscesses of fistula;
and are also like the needles with which one sews the sores, and are of citrine iron or silver, and those that are yellow are more valuable, and are more proven to be used with black lead to encircle the curves of fistula;
and they are in three ways: large, medium, and small, according to the quantity of the width of the openings.
The forms of the probes are of many kinds, as you see here: large, medium, and small; and so also there are probes that have two curves in three ways;
and so there are probes that have three curves, and these are also in three ways; and so there are probes that have two curves, and probes of a single curve, and these are also in three ways; and all these are necessary in their place.
The head of these things is to cut, and there are some that do not cut more than one side, which we peel the skin for so that one does not cut the vein nor the nerve.
And of these introducers are the small knives put into handles so that the patient does not feel them when opening abscesses.
and there are in three ways: large, small, and medium, as you see.
and one does not use them more than in fleshy parts such as legs, arms, breasts, and underarms, and similar places.
And sometimes one makes i.e. another instrument small, seeming to the strips of fistulas, according to this form, for which one staunch blood.
And it is placed sometimes in the place where there should be a cutting of veins, and arteries, and sometimes reopened according to this great form.
Sometimes the breasts of some men swell when they begin to be corrupted, so that they seem like a woman's breasts.
And remain swollen and discolored, and whoever wishes to cure them, it is necessary to follow according to this form from this line b. until line g. Then scrape the fat, and apply medicine to the wound preventing flesh, then bring together the two lips of the wound with sutures, and care for it until it is healed.
And if the mother's breast is laid low and softened like it happens to women, then make two incisions above in two places resembling ribs so that one holds to the other at the end of one and the other, so that the larger line contains the smaller according to this form, from this line b to the line g. Then scrape the skin that is between the two lips, and remove the fat, and there administer what we have said about suturing and powders, and what is necessary in the cure, until it is healed.
and if it is not healed, or the incision is not fully made, because the patient does not want to rest, or for the flow of blood, then it is necessary that you fill the wound with moistened cotton in corrosive ointment. and let it until it dries the remaining and the fat, then cure it until it is healed.
of abscesses of the buttocks
These abscesses that come under the buttocks are kinds of hard scrofulous lumps or boils and some contain moisture.
Those therefore who contain moisture should be cut according to this form, from the line b. to the line .g. And when all the pus that is in the abscess is emptied, then apply to the wound old cotton, and leave it until the next day, then remove all the cotton, and care with ointment beforehand as long as it is healing.
And if the abscess is of a similar appearance to scrofulous ulcers, then treat it as we have said in incisions of scrofulous ulcers, and if the wound is full of pus, then administer cautery as we have said before.
of the rupture of the artery
When the artery is routed, and the skin is sutured above it, many times abscesses come about, and just as much happens with an inflamed vein and abscess.
and if one knows this concerning the artery, then the abscess is long made by them; and when you feel it at your fingertips, that is to say strangulation; and when this is for the vein, then it is redness appearing beyond.
and it is folly to cover this abscess, even when it is under the armpits and groin and neck and in many other places, and it is very large. It is therefore necessary to avoid the cure of iron, and he who is in charge should also avoid it, and in him who has an inflammation of the artery made from above the skin with long.
It is therefore necessary to avoid the cure of iron, and he who is in charge should also avoid it, and in him who has an inflammation of the artery made from above the skin with long. then work the cut as soon as possible, and beautifully separate the artery from the tissues, as long as it is discovered.
Then put a needle under it, and make it pierce to the other side, and extract the artery with a double thread in 2 lengths, according to what I have taught you in the extraction of the 2 arteries that are in the temples;
Then stitch the place that is between the 2 links with an introducer as long as the blood that is there comes out, and make it loose the abscess;
then administer the cure that prevents bowing, as long as the bone hangs. Then cure those of ointment following this, as long as it is healed.
and if the abscess is for the size of the vein, then it behooves you to grasp with your hand that which you can of the abscess to all the skin, then thrust the needle under where you hold in your hand, and have it pierce, and there be one thread double, so that you draw it from the other side; then bind the abscess, as I have told you, or tie one of the two ends of a thread with the two ends of the shoulder;
and if you doubt that the thread is not strong enough, reinsert another needle through all of one end of the thread under the whole abscess at the incision of the first needle, and tighten the threads in four lengths;
then cut away the abscess as much as the excess issues, then cut away the excess from the core and leave that which is tied together;
then put a moistened cloth in wine and oil on top, then administer ointments and dressings to him until he is healed.
of abscesses of the nerves
Also as abscesses come in the artery and vein, abscesses come to the nerves when they are rubbed, or by too much labor, and similar things.
And these happen more often in the shoulders and hips, and in all places where there are joints, and this is a very painful abscess, and its color seems like the color of the flesh, and is in many dispositions without pain;
And when one presses it firmly, then the patient feels pain, and is not in full part of the flesh, but below the heart;
and let it be still from all parts, and do not go forward or backward, nor down nor up, and the one that is in joints should not be covered by iron: for fear it might go into contraction.
and the one that is on the head or forehead, make the skin smooth with a spatula. If the abscess is small, then take some tweezers, and cut it at its root.
And if it is large, then suspend it with a hook and cut away the skin, then clean out the abscess and close the wound together with stitches, and dress it until it heals.
of great boils hanging Sometimes they happen in bellies and nowhere else there is called “fungus” because of the resemblance of it, and is the root subtle, and the head large; and there are small ones and very great ones;
And I saw  one man who had two in his belly which were more like fungi than anything else, and there was no difference, they were white, and had fine roots, and were slightly split, and pus oozed from them.
I cut them open and found in one 18 ounces weighing, and in the other 6,  and the work in the incision is that you look at whether the patient is moist, and the color of the arterial is white and moist and of fine root;
if the cut to the spatula is wide, and are in your presence the cautery on fire. For when cutting comes many times too great hemorrhages of blood, and if without you it is fainted, then hasten therefore to cauterize;
and if you see the patient afraid and fearful of the incision of iron, then take one thread of wool well made, and in tie the articulation as we have said, and let it two days;
and then restrain it, and do not cease to restrain the thread of wool until it closes the articulation, and cease by it without work; and if the roots are thick, then fear to cut even for the belly, but you may well cut half,
then cauterize so that it does not return; then treat the wound, and guard that you do not cover the thelul which is of reddish hue and of poor sensation and of milk appearance.
For it is an abscess that has broken open, and I will come to the treatment of sores after this.
when the boil has matured
If the appearance of the boil comes from a cautery wound or a rupture of tissue, and it is on the belly and has no other boils, like those which happen in other wounds, or from blood that flows from veins or arteries according to what was said before, or from wind;
And if it is by the rupture of the syphax and by the exit of the bowel, then the color of the abscess is similar to the color of the body, and it is a light thing without pain, and open from various exits. And if it is by the exit of the intestine, then it is more diverse, and when one presses it at its sides, it rebounds, and then returns, and perhaps it is scarred, and enlarges much at the entrance of the bath and for hard work.
And if it is by moisture, it is a light thing, and opens well when you press it with your hand, nor does it constrain at all; and if it is by blood, it opens by these signs the abscesses are large and hard, and are fixed according to a quantity;
And if it is because of windiness, then feel the touch, and the work is that you look if its appearance is for the blood of the artery, or of the vein, or windiness. Then it is necessary that you leave the care. For there is doubt and fear in it, as I have told you in the chapter of abscesses, for the artery and for the vein.
And if its appearance is for the intestine or the bowel, then it is necessary that you command the patient to hold his armpit, and be extended straight, then reign in a circle around the bulge; then command him to move sovereignly between your hands, then go around the place that you have marked to all the spatula then extend the half of the abscess upward to all the large point
then work the half of the abscess extended on the thread, and put your index finger in it, and search for the inside; If you find it caught by the ligament, untie it, and put the intestine outside of the belly.
And if you find it boiled, take it with the pincers, and cut away the excess.
And if the artery or vein goes against you, then go beautifully around it, then return to your work and take two needles, and put two threads through them, and put the two needles around what you have done in a crosswise way so that you make it perceivable;
Then tighten the abscess with four threads on the needles, and if you see it, remove the needles, and leave them there as long as it can, and let the dead flesh fall off by itself. or you cut it when it is subtle and swollen, then cure it as it behooves, and shave the abscess as we have said;
or you cut it when it is subtle and swollen, then cure it as it behooves, and shave the abscess as we have said; and extract the blood or moisture that you find, then cure the place as it behooves, and close the place.
of the ulcer
We have said in the division the likenesses of ulcers, and how one must work on them with medicines, and how one must avoid iron cure; and let us say that an ulcer is avoided in moist places, and great caution should be taken in its cure, and the ancients said that when an ulcer is in a place where it can be scraped like an ulcer that is in the armpit, and in the groin, and similar places, and it must be entirely removed when it is in its beginning; and when it is large and old, it is not fitting that you approach it, for I have never healed any of them; nor has anyone ever healed one before me.
And the works, when it is in place where one can remove it, as we have said, is that you purge at any time the patient of black cole; then make him bleed if he has a manifest repletion, then make the patient i. good place to do the work; then set your incisions or sores, and the hair from all sides, and the bone from all sides without leaving anything; and let the blood flow completely, and press well the place with your hand or any thing, and if the hemorrhage of blood makes you contrary to the incision of the artery or vein, then cauterize it until the blood is extinguished; then cure him with another cure until he is healed.
of dropsy We have said in the division the similarities of dropsy, and in what manner the assembly of water is made, and the signs of each similarity, and the cure which is done by medicines, and that which is cured by iron; thus it is illuminated only; and one must not touch iron in these two similarities: namely, tympanites and hyposarche, because it is a mortal thing; therefore when you medicate this similarity of dropsy which is called "illuminated" with medicines, and the cure does not benefit, consider if the patient is weak, or if he has another illness besides dropsy, such as coughs and looseness of the belly and similar things; if you do not touch iron, because there is doubt; and if you see the patient of strong virtue, and he has no other illness but dropsy alone, and he is neither too young nor too old, then you must thus operate: Lift the patient's right side with your hands, and the minister presses the belly pushing the water to the lowest part of the hip, then take the spina knife according to this form: And be trenchant for 2 parts at the point, and entirely do not be so deep that it can come until the intestine when you insert it, and not pierce it.
Then look if the dropsy is joined toward the intestines: If it is necessary that you cut below the belly three fingers straight above the nipple; and if the dropsy is because of the disease of the liver, then the incision should be on the left side of the belly three fingers; and if it is because of the spleen, then on the right, and it does not behoove that the patient lies upon the incision so that the superfluities do not run to that weak place;
Then pierce the whole skin with the instrument, and push it through, and lift your hand to the spina knife between the skin and the syfac as when you are scraping at the quantity of a fingernail or in length; then pierce the syfac until the spina knife comes to the place eight, and this is the place of the water, then draw out the water, and push this instrument from where it is. This form: And is similar to a silver thread subtle, and is of iron or light wood, and has in the lower part one small hole; and on one side, three holes; and two on the other side, and one on the other; and the head is cut like a feather, and this is the shape of the incision with which the scribes cut the feather.
At the chief above is the ailment, so that when the instrument comes to the eye, it descends now upon the instrument; empty therefore half or the third part, because if you empty more than it is proper in that hour, by chance the patient may die for the resolution of his spirit from the weapon, or he falls faint, or he approaches death.
But empty according to the quantity of his virtue, and according to what the dispositions of the virtue of the sick signify, and his pulses; then treat the instrument and hold the eye, and it is held now for the heart which stops the opening which is on the syfac, because of this I have spoken, that you pierce according to this manner; then begin again the instrument the other day, if you see the patient suffering those things, and treat from the eye a small quantity;
Do this every day, and guard yourself from overflowing until there remains but a drop of eye fluid. And if you doubt about the patient, and you let out too much eye fluid, cure him with earth or hot sand, and with sweat or bath and sun, and let him drink; and cure him with drying medicines as long as he is healed, and cauterize on the stomach and on the liver and on the spleen after the extraction of the eye fluid, as I have said before.
of the stopping of the penis Sometimes a child is born who has no holes in the penis, or the hole is small, or it is not in its place. If this is the case, it must be inspected as soon as possible with a very fine spatula according to this form: then put in the hole one clo subtil of lead, and tie it and hold it for three or four days and when he wants to make urine, let it be removed, and make urine, and then put it back; and by chance it does not fit, because the urine that comes out does not leave it closed. Those whose hole is small, if they are medicated with the lead clo as we have said, it will widen. Those who do not have the hole in its place are blueish, because none are born who have the hole at the head of the penis, so that they cannot urinate before they raise their penis; and cannot ejaculate for that reason because the matter cannot come as far as the glans, and this is a bad disease.
And the manner of the work is that the patient lies usually on his back, and are the head of the rod and the cope as well as the waist of a pen, so that the pierced falls in the middle, as it convieneth; and keep yourself from overflowing of blood that often comes, and if it happens, then the stanch of those who stanch blood, and cure the wound until it is sound.
of the pustules of the rod Many times these boils come in the rod, and it is an appearance of flesh ugly; and there are malignant and non-malignant; so it convieneth that you prick them with .i. oncine subtle, and the cope and cleans all, then put up cotton moistened in Egyptian ointment; then cure with diafinicon ointment until it is sound. And if the boil is malignant, of bad color and suppuration, then it is necessary that you apply a cautery to it. When you have cut it, and if the boil is in the depth of the root, and has part inside the skin and part outside, then it is necessary that you remove the boil that is inside first; and when it is cured, then cure the outside. For when you cure it together, it is not certain that the head of the root will not be pierced, and blackness and corruption come in its root and groin; so it is necessary to shave off all that is black and corrupted, then apply on the wound plaster made from the bark of quince and pomegranate, and other cures until it is healed.
And if bleeding occurs, apply the lunar cautery according to this form: The cauteries help with two types of conditions together: that is to say, for bleeding and for corruption; and if the head of the root is corrupted and retracted, then it is necessary that you put or lead a chain of lead from the root and urinate the patient amongst; and when the skin becomes rough at the head of the root which happens to those who have not been circumcised, or there is a wound or an abscess, then it is necessary that you scrape it with one instrument until the bonds are loosened, and the head of the root is free from all sides;
And if it is a difficult thing to consider these things, then it is necessary that you scrape it with one spatula carefully from the head of the root and the skin; then gently separate between two, and put one thin cloth of linen moistened in cold water, so that it does not dry out.
of circumcision
Circumcision is not a wound of continuity like the others; however, when we do this work by our own will, and properly on children, it is necessary that we make the best work, and the lightest to salvation.
I say that the ancients did not speak of circumcision of their children, because they did not use it in their law, and we have nothing more than what we have acquired by experience.
Because I have wanted the most part of masters and healers who practiced circumcision around one dal, and with force, and at all times with a new scalpel; thus it was their custom because there are two cloths, and by chance if one cuts above and remains below.
Or it is necessary to cover, and the pain is doubled, and in the purification which is with the hole of the member it is not assured; and in the purification of the elbow by chance the iron escapes, and the work runs, and many times they are born as if they did not need purification and I have wanted.
Of the purification which is made with force to all the linen of thread I have found the goodness of the experiment, because the forces cut just as well above as below.
Because when you press your hand, it cuts equally in one way or the other all throughout the tension; but that the thread be well stretched around the skin; and the manner of the first work is that you make the child think, if he understands, that you only tie the thread around the rod so much, and then make him rejoice in all ways that you can; then make it be between your hands straight, and place the forces between your hands or under your feet that the child does not see them, nor any of the instruments; then put your hand to the shaft and blow or heart, and pull it up until the head of the shaft is in; then purify it well of the dirt that is assembled there, then tie the place signed with a double thread, then tie it below i.  one for each other lien; and hold it as ii. two by the second lieeure to the pouch and to the index finger, and cut between the ii. liens, then lift the heart above gently and pull the head of the shaft;
then make it be between your hands straight, and place the forces between your hands or under your feet that the child does not see them, nor any of the instruments; then put your hand to the shaft and blow or heart, and pull it up until the head of the shaft is in; then purify it well of the dirt that is assembled there, then tie the place signed with a double thread, then tie it below i.  one for each other lien; and hold it as ii. two by the second lieeure to the pouch and to the index finger, and cut between the ii. liens, then lift the heart above gently and pull the head of the shaft; then let it be corrected the blood a little and a little, because that is the cures; and put powder above and above the powder i. drapeil glued with an egg white cooked destempreit of rose water, confited with rose oil well and fresh, and let it stay there until the next day, and cure it from another cure until it is cured.
The form of the forces at the purification is this: the two heads be held and be sharp, and be the heads also as large as the hand evenly;
The error of the purification is when the kernels inside are at the incision; therefore it is necessary that you extend it to your finger, so that the leaves make an abscess; and cut it evenly, and if you cannot hold it with your finger, then hold it with pliers, and then cut it.
And if they pierce for three days, and what is below the shaft is swollen, let it be as long as the abscesses are calmed and the scabs are slightly scraped; if you can cut it as much as you can move, and guard yourself from the part of the shaft, it will not harm him at all.
Therefore, heal the place of things suddenly with a wound powder, which we have said or treated of powders, and if you cut out the kernel beyond measure, and it goes upwards, it will not harm; therefore cure it as we have said, until it is healed.
Retention of urine
Urine retention is from an obstacle in the kidney, or blood that has clotted, or a bowel, or new flesh, or similar things as we have said in the division;
and if the urine is not released, and you see that the retention is due to a stone in the bladder neck, then it is necessary that the patient be bent on his knees; and his feet should be placed on his back, and extend his belly from the part above his back, and restrain the patient's arms as much as he can; and then the neck of the bladder is constricted to the expression of the stone upwards, so that the urine is released;
and if it does not come, as we have said, and the patient feels great pain, then it is necessary that you administer extraction with all the instrument which is called "syringe", of which this is the form: and it should be made of fine light silver, like the feather of a bird; and the handle should be one palm long and a half, and finely pointed at the head.
And the manner of the issue of urine is that you take one double thread, and tie at the head one pock of wool or cotton, and put the head of the thread inside the syringe; and cut the superfluity of the wool and put it to the head of the syringe, then anoint the syringe with oil or butter and aubin of egg, and make the patient sit on one seat, and raise his bladder and penis with moist oil and olive oil and tepid water;
then gently put the syringe on the penis, until it comes to the root of the penis, then double the penis upwards towards the bud; then put the syringe forward until the bladder, and feel the patient come to the empty thing, and this is not done according to this order unless because the conductor or where it goes is twisted; then the thread to all the wool pock and pock, and the urine follows the wool, then extract it further, and make correct the urine;
and recommence the syringe until the bladder is emptied, and the patient is aligned.
of the diseases of the bladder
When sores or blood comes in the bladder, or there is an assembly of rot, and you see it distilled with sharp and medicines, do as all the instrument which is called "clepsydre", and this is its form:
It is closed, and has .iij. openings: .ij. on one side, and .i. on the other, as you see; and the leus are shaped so that the medicine court is such that it stops the penis well without addition, so that if it can be drained the moisture, and ejected when necessary;
and when you want to put your medicines in the bladder, put the chief of the catheter in the moisture, and draw with the drawing which is inside; so you will draw the moisture into the catheter, and then firmly reinsert the drawing inside; so the moisture will enter inside, and come to the bladder now, so that the patient feels it;
and this is the form of the enema with which one enemas the bladder: it is here:
And it is of silver or of wood, and the head is higher; and below a .i. breast or where the shoulder bone lies; then take a sheep's bladder and put in it the moisture with which you want to enema the bladder, then tie it between the two breasts formed by a strong double cord, and heat .i. pock of that moisture on the fire; then put the head of the enema into the penis, then strain your hand over the bladder throughout the entire moisture administration, until the patient feels that the moisture has arrived at the bladder;
and if you do not have the bladder, then take a piece of parchment, and make .i. circle out of it, and pierce it roundly all around; then put .i. strong thread into these holes, then assemble the circle as one assembles .i. dial, and put inside it what you want of oil and moisture and water, and tie it in the instrument; and do as you have done with the bladder, pressing with your hand until the moisture comes to the bladder.
of the stone
We have just said in the division the manners of stone, and the extraction together with medicines; and I have said the difference between stone engendered as rains, and all the signs, and in what stone one must work by cutting; and in the bladder, and in the penis; and I will tell it to you clearly and briefly.
I say that the stone which is engendered in the bladder more often happens to children, and it is a sign that the water leaps from the bladder similar to water in its subtility; and it appears harsh, and grieves the patient his penis, and he can many times, and then it enroids; and with much of these leaps the foundations are made; and it is light the healing of children until they have four years, and it is very grievous in old men, and it is as the middle to those who are between youth and old age; and it is the cure lighter of those who have the large stone, than of those who have it small.
And when we come to the cure, it is necessary first to purify the patient by enema, in order to draw out all the phlegm that is in the intestines. Because it encumbers at times to seek the stone.
Then take the patient by the feet and push them down and move them backward, so that the hips descend to the level of the bladder, and it rises no more from above; then make him sit between your hands properly, and his hands be below his thighs, so that the bladder is completely sloping downward; then press and touch its top.
If you feel the hip in the space, then hasten now to cut above the hip. And if it does not fall at the touch of all, then moisten your index finger with oil from your left hand, if the patient is a child, or your middle finger, if the patient is a young man; and put it in its foundation, and press the hip, and when you feel it on your finger, say [it] to the neck of the bladder; then press upon your finger and put it out further where you want to cut.
And command the minister that he presses the bladder with his hand, and command him that he extends with his right hand the testicles upward, and with his left hand remove the skin which is below the testicles in the part where the incision is made; then put the spatula cuttingly, from which this is the shape:
And make between those who are between the hips and the foundation, not in the middle but at the side of the left wing; and be straight above the stone, and the two sides be even or foundation, and let the waist be so that it is wide outside, and inside narrow, according to the quantity of the stone, nor too large.
For chance the press if the two sides that are or foundation, that it be pushed out without work; and know that there are such stones which have angles and margins: so is it grieved to move; and if there is one that is submerged, resembling a glint, and rounded, whose exit is light.
To that one then where it has angles and margin, make the waist greater; and if it does not come out, then you must extract it on tongs which are like a file at the top, so that it is drawn to move the stone so that it does not escape; or you thrust under it one instrument subtle curved at the top; and if you cannot engineer it thus, widen by one pock the hole, and if the stone does not come out, strain it with vitriol.
And if there are more than one stones, put the largest first at the neck of the bladder, then cut above, then drive the blade away and the small ones after, if there are more. And if it is very large, it must be carefully removed and make a larger wound. Because two things happen to the patient: either he dies or urine comes back through the place that the skin cannot close; but nonetheless, try to drain it or break it with pliers until you pull it out in pieces
And when you have completed your work, apply incense and aloe and dragon's blood to the wound, and bind it, and put on top one cloth moistened with oil and wine, or oil and rose water and cold water, to soothe the hot abscess; then turn the patient on his back, and do not loosen the bandage until the third day.
And when you unbind it, carefully moisten the area with oil and water, then treat it with diaphania ointment and basilican ointment until it is healed.
And if abscesses come in the wound and corrosions, and blood congealments in the bladder, and due to this the urine is held back, which is known in this manner that without jumping with urine: therefore you should drain in the wound, and extract that blood, because if it remains, so will they corrupt the bladder, and the rot.
Then raise the wound of acute and easy and slight, and help him in all the ways that you know, as long as he is healed; and it behoves that all the hours that you cure him, that you bind his two thighs together, and assemble the medicines on the place.
And if the stone is small, and it is where the rod conducts, and attached within, and the urine cannot pass; so cure of these that I say then, that you enlarge it many times, it is excused from the cutting by this cure. I have already proven this thus.
Take one piece of iron shaped like this and have it fitted with three points on one end.
Then take a thread and tie it around the shaft below the stone, so that it cannot come back into the bladder; then put the iron point gently into the shaft until it reaches the stone; and turn the iron in the stone back and forth, as much as you can feel the stone on the other side; soon will come the urine, then press your hand on what remains of the stone which is inside the shaft. Then it will be broken, and it will come out with the urine, and the patient will be cured.
And if you cannot do this because of anything that hinders it, then tie one thread below the stone and another above it, then make the shaft straight with the stone between the two threads, then pull it out, untie the thread, and cleanse the congealed blood which is in the wound; and cure it until it is healed.
of the stone of women
It happens that stones are present in women, and if it happens at any time, it is a serious ailment, and it is forbidden for three things: one is that perhaps the woman is a virgin; and the second is because one cannot find a woman well knowing who discovers herself to the eyes, especially when she is chaste.
And the third manner is that perhaps one cannot find a woman well knowing in this art of hands; and the fourth manner is that the stone of the woman is more profound than the stone of the man, so it is necessary to make a deeper incision, and great fear there is.
And if necessity requires this, it is necessary that you take a midwife well knowing, and at pains the find one, and if you do not find one, then do not attempt to have one chaste maiden skilled in this; and present her to a wise woman who knows about the life of women, or a woman who knows a part of the art, and command her to do what you command her concerning the incision of the stone.
And look very well if the woman is a virgin: therefore it is necessary to put her down or foundation and search for the stone; and if she finds it, she constricts it below her buttocks, and she recommends that she puts her down or with the sick person, and seeks and presses her left hand on the bladder.
If she finds it, it is necessary that she moves it from great to small from the entrance of the bladder until below, as long as it comes to the root of the thigh; then cut on the stone in the root of the thigh opposite the middle of the con, where it is moved appeared, and feel the stone in that part; and do not move her buttocks above the stone or below, and let the tail be at first small;
then put the tail in the waist, if you feel the stone so close to the wound as long as the stone can possibly issue forth, and know that many ways of stones are: namely, small and large and rough and smooth, long and round, and which have reins. If you know the appearances to know the outcome.
And if the stone is not coming out, put crushed vitriol in place, and keep it there for an hour until the stone is softened; then return to your work, as long as the stone is loose, and have the instruments that I told you in extracting stones from people so that you can aid in your work.
And if the stone is not coming out, and it's from the artery that was cut, put powder on the place and restrain it with strips and bandages, and do not begin again those (actions), and leave the stone and do not pull on it, for fear that the patient might die; then cure the wound.
And when the heat of the blood is calmed, and the limbs are numb, then return to your work, as long as the stone is loose.
of fleshy hernia
Watery ramice is nothing else than an assembly of moisture or white syfac, which is the under part of the testicles, which contains the egg; and it is called 'syfac', and sometimes properly in the membrane of the egg, if one thinks that it is another egg; and it is the skin of the testicle between the white syfac that we have said; and these did not have this point.
And the generation of this ramice is so weak that it comes from the testicles, and is expanded that matter.
And sometimes it comes from percussion on the testicles, and this moisture has many colors: either it is declining to yellow, or it is without red, or black, or watery white, and this happens more;
and these are the signs to know this assembly, because if it is white as we have said, then the abscess is ripe, that is, long like the shape of an egg, and does not open its openings, because it has moisture all around.
And if it has moisture in the proper cloth, then the abscess is ripe with part of the egg, and for this reason one thinks that it is another egg;
and if the moisture is between the skin of the openings and the white as such, then one feels it well; therefore when you want to know the color of the moisture, you should probe with all the intro-inserter quarreit, for its shape is as before. According to what comes after the introducer, judge of what is inside.
According to what comes after the introducer, judge of what is inside. And when we cure it with iron, it is necessary that the patient be healthy according to our power and the fullness of his body; then lay him on his back, on a thing slightly high, and put under him many blankets;
then sit on his left side, and command the minister to sit on his right, and extend the rod to one of the two ribs near the heart of the hips;
then take the spatula left, and cut the skin of the hips between them from the long until near the elbow, and let your cut be straight dividing the skin of the hips until the white flesh, and the peel subtly according to your power;
Then pierce the  symphysis with water, to i. wide openings, and draw out all the water, then place your bandages, and hold the symphysis up; and do not touch the root of the bones, but only the symphysis; cut all or by pieces even the costal of him subtly, that if you do not cut it wisely, it will return the water.
And if the bone leap from its place during your work, then reset it into place when you have completed the work of the symphysis; then assemble the two leaves of the root of the bones with a suture, then cure it like other wounds, until it is healed.
And if you find the bone corrupted by another illness, then it is necessary that you tie the vessels that are suspended, fearing the flow of blood; then cut the bone along with the entire suspender, and draw out the bone, and cure it as we have said.
And if the liquid is assembled in two parts together, know that these are two branches; if you cut the other part as you did the first evenly, then wipe away the blood, and put in the wound linen moistened in rose oil;
and put over another linen moistened in wine and oil, and put on the two cushions, and put above cloth doubled, and tie it on top of all the linen according to this form:
Then take two cloths, and wrap them in woolen padding according to this appearance and be assembled by stitching at the neck of the breeches, and one of the heads rests on the foundation up to the back, and the other at the armpit; and the other two to the chief over the two arms, and let the whole restraint be assembled in the buckle of the breeches;
And sometimes this remedy of cautery is used in place of iron knife, and it is that you prick one cautery scalpel fine, and cut the skin of the testicles, and be heated as we have said, so that the white syphac containing the water is uncovered;
If you take the cautery according to this form, and pierce that syphac as one time, and scorch it with this subtle hot cautery:
And the cut in all ways that you can, as long as you scrape everything; and keep that the fire does not touch the egg; and know that this work is more salutary; and moves guarding against blood loss, and movements than the works of a knife;
and if nothing goes against you, or abscess boils or discharge of blood or other thing, so cure what is against you, according to what is said before.
And if the patient is fearful and does not want to wait for this work because of its horror, then administer a puncture as I have told you, and it is that when you are well certain by the meanings that we have said that watery root is there,
then make the patient sit on a raised seat; then pierce the abscess in the part below to all the spatula wide, and place the perforation deep into the body; and let the opening be wide, so that all the water runs out;
then put cotton on the spot, and tie it, and let the remaining water run out, then cure it until the wound is healed;
and if the white cloth does not let water flow into the mouth of the wound, then it is necessary that you pour in a quill or instrument used to treat water from dropsy, whose form is described before; and widen 1 palm's width the wound, and know that the water returns, and is assembled after 6 months or whenever it comes together, and when it is assembled as before, and thus will pass the days of the patient.
of the abscesses of the testicles
Know that in the section of this root there is fear in more positions, so it seems to me that it is better to leave it.
and I will tell you the work and the appearances of the abscess.
I say therefore that many abscesses come to the body, and also to the genitals; and it is by many causes.
That is to say by excessive sour and acrid humors, which are spread to the genitals, or from blows.
And the color of the abscess is according to the color of the body; and it does not feel any pain, and it is a painful abscess;
And by adventure there are some pus-filled and painful abscesses, and of a bad color, and sometimes it comes from our artery, or from an inflammation of the vein.
When it is by our artery, it is known by the disposition of the hot abscess, when you press it with your hands. And it does not behoove you to touch it.
He who is caused by an inflammation of the vein is known by its disposition to the expression of the touch of the hands,
and one can well do the cutting on this sort of thing, and on other similar things. and it is that you cut the heart of the onions, then is the bulb on top, and the stalk towards the white part, and deliver the suspensor from all sides of the bulb.
If the bulb is already softened with these new things, then it behooves you to draw out the bulb, and cut.
and if it is airy towards the stalk, or in those which are within the vessels, then you must deliver all that vein, and cut it roundly.
And if the birth of the flesh is or its rear, it behoves you to cut it all, and extract the egg, as we have said.
And when the works are accomplished, then apply the wound with wool soaked in rose oil and wine, then the cure of other cures until it is healed.
of the abscess of the genitals
This is an abscess enclosed in an envelope resembling a kind of onion, with the softening of the genitals and the patient moves painfully when he goes.
and the cure of this disease is as well prescribed as fearsome as before,
and nonetheless we will tell you the work of it, according to what the ancients did.
It is necessary that you make the patient sit on one elevated seat, then tie the suspensory of the testicles down to his two heels, to all the vessels that are near to the penis, and the masters braid them, and they extend them.
then cut with a sharp trowel wide through the vessels, until they are uncovered.
and then scrape from each side, as we have said in the extraction of the arteries that are in the temples;
then insert a needle where it has one double thread, and tie it to the first place where the vein came from, and tie it straight to the other end; Then the knife cuts through in the middle straightly, according to the length of the body, and removes the corrupted moisture;
Then heal the wound as with the others where one avoids a bump, so that no vessel flows and nourishes one of the corners;
For by these, no harm comes, and since blood flows to all vessels, it is necessary to draw the corners to all vessels. So that the flesh does not lose its nourishment because of the incision of the vessels, and dries out and cannot be aided.
of the rupture of the shoulder The occurrence of this branch is by the section that comes or shoulder, or the extension over the belly in the part of the angles, for which the intestines descend from that rupture to one of the corners;
and this rupture is or of the shoulder, or of the extension of it, and these two manners of much come from causes: or of percussion, or of jumping, or of a fall, or of lifting a heavy burden, and by similar things;
and the signs when it is of the extension of the shoulder, it is that it happens little by little, in a long time, and does not come suddenly; And is the abscess even until near the center, because the pus pushes toward the intestines.
And the signs are when it is from the section of the pus, that it brings a sudden pain at the beginning, and the abscess appears various ways, under the skin near, and this is for the issue of the intestine and the body to the outside of the pus.
And sometimes the intestines are drawn with the pus, and it is held in, and causes great pain to suffer for the patient, even when it is pressed.
And in these cures of iron there is fear, because one should avoid them.
And the manner of the work is that you instruct the patient to put the intestine into its place in the wound, if it can enter. Then support it on his neck between your hands, and raise his hips.
Then extend the heart upwards, and cut all the skin of the flanks long. Then put inside the folds of the waist needles according to what you need to open the wound, and be such that the guts can emerge.
Then scrape the skin that is below the skin of the bones, until the white underlying tissue is uncovered on all sides;
Then put your index finger into that which follows the bone, in that which is between the white tissue that is below the skin of the hoof, and between the second layer of tissue.
And depart that which is behind the hoof, and between the second layer of tissue; and then move with your right hand into the center of the bone, and keep the white tissue on top in your left hand, and raise the hoof to all the tissue toward the waist; And command the assistant to extend the hoof upward, and untie that which is behind the ligament.
And if it has a point of the intestine enclosed or white, hard like that, and if you find none of these things, then put it into the belly below.
Then take a needle or one that has a thick thread made of ten threads, and put it in the back part of the scrotum, which is after the skin of the testicles; after the waist, then cut the hairs that appear from the threads, as long as there are four threads. Then assemble them one over the other in the manner of a cross, and tie the scrotum, which we have said is below the skin of the testicles, with a strong bandage of two parts. Then enclose the hairs of the threads, and tie them together forming two parts, so that none of the vessels that nourish them can enter inside, except for an abscess if it comes. and put straight the thread according to the first thread long two spans of that one, and after these two threads leave the other which is under the chest of the ribs the width of a span;
and after all the other according to the roundness that the egg carries; then cut in the part which is under the skin of the ribs, as long as the sinew and the bone, as we have said before;
then administer wool moistened in oil, and put it in the wounds, and put the thread that we have said. And at any time is cauterized the white fascia that we have said, after the incision, out of doubt of a flow of blood.
For this happens many times, and leave the line as long as it dries through it; and if it delays in drying, then be raised with hot water, and put upon what we have said, until it dries.
then cure the wound with other cures, until it is perfectly healed.
of fleshy hernia
In this branch, I never saw anyone who dared to cure it with iron.
And the ancients said that it is made like a branch which is joined to the tree, in such a way that you bind the vessels after the cut above or slightly below;
Then cut it in the middle, and treat the abscess of those who work, as long as the vessels are bleeding; and treat it as we have said, until it is healed.
At no time does a rupture come in the angles, as we have said, and open them; and do not pull any of the intestines to the openings, and if any are pulled out, it is bad, and repair at all hours;
And nonetheless, if it remains too long in this point, the wound or phlegm increases, as long as the intestines are pulled out;
and this happens through the extension of the fascia which is at the angles, as we have said, because it is extended, then it is softened and swollen and opened.
and the cure this is by cautery, as we have said before; and sometimes it is cured by iron in this manner:
and it is that the patient lies down on his back between your hands, then cut the place of the rupture inflated with a wide according to the quantity of three fingers;
and then extract the fascia which is under the skin that follows it, then take the thread and put it on top of the place appearing of the fascia;
and press on the front of the belly, then count the two apparent eyes of the face above the head of the thigh, and count one and the other.
then extract the head of the thigh, and do not cover the face nor extend anything else, as I have told you in the treatment of the root of the intestines;
then treat it by the treatment of wounds. And when you cover the threads, if you disinfect and cure the wound, as long as it is healed.
The face is constrained, and has no appearance in the rupture, and the cautery is moved in this place, and closer to salvation.
of the softening of the skin of the testicles
Many times the skin of the testicles is softened in some men, because the contents within are softened, and it becomes visible; and it is necessary, when one wants to cure it, that one makes the patient lie on his back, and he cuts the skin which is softened on the natural skin; then assembles the two lips with a suture, and if you see, sew first the superfluity of the softened skin at three or four stitches firmly; then cut between the sutures, and the cure as other wounds, until it is healed, and remove the thread.
of the  castration
Know that castration is common in our law, and for this reason I would like not to speak of it in this book; and it is necessary only for two reasons: one is that the skilled ones know how to respond when asked, and know the cure; and the other, because we often need castration of some animals to help us, such as goats and sheep and calves and other animals. I say therefore that castration is done in two ways: either by attraction, or by cutting.  In the one that we do by attraction, we make the animal sit in hot water, until the testicles are softened and hanging; then take them in your hand, until they are retracted and you no longer feel them.
Of the hermaphrodites
Hermaphrodite is according to two manners as men: one if it is between the two sexes appears also as the figure of nature of a woman, or it has hair, and sometimes in short the urine. And the other manner is in women, and it has on the groin as a penis and two genitals. And the cure of the man and the woman is that you cauterize the joined parts all, and treat them like other wounds; in the second manner, of men whose urine jumps through the skin of the genitals, there is no cure.
Of the tenting
Tenting is a joined part on the natural part, as long as it is too ugly to see; and some women have it as large as a hand, and that is the cure. It behooves you to cut away the superfluity of the tenting with your hand or with tweezers, and do not go too deep, so that bleeding does not come from there, then treat the other wound until it is healed; and at another char that is born at the mouth of the anus, and the one employed, and by adventure falls out, and according to the resemblance of a cow, and for this reason they called it in the old days 'cow disease'. If you must cut it, as we have said about the tenting, and treat it until it is healed.
of erratic
of erratic if is when the nature of the woman is not perceived, or the opening is small; and it is natural by birth, or accident by illness that came to it; or it is by charm attached, or dou syfac subtle or thick, and it is made in the ribs, or in the sides, or below, or wherever; and prevents conceiving, and pregnancy, and perhaps flowers to have; and the knowledge of these is by the gaze of the midwife. If the obstruction is approaching appearing, if you wish a to your two or the rear. If it is dou syfac subtle, and it is approaching the .ij. pounds, then hurry, and the round thus: put your .ij. two fingers together, and the woman be on her back, legs spread; then being the .ij. pounds form, until the subtle syfac is rounded, and is over the obstruction; then take wool, and moisten it in oil, and put it on the spot, and lie the woman to home each day, so that it may not move. And if the syfac is hard and thick, it is necessary that you cut it with a spatula like a myrtle leaf. If the obstruction is of flesh born, then suspend it at the knee and cut; and have the medicines blood-stopping, as acaice, dragon's blood, incense, together abundant of egg; then administer a bandage of linen wide, so that the wound may not move; and thus for a long time, and administer a tent of dry linen; then be cured of other cures until it is healed. And when in the ribs comes flesh born, then it is necessary to cover according to this manner, unless it is inflamed abscesses. For the inflamed abscess which is in the ribs, one must not touch to make.
of hemorrhoids
Hemorrhoids are openings of veins which without custom, and when hemorrhoids are old they become hard; and we have said in the division the resemblances of them, and the signs, and I will say here those who resolve healing.  I say that hemorrhoids and the hard stuff, when they are drawn into the flesh, and they do not appear to the touch, except for the cure by iron. The ones which are at the mouth of the flesh, one can feel them, are those one can cure. It behoves therefore that you put the woman in a cold house, then is the hard stuff with tongs, and the cut in its roots, then powder on medicines restraining blood, as such as acaice and dragon's blood and incense, and similar things; then put her feet to the air for an hour, then put her in cold water; and if there comes a discharge of blood, so make her sit in a decoction of sumac and bark of pomegranate trees and gall and similar things, and then take barley flour, and mix it with honey and aisil, and make .i. plaster on her back. And if she is relieved, that's good. If not, so let her apply leeches to the back and breasts without hurting; then take linen, and moisten it in juice of plantain or in juice of elderberry with old wine, and apply it there.  And when the abscess rests, so cure its place with ointment until it is healed; and the one called "albathir" is red, and is similar to .i. chief as sharp, if it behoves to cut it as I have said the hard stuff; and then cure it until it is healed.
abscesses of the flesh
Many ways of abscess come in the flesh, as such as chancre and pus-filled abscess and herpes and boils and fistulas and hemorrhoids and hot abscesses, and more other maladies which I have said in the division. It behoves therefore that I say in this treatise the hot abscess that comes in the flesh, which is not of the abscesses that are full of pus; and if you want to know the work of iron, so regard if the abscess is beginning at its coming, and full of heat and fever, and if it becomes red you can see it.  Therefore do not hasten to pierce it, but let it die until the pain is appeased; and then make the patient sit on a stool, and have two small stools where he leans, and support him on his back and assemble his legs to the parts outside of the leg; and let his hips be spread, and put his arms under his knees, and bind them well with a good linen band; then suckle his belly towards the right side, and administer the instrument which is used for opening the mouth of the flesh, because after this comes the form; and it behoves that when you see to administer this instrument, that you first stick the point in order to know the depth of the flesh, so that what goes in from the instrument does not go more deep than it should, and that it doesn't hurt the patient; and if the instrument is larger, then it behoves to cover the depth of the flesh with cloth, so that the instrument doesn't hurt him; and it behoves to put the cone of the instrument at the top, and to hold the instrument. And when the abscess opens, and one feels it with his hand soft, then it behoves to cut it at the chief, at the spatula left; and when the pus is emptied, then it behoves that you put in the wound tentes moistened in rose oil, or in green oil sec; and put the tent further from the wound to the bottom of the flesh, and put on top of the flesh and on the bandage linen clean moistened in water or malves be cooked; then cure it after two days of ointment following this, until it is healed; and once elevate the flesh and the wound by enema of water and honey, and then of water or roots of lilies and long aristolochia being cooked; then return to the ointment.  And if the wound is returned in the flesh, then it behoves that you guard yourself from cutting with iron, but cure it as we have said in the division.
of childbirth
The midwife must first know the figure of natural childbirth, and the signs thereof are when you see the woman pressing down, and desiring to smell the air: then hastens the child to be born; therefore you know that this childbirth is according to nature, and is the issue under its head, and the second with it; and when you see these signs, it befits gently to press her belly so that the child comes forth quickly; for when it descends upon its head, then does the second come with it, and it is purified of its superfluities by good purification; and this which comes otherwise does not come naturally. For it sometimes comes upon its feet, and comes forth further the body or the shoulder, and the hands, or it comes upon its belly, or groin, and is turned by chance on its neck, and by other evil figures; therefore it befits the midwife to be wise and subtle in these things, and avoid error and deception, and I will show you all the figures how one should help them.
If the child comes upon its head by natural issue, and the woman gives birth loudly, and the virtue of it is weak, then have her sit on a saddle, or the women hold her; and rose her nature of oil or fennel seed shall be cooked, and then put the midwife between her thighs the small spatula whose form is here: And cut the secondine and cut at its nail as long as the moisture which is in the core comes out; and take the belly of the woman as long as the child descends, and if it does not descend, then it is necessary to cleanse the woman with muslin of fenugrec with sesame oil; then make her swallow and sneeze from condiment, and hold her mouth and nose for an hour: so the child will now be born. And if the two hands have come out, then it is necessary that you gently move them back and forth; and if they cannot enter, then put the woman on one seat, and raise her feet up; then turn the seat over on the ground, and hold onto the woman so that she does not fall during the turning; and if the hands cannot enter, and the child dies, then cut the hands at the knife which is before put, and extract the child, and reset them equally.
of the issue of the child on his feet When the child comes on its feet, then it is necessary to push up high. and then turn it back and forth, until it is even;
then prick it with the point and extend it back and forth.
It should jump as far as the hips, if commanded to leap, and make it sneeze from the condition; if it leaps, God willing.
And if it is not as we have said, then turn it back and forth until it is according to the natural figure. For then it is easily.
And if it does not come as we have said, then take a mixture of alum, and sesame oil, and melted gum, and grind everything in one mortar; and put on the natural part of the woman inside and outside this ointment, then make him sit upright, seated until under the ribs;
and when it is softened underneath, make him one collar of mire, and put it underneath, and let it for an hour; then make him sit on a seat, then make him sneeze and restrain his mouth and nose, and take his belly lightly, for the child jumps now. from the exit of the child on his knees When the child comes in this form, he puts his hands hand over hand.
of the birth of the child which comes out with a wide hand it is necessary to devise to bring back the hand if one cannot bring it back, then make the woman rise, and go.
If it cannot go, then make him lie on i.e., one bed, and the legs form apart
then administer the muscle treatment that I have recounted;
and if she does not give birth, then make her sit on i.e., one seat, then study to return the hand; and guide the child according to natural form, and make her sneeze, and command her to strain until the infant emerges.
of the birth of the child upon his neck, and has spread her hands, and her face turned towards the back of her mother it is necessary that the midwife holds her hand, then turns it little by little, and the egg lightly;
and when it is equal, she puts it on the muscular nature of the high and oil, as we have said, then commands her to move it little by little;
and when you have done this, let her sit on one seat, and command her to strain herself; and let her sneeze. in this same manner to the entire shoulder
in this same manner to the entire shoulder When it comes to be done in this manner to the entire shoulder, cut the shoulder with your finger, until the moisture is drained.
And if the child can push up on his face and neck, cut through the flesh so that it doesn't hold back, and kill the child.
Then put the child inside, until you have placed him as he should be, and command the woman that she not move at all.
of the separation of the twins Know that twins are born many times, and sometimes three or four; and this is not a strange thing, and it happens. Two [twins] being an odd thing, and do not live; if they are named.
I know these, that they are multiplied, and are severed by the syfack that divides them, which is attached to the bud.
And sometimes they issue as naturally as one under all, as we have said.
And if they issue grievously, then the cure as we have said, and let the bail be subtle, and make quickly and lightly what she does; and do thus as it deserves to heal. of many children
of many children Never are formed in the marsh i. or ii. or iii. or iv. or v. or vi. or vii., or more up to xv., and they are all formed in the shape of a child by the measurement of its wise glorious,
and it is necessary that the bailiff know all these things, because by chance similar things happen. so it is done according to what is proper.
of the dead child
When you cure the woman of the dead child or belly, as I said in the division, and it does not come out, and you are constrained to work with hands; so it behooves that you know whether the woman is of sound virtue, and has no accident or she has fear of death;
so it behooves that the woman is laid on her back, and her shoulders are inclined downward, and her legs raised;
and the minister applies the bandage in two parts, where it is tied to the bed so that it does not move with the descent of the child;
then rub the mouth of the mare with moist oils with mallow and fennel and flax seed, then anoint the midwife's hands with these oils and these mucilages. then put them gently into the mare, then take one or two of those that are suitable for these,
and take care if the child is born with its head rising. If you place the needles in his eyes or in his neck or in his mouth or in his palate or below the beard or in the groin or near the ribs
And if the descent is on feet, you place or prick it and at the middle ribs;
And it is necessary that he hold the needle in his right hand, and put the curve between his fingers of the left hand, and thrust it with all his hand lightly, and place the needle in any one of these places that we have said, until it comes to the empty thing;
then fix it against another bone, or the third if you need it, so that the extractions are equal
and then make it equal by moving it from one side to the other, so that it moves easily, and let the bones be toothed so that they hold together, as this is the form.
And if one part remains, then apply some of its oil to the joint, and put it in that part, and pull the other part.
And if none remain, then put this bone or higher up its place, and do this until it all comes out fully.
And if one hand comes before the other, and it cannot be returned for constriction, then it is necessary that you enclose it on cloth, as long as it isses entirely;
then cover in the juncture of the foot or at the knife, and thus it is necessary that you do in the other hand, and for two feet.
And if the child's shoulder is large and it is strained in the exit, or it has sharp pain assembled, If it is fitting that you put the pointed spatula between your two [bones], and make the point and extract the water. Or you put it with the instrument that is called “almidach,” so that its shape comes with the instruments or chapter which follows this one;
And in the same way, do the same if it has a large natural point. And then pull apart the bones with the pliers.
and if the head jumps out and it is strained with force, it shall be split open, as long as the moisture which is there or worse has issued forth
and if it cannot issue forth, cut it in pieces as much as you can.
And if it is swollen in the belly or under the ribs, then it is necessary that you pierce it as long as the moisture runs.
And if the child is on its feet, then the traction is light, and the application to the mouth of the marsh is light.
And if it is trapped in the belly or the breast, then you must extract it with i.e., a cloth wrapped around the hand; and press the belly or the breast, as long as the moisture inside is gone;
and if the other limbs are dislocated and the head remains, then put his hand in through the opening of the wound, and draw it until the mouth of the wound; then it is put one or two times, and the body will hurt
and if the mouth of the wound is narrowed by the heat that has come from the abscess, it does not need to be worked on then it is necessary to administer moist and fatty things and administer plasters, and soak in softening and moistening water
And if the child is on its side, and you can set it straight, follow what we have said about a living child;
and if you cannot do that, then treat it in pieces, and leave nothing of the secondine.
And when you have done this, follow what we have said about abscesses that come in the groin;
and if there comes discharge of blood, it should be put into a sharp ointment, and follow with other treatments.
And I saw a woman in whose belly a child had been stillborn, then conceived another upon that one, and refused the others. After long time it came to her an abscess in the bosom, and it inflamed so much that it opened, and began to great pus flow.
I was called for the cure, and I pondered long time, and could not suture the wound.
I put on a plaster of strong attraction, and out came one bone, and after some days another. I was greatly amazed, because this one whose belly has no bones.
I thought that it was the bones of a dead child.
I touched the wound, and in my hands were bones, as long as the woman was in better condition; and the woman lived for a long time thus, and it seemed to be a little bit of bowel from there;
and I have not recorded this chapter for anything other than that, when the masters find a strange thing, they should know how to help it.
to bring back the bone to its place.
Here after comes the form of the forceps, as it is written in the books; and to two turns as two handles of the two limbs. However, the horns should be more subtle of the restrictor, and made of ebony or boxwood;
And let the mouth of the staff be i.e., two of wide, and the edge of the trees i.e., one must, and of length a palm and half. And among the two limbs be joined to adjustments of this same staff, which are fastened in one and the other, of half a palm of length or a little more;
And these two adjustments are put in the mouth of the harness to open when one turns the two horns.
Another form, more subtle and lighter in appearance, be made of ebony or boxwood staff, according to the likeness of pliers; and have two shoulders two joints, as you see, of the length of one palm, and two fingers wide;
and when you see to open the womb with all the instrument, so make the woman sit on one bed, the feet hanging and the legs open; then put the two joints together in the womb, and hold the head of the instrument below between her hips; then work your hand with the instrument, as you have done with the pliers equally, according to the quantity that you see to open the mouth of the womb, until the patient does what she wants.
These instruments are all mounted, and their likenesses are multiplied; and when the one sees them appear, so much is the work hastened, and higher to the men for their quantity.
If you do not despise the instrument that you have not appeared it, because their necessity is not excusable.
When the secondine is retained during childbirth, it is necessary that you command the woman to retain her breath, and then make her sneeze with condiment, and hold her hands to her mouth and nose; and if she jumps because of this, well it is.
If it is not so, take one pot, and make one perforation or cover, and put in herbs that can open the mouth of the wound, such as calaminth, rue, anise, chamomile, cassia, and centaury.
All these herbs, or any of them, be boiled or put in water on the fire; then put a band or perforation in the pot and the other end in the mouth of the wound.
And let it steam until the vapors come inside the wound; then make it sneeze, as we have said. If it jumps back suddenly. And if it remains after this cure, and there is no more force, command the woman to moisten her left hand in sesame oil or in the juice of alder, and then put it into the wound.
And seize the second one; and when she has found it, grasp it and extend it little by little straightly, so that the hair does not fall off during extraction. But you must move it lightly to the right and left, and then pull; then it will come out and unravel.
And if the mouth of the hair is tight, we have said the cure of sneezing and fumigation with herbs;
and if it is not from all those things we have said, so guard that you do not use the milk.
but it is necessary that what is at the mouth of the marsh, you tie it to the hip of the woman, then the enema with ointment tetra-farmacon.
if she bears and puts it back, and comes forth; but nevertheless, when she bears it, bad odor comes to the stomach and head, and paleness comes to the sick woman.
So it is necessary then for fumigations suitable for this: none of the ancients have experienced the fumigation of watercress and dried figs.
The shape of the instrument by which one fumigates the woman at the time of childbirth and afterwards is this:
And it is shaped like a dog, and one puts the head delicate in nature, and the shoulders wide over the fire.
And let the fumigation be on coals, and the tinder as long as it is burning, and begin another one.
To examine the foundation
Many children are born who don't have a perceivable foundation, but it is stopped by subtle crafts. Therefore, it is fitting for the midwife to pierce that craft at its proper place, and not pierce it with sharp instruments, and keep the bandaging so that she does not touch it.
Then put upon it a half linen cloth in wine and oil, then the cure of ointment until it is healed.
And if you doubt that it will not stop up, then put on a piece of lead upon the wound, and leave it for many days, and remove it when the child wants to go to bed.
And sometimes this stoppage comes from the closing of a wound or an abscess; so it is necessary to cover that closure: if it is cured, as we have said about the cauterization of flesh.
of the fistula of the fundament Fistulas that come from below the fundament are knotted, and larger than those that come from near the external fundament or in the space of the two parts.
If there is one fistula or more; and when that knotting is old, it works, and still moisture arises white or subtle bows,
And sometimes these fistulas are pierced; and they are known by those who feel them or evacuate or venting when the patient evacuates, and perhaps some jump towards.
And if the fistulas that pierce up to the bladder, and to half the penis; and reach up to the groin joint, and to under the hipbone.
And thus one knows the fistula piercing at the base, and not piercing: and is that you put your two index fingers or foundation, and insert a fine needle of iron or steel into the fistula when there is no twisting.
And if it has a curvature, then put in a tent of fine lead, or one hair of a horse, as long as you feel the tent or hair at your fingertip;
and if you do not feel it, and it does not come out through the opening or windiness or vein, as we have said: know that it does not pierce; so hurry to cure it.
And when the fistula is pierced up to the bladder or up to the urinary duct, so that urine leaks out and cannot be stopped by medicine.
If it is pierced to the junction of the hip, then the tendon comes to its place. If there is no torsion and the pain is inside the joint, then it is that there is a bowing in it, and there is no value of medicine or treatment by ointment.
And in these persistent fistulas, there is no cure other than labor, and the vanity of foolish remedies that intervene in them.
In those that are neither persistent nor ancient, there is hope of healing by iron, as I have experienced.
and it is that the patient lies between your hands on his back; and lift his legs up to his hips, and have his hips inclined to his belly; then insert a tent of reed, or of lead if there is tortuosity, until you know where the tent comes.
If the patient feels it around the base, then you must put your index finger there;
then feel that the tent has pierced it; and if you discover between your finger the soft tissue or the bone, then you know that it is penetrating; If one does not work on it, one cannot heal it.
One says however that one can well heal none, but this happens rarely.
and the aid one does, if it is that one heats up the subtle cautery according to the width of the fistula, as it has been said before. and it sets all hot in the fistula, as long as it comes near the base; and do this two or three times, as long as you know that these charred fibers are burned, which are seeming to an eye feather.
and then the cure of tents moistened in butter, as long as that skin is still raw, then the cure of ointment healing flesh and joining together.
If it is thus healed, it is well. If not, in no other way can it be healed;
and if the tent goes in and does not pierce to the depth which is the foundation, and there is between your tunica and the tent a thick covering of flesh or of fascia, and you see the fistula following the covering of the heart; if you cut at the beginning of the fistula, and push it forward before the tent, and then the cauterize after, as long as it comes to the head of the tent;
and will be delivered the tent, and will fall; then define those char faults that seem a feather of bird, and there remains nothing.
And if the without-skin goes in, and is caught between you and the work, then cauterize it with fire or medicine sharp.
Because the fire cautery assembles two good things: that is to say, the burning of those joined-up hairs, and the stopping of blood and the drying of moisture;
then the cure of tents moistened in butter or in ground thing, as long as the wound lies low, and it has been burned from within by the fire;
Then cure the wound of eye infections by applying a hard, dry substance, and they are dry medicines.
Because when it is restored, it is healed and does not return.
And if the fistula comes all the way down to the very base, and is separated from the body, then you put your finger or foundation in, and examine them.
If you feel the opening and between two is the membrane or sheath or cartilage where it is close to piercing, then there is only a way of faith and hope, by the administration of one of the three ways:
or you cauterize it as we have said, or you cut it to the bottom, or if you can put a tent there and care for it as before.
and do not let them be too full, so that you do not cut the tenement which holds the foundation, and come the excrement by the free will of the senses. then cure it, as we have said.
then cure it, as we have said. by chance it will be healed, or you remove that covering and the wound once it is cut near the foundation, or by tent or by another pointed instrument. then bind the flesh which is in the wound as well as you can
then study to restore the wound, and to delay the fistula in the part outside the foundation; so it is lighter thing for the patient.
And at times are fistulas according to this manner: and it is when you put the tent in the fistula, and it is or costs next to the foundation of along with the skin above, if take a tent pierced at the head according to this form: And one puts two threads twisted together, and puts the tent on all the thread in the fistula until it reaches the head.
If it is pierced in the margin of the base inside, then extract the thread from that one, just as you put your two threads or foundations.
And treat the head of the thread, and assemble the two heads together, and bind them to each other, and let it be one or two days;
And restrain it every time, until the threads close the channels that are between them, and they stick together;
Then cure the wound until it is healed and sound.
If the fistula does not pierce, make it pierce in all the ways that you can, if it is not too deep.
For it does not behoove to make for the lacing covering if it is too deep, and then cure it, as we have said, until it is healed.
The form of the spatula spinal which one makes the fistula with is very acute, on one part and cutting; and on the other hand no, because for that one does not cut what one should not cut, as you see here.
Hemorrhoids are according to 2 manners: or they are within the fundament, as grains of resin, and there are small and large ones, and in short they bleed. And there are one or more, and they are outside the fundament and at the head of the fundament; but those that are outside have little moisture,
and again a drop of citrine water or a drop of blood, and have the color of the body;
and the cure of those who have them within the foundation, if it is that you command the patient to stretch in order to go into rooms, as long as the foundations are gone, and the threads appear; if you hurry, and can seize it with tweezers, or you hold it with your finger, then cut it at its roots;
and if the tweezers cannot hold them because of their moisture, then take them with one drapery, or with cotton, or from a piece of felt; and lead them to your hands, then cut them, and powder above any hot powders that are in place of cautery. and you cauterize them as it is said in the chapter of cautery, then cure them with other cures until they are healed.
and if the foundation cannot come out, then enema the patient with a harsh and biting enema to wash what is at the foundation, so that it can come out clearly.
and if the patient is restrained, and if the threads are far from the foundation, then the cure is light. And it is that you seize them with your finger or pliers, and cut them, then cure them as we have said, until they are healed, and he fears the incision by iron.
If it is necessary that you administer the suture according to this manner: take one twisted thread, and put it in a needle, and then pull the thread above and make the needle pierce on the other side, and turn the two ends of the thread below the needle. and if it is of a wide width; and tighten the thread firmly, then knot the thread, and extract the needle, and do likewise with all the others, and leave one for correcting the superfluity of blood;
then place upon the foundation one draping moistened in rose oil or in cerate, and place it on the foundation, and command the patient that he rest;
And then leave it until they itch, and when they are set, treat them with ointment and other treatments, until they are healed.
Through drying of the fevers or foundation Many times there is a drying of fevers in the intestines, and by constraint of nature, and when the disease is old and the medicine does not help.
Then it is fitting that you scrape to the point of a spatula or with your fingernail the bark on top, so that it does not get moist. then the cure as long as it is healed as it should;
and if it cannot heal, begin the shaving again more strongly than before, until it heals well, and be scraped; then the cure as long as it is healed.
about trembling A formic is a small appearance faulted before the body, and goes much en by them.
And no time the trueve the cold, and it feels him also like dead of shiver, and comes in all the body, and more as hands than other part.
And the cure is that you take a cane of a goose feather, or a vulture feather strong, and put that cane upon the shiver, until the circle preignite the shiver all around; then turn your hand to all the cane until you cover all around the shiver, and let it go in by them, and root out the shiver from its roots.
And if you see this, do like that of a dog's iron or steel according to this form, and be subtle below and trailing above:
Do not let it pierce, so as to hold at the two, and move pressing; And if you see this, cauterize the vein, as it is before or chapter of cautery.
of the form of the clyster Sometimes a clyster is made of silver or copper, or melted iron or mesh; and sometimes these instruments are made small and large, according to those to whom they are administered.
Those then whom one administers care to for children and who are weak and painful, are small.
The form of the clyster small and large is above wide, where the belly is tied in this manner:
and there is a separation where the belly is tied, as you see, and the shoulder is pierced inside; and on one side two holes, and on the other one;
and the belly is where one puts the medicines of a bladder of beast or parchment, and it is pierced all around with small holes,
and between each wound one must put a space, then put in these wounds one strong thread of twisted thread for ten or as much as it goes around, and assemble the belly as if it were a kid; and when the medicine is inside, then the ligature has in front of it a strong thread, then enema; and this is the form of the circle:
And let the medicine not be too hot nor too cold, and ointment the head of the enema with oil or beaten egg yolk, or something similar, then put it in gently;
then the minister squeezes it with his two hands together, until it is all in, then withdraws the enema, and raises the patient's legs to the side;
and if the medicine wants to work well, let it stay as long as possible; and if it stays one whole night, it is more helpful.
And if you give him an enema for the sickness of a falling belly, and the medicine rushes out quickly, let it return as many times as necessary until he is healed.
And if the hemorrhoids are located at the base or as an abscess, then administer the enema as subtly as for a one-year-old child.
And this is the form of the subtle enema used when the skin is constrained:
of wounds
We have said in the division the cure of wounds; now we will tell you the cures of hands and medicine, according to accomplishment.
I say that wounds are diverse according to what they are made, and according to the places where the wounds are made, and of what they are made.
The things by which wounds are made are by the thrust of a stone, and the cutting of a sword or knife, or of a spear or staff or arrow, or of similar things.
or which are made according to the parts of the body, such as a wound that falls on the neck, or on the head, or the back, or the belly, or the liver, and similar limbs;
and I will tell you the cure of each wound, and I will begin with simple wounds of the head, because remembrance will come in its chapter.
I say that when a simple wound comes to the head, and the bone is not broken, then take care if it is from a stone or similar things, and the skin is entirely torn and the wound is large, and you doubt greatly of a hot abscess: if it makes so soon to bleed from the cephalic itself even if little blood comes from the wound, and the bleeding is on the contrary side of the wounded part;
and avoid the patient's intake of wine and heavy meats.
And if he does not want to bleed, then let his meat be lessened, and drink no wine, nor eat meat.
And put on the wound, if a boil comes to it, cotton moistened in rose oil alone, or in wine steeped.
And if there is no boil, then put on the wound, if it is fresh and all its blood has not been shed, and it is not touched by air, a powder, which I shall say in a little while later.
and if the art has moved it, place some ointment on it, until it is healed.
And if the wound is large as of a sword cut and similar, and the lips cannot be brought together by tents, then assemble them by stitching, as I shall say about wounds of the belly, of the suture.
If the wound is exposed of the bone, and hanging, and holds only by a bit, then cut it off; then cure the wound with medicine, and restore hard flesh in place of skin. And command the patient to eat thick meats, such as beef and cooked wheat, also as beans, and similar things.
And if you find yourself with rotten skin, and it does not reach the bone, then cut out all the rot, and throw it away, then treat it;
And if there is an artery in the wound or vein, which cannot be stopped by anything, and it does not stop bleeding with medicines, then cauterize the artery, and if you find it dislocated, tie it with a thread. And if this does not help, then cauterize it.
And if these wounds are small and simple, then the treatment is light: and that you put into this powder which binds so that when the wound has been cleaned.
And the manner of the powder is this: take incense one part; dragon's blood two parts; quicklime three parts, and grind the powder finely, and apply it to the wound, and hold it firmly in place until it dries well and joins all its blood;
and then bandage it well, and leave it unbandaged if it doesn't swell; for the medicine is not removed until it is healed.
And at no time is this made with only quicklime when incense or dragon's blood are not available, but that the fire has cauterized the wound.
And if the artist has cauterized the wound, even still, if one does not put this powder there;
but puts on certain dressings digested, or poultices of barley flour made with water and honey, as long as it lies bowed; then he cares for other sores until it is healed.
And if the broken bone comes with the wound, and it is small, then he extracts it with fine pincers;
and I will tell you here after the fractures of the head.
of the wound of the neck
The wound comes to the neck and it is simple, if there is no difference between it and that of the head, but if the nerves of the neck or the artery are cut.
If it is the nerve, there is nothing else to do but let the wound heal, and put nothing restraining on it, because it harms the nerves and makes them retract. And do not put on the wound anything cold, for the substance of the nerves is cold, and the continuation of these with the brain, which is the most high part of the body.
But let the medicine be warm, such as calx washed in water and mixed with rose oil, and cupped also in water. And other minerals according to this manner, and humid ointments.
And if the wound is large, sew it and bind it with bandages, then care for it until it is healed.
And if the wounds are deep and the head is raised and full of bulge, then pierce it or lower down.
And if the artery is cut, and there comes bleeding, then stop it, and tie it off, and cauterize it as is necessary.
And if the spine of the throat is cut, or the gullet, and the passage is kept open, so that the meat goes through, then sew the heart above the chain of the throat, and do not touch the throat but place it according to its natural form; and then the strain happens and let him for some days, then cure with ointments until he is healed;
and if the wound has made an impression in the bone, so desire it; and if there are fragments of bone, if you can remove them all with instruments, and those that you cannot get, leave it until the wound decays; and let it be cleared and aligned the opening;
and if the wound is fresh, then powder on the powder that I have said. And if it has bone in the wound and there is a fistula, then treat it as I have said in my chapter.
of the wound from a lance or knife
If it is a wound from a lance or knife, and the wound is deep, then look if from the wound there are wind escaping as the patient breathes: know then that the wound is mortal;
And if it is not deep, and it is fresh in all its blood, then do not put any powder to it in the first hour, nor bind it at all so that the blood does not stay in depth. And return to the heart, and console the patient. But I put attractive ointment, and bind it two times a day.
And if you do not have ointment, then put old cotton in the wound to suck out the moisture.
and make the patient sleep on the wound for 3 days, or 4, or more; if no spasms come, nor bad trembling of heart nor drawing pains of the arm; and when you see the good disposition, then you know that the wound is saved. Treat it then with bandages and other dressings, as long as it is healing;
and if it cannot heal and work, know that there is a fistula; so treat it as one should.
And if the wound is from a sword or knife incision, and it is simple, or deeper, or on the back, so treat it as described above.
if it is large, sew it; and if it is small, treat it with powder; and if it is deep into the bone, and has broken pieces, then clean the wound, and remove the foreign objects if they are loose. and if they are not loose, leave the wound to rot so that it will be easier to remove them.
And of other wounds, as of other members is the judgment as we have said.
Of the displacement of the belly
The displacement of the belly is great and medium and small;
Of the great wound sometimes the intestine or the nerve of the intestines jump out, because of which the introduction of others;
And the suture is more troublesome, and sometimes a small wound is worse than a large one.
Therefore, for this reason, intestines are put back in place more carefully if they are not immediately put back in warm [water or solution] because the intestines swell immediately when they feel cold, so they go back in place more difficultly.
And for this reason, it is worse to treat the middle wound because for this reason intestines are reset into place more than other two  [wounds or areas].
And know that the rupture of the belly is according to .iiij. manners:
The .ij. common sutures occur in the suture of the belly,
And the suture of other wounds of the body and .ij. other proper sutures are common to other wounds;
And nonetheless they are more proper with the suture of the belly, and I will say each one and declare it.
I say that when the wound is small, and nothing from the intestines has been brought out, and if something is to be put back in, then it is done by one of the two ways: or because of the smallness of the wound, as we have said, or because the intestine is swollen from the cold.
And when it is cold, warm it in this manner: Soak a sponge or a piece of cloth in hot water only, or you cook it in water with boiling and cypress and spice. and remove the intestine until the swelling is gone;
and sometimes this kind of tightening is done, and it is moved back to its place for healing.
And when you see the swelling depart, moisten the intestine with water or broth and apply bandages that are well cooked. because by these it is aligned the entrance to small things;
and if it cannot enter, then make an opening in the wound with the instrument that is used to treat hemorrhoids;
and the first cure is to move the waist that we must not cut into it without great necessity  there be;
and this is the instrument for splitting it:
so trench inside in the curve and not outside, and see here the form:
And when the wound is enlarged, and the intestine leaps out if it is returned again according to its natural form in its proper place, if you have the power, because this moves.
When the wound is wide, and it is in the part below the belly, so it is necessary that you make the patient lie on his back and put his legs higher than his head; and if it is in the lower part of the belly,
and also if a rupture of the belly is in one of the two parts if you put yourself in those that the sunken part be higher than the other;
and thus it is necessary to administer what I say in large and small wounds.
For small wounds put that which has appeared to you,
then have between your hands i.e. minister pitiful who holds all the fracture to his hand and assemble the lips; and this is the common manner of stitching,
and this is the common manner of stitching, and that you prick a needle or more, according to the quantity of the breadth of the wound, then leave from the head of the wound i.e., a space of, and put a needle where there is i.e., a good strong thread; and pierce the two heads of the skin with the two heads of the siphon,
then the restraint of a double thread around the needle of two parts then assemble the two ends of the wound conveniently
and then leave one  two of spacing, and insert another needle; then tie the thread as you did with the first needle, and do not cease doing this according to what you need of needles, as long as all the wound is restrained;
and the needles are medium-sized, between fine and coarse, because the fine needles cut all the flesh, and the too coarse ones cannot enter well: for this reason they must be shortened;
and it is not proper to put the needles too far from the flesh and skin.
lest they cut and open the wound in front of the suture;
and then cut the needles' points so that they do not prick the patient while sleeping, and I put tents or cloths on the shoulders of needles to hold them and let them until the wound is healed;
and this manner of sewing with needles is more convenient for small wounds, because one needle or two are used
The second suture is common, and it is that you join the two joints of the skin and the two joints of the fascia together with a needle or it has one strong medium thread; and when you will have pierced these four joints together,
and when you will have pierced these four joints together, then pull the needle to the part where you have begun, in the manner one sews the drapes;
and put space between each suture the thickness of a minor coin;
this suture is taken by the man,
and I sewed a wound that one had in his belly,
which was pierced by a knife, and the wound was more than a palm wide, and it was two palms wide of entrails
and the wound was in the middle of the belly I brought back the intestine after it had been for 24 hours.
and the wound was stitched until .xv. days, and I treated it, and it healed.
And the wise men had judged that he would die, and it was a miracle;
and I did not cure him with ointment, because I was in one place where there were none to be found, nor any medicine; and I put half a handful of old cotton on the wound twice a day, and washed it with honey water until it healed.
Or I will tell you the two proper ways of suturing:
Take the needle, and bring it out from the outside part to the inside one;
When it pierces the right core straight through, lay it on top of the siphac or where you put in the needle,
and make it pierce from the other side, from the inside out;
and the understanding of this sewing is that you sew as the furrier does furs, and that you leave once the seam of one part, and take it up of the other, as long as the sewing is all complete.
The second manner of sewing, which the Galicians say properly,
is like no other, which assemble the two parts together naturally, and apply one of the head to the other head, in such manner:
insert a needle or head of the mirror close, and make him feel it alone, and let the two heads of the syringe; then turn the needle, and make it feel from the outer part until the inner one, As the two shoulders of a person;
Then have each one examined from the outside part to that inside, in two other shoulders of a mirror which are on the other side;
and this is the most common and usual way of stitching.
The Gauls say this word, and no one testifies it.
One must sew the belly with two needles, each having thread.
And one must push one needle from one side and the other from the other, in the manner of those who sew corsets;
and know that when the rupture is in the middle of the belly, it is more difficult to suture than other parts of the belly.
The judgments of the wound are like the judgments of other wounds:
and it is that when you find the wound fresh with all its blood, as if the arrow has moved it, then set back the intestine, and sew it up; then put on powder mixed with charcoal,
then set back the intestine, and sew it up; then put on powder mixed with charcoal, and if the arrow has moved it, then put on any ointment that is present, until the wound closes; and stitch up the thread, and have the sutures sealed, and the bandage. then treat the wound as with others, until it is healed;
and if you lack medicine, apply upon it, as soon as it begins to fester, old cotton, and change it twice a day until it is healed.
For you need no other medicine in many cases when wounds are simple.
and if you doubt that the wound does not join with principal members, then it is fitting that you moisten the linen lightly in oil of thyme warmed, or in rose oil, and lay it around the edges, and under the armpits;
and if he feels pain or rot in the bowels, and many times it happens if they cleanse with black wine enemas, and similarly if the rot comes to the intestine;
and pierce it inside, and know that when it is the large intestine, it is easier to heal than the small one.
The intestine called "young" cannot heal when it is rotten, And it is for the disposition of the veins that they are, and for the subtlety of the whole body, and the proximity of its nature to the nerves.
And if the thread jumps from the wound, put it back in as if it were an intestine, while it is fresh;
and if it is old and has become dark or black, then it is necessary that you tie the place that is black so that bleeding does not come from it, because there are veins and arteries there;
then cut what is between the bones and put the two heads hanging from below the wound area to the outside in order to align the extraction when the bones fall and the wound bends.
of the rupture of the boil
When the intestine is round, and the wound is small, if it may be restored in certain men,
because I saw that one man was wounded or pierced in the belly of a spear;
and the wound was on the right side of the stomach, and it became infected and turned into a fistula, and through it there came excrement and wind;
I took care of it according to what I could, and did not cease to treat it until it was healed, and the bones were soldered.
And when I saw it soldered, I doubted that the patient was unwell in his belly; and he had no pain, but remained in better condition, and ate and drank.
And they said to the experimenters that when he has a small wound in his intestine, it must be bound in this manner: take thread to large test (or,  thread made of big twists), then gather the lips of the wound and when the thread has opened the mouth, put it on the two lips
then put one other flem after in that same manner as before, until the wound is completely covered;
and cover the wound. If it gets hot in the intestine, and no harm comes to the patient,
and if one can bind the intestine with a fine thread that is cut from the intestine of an animal,
in such a manner: take the head of this intestinal thread that be much cleaned, and then tie to the head of this thread i.e., a thread of fine twisted linen, then put the thread into the needle, and sew the intestine, and stitch it up in the rupture;
and this manner of stitching of fringes is not foreign but according to the way of faith and hope;
and if the wound is great and wide, even when it is in one of the inner parts of the bowels, there is nothing but subtlety.
of fistula or wherever it may be Know that every wound or abscess, when it opens, is universally called "fistula", and also when it is raised and bent back.
And a fistula is according to the truth a knotted sore hard and white, in which one feels no pain, and is also raised like the feather of a bird;
and sometimes it jumps clear back, and other times thick; Some times little, and sometimes enough;
and I have spoken of it in the division of wounds, that any wound that is not healed, and there is no flesh, it is only due to one of the eight causes:
that is to say, by the smallness of blood or flesh; or for its wickedness; or because there is hard flesh inside it, and on the lips, which does not allow flesh to grow; or where there is too much swelling; or when the wound is festering, and the matter is of bad quality; when the medicine is not good for the cure; or because the corruption is manner of pestilence; or because the property in the region is tardy for digestion, and tardy for health, and inflated by nature; or there are veins or bones:
and I have already shown all these causes, and the signs, and the cures of medicines in the division.
And it is necessary that I make you know the cure of fistula which is done by the work of hands.
Know that fistula occurs in all members of the body; For there are fistulas that come from great veins, and arteries, and nerves, or to the liver, or to the intestines, or to the bladder, or to any of the ribs. or to the spine of the back, or to any joint of the hands or feet;
And all fistulas that are in this manner are of grievous healing, and there is only labor, and ignorance;
and if there is any fistula that does not come to where I have said, and you are confident in the cure, and if you see it known, then take a tent of iron or iron, if the fistula is straight, otherwise curve it.
and if the fistula is crooked, then surround it with a fine tent of lead. for lead can be bent to follow the twisting;
and if the fistula is poorly pierced by hands, then treat it with one of the openings,
because the moisture runs from one opening to another, and cleanses it;
then carefully probe with your power, that you know if there are bones or nerves, and is it covered by a membrane,
and ask well the patient of the pain he feels when pressing with your hand, and the place where he feels it.
and when you will know truly the place where it is, and if it is far from a joint, or nerve, or artery, or vein, or in any of the places that I have told you, if the cut according to what I have told you,
or in any of the places that I have told you, if the cut according to what I have told you, and bone be removed the rottenness and the corrupted matter which is within; and then the treatment until it is healed
and if the fistula is well deep from right place, then you must cut it deeper, as much as you can then put moist tents in medicine of honey, and push them up to the head of the fistula
then put moist tents in medicine of honey, and push them up to the head of the fistula until the medicine corrodes the superfluity which is accumulated at the bottom;
and then I put ointment invigorating sinews, until it is sound
and if it is not sound by those means, then cauterize it as we have said
and if the bone is corrupted by the fistula, cut it away. If veins or nerves strike or injure principal members as we have said;
and if the bone is uncovered, and there is corruption and blackness, then remove all of the corruption. then cure it with things that are appropriate until it is sound
and if it does not become sound, and returns to being as before know that you have not gone far enough
if you discover and as long as you are at the bottom and remove all corruption, then restore the place;
and if it is thus healed, it is well. If this does not happen, know that the corruption is too deep, that you cannot succeed there; if there isn't another thing that lets nature to do
and if there is a small bone corrupted, and you can pull it out with pliers. if the extraction with i.e. an instrument suitable for this is done
and if there are many bones, pull them all out carefully, don't leave any behind;
and if moisture acts against you, and there is no error or fear, if it copes and moisture and flesh, and delivers the bones.
And if you cannot remove them within an hour, then put upon the wound something hindering rot, and let it stay until the flesh around the bones is rotten,
and therefore they will have the bones more easily;
And if it is a large bone, such as of the leg or thigh, if you remove only so much corruption until the blackness is entirely gone, then restore the wound;
and if there is a great part of it rotten, and comes to the bone; then it should be cleaned and covered until the corruption, and then cure it until it is healed;
and I will tell you about a fistula that happened to one man in his leg, so that you may take it as an example and help in your work.
There was one young man about thirty years old, who had pain in his leg from a cause that came from within the body.
As long as the materials came to the leg, and was swollen with a large abscess, and had no external cause to open.
But the surgeon, through their foolishness, opened it so much that the abscess opened. And in pus a great deal of matter came out, and it became a fistula, and there came much of moisture that all lay swollen and wet from the body;
and many a mire put care for two years, and there was no sage in the art of hands
until I came to be called, and saw his leg and the medicines with which they were treating him and those who ran through the veins to a great extent and became red the body of the youth, and had a yellow color.
I put a tent in one of these pits, and then I searched all the pits.
and found that one came against the other from all parts of the leg.
I hastened then, and dug into one of the pits until I uncovered a part of the bone and found it rotten and pierced, and the corruption came  to the inside bone
I was the one who appeared to me of the corrupted bone, and I thought that there was no other corruption, except for this one which I removed.
And I began to restore the wound of soothing medicines by long length, and it cannot join.
And then again I started, and discovered the bone as before.
and found the corruption continued in the bone, and I removed it, and then I took out the bone, and tried to join the place.
but I could not more than I coped around a palm of the bone, and the treated was to its whole form then I restored it with medicines; and he was healed and joined together quickly,
and he needed not to recommence the work except for the weakness of the patient, who could not bear and for the fear of death that I had of him. Because for bloodletting often happens, but it was healed entirely.
Because for bloodletting often happens, but it was healed entirely. And in the place of the bone, a hard cartilage was born, and he was of good disposition and had no pain nor contrary at all, neither now nor to come.
and extend the head so that you draw the corrupted flesh outward. and uncover the skin on the place where you want to be, so that the bone does not whiten the skin; and put one coal or a board under the bone so as to cover the corrupted flesh; and it is necessary to be as careful as one can see and feel the corruption, and to be even more careful another time.
And if the bone is corrupted, and does not open well, and the corruption is in the middle or in one part, if uncover all the flesh; then put one coal under it,
and then let it pass from one part to the other the corruption, and be the silk long of the corruption i.e. pox, as we have said.
and if the corruption is in the joint, so cut the corrupted joint, and let the bone where it contains from the other side;
and if the corruption is in the continuation of the two joints, so there is nothing else than to cut;
and if the corruption is or finger of the hand, or or finger of the foot, so it is very strong that thing, but nonetheless it is necessary that you inquire about that corrosion, how it opens to you; and purify it in all the ways that you can, but that the vein or nerve do not oppose you;
and know that the scalpel and threads for covering these bones are many, according to the setting of the bones and their appearance, and their thickness and subtlety, and their size and smallness, and their hardness; And for this reason, it is necessary to prepare each kind of work its instrument.
And know that the work will show you the instrument which you will need, according to the knowledge of this art, and the testimony of the manners of the diseases; so consider the instrument which you need according to what is fitting.
of fire The shoulder may be dislocated due to inside, or outside.
and when you will have medicated that corrosion by the cure of medicines, and they do not benefit then it is necessary to cover that limb up to the place where the corrosion comes if the patient escapes by this from death, or by the malice, which is greater, of the fault of the member
if the patient escapes by this from death, or by the malice, which is greater, of the fault of the member and the signs are that the limb becomes black, so that it seems to be burned by fire. and after the blackness, then goes that corrosion of limb from limb and takes over the whole body; if you hasten to treat it,
and if it is by the percussion of some venomous beasts, such as sea scorpions and vipers and similar.
if the corrosion is at the head of the thigh, then cut it, and do not allow him any space to come as far as the hand.
And if it comes as far as the hand, then cut at the joint so that the corrosion does not come as far as the arm;
and if it comes to the arm, then cut at the elbow; and if it passes the elbow, it is death. and there is no worth of administration beyond the quantity of its virtue;
And thus do it when the corrosion comes or sets in; if it comes in the first joint, cut after the other joint.
and if it comes at any point, cut the whole part. and if it ascends to the leg, cut at the knee joint;
and if it comes above the knee, there is no other means than to leave the patient to death;
and the manner of covering or supporting the limb is that you bind it above and below, and extend some bandages one from the lower band, and others from the upper band, and you will widen the skin which is between the two bands by one span wide, so that the bone may be uncovered;
Then cover or cloth it, and put on each side one drape of linen, so that the sore does not touch the healthy place. And there may come to the patient another lesion and abscess.
And if bleeding comes when you operate, cauterize the place thoroughly. or put on some powders restraining there, then return to your medicine until it is complete,
Then bind the injured limb with a suitable bandage, and treat it until it is healed.
And I will tell you that it happened to one man in his foot:
He had a blackness that seemed burned by fire,
and that corrosion first came in his heel of the foot, until it possessed the whole foot;
And when the knight saw the corruption, he hastily covered his foot, and was healed.
And long afterward the corruption returned to him in the hand, and he came to me.
And I put on him things  that are repulsive after the purification of the body, and could not stop the corrosion.
And he wished that I would cut off his hand, but I refused, because I had hope of repelling the matter. and beware also if he cuts his hand, that it does not become infected because the virtue of man is weak; and he despaired of all, and returned to his land, and took care to cover his hand, and was healed;
and I have recounted this tale for the reason that others may do likewise, if they need to.
Sometimes an abscess comes to a head in the flesh and remains for so long that it causes a great gathering of pus. And then bursts and pierces, and the pus leaps out, and the wound remains open like a vessel; and the skin that is above it is as thin as one fine linen cloth, and does not go all the way to the bone or nerve, and such a disease is called "healthy",
but if it is so elongated that it comes to the bone and penetrates it, then it is called "fistula";
and the cure of this is that you cut that skin all around, and also when it is thinned out, just like a cloth; and it will not be harmed by its decay.
And if you believe the skin is hardened, and the corruption is not yet complete, and the skin is thick with flesh, then treat it with this enema:
look if the breasts are large, and the bowel within them is of a foul smell, then administer an enema of Egyptian medicine which is made as follows: Take thus, oil, and lead, equally, and put to boil in one vessel over a fire. until the medicine becomes red, and as thick as honey;
and then take of this according to your need, and make it in water and honey, and in clysters the loin, and restrain the discharge; and leave the medicine on for 2 hours, then remove it by pressing
do this many times, until the chest is relieved and the fear is gone.
and at no time is it clstered with water of ashes, when this medicine is not present, and is that you take ashes from a vine branch, and pour water over it
Then let it flow, and keep it clean, as long as you know that the breast is well cleansed;
and if the patient cannot bear it, neither the Egyptian remedy nor the water of ashes, then administer a clyster of water and honey where there is a bit of litharge ground; or you can give them a clyster of honey and  sweet wine, as honey has the property of purifying and washing; and wine makes blood flow;
and when you have done this and you are certain that the chest is well purified, if the clyster of those things which cause flesh to be born in it,
and is that you prepare a plaster definitive, and make it with rose oil and wine; or you cleanse him with some medicines and ointments, about which I have spoken the properties or treatment of ointments
and if the opening in the chest is small, and the cannula of the enema cannot enter it, then enlarge it with an iron a bit, and put in an ointment tent of Egyptian ointment, or basil ointment, until it is enlarged;
And if the wound is too wide, so much of the edge you leave it only to where the clyster can enter
And if the peritoneum that lies above is lower, so he cuts or more below where it is. Because when the bowel is in perfect position, then you do not let flesh interfere; and if you cannot cut the side below as you see fit, if it is arranged in such a manner that the belly reaches the lowest point that there is
and if you cannot close the breast as you wish, if it is arranged in such a manner that the belly reaches lightly downwards and nothing of the belly be left; and take consolidating medicines to put on the chest
and are placed on it, that is a linen cloth that covers the entire chest; then they cut as forces in place the opening of the chest, that is, a bit larger than the first one, then they put ointment on it (a)n other cloth according to the quantity of the opening, and place it on the wound of the chest to align the ribs, and do not remove the large dressing outside except after many days once.
And he who is outside the wound of the chest, often removed to remove the ribs, And know what comes from the ribs, whether it is venom or pus or enough, or digestible, or indigestible;
And take heed if the patient feels pain or not, and if there is an abscess or no.
and when your medicine has been spread out in such a manner and you see nature rise above the wound of the chest, if you know that the breast is already healing, and approaches health;
and then unwrap it in the morning, or every third day, and when you unwrap the wound, if you change one other bandage, and renew the ointment.
And if the chest lies bowed indigested after many days, know that the chest does not heal well. And if subtle venoms cut after a long time, so do not despair of health,
for health approaches. For there are men whose healings in their wounds take long, and of those who do the opposite;
and if a chest lies bowed indigested after many days, know that the chest does not heal well;
And if the chest is slow to heal and is protruding, then apply drying medicines moist in substance and dry in virtue, such as the ointment of diaphinit, because it has a great portion of vitriol, and this is the last medicine;
take the ointment of diaphinit, and make it with rose oil, and the ash of old wine equal in substance;
then mix it and use it; and the same thing is made with honey cooked well, mixed. when an inflammation does not appear
or you take myrrh and aloe and incense, and grind it, and powder it on honey when it is over the fire; and then you glue it onto one cloth, and place it over the chest, and each time administer one long thread of  aristolochia and roots of the lily of heaven, which is also like the flour of vetiver and centaury;
and roots of the lily of heaven, which is also like the flour of vetiver and centaury; and in the use of simples or composites: grind them, and make a powder of them, and put on the honey that I have said, and use it. and if the wound is prolonged, and is not cured by this treatment,
and if the wound is prolonged, and is not cured by this treatment, then know that corruption is already deep, and makes an impression in the bone, or in the hard members, or in the limbs; if the wound of fistula, as we have said before.
of the abscess of the angle
A pimple is an abscess that arises below the finger joint of the hand, or of the foot, or perhaps in other places;
and when it is neglected and one does not take care of it, then there comes 1 abscess worse, and it is worn and pulled until it reaches the root of the joint, and by chance it is worn all the way.
and the corrosion comes to the bone, until it comes pain pungent, and the shoulder is of two widths, and the color is fallow.
When you treat it as we have said in the division, and the treatment does not help at all, then it is necessary that you cut with iron all the superfluity which is remaining from the joint, then cauterize the wound after. The cautery is a great help if the bone is healthy and the nail is healthy;
and if the nail presses against the flesh, and begins to prick, and the blackness, then it is necessary that you put the root under the nail that pricks the flesh, And the end at the top, and cut that carefully and lightly And put on top the rest of the medicine burning and corrosive to remove everything.
And if the corrosion is in the bone, cut it out and treat it further, because as long as the bone is corrupted there, it cannot heal.
And if you see the two bones are broken, then cut them in 1 of the same as has been said before. then treat it until it is healed;
and if it is broken and bruised, and it hurts a lot, then you must first heal it; then cut the angle of the spatula knife across
and guard that the tail does not come up to the flesh which is below the angle, for the patient would feel too great pain.
And if it happens, put something on top that soothes.
The two things that are born in the hands of some men by chance are entirely fleshy. and by chance there is some place where there are bones, and sometimes there is a nail,
and none of them [bones] grow at the base of the joint, where the birth is in no one of our two arms. He who is born in either of our two arms does not move and he who is born at the joint of the arm, by chance does move;
The waist of that one who is fleshy is light, in such manner: the waist in its root with a broad spatula.
He who is born at the root of the joint, he is grievous to cure; so you hold him to be covered.
In that one who is born or should at the end of the buttocks, so you must first cut the round flesh until bone, then set the bone with a suitable bandage to it, then treat it until it is healed.
The swelling that comes to the two joints together comes from birth, or from the joining of a wound, or from the burn of fire, or by similar things.
If it is necessary that you set that swelling, so that the parts return according to their natural forms; then put between two tents or cloths moistened in rose oil, so that they do not stick together; or you put between two pieces of subtle plank, until their ends are joined, as it is fitting
If soldering comes to none of its two with the palm, then cover that solder as it is fitting.
Of vices
Veins are large and full of superfluous melancholy humors that come into more members of the body;
And more often happens in legs of those who go on foot and work and carry, than others.
Therefore it is necessary that you administer to him once purging with syrup, and then the healthy of the basilica.
The cure of iron is thus in .ii. manners: one is with the cup, and then draw out the black blood; and the other manner is that you lift the vein, and draw it all out forcefully.
The hip is treated this way: first raise the leg with very hot water, so that the large joint is softened. then restrain the leg of the patient from above the hip to the part below the knee; then cut open a vein in one place, or two, or three, of a wide size,
then gently elevate and pull out the black blood with your hand, from one end to the other, as much as the strength of the patient can bear;
and then tie it, and instruct him to keep it warm with black bread dough.
and recommence bleeding and lancing when the veins are full, and harm the patient.
The elevation of the leg for the patient is according to this manner: raise the leg of the patient if there is much hair, then put it in the bath, and raise the leg with hot water until it becomes red and the veins swell up;
and if you have no bain, heat it at the fire, and then the cut place the vein long to the thigh or in the part below to the ankle;
then work the skin at the incision, and scrape the vein on each side, until it appears when you feel it;
and you see it red and black, and when it enters the skin it seems like a white cord;
then push the root beneath, until it is lifted from the skin, and then place it at the incision lightly,
then place the cup in another location above three fingers; then scrape the skin over the vein until it appears then lift it to the vein, as you have done, and place it on another incision, as you have done first.
then apply another cup, or more if you need them, then lift it, and place the cup on the two points of the foot
then move it and lift it until the second incision; then extract it from one incision to the other, until all the blood has come out, then apply the cup.
and if you cannot draw it out and raise it, then put a needle to its full 1. very strong double thread, and the tie and draw it out, and put below 1. a strait, and turn your hand on one side and the other, until it comes out; and guard that it does not break, for if it breaks, then one cannot draw it out or raise it, and it comes to annoyance for the patient;
and when you have drawn it out completely, then place upon the spot of the wound wool moistened in wine and rose oil; and tend to it until it is healed.
And if the bone is contracted and twisted and wrapped together, and it is not straight, as we have said. if it is necessary that you split it tortuously, but do not cover it; and treat it as we have said before.
if it is necessary that you split it tortuously, but do not cover it; and treat it as we have said before. The shape of the iron used to cut the bone is curved, and does not pierce, so that it does not cut the vein.
and is of thick curvature, for if it were thin, it would cut the vein, but be thick as we have said, and this is the shape:
Of the civil vein
This vein is found in legs, in hot parts where no herbs or trees are born, and in land where there is no moisture;
and by chance it may be found elsewhere than in legs, and this happens because of the rot that comes from beneath the skin,
just as it comes from within the body, from serpents and worms, lodged between skin and flesh.
And if the signs of the beginning of this vein are that there comes in the leg a very great inflammation, then the veins change, and the vein begins to burst forth, as does the root of a plant.
When the head opens, then it is necessary that you envelop around a piece of wood from three and a half to two and a half inches, and the knot,
and leave the wood on the leg, and all times that it is in pain from the outside, then envelop around the wood, and the knot; and if it is too long, cut a part of it, and wrap the remaining portion, and do not cut it at its root, until it is fully emerged; for if you cut it, it goes back into the flesh, and brings an abscess and rot there, and bad sickness;
for that reason it is necessary that it be treated little by little until the head, and nothing remains on the body;
and sometimes this vein when it is treated is 5 palms long, or 10; And one time a worm came to me, which was 10 palms long, and when you cut it, it shoots out 1 ray or spurt, and it pierces to the bottom,
so that all of it issues forth; and let the matter which is inside be emptied, and administer to the place medicines preventing putrefaction any day, then treat it like abscesses.
And sometimes this vein hands pain, and even when it opens in the joint of the foot, or the foot, and there comes much blood, and from which it leaps pain; treat it therefore as we have said before.
Of worms which are born between skin and flesh
This illness is called in our land "ox disease," because it happens many times to oxen,
and is a small worm which is born between skin and flesh, and goes throughout the body going up and down, and one feels it well at the passage from limb to limb, as long as they pierce the skin where they go, and leap out;
and it is caused by rot of some humors, such as come worms and serpents and roundworms or belly;
and doubt one of its wickedness, for when it goes through the body, and it goes up to the head, and it comes to the eye, by chance enters, and destroys the eye; and this happens many times.
When you see it being cured and milked, if one can flee only when it goes:
so therefore it is necessary that you bind the place above and below with a strong cord very tightly,
then cut on top and pull the string out, and if it is driven too deep in the flesh, and you do not find it, if then you cauterize it with fire above until it dies.
and the greatest harm that it does is that it spoils the eye, as we have said;
and if you see it coming or near the eye, then restrain under it the eyebrow, then cut above, and the pus out;
and it is necessary to use the patient of purification of body with medicines solubles for the illnesses humors corrupted,
and if a wound of flesh decaying putrefaction.
Of the pain which comes from windiness This illness is called “vakirir” in our land, and is a pain that comes in certain limbs, and then moves from limb to limb; and I have seen those that I tell you.
I was called to a sick woman, and she uncovered her arm, and I saw a small swelling in the vein of the arm;
and one time after that, I saw it rise as if like a worm to the shoulder, More quickly than anything, as living silver when it departs from its place;
The pain departs from that place, and settles in the shoulder;
And then a little while after it corrodes throughout the body, until it reaches the other arm;
Then she told me that it returned toward her body, as I saw it.
I was amazed greatly how she moved so from limb to limb, for I never had seen this illness in this manner. Nevertheless, I had seen many who well moved pain from one place to another, but I never had seen it like I saw it in the woman;
and I thought to myself that it was because the woman had a dry body, and veins exposed, and because of this appears that constraint windiness;
and do not appear well according to this reason to those who are delicate, and who have moist bodies and swollen veins.
And when you see curing this disease, and the patient feels that pain, if it appears to you as we have said, if the  lump above and below is spread out evenly, and then cut upwards until that constraint windiness at its source is gone; and cauterize the place; and if you do not see it with your eyes,
if the cure of those who bring forth wind, such as fetid pills, and pills of serpentaria, and similar others.
Of arrows
Arrows are diverse, according to their appearances and according to the places in the body where they lodge.
The diversity of them is that there are some with large points, and small, and hairy, and joined. And of those who have two angles, and those who have tongues, and those which have pieces. And those which fall in any limb that falls in two ways: or in the principal member it falls,
such as brain, heart, liver, lungs, reins, intestines, bladder, and similar members. When she falls therefore in any place of these limbs, and the sign of death, which I will tell you afterwards, appear to you: then it is necessary that you take care in the extraction of this arrow, because death comes afterwards in many positions. and when this bad sign does not appear to you, and the arrow is not deeply embedded, then draw it out, and treat the wound.
And the sign of the brain when the arrow falls and pierces the bone, and leaps up the dura mater which is on top of the brain, It is when there is scotoma and soot and swirling and redness in the eyes, and inflammation and redness of the tongue, and spasm and confusion of mind, and vomiting of bile. and perhaps it is without feeling in the nostrils, or ears; and perhaps it loses speech and voice. and jumps from the wound moist white resembling to pus, and in jumping also as burned flesh;
and if this sign appears to you, then hold off on the treatment, and treat the arrow if it is still inside.
The sign of the seventh when it falls or heart, are that it is near the left breast, and feels as if it were fixed in a hard thing, not empty. And by chance the seventh moves also like the pulse, and in short black blood, and comes coldness and cold sweat, and fainting. Know then without doubt that death is near.
And the sign of the seventh that does not move its root is that without pains of foam leaping from the wound, and the throat swells, and the patient changes color, and sighs loudly and seeks the cold air.
And if the arrow falls into the covering of the hip, it is near the ribs; and throws great pain and great pain and sighing; and moves all the members of the shoulders.
And if the arrow falls into the stomach, perhaps it jumps from the wound any thing from the indigested meat.
And if the arrow falls into the belly, and it jumps a point of fiber through the intestinal road, there is no hope in the cure, nor in the extraction of the arrow.
And if the arrow falls into the bladder, and the urine jumps out and comes out, and the patient feels great pain: know that the wound is mortal.
The other members, such as the face and neck and throat and shoulder and arm and back spine and ribs and hips and legs, and similar members, are saved according to various provisions. When the arrow is in the nerve or artery, and it is not venomous, as I will tell you that it happened to me, for that you do it in the same way.
It happened to one man with an arrow that went into the root of the nose: I tried it, and I pulled it out from the other side beneath the fat of the ear, and he was healed without any trouble.
And treat with a tool an arrow that fell in the fat of the oil under the skin. and the arrow was reshaped, and could only reach the point toward the shaft, and the arrow was large of a Turkish bow, all one iron light without ears; the tool was safe, and did not bring any bad accidents to him.
And treat an arrow from the throat of a Christian, and it was an Arabic arrow with ears:
I was the barbers, and subtly as I treated her, and she was healed by the Christians.
And I treated an arrow to one man, that it was in his belly, and thought he would die;
and then after he had passed thirty days, he did not change his condition; I cut above the arrow, and I squeezed it out, and treated the wound, and there was no bad accident.
And if you see a man to whom an arrow fell on his back, and the wound was soldered together above;
and the arrow remains inside him, and did not change its natural positions, nor found any inconvenience in any of his natural works.
And see another man, to whom an arrow fell into his face, and the wound was soldered together;
and remain thus enduring great pain; and many other similar things.
And treat an arrow in one of the king's men, which was stuck in his thigh, and was a little declining toward the right side; and the arrow was completely embedded
I was called to treat him after three days had passed. I found the wound very narrow.
I felt it with a very fine probe, and did not feel it at all; and he felt prickling and pain below his right ear. I thought it was from the tip of the arrow
I put on top of it an adhesive and digestive plaster because his wound did not swell; and appeared to me the location of the arrow.
and appeared to me the location of the arrow. I put the poultice on for several days and closed the wound directly, and the patient remained so for a long time.
until he felt the arrow head inside his flesh; and he told me this. I put on the wound a strong corroding medicine for several days, until it was open.
and feel the head of the arrow which is reddening at its place; then adjust it in the opening of the wound with that sharp medicine, until the head of the arrow appeared visibly to me;
and pierced well the ends for about four months,
and then I widened the wound so that I could insert pliers, and my own hands on either side, and it cannot be pushed out;
therefore did not cease to contrive and devise ways of instruments, until I took one day pliers well made according to that which its shape will come in the end of this chapter, until I worked it, and restored the wound
And the wise judge that the cartilage of the nose cannot be restored: I restored it then, and was sutured the wound, and was healed the patient completely.
Or I have told you the quality of the extraction of some arrows so that you put your care on those that I do not say, because the books cannot take in everything.
but the wise masters compare on things of very little importance, and on those that are present and lacking, find new works, and new instruments, to the arrangement of strange things that happen in this art.
I say that arrows are not found in the limbs where they are fastened except according to two manners: or by the place where they enter, or by another part;
and that which leaps further than where it enters, is an arrow that enters into the flesh, and does not leap any other time.
And if it does not leap now, let it remain until the flesh is carried around it, and the exit be healed.
and also if it is stuck in the bone, and it cannot move out, let it be like this for some days, and moisten it every day;
and then it will jump out, and if it does not jump out, pierce around with a very fine needle until the surrounding tissues are spread open, and then treat it.
And if the arrow is put back in its place in the body, but it cannot be seen, then you must search the whole tent; and if you feel it, then treat it with any suitable instrument;
and if you cannot by the widening of the wound, and by the depth of the arrow; and there is no bone or nerve or vein, then widen it as much as the wound is large; and treat the arrow if you can, and if it has ears where it holds
and treat the arrow if you can, and if it has ears where it holds if remove the bone that is embedded in two parts as much as you can and then break or bend the ears of the arrow as much as you can draw it out;
and then break or bend the ears of the arrow as much as you can draw it out; and carefully so that you do not break the arrow, but draw it more easily.
And if you cannot at once, then lay it until the place around it is softened, then treat it, because extraction is easier. And if the bloodletting goes against you, then administer what we have said about the treatment in its chapter;
and guard yourself from incision near the nerve and the vein, and put every effort to extract the arrow without danger;
whether quickly or slowly, whether firmly or gently; and put the patient in the position he was in when the arrow struck him, for this is the greatest help that there can be, and if you cannot, set it according to what the signs show you.
The arrow that comes from elsewhere, where one sees nothing or the skin is swollen in that place if one sees it or feels it clearly:
Cut then, as much as the pliers can take, and then extract it; if it jumps out now.
And if it is held in the bone, then turn your hand round and round until it enters the bone, and widen the bone, then extract it.
And if it cannot be drawn out, leave it there still, and then begin to extract it again until it is drawn out.
and if the shaft of the arrow is in it, pull out the whole shaft;
and if the shaft has broken off, and you see administering puss-drawing is necessary, then administer one instrument so that the point of the arrow enters into the hollow of the instrument; and then pull it out,
and if the arrow is lodged, one puts one instrument to point entering within, to aid the extraction.
And if the arrow is encircled, it is necessary that you cut all the flesh around where the venom is, if you can. then cure the wound as is proper.
And if the arrow falls in the buttocks or the belly or the bladder or the ribs and it is close, and you can cut above, then cut.
and guard yourself from covering the vein and the nerve, and then extract it, and then sew up the wound if need be. and care for it until it is healed.
The form of the forceps used to treat arrows are similar to the beak of an eye, and see here the form:
And there are many types: large, medium, and small, according to the quantity of the arrow.
of the veins of the common body There are 31 veins from which one heals, from which there are 16 chiefs.
That is to say: 2 batsons which are after the ears, which are called the two "herbech"; and the 2 arteries which are in 2 temples appearing; and 2 veins that are in 2 tear ducts of the 2 eyes, which are called "aspirates"; and the vein that is in the forehead; and the vein that is at the top of the nose; and the two veins that are on the neck; and the two veins that are in the lips above the mouth, and these are the veins called "augeherich"; and two veins that are below the tongue.
The veins which are commonly used are five in each arm:
One is the cephalic and is on the inner side of the arm, and the common people call it "vein of the head"; And the middle one is called "fast," and is composed of the cephalic and basilica, And the common people call it "vein of the heart"; and the basilica is on the outer side, and the common people call it "vein of the belly", and is on the bone. and is the one that is healed, which opens clearly on the pouch.
And the  salve vein is the vein that is between the ring finger and the little finger, and has two veins;
and in the leg and where the foot is there are three veins: one of them is below the curve of the pouch on the left side ribs; and the second saphenous vein which is at the ankle of the right leg; and the vein which is called "nerves", which is in the ankle of the other leg.
and in the other leg are three veins below those.
The vein of the veins that are after the ears so helps with ancient catarrh, and migraine; and the quality of the sanie, as I tell you, and is that you raise the head of the patient,
and the quality of the sanie, as I tell you, and is that you raise the head of the patient, And rub the place where the veins are with a rough cloth; then tighten the patient's neck with a strap. Until the two veins appear behind the ears in two places depending on the head: Then to your loin, and where you feel the pulse below your loin, seize hold of it;
then take the lancet, and thrust it below the vein until the bone, then lift your hand all along the vein upwards, and cut and the skin and the vein well two times through, and make blood flow as much as you see
then restrain it and bind it, until it is healed;
and I have already said the incision and cautery in the first book.
The draining of the two arteries that are in the two temples, it is good for ancient migraine, and suddenness, and habitual blepharitis, and to the body of the sharp tears the eyes;
And the qualities of the blood are so as I say: And that the patient retracts his neck so that the two veins appear openly; and feels the pulse below his jaw, and then governs by it;
Then lift lightly the heart on the vein upwards to your index finger, and push the lancet underneath. and lift the vein upwards, and the cut, as you have done in two other veins, and make a flow of blood according to your need.
then untie the patient, and put your hand on the vein for an hour, then put cotton on it.
and then bind it together, and leave it until it is healed; and we have already spoken of their cutting and extraction, as at the beginning of the book.
The bloodletting of the vein of the forehead is as valuable as that of the cephalic vein for old face ailments, and for migraine, and for redness.
And the quality of this is that the patient strains their neck by twisting it, until the vein appears; Then take the instrument which is called "fossor", whose form is:
And put the point on the vein, and steady it with your hand, or something else, and let the blood flow according to the quantity that you see; then bind the patient's neck, and tie the vein as long as it is healed and never work with a wide flame.
However, it is not proper that the flames are too large; and to heal across, because the bone is near, and by chance breaks the flames when they are subtle.
The healing of the two veins that are in the two tear ducts helps the eyes, and to the jaw, and to the nosebleed, and to the  orifice in the eye, and to the diseases of the face.
and the qualities of their healing are that the patient strains his neck by twisting with some linen, as before;
Then heal it, and let the healing be through the thickness, an inch long and an inch wide, for there is no flesh there.
And if the flame is fine, perhaps it breaks; then make a correction with blood, as much as you need, and then tie it with cotton, and tie it well.
The healing of the vein of the nose is good for fever, and for fresh wounds, and for facial diseases, such as migraine and redness that comes on the face, even if it is old.
and the qualities of the vein are such that the patient tightens his neck, then strains his head with your left hand, and take the subtle long flame, and place it in the space that is between the two nostrils, for the vein does not open well enough when, and the blood will now begin to flow;
and do not allow it to flow too much, and make the blood flow according to your need, then tie it up for a night, because it is very quickly restored;
The blood of the two guindeges helps in the treatment of the  alanne, and in the beginning of meselerie, and in many diseases, and in pestilence, and in corrodens, and in herpes, and esitiomes.
and the qualities of the blood is that the patient pulls his neck out from one and the other, as we have said. And so be the master standing on top of the patient's head, and the patient sitting on one seat.
then heal the vein of the long one a little widely, then treat the blood moderately, or as much as is necessary;
then redo the other side in the other vein, then untie the linen, and restrain all the veins moderately, so that the patient does not strangle; and leave it until morning, so that the wound is healed.
Of healing the limbs The blood of the veins of the lips above helps to heal in the mouth, and to corruption of gums, and splits of lips, and sores and ulcers.
And the qualities of the blood is to make the patient sit before you, and restrain his neck as I have said; then turn the lip, and look at the two veins, one of which is on the right lip and the other on the left, and you know them by those that are black, and by those that around them have small black veins: therefore one and the other, and if you do not know them, and you are in doubt,
therefore one and the other, and if you do not know them, and you are in doubt, if you cut the larger of each side, and also make two veins that are above and below, because it is the same manner.
Of the vein below the tongue The vein below the tongue is helpful after the cephalic vein and is used for constrictions of the throat, and diseases of the eye, and diseases of the mouth;
And the qualities of the vein are that the patient lies between your hands in front of the sun, and he raises the tongue, and looks below on each side a black vein:
Then feel both, and do not feel too deeply into them, for beneath are the arteries.
The veins of the arm which commonly are felt are felt in two ways:
or they prick at one entire flame, martin wide, or olive subtle as you cut trenches, and it is called "anesil"; and are wide and subtle according to the width and narrowing of the veins. The form of the flame mirror is very renowned, and is as wide as you see:
And it is necessary for opening the veins with a flat, large blood supply, and which contain large, troubled blood; and this is the form of the olive flame:
And is more subtle pointed, and is for healing veins subtly, where there is subtle citrine blood.
The vein of the basilica, which is one of these veins, helps with diseases that are under the throat, and on the neck, and on the chest, and on the belly;
And it befits the healer to heal skillfully, and that he beware of the artery which is below. And if he cuts the artery, and a gushing of blood comes, then it befits him to staunch it, as I have said; and it must not be piercing the flame, but cutting like a knife.
And if the basilica does not clearly open, then you should constrain it and change another one; or you want no vein from it, or you heal in its place the vein within the arm: it opens clearly. and apply the knife-flame as we have said.
And if you see know the place of the vein, then it is necessary that you draw out the arm, that you touch the place until you know the pulse. Then sign the place with ink, and then tie the arm, and cut the vein with a sharp knife.
And guard that you do not wound the artery when you see the place inflamed, because it is of the artery: escape therefore.
And if you see it spurt upwards just as the urine of a child, and the blood is red and thin, know that it is blood of the artery: Hurry then, and put your hand on length, then remove your hand if it does not come out easily, which happens many times.
Bind the arm and leave it so, and do not move it, the patient; and be careful, and do not move it until it is healed.
And if it does not come out easily, and it pains you, and the medicine is not present, then cut the artery if it opens, because the head of the retraction; and bind the wound.
And take a rind of fig, and break it, and take one half and tie it well up to the other day.
If the wound is clean, that is good; if it is not, cure it, as we have said, with powders that staunch blood.
And the stanching is not done badly in more than a few positions for the small space of the wound, and the power of the arm.
The vein's blood in the middle so helps that it treats blood from the head above, and from the body below. for those that it is composed of the basilica and cephalic, as we have said;
and it is fitting for the surgeon to place himself over the nerve which is below, and if he does not prick too much, and he finds the nerve, and it swells and the saintes be grieved, and by chance cannot heal;
and this nerve opens many times, and if it does not open in any men for its subtlety, so it is fitting that you feel it with the instrument annealed; and avoid the nerve with your power.
And if there is a vein between the two nerves, then cut it long.
The vein of the head so helps, that it draws blood from the head, and helps the eyes;
and it is necessary to vein when pricking at the olive flame or the myrtle flame, because it is the safest of all veins, because it has neither nerve nor artery.
However, it is necessary to seek the lightest place, and it doesn't matter if one misses the first time, and one begins again. and by chance swells up the veins for some men, when one misses the first time, but it doesn't matter. The quality of the blood is according to your thoughts.
The first thing that you must know about bloodletting, is that it is administered only to preserve health.
and to ward off future illnesses; and it should be done in one of the three veins that are found: namely, cephalic, femoral, and basilic; and one must bleed at the beginning of Lent for everyone, and in autumn and in winter after eating, when the sign of repletion appears.
and one must bleed on the first day or the third, after two or three hours of the day.
The bloodletting that is administered to diseases does not have a determined hour, but when need is of day or night, at all hours and in all times.
and it does not behoove to bleed children until fourteen years of age, nor a woman carrying fruit from the fourth month until the seventh. Do not blood let the old who have passed 60 years.
And when certain want to bleed, in whatever manner that it may be, it is fitting that they cleanse the bowels with a light clyster. If they have much phlegm held back, so that the veins do not draw up the superfluous impurities harmful to the principal members;
Do not blood let those who are too fat from meats, nor those who are drunk, as long as they are intoxicated, nor the dropsy-stricken;
and if it is worse after colic passion, and vomiting, and belly pain, and increase of labor in woman, and travail, and watching, and fasting, and whatever the virtue, or by thing of the arm or of the body;
then subtly thin the humors if they are thick, by meats and by drinks and by medicines, if you have their power.
then enter into a bath, if nothing prevents it, to thin the blood.
and bleed from the vein of the wrist towards the third finger, as we have said;
and guard yourself from labor on this day, and from pain, and from lust, and from similar things;
and be bound and joyful, and let the hands of the one who is healing be higher than those who are being healed, and rub their arm two or three times.
then restrain the linen in the middle, for when it is too tight or loose, it cannot correct the limb.
and then rub the place with your hands, until the veins swell and you feel them.
then moisten the vein with a drop of old oil, then place his finger of his left hand on that vein below its location one drop where he wants to bleed. so that the vein does not be and fail to cut. For there are veins that are as thick as cords when bleeding, and some that are full of windiness. so that when one puts the flame on it, it retreats from the flame and cannot open the vein, and thus is one of these.
And if he opens the vein, it is too tight, for this reason it is necessary that the surgeons be advised in these things.
And if the vein is opened for the first time, it is good; if not, begin again a little below where it was cut or above, if it is not inflamed.
And if the vein is inflamed and the patient fears, let him leave it for one or two days and do not bind the arm. Perhaps an abscess will come; do not put him in a bath, then resume bleeding if it pleases him.
and if the opening is small, or the vein is short and subtly, and you doubt that there is not as much blood as you see, then fire in that same opening directly into the entire flame;
and work a point gently, so that the eyes are swollen; for this often happens when the wound is small.
If you see the place swollen, do not begin bleeding again, and put on a little bit of olive oil, because it soothes the body from blood, and is well-applied in this place, the oil.
and thus administer the olive oil in each bleeding that you bleed the veins, to stop the flow of blood.
and this same thing applies to a three-bone fracture and a bow of them, when it is put back in place; so subtle the bone and it separates when it is too big.
And if there comes a large abscess, which happens often, even when it is only drained once when the opening of the vein is small. If you hasten, and put on top a sponge moistened in water and some warm wine, and hold it for an hour.
And it is proper that you do this after the blood from the vein has flowed out, and if it remains in place after a few days with no blackening or greenish discoloration, then it does not harm him. and if you see, put on no thing of aloe or myrrh mixed in juice of calamint, mountain mint, or seeming.
And many times abscesses and appearances to the saint's basilica happen: put therefore your hand upon it, and if you find the place soft at the pressure of the hand, so is that appearance evil. Therefore shun that you put on any of those things that we have said, for by adventure it comes short of the artery; but make i. plaster dry to harden the place, then cure it with other cure, until it is healed.
And treat each according to the quantity of his virtue, and the color of the blood.
For if the wound is black, let it ooze until it becomes red; and if you see it swollen, let it subside until it is thinner; and if it is too hot, let it cool.
And it behooves him who is pale and weak, and needs the extraction of blood, to make a wider wound for him, and let the flames be wide.
And to the one who is weak, do the opposite, and it behooves him to bleed little by little and often, and one should bleed him by cutting across, not by pricking.
And this manner of bleeding is safe from the depletion of blood and the cutting of nerves, and is worth more than bleeding from a long or wide cut.
And to the one whose body needs bloodletting, it is necessary to give softened bread in pomegranate juice; if it is dried up, treat with blood three or four times.
And if he is of a cold complexion, moisten bread before bloodletting in syrup made from figs, or in honey syrup with spices, such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and chickpeas, and well-scented syrup.
And if he faints from bloodletting, after the outflow of blood, it is necessary that he inhale broth of meat, and subtle fragrant syrup.
and use other things that we have said in the division or chapter on fainting, for the evacuation of veins.
And if he wants to drain his arm, and bleed another time, if it is necessary, when he is weakened by great bleeding, that he bleeds little by little, according to the quantity of his virtue continuously.
And whoever wants to drain his arm after the first bleeding, and he has a strong body, he bleeds seven hours after the first bleeding, or after the ninth hour.
And whoever wants to bleed from another side, he must bleed on the second day or the third.
Because he has much blood within the body that is already exhausted, and brings on fever; so in this case it is necessary to draw a large quantity, and widen the opening until it flows in streams. since you have fulfilled all the conditions of health, and put your hand upon his pulse when he is healthy, so that death may not come in place of passion and this happens many times, when the healer is negligent.
and it is not right when you see a person's arm dislocated and make blood flow the second time, and the wound is closed that you press firmly upon it; nor if he is curved, that he extends his arm fully, for this would be bad;
but let it alone until it heals the second time; or you prick it at the tip of the flame, until the blood that is frozen by the vein's exit has been expelled. and put upon it i. pinch of salt rubbed in water, and press lightly.
And if the vein is swollen, leave it alone and do not constrict it, until the abscess is calmed.
And if necessity requires drawing blood a second time, let it be done in the same place, or in another vein, or in the other arm.
The vein of the arm is bled at the place of the vein of the neck because it is composed.
And the manner of bleeding is that the patient puts his hand in hot water until the flesh is red.
then be bound moderately so that the vein appears well, then bleed now through the middle, not too wide nor long;
and let the opening be wide, and bleed well near the joint of the hand, and if you cannot draw it out, put the hand back in hot water, and leave the blood in the water until you have enough.
and if it is in this state, do not put the hand in hot water, because it is put in more in winter than in summer.
and the vein of this vein is safer from all other veins, that there is neither artery nor nerve in it.
The vein of the salvation of the right hand is worth for all diseases of the liver, and this is the manner:
strain the hand, and put it in hot water, until the vein is swollen, if one sees it; and if the joint is crooked, and if you cut it completely through, it will not cause any harm.
and do not go too deep into it, because the nerves are all naked of flesh,
and then put your hand in hot water if it freezes in the wound, and cannot be pulled out.
And when you have treated the blood as much as is necessary, put oil and wool on the wound to soothe it, and do likewise for each vein.
The blood of him in the left hand is worth to the sickness of the mouse, and do all as I have said to you toward right.
The blood of the sphene is worth to all the diseases that are below the body, as diseases of the kidneys, and retention of flowers, and disease of the hips, and thighs and old legs, and similar diseases.
And the qualities of its blood are that the sick person puts their foot in hot water, and rubs over the vein until it softens, and binds above the joint of the foot; and the vein is at the ankle, and above the foot go many reins;
so take there the larger vein, or at the ankle, where it is worth more.
And if you vein it on the foot, guard yourself from the nerves that are below, and cut through it as well as when cutting; and let the flame be annealed.
And if he cannot pull out [the vein] from it, put the foot in the water and leave the vein well open.
And if the first incision of the sinew is necessary, start again a little higher up because the place is salty; Do not doubt the nerve, as we have said, and thus do the same with the sophen from the other foot equally.
The place of the sciatic vein is at the heel of the foot, and its incision relieves the pain in the hip when it is warm blood.
And the qualities of its incision are that the patient enters or bathes, and stretches above the ankle four fingers' width by twisting,
for otherwise the vein does not open; and if it opens, then heal it in every way that you can, and by crossing. and it is better that you cut it, for the vein is dry, and it is very well-covered by hand humans.
and it is better that you cut it, for the vein is dry, and it is very well-covered by hand humans. And if you do not find it, then heal any vein that opens or under the foot, and toward the small toe, and ward off the nerves;
and make as much blood flow as you see, then untie the bandage, and put cotton on it and restrain it; she is now healed.
Of suction cupping
Cupping glasses are made of horn, or glass, or wood; and cupping is done in two ways: either by pricking and drawing blood, or without pricking.
And this cupping which is without pricking, it is done in two ways: either with heat, or without heat;
and two others in two ribs of the neck; and the suction under the chin; and the suction on the two shoulders; and the suction on the  hips; and the suctions in the two arms; and the suctions on the two legs; and the leeches on the two ankles; and the suction does not treat blood, except from the small veins that are spread in the flesh.
and for this reason it does not weaken one as much, as one does with bloodletting from a vein; and it is not fitting that it be administered, neither with hot nor cold fire, in any illness which comes from repletion, until the whole body is emptied.
And if by necessity of illness it is fitting to suction, or for customs, then we administer it each hour at the beginning of the month, or at the end, and in the middle, and in any time;
because there are such who, when they have need to blow, have a heavy head;
and those who spit up phlegm and blood from their face, and their head, and neck, and darkness in their eyes;
and those who spit out a drop of blood from their mouth, and have a swollen tongue, and bleed; and there are those who dream, and see through blood and gore and death and similar things.
And when we see these signs, and even when it is removed in the month, we command to ventilate after 3 hours of the day.
The blood of the muse helps to the greatness of the head... which comes to the eyes, and it is not fitting that this be done after the evacuation of all the body;
and this ventilation is in place of the blood of the cephalic.
and it is not fitting for those who are of cold complexion to use it, or who have catarrh, because this does them great harm;
and for this reason it does not become that the elderly use them, nor those who have or head colds diseases
And those who heal from it often become oblivious, and for this reason it is necessary to place the suction cup a little lower because of the fear of obliviousness.
The ventosaion  in the neck is in place of the healing of the head and of the basilica, and for this reason it is worth to the treatment of the pain and to the bursting of the channel of the windpipe, and to all, and to repletion.
and there one must put not too firmly, because if it holds too tightly, it injures the belly or stomach and or heart.
The ventilation of the two ribs of the neck is good for pains in the head and migraine, and strangulation, and pain at the roots of the teeth.
and it is in the place of the vein of the basilica; and you must command the patient that he squeeze his hand when putting it on, so that he does not cut the artery, and there does not come a running of blood.
The ventilation below the chin is good for mouth sickness, and gum disease, and similar illnesses that are in the mouth; and it is in the place of the veins of the two lips.
The ventilation of the shoulders is good for illness that comes from heat and fullness.
The ventilation of the armpits is as good as three veins of the arm. Because it draws blood from these large veins;
And commands the patient not to pierce them too much, for their skin is bare and contains nerves and arteries.
The sucking cup which is on the rump is good for hemorrhoids of the foundation, and for diseases below, and it should be big, and of iron, that it needs to well draw; and perhaps, if it were subtle, it would break; and it makes great wounds.
The sucking cups of the legs are used openly, because they draw blood from all parts of the body, and are good for old pains of the hips, and of the knees, and of the bladder, and soften the flowers; and they are placed in the place of two shins, and of two ankles, and nonetheless they weaken the body after long use, and bring weakness in more dispositions.
The manner of putting on the sucking cup is that you put it first empty, and successively, and place it gently, and move it equally, and do not cease to do so, until you see the place red and inflamed, and appear the redness of the blood; then close it, and replace the cups, and take care in the disposition of the bodies, because there are some who have fleshy flesh, and clear pores: therefore it is necessary to strike only once, and it is necessary to make large wounds, and a deep hole; and suck gently.
And if the vein is thick, then it is necessary to strike .ii. times: the first time to subtlety the way of the thick blood.
And if the vein is very thick, then it is necessary to strike the third time; and when we want to drain blood little by little, then we pierce only once.
And if we want a lot of blood, then we repeatedly strike; and if the vein is thick, pierce it deep, and the end is that the cords be pierced constantly.
And it is necessary for one who has thick and hard skin, and who has large pores, that you oil the places of the cupping glasses with an appetizer and dissolving oil: If it is inflamed, of violet oil, or sweet almond oil, or cucurbit seed oil;
And if it is a wound, of watercress oil, or lily oil, or chamomile, or similar.
And if the superfluity is large and cold, then take wormwood oil, or balm oil, or anise oil, and similar.
And if the one being healed has tender skin and wide pores, then it is not advisable to put any oil there,
but it is necessary to wash after the evacuation of water, rose water, or cold water, or mulberry water, or gourd water, or porcelain water, or something similar.
And he who has much moisture, rise from ash, or water of myrtle, and sumac, and similar things.
And those who have large superfluities rise from old wine, or water of wheat, or decoction of anise or chamomile, or other similar things;
and it is not proper to cupping before the bath or in the bath, but after the bath for an hour or two; and do not sleep after cupping.
and it is necessary that he warms himself when he must blow wind and when he is blowing wind. And guard yourself if the one who is healing is choleric, and if his veins are too full and inflamed; If it is necessary that he eat cold things, such as pomegranates and endives and lettuces in the armpit, and similar things;
and mince puddings, and roast meat, and moist meats.
And he who has a cold complexion, take syrup of honey, and wine with a medium scent, which is between old and new, and minced poppy, and minced rosebuds and small onions and pigeons;
and on the day that he shall be vented, he must drink more than eat;
and it is fitting to give no man at any time garlic or nutmeg before or after the venting, in order to comfort the main limbs; and be subtle with the wine, but it is not fitting for those who are hot to drink it.
The suction cups that are placed without harming are those that are placed on the liver, and on the mouse, and gout, and on the belly and the groin and the hips and the hip, because those members do not suffer to be harmed on their own.
and one does it only for to draw blood from limb to limb as we put on the breasts when the child is born; to remove the viscosity which is in the limb, as we put suction cups on the belly and on the groin to lessen the member;
and remove the pain, when there is an impaction or stone, so it removes by its attractive virtue perhaps the impaction, or dislodges the stone from its place;
and thus it is done when it is put upon the liver and upon the mouse when there is wind detained.
and these leeches are administered empty to suck only; and some times they are administered together with fire, and sometimes full of tepid water.
as in diseases of the pleura, and in this way one fills the leech with hot water alone, or with water in which herbs covenable to it have been boiled.
The form of the leech administered with fire is thus:
And have two inches wide and half a palm in length, and have or on the side toward the middle one small hole, as for putting a needle.
and let it be of iron, softened in front so that it does not burn the patient when placed on the limb;
and have in the middle a transverse bar of iron or steel, to put a candle enclosed in it,
and be made both large and small according to the illnesses and the condition of those who take them;
for the suckers of children are other than of old people, and of the thin ones than of fat ones.
And should one thus place this sucker onto the limb?
Take the candle of wax or .i. a lining, and put it within the sucker across the rod which is within the sucker, so that the brightness be at the bottom of the sucker so that it does not burn the patient.
And then put it on top of the member, and your should be on the opening that we have said so that when one wants to, one goes into vapor, and remove the suction.
And grasp the lining as before, and redo it often if you need it.
In the suction therefore that is administered in illnesses of pleurisy, to any acute [condition], it has no shaft nor opening, and it is administered only when it is full of water, and it is placed on the member only so long.
and this is the form:
Bloodletting is not administered except to members where one cannot put cupping glasses because of their smallness, such as lips and gums, and similar ones. And in their denuded flesh, such as the two or the like, and others similar;
And the qualities of the user are that when you find bloodletting which are in clear waters without impurities, then take them;
and put them in water, so long as they become familiar, and have nothing in their bellies; and then be healthy by vein and leech, then rub the limb until it is red, and put on poultices;
and when they are flat and fall, if it is a place where one can put a leech, put it, because it does much good after.
If not, raise the place with ease, and then with water, very well, and then bind it.
And if the place heals too badly after the poultices, moisten one cloth of linen with cold water, and put it on, until the swelling is reduced.
and if the sores are multiplied, put on it ground vitriol, or saltpeter, and similar things, until it is stretched.
and you put on the wound half of peeled beans, and leave them there until they dry out in place, then it will now stop.
and if you need more of these, take other bean pods.
And if the bean pods will not be taken, rub the wound with fresh blood, or pierce it with a needle until the sore issues forth. and then put them above, and as soon as they feel blood, they burn.
and when you see that they are weeping, powder on a bit of aloe and seed ground, or ash, they will now dry.
Here begins the book of fractures.
This chapter is many times necessary in the art of medicine, and it is the restoration of fracture and dislocation.
Know, dear son, that the matter of this chapter, they will never see in any ancient books, nor read a letter about it.
And for this reason, the science is hidden in our land, because I have never found any good one;
and I know nothing of it, except by the science of ancient books, where I have studied so much that I have mastered the science, and by experience, and by the custom of my life.
and I have described for you in this chapter what is contained therein, and have abridged it at the end, and have clearly shown the forms of the instruments that are brought, as I have done in these two chapters before.
It is therefore necessary that we say the prologue of this book the sums of the word and the chapters where the sages put their understanding, and remain on the truth, so that those who are experienced know and learn this noble art, and learn it to others.
I say that when fracture or dislocation or twisting or sprain comes to anyone, it is necessary that you hasten to heal the patient on one part and the other, if no thing prevents it, such as weakness of body, or infancy, or old age.
or if the tension is not very hot, or too cold; and avoid cold things, that is to say, cold meats, and flesh of lamb and goat, and do not drink wine, nor consume any fatty meats, and do not fill yourself too much with meat which fills the veins with blood, until you have doubt of a hot abscess, or an expansion of matter in the limb; so return the patient to his former government that he has used.
And when the broken bone begins to heal, it is necessary that one nourish the patient with meats that make thick nourishment, or there is viscosity, as wheat cooked in water, and rice, and testes, and pies, and belly of beef, and eggs, and fresh fish, and strong wine, and similar things. For with such nourishment it recovers muscles and more quickly the fracture.
And know that the broken bones of the old and the decrepit do not well recover nor join according to their nature because of the dryness of the limbs, nor those that are too tender, such as the bones of little children;
but if there is no cure, reset the broken bone, that is, large joints which are separated and join the limb together, until it strengthens as before; and do not let the least part of his work, and for this reason it befits to nourish him with thick meats, as we have said.
And know that fractures are diverse in many ways.
For the fracture of the head is different from the fracture of the leg or foot, and I will tell you in this chapter all kinds of fractures. For there are fractures that go inward, and others outward, like the point of a pen for writing.
For there are fractures that go inward, and others outward, like the point of a pen for writing. And if with fracture with wound, and fracture at all a small fissure.
And to each manner has its engine, and its proper instrument in restoration, according to what the memory comes in its place;
And it is known the fracture of the bone by those that the parts are twisted, and open well by outside, and feels to the pressure of the hand;
And when there is no torsion nor feeling at touching, and the patient feels no great pain, then there is no fracture;
but it can well have twisting, or a split, or a small fracture. If you do not need to move it with your hand, but put on the medicine that comes after, and then gently restrain it.
And know that the fracture that goes in a circle, and are the two parts disjointed, it is necessary now to put them together evenly, so that abscesses do not come.
And if abscesses come, then let him leave it alone for any day, until the abscess is calmed; Then put it evenly to the joint that you can lightly and wisely, and know that the restoration of it is lighter than the restoration of him who has pieces; then restrain it, as it is fitting after this.
And if in the bone to broken pieces, if it is of two parts, whether it be hands or feet, or in your hand if it is one small limb, or two strings, or one string and in your hand;
and put the limb according to its natural figure, so that when the parts of the broken limb are separated, you will as much as possible join the additions in their places at the joint, and keep that by your work no damage or pain comes to the patient;
and adjust well the two heads of the bones according to the best forms.
And he feels it well by hand if it seems to you that it is not well: if the draw well and do not restrain it too much, nor press as those who make it come by their work abscess hot and contraction in the limb, as we have wanted many times.
And when the member is in place, so chastise well the sick person that he does not move it, neither watching nor sleeping, neither turning, nor in any other manner; and guard well that the member be so assured that he feels no pain at all. For when he feels no pain, then it is not well in place, and it behoves to put it in such a disposition that he feels no pain;
For when he feels no pain, then it is not well in place, and it behoves to put it in such a disposition that he feels no pain; and keep it straight so twisting doesn't come when it is restored.
and the qualities of the broken limb are according to what I tell you.
Know that broken limbs are diverse in smallness and largeness and in form.
For there are small limbs, such as arms and legs and similar things; so it is necessary to enwrap them with soft and fine linen cloths;
and those who are thick, such as the hips and legs: it is necessary to wrap them in a wide and hard bandage, because the wide bandages embrace the whole large limb, and restrain it from all sides equally, so that there is no gap;
then bind lighter compresses, 3 or 4 according to the limb, and tighten your hand a little on the whole bandage, then go above the break and tighten less, than the break, and push the break away a little.
and soften the bandage little by little, as much as you reach a large part of the healthy flesh, then take another bandage, and turn it around directly above the broken place;
Then return to the part below the fracture, and restrain it moderately, neither too hard nor too softly, as we have said in the first place above.
Then put between the ligatures of linen or cloths, until it is all even, then bind everything above with a bandage, and then put your well-made plates on top, if there is no abscess or swelling.
And if there is an inflammation or abscess, put something soothing for the abscess above that and which removes the swelling, and leave it so for some days.
Then restrain above your plates, and be of half the width of a good-sized cane carefully cut, or of wood from which one makes clefts, or of palm branches, and be according to this figure:
but it is necessary that the splint placed on the fracture be a little larger and wider than the others;
and also as long as is necessary for the limb, whether small or large;
then bind on the splints just as you did in the first hour, then tie them above with a string evenly, just as in the first hour on the fracture;
tighter it is above, less below; and it is necessary that the strings be moderate, neither too thick nor too thin, and be of soft linen;
for if the threads are thick, as I have seen of fools who make their works of ropes of linen twisted, and that is a great error, for the thread cannot be even if it is too fine, and it is not fitting that it should have between each stitch less than two of space.
And if the patient is annoyed by the stings of the stitches after the tightening in their healthy parts, then put under them pads of linen, or felt wool, so that it does not become inflamed.
When the wound is with the break, and the bone is broken, I will say its cure here after.
And know that it does not behoove to bind all broken limbs on the first day. For when the limb is large, it does not behoove to put splints on it forthwith, but after 5 or 7 days, or more according to your certainty of an abscess occurring.
And see here the manner of ancient plasters for restoring fracture, dislocation, and torsion: and it is that you take flour that stands on the walls of the mill, and mix it with abundance of egg, and put this confection, neither too thin nor too thick, and in use, and this is the common manner of the plaster restoring the fracture to many dispositions, and likewise to women and to small children, for it is not too hot nor too cold.
Another manner of plaster restoring fracture and dislocation and torsion: take  three parts each of honey, lard, and elecampane root, and asafoetida, and gum arabic, and mastic, ana .x. З.; myrrh and aloes, ana .v. З.; and make it into powder, and mix them with the white of an egg; if the complexion of the man is hot, use this plaster, because it is of good composition, and restores broken bones well, and is worth much to many men.
Another way to make a poultice that is good for torsion: take mugwort and wormwood, ana. x. Z.; myrrh and aloes, ana. viiij. Z.; acacia vi. Z.; Armenian bollic .x. Z., and grind well, and cook with water or the white of an egg, and administer it.
Another way to make a poultice for joints and bones out of their places, and soothes the pain that arises, and the use of the bone, and the bruise: take new linen, and moisten it in wine and oil cooked, and put it on the place. This poultice does not restore anything, but it is good for soothing a hot abscess, and properly removes the pains.
Another way to make a poultice that restores broken bones: take dried fig leaves, and ground elder leaves, and grind them together, and make a poultice.
Another manner of emplastre to the restoration of the fracture of the bone and for to lessen the remaining of the abscess. Take root of wormwood, chamomile, flowers of violets, flour of verbena, of each one part; and grind, and confit with wine, and if the member is scalded, confit it with coriander water moist, or of water, and use it.
Another manner of emplastre more strong than the first, when an abscess hard comes to the restoration of the member. Take roots of wormwood, and seed of flax, balm, melilot, and henbane, and flowers of violets and chamomile, of all one part; and grind, and confit with water of salt, or sweet water, or with wine, according to the heat of the member, and its rest.
Galen says in his book that on the broken member for restoration one should put a certain one made of wax and oil, and nothing else more, and he says that it should be between two not too soft nor too hard.
And it seems Galen one must put on the broken limb, to restore, things dry a little hot, as myrtle and aloes and incense and similar things, as we have said.
Another way to make a plaster that is good for the lesion and pain: take mugwort and henbane of men chopped, or feathers of owl, and viper's grass, and equal parts, and grind them, and make a plaster with it and apply it.
And then loosen the bandage a little afterwards, and take care if the patient feels no pain, nor have his bones moved from their place; if not, do not unbandage for many days.
And if pain comes to the place, or itching, no rest or swelling, then hasten, and unbandage it, and remove the plaster now; and take a light cloth, and sponge of sea moistened, and dip in water, and lift the place, until the itching ceases, and the pain is appeased. then let the limb rest an hour, then put on dry cloth, moistened in water or rose oil, and tie it with a bandage, until you are sure of a hot abscess
and rest the inflammation of the limb, and let the pain be removed, then begin the fine ligation, and a little bit of plaster, and do not bind it as tightly as before; and subtlety until it is healed.
And if you see that the abscess is hot and red and the pain and swelling are all gone, and you need plaster and bandaging, then begin again, as you did at first.
And if nothing of what we have said comes to the limb, then do not unwrap it for less than 3 days or 4 or 5 or 7. And never leave it unwrapped for 20 days, according to what you see, until the fracture heals and the joint aligns itself.
therefore he must be restrained more than the first time, and fatten his flesh as I have said before; and if you see him getting drier than necessary, know that there can be no nourishment there. then comes the hot water bath, every time you unbind him, and once every three days, and slightly moisten his part.
through this work then the nourishment comes to the limb, and mends quickly those who do foolishly, who keep the limb twisted: it is bad, and this work is dangerous, and I see nothing else than to let it rest and work it straight.
of various kinds of fractures Many kinds of fractures are there, and various forms, and the causes are assigned.
For there are fractures that are made by the impact of a sword, and the collarbone all the bone up to the shaft which is below the bone, as it is done with an axe or club; and for this reason this kind of fracture is called "haiched."
When the sword cuts through the bone from above without piercing, and this kind of fracture is called "absolute"; and the wound of these two fractures great or small.
And if there is an impact embedded, or splitting or of the neck of bone, or of the thigh on bone, or other similar things.
And if there is a fracture passing, which approaches to the membrane which is under the bone, or above the bone, and this wound is large or small.
And if the wound which is placed in the bone also subtle as a hair, and the fissure is small, and for this reason this fracture is called “capillary”;
and if the wound which is made by a blow of stone, or by a fall, or by something similar, and makes the piece of bone go inward, and it lies like the handle of a poker when they heat it over the furnace; so it enters between the bones inside.
And this happens more to those who have or whose heads are moist bones, like children's heads;
And there are all these ways of breaking that small pieces are scattered as if stars; and I will speak of it in its place.
And let us know all kinds of fractures by the traction on them, and the investigation at their ends, and by the corrupted cartilage that is above.
The appearance of capillary blood vessels is known by this: when one has uncovered the bone and rubs on it, the black fracture appears.
In the cure of a fracture, be wary of accidents in the patient, and if you see no bad accident, such as vomiting of phlegm, and loss of consciousness, and swelling, and numbness, and fever ague, and the eyes are watery and red, and other similar things in more dispositions, then it cannot heal without doubt.
And if you do not see an escapable accident, and you hope for salvation, then commence the cure.
And when the fracture comes to you first, and it is in winter, then it behooves to remove the bone before the fourteenth day as much as you can.
And if it is in summer, then hasten to remove the bone before the seventh day, so that the cloth under the bone may not be corrupted, and the accident that we have said come.
And if the fracture of the bone comes as far as the cloth that covers the brain, then it behooves you to split the fractured part thus: and that you probe the head of the wounded man carefully, and uncover above the bone in all the ways that you can, and on the figure of the wound more deeply than you can.
And if blood comes when discovering the bone, or abscess is closed, help him as it is proper, and that you fill its place with soft cloths in rose oil. And let the wound rest until the abscess is closed and reassured of blood loss; then begin to remove the bone, and it is done in .ij. ways of work: one way is that you cut at a narrow edge before, and this is the form:
And then put another incision larger than the first.
And the second way is that you have a number of incisions of various types, some narrow and others wide, pointed, and made of iron; and in working lightly, that you do not crush the head.
And if the bone is hard and tough, then you must pierce it around it, so that you administer splints with chisels, not too deep so they do not pierce beyond the bone of the test, and it should have above the point a margin or a circle, which does not let the point pass beyond the bone; and you must have several more, so that each one comes in its place of the breadth of the bone, so that you may have chisels for all tests; and this is the form of the three kinds of chisels:
The quality for piercing around the broken bone is that you put one chisel on the bone, and turn to your two hands as much as you know that the bone is pierced; then put the chisel elsewhere a bit later, and so do all around, then cut with the chisels the space of the bone which is between the perforations, and do this more subtly than you can, and lightly, as we have said, until you draw the bone to your hand, or to any of the instruments that you have like pliers, pincers; and keep that you do not touch the marrow nor the syfac.
And when you will have the bone pierced and treated, then it is necessary that you remove the debris which is left of the bone to any other instrument similar to a chisel, but it must be more sturdy and more subtle than the other chisel;
And if it remains nothing of the small bones, nor any scales, so lightly to the bones with i.e., instruments; then treat the wound of tents and ointments as we have said.
And the other manner of work is that which Galen says, which is drier; and he praises it very much, and this is his word. It is necessary first that you uncover a portion of the bone, where the fracture appears to move, so that when you have uncovered that part, you will place beneath the head of this lens-shaped incisor, for that is its form:
And do not cut on one side, and it is the pointed part on two sides, so that the cutting edge is towards the bone; then strike with a small mallet above, so that you gently chip the bone all around, and take good care of the cloth that is underneath;
If it is adhered to the bone, then gently separate it, because one should separate it well without pain, and without fear.
And if the bone fracture does not reach the skin, and the bone is broken only from above, and there are small pieces, then it is necessary to carefully remove those asperities, and remove the scales with a fine razor which you must have in various quantities, to administer in each place the most suitable, according to the work and the figure of the fracture.
If you start with large razors, and afterwards with more subtle ones, and do not cease until it is well done.
In each of the other hair-cutting and subtle bone fractures, it is necessary that you administer care according to its direction; and this is something that is not fully repaid to one who has placed their study in this art.
And if the wound is uncovered, it is necessary that you take i. drape of linen, according to the quantity of the wound, and moisten it in rose oil, and put it on the wound; then take another drape doubled in ii. or in iii., and moisten it in wine and rose oil, and put it on the first drape; and do this more gently than you can, that you do not injure the wound, then administer by above i. other linen, and do not constrain it more than k’it holds the wound alone;
and leave it so for i. day or ii., until the abscess has calmed, then untie it, and administer medicines such as roots of lilies, and farine of veveses, and powder of incense, and aristologe, and similar things; and of these things make a powder, and put it on the wound, and administer further medicines mondefians without mordication;
And guard that the wound be well and clean, that you do not leave any ointment there, nor let any flesh come together, because when flesh comes together over the brain cloth, it corrodes and irritates, and brings great harm to the patient; because when one puts a biting thing on top, it pierces upward.
Take guard then, if any bad accident comes to the patient, as we have said, it is doubtful without doubt.
And if nothing bad comes from outside the medicine that has been put on, it is doubtful, then you should take a part of honey, and three parts of rose oil, and glue one cloth, and put it on top. Then the cure with manners of cures as it is convenient, until it is healed.
Know that the two parts of the nose are never broken, or one by itself, because they are two bones; and the lower one is cartilaginous and does not break unless it is forced to bend or twist, and then heals.
And if one of the two parts is broken, it is necessary that you put your little finger or point of the nose, and place each fracture inside with your index finger, and with the palm outside, until the nose returns according to its natural shape. And do this gently, and take care that the patient does not feel pain from your work.
And if the fracture is in the part above the knee and cannot come to its place, then it befits you to put it equal at the head of a stick one piece thick.
And if the fracture is of two parts, make another such splint, and hasten to restore it on the first day, if you can.
If not, after the seventh or tenth day, when the abscess is calmed, then bind to the head of the knee with ten lengths of linen cloth, if the fracture is in one part.
Or you bind one on the other side, if the fracture is there; and let the lengths be so thick that they fill the hollows of the knee.
And said any restorer one must soak the tents in grease, and change them every day. It does not seem to me that this is good, but it is necessary that they be soaked in a confection of yolk of egg, and ground powder; then leave the tent, until the bone is hard, and the cartilages are hardened.
And sometimes one puts down goose feathers in place of tents, and so to 1 souef drape it around, and hold the scalpel and blow on the patient among; or do what you see.
And if an abscess comes to the new while you are working on it, put cerote or cotton soaked in rose oil, or in 1 pock of diachylon.
And if an abscess does not come out, put a plaster from outside, of sesame flour and incense powder, mixed with egg yolk, then put light bandages on top, and do not bind it tight.
And if the fracture of the bone is small and it is broken into small pieces, then extract them with suitable instruments, then sew up the opening, and care for it with things encasing flesh, and  binding, such as plasters and ointments suitable for this.
And if there is no wound inside the bone, then treat it with bandages, and put some pieces of wool in it, until it is healed.
Of the jaw fracture
When the jawbone is broken from below, and there is no external wound, and the fracture is only superficial, and is not broken in two, except for a slight inward bend, if one knows it gently.
It is necessary, if the fracture is on the right side, that you put your left index finger in the mouth of the patient; and if the fracture is on the left jawbone, you put your right index finger, and push the fracture inward gently, and hold it with the other hand from outside, and make it even.
And if the jawbone fracture is separated into two parts, it is necessary that you administer extension to the two parts, until they are even.
And if movement of the teeth happens, or rupture, so restrain them with a thread of gold or silver or silk, then put on the broken jaw cerote, and put on 1 double cloth; and put on the cloth a great star well made, or a piece of leather equal, long and wide according to the jawbone, and tie it on as much as you can, and command the patient to rest, and eat light meats.
And if you see that the figure changes, so untie it on the third day, and then re-stitch what has changed; and put a plaster on top, of powdered flour with an abundance of egg or sesame meal, after which you have removed the cerote; and put on top a light cloth, and if the plasters harden, and the disposition of the patient does not change, leave it until it is healed; many times it is healed in 3 weeks.
And if a boil comes, so administer what we have said many times.
And if there is a fracture and wound together, reward so that no piece of the bone is removed; if subtle to remove it with instruments suitable for this.
And if the wound is narrow, then enlarge it with flame according to your need.
And when you will have removed all these pieces, and there is none remaining, then sew the wound, if it is wide, and put on one layer of plasters suitable for this, to prevent flesh from growing, until it is healed.
Of the forceps The fracture breaks many times in front, toward the shoulder, and the fracture is according to three manners: or it is broken and separated into two, and there are pieces, and it is the lighter to restore; or there is a fracture with a wound.
And the work is so when the fracture is without wound, that you have two ministers, so that one holds the shoulder which feels the broken forcele; and the other extends the neck towards the part; then put each of the fracture to your hands, so that the form be as it should be, and there is neither appearance nor disfigurement.
And if you need to extend it further, so put under the shoulder of the patient a round sphere of cloth, or wool, and be large according to your necessity; and hold and gently raise the forcele, and strain the sphere in your hand, so that you put each of the fracture as it should be.
And if you cannot draw the head of the shoulder by force because it comes back in place, then it is necessary for the patient to lie supine on his back and put under the shoulder one-half hour, and push the minister's shoulder down, until the bone of the shoulder is raised.
And then address the fracture to your two, and if you find it broken, then it is necessary that you cut above; and pull the pieces gently, and if the bone cannot join for any mounting, then cut with one of the incisors that you have; but that you put under the shoulder this instrument, in order to ward off the shaft:
And it seems a spoon, and is not at all curved, and be also wide as it is necessary, according to the size of the bone and the strength of the work; and have two heads, as you see, and one be wide, and the other narrower, as is the route of the wound that you made when you treated the bones;
And when you are assured of the abscess hot, if cut the wound, and if the rupture is small, or you doubt the abscess hot, if apply the wound with drapes and tents, according to its quantity.
And if the abscess is hot there comes, so moist it. one drape in rose oil and in ash and in wine, and put on top.
The strapping of the bone, when it is felt in wounds and without cutting, is that you put on top of the bone the plaster of the powder from the mill and auburn of an egg, and put light bandages on top, and put a sphere under the saddle, if you have need. Then take a very broad bandage of one palm wide, then put one double drape on top of the bandages and the plaster; then take a subtle strip of three fingers wide and long, and wrap it around the banded one, so that the head of the bandage hangs down. and place the splint upon the fracture, and turn the bandage upon the neck, and lower the sound shoulder, and lower the broken shoulder; and straighten from each part, and when you see that the ligature holds the fracture well, and you clearly see that the splint does not move above the fractured bone, then reward each day, and when the ligaments loosen, then restrain it.
and make the patient lie upon his back, and place him when he sleeps one small pillow under the shoulder, to raise the shoulder high; thus it will lighten the fracture of the humerus by the alignment of the shoulder, or you may bind the arm to the neck, and do not unbind it unless bad accident comes, until twenty days;
then begin the plaster again, if you see that he needs it, and restrain him and leave him thus, until he is restored; and it is restored in at most twenty-eight days, and in less time for some men.
of the fracture of the shoulder
There is little that happens when the shoulder breaks or its wide place does not come together and it's known only by touch; so arrange it according to the figure of the fracture, and reset it according to its natural shape, in all the ways that you can; then put on the spot powder from the mill with abundance of egg, and light bandages, and put upon .i. a double drape; then put upon a broad and subtle splint, a little more wide than the shoulder, and if the splint is well placed in any place of the shoulder, so employ that hair of linen bandages, so that the splint lies evenly; and then restrain it with a whole great bandage firmly, so that the splint does not move from its place, and look at it every day; and every time that it softens, so restrain it, and put back in place the splint if it is out of place, and lay the patient on his side; and the shoulder is restored in .xx. days or in xxv, And when this number is accomplished, then untie it, and be sure, because it is not bone that is put out lightly.
And if a piece of the bone protrudes before and not under the heart, so do it above, and the bone, and make those things that we have said in the fracture of the collarbone to soothe the abscess hot.
of the fracture of the foot
The foot is sometimes fractured in the middle, but this happens rarely; but it often breaks at the outside. And when it is broken in the middle, it bends towards the sole, and the patient feels great pain, and lack of strength, and all sorts of things, and perhaps vomits blood, and the tendons appear in the broken bone, and one can feel them well.
And the restoration is that the patient lies often on his back, and one puts 1 cushion between the shoulder blades, then presses the shoulders, and he brings together the sides of the 2 bones with his hands, and subtly does put it in every way that you can, until the shape of the bone is as it should be; then puts bandages and poultices above the thin skin of salt, or some other light cloth, and wraps it in 1 cloth, and ties it over the broken bone, so that it does not move; and turns the tie around on the back, and tightens it well, and rewinds each hour the bandage, and if it softens, he tightens it; and if it is necessary to untie it, for corrosion or for itching that comes to the place, or pain or abscess, then hurry, and unties it, and cleans what has come up in ways of cures; then puts back the bandage, and tightens it until it is healed.
of the fracture of ribs
Know that the fracture of ribs comes only in their thick parts after the back, and at the top inside, and they bend only because they are brittle; and one feels it well to the touch on both sides.
And the restoration is that you put the fracture even, as it should be. And then put the bandage, and restrain it with a splint, if you have need of it.
And if the fracture of ribs is sloping inwards, the patient feels very great pain and numbness, as well as shortness of breath, because the bone pierces the lung; and besides aches, and coughs and vomits a lot of blood, and this is a serious illness, and the ancients put a great deal of care into it.
And if there are some who say that it is necessary to administer foods that swell the belly, in order to drive the pleurisy outwards.
We do not do this, except for boils if they have come. And if it has come, then heal it.
And they say none of us put suction cups on the place, in order to suck out strongly, and that seems reasonable; however, there is doubt that the suction cup does not draw out superfluities to the place for the sake of weakness.
And they said that one must cover the place with a woolen cloth in hot oil, and put a tent between the ribs to make it even on both sides, then be cured of the cure of pleurisy, meat and medicine.
And if the patient feels great pain that he cannot bear from the bone that pierces the cloth, and there is doubt for the patient, then it behooves to split above the place of the broken rib, and it behoove put under one instrument to guard the soft part; and then one must drill the bone, and drain lightly, and then sew the two lips of the wound if it is large, and cure it with ointments until it is healed. And if an abscess comes, then put on soft cloths in rose oil, and put them on top; and cure while the place of this which it behoove an abscess, and lie reclining on the side where it should be, until it is healed.
of the fracture of the neck
Sometimes a fracture occurs to the bones of the neck, and sometimes it happens that they bend; and also in the spine of the back. And when this happens to someone, and you want to know if he will be healed or not, take note if you see his hands softened and swollen and dead, and he cannot move them or stretch them, and when you prick them with a needle, he does not feel it. Know that he is mortal in many dispositions, and if he moves them and feels well when they are strained and pricked, know that the joint of the bone is saved, and that the patient will be cured, if one takes care of him.
And if similar things happen to the spine of the back, and you want to know if he will be healed or not, take note if his legs are softened, and if the accident is in his hands, and on his back there is a windiness and excretion involuntarily; and when one has him lying on his stomach, there is an involuntary excretion. And when he is lying on his back and wants to straighten up, he cannot. Know that he is mortal: if he does not labor in his cure.
And if this accident does not happen to him, then the thing is lighter.
And the cure is that you reward if there is an abscess hot, then put on the spine rose oil or egg yolk of one egg, as long as it is appeased; then put on a comforting and drying plaster, and tie it with a linen band, and command the patient to rest; and do not sleep on that part where he feels pain, until it is healed. And if any bone is dislocated, it is necessary to cover the joint with wool; and remove the bone, then assemble the two edges of the wound, if it is large, with a suture, then cure with ointment that promotes flesh, until it is healed; and if the head of the bone is broken, which is called "head of the cow," put your fist of your left hand, and place it equal to the other hand on your power, then put the plaster and bandage on top, if you need it; then restrain it, and if there are bones dislocated, do so again, remove the bone, and cure the wound until it is healed.
of the fracture of the hip bone
Few things happen that the hip bone is broken, and if it happens, then there would not have been a little bit of lessening to the top; and making long, and declining to the sides, and comes to the patient pain at the place, and prickling, and swells what breaks.
And the restoration is that you extend your hand over, as long as you are over the fracture; and know what are the fracture and the shape of it; and if the fracture is at the top only, then put equal that fracture, as long as it is to a natural figure.
And if the fracture is long, or it declines to the inside, then make gesture the patient on his belly, as long as the restoration of that fracture is apparent to you. And when you have placed it equal, place it on the plaster, then place a splint of wood or of heart, and restrain the bandage so that it does not move; and employ the place under the ribs, until the ligament is equalized.
And command the patient that he sleep on his healthy rib, or on his back.
And if abscesses come to them, do not touch them, until the abscess has been appeased, and place on it what we have said before; then return to the restoration, and restrain it as is proper, if there are no bad accidents; and this is the manner.
of the shoulder fracture
The helper is that which is between the shoulder and the head of the shoulder, and if it is broken, then one must restore it according to one of the two ways: one of which is that you take one stick plain of medium thickness, according to this form:
And tie the two heads two cords, and bend them upward, and seat the patient on one seat; then place the broken arm on the stick, until it comes to the armpit, and has in the middle a curve of stick, then put on top any heavy thing or the ministers extend it down; then put the splints the fracture even to its hands together, as long as the fracture returns as it should.
And the other manner is that one supports the patient on his bed, and ties the hand to his neck, then commands two ministers that one holds that which is above the fracture to its hands, and the other holds below at all one line, and extend each to their part.
And if you see that the extraction is more far, restrain i.e., the ligament below the fracture, and above the fracture, and extend each of the ministers to his part. And if the fracture is near the head of the shoulder, it is necessary that you put i.e., one ligament below the armpit, and another towards the outside, below the fracture; and also if the fracture is towards the outside, then it is necessary to put i.e., a lighter ligament, without labor, until the fracture is equal on the top, and on the outside; then put equal the fracture, as it is necessary, and the restraint, if an abscess does not come.
And if an abscess comes, do not restrain it until vii days, and put on a linen cloth moistened in oil of roses, as long as the abscess is appeased; then restrain it, and the manner of restraining it is that you put the splint above the fracture, then assemble the arm on the shoulder, and put your hand on the shoulder or on the chest; and put the bandage, and restrain on the shoulder, and on the arm, so that the arm is in its place of stars, if nothing prevents you, or if the bone is not moved.
And if you doubt that the bone does not move, use splints, and put on the fracture a splint wider and stronger than the others, and have between each splint ii of space, and let each splint be so large that it passes over the fracture iii times on each side; then restrain on the splints, as I said at the beginning of the chapter on the fracture, stronger and less away.
And if you see the position of the stars, and the tightening, as we have said, in the hour that you restore the broken limb, and you doubt the abscess is hot, leave it to be tied until the seventh day, as we have said; then look every three days at the bandage, that itching or swelling does not come to the place, or the nursing cannot come to the limb for that it is too inflamed. If it heals, as we have said.
And if no such accidents come to it, do not untie it until after three days or more, and have the patient sleep on his back, and have his hands on his stomach; and place under the shoulder one cushion full of wool evenly, and look every hour of the day or night that the figure of the broken limb does not move, or the bindings are softened; if it heals by the virtue of medicine, and give him the food that we have before put, in such a way that the food is at first subtle; and when it begins to recover, let it be thick. And it is customary that the shoulder and leg should be taken back in forty days of all; and then you must untie it and administer baths and medicines of ointments for the place to heal. And if the constriction is bad and emboldened, leave it tied for one day or two months.
of the fracture of the arm
The arm is composed of .ij. bones, which are called the two «fossil», because one is small, and it is the one that follows the pouch; and the other is large, and it is the one that is below, towards the small one; perhaps breaks the great fossil alone, or the small one, and perhaps andui together.
When the small fossil is broken, the restoration is light, and the healing; and when the great one is broken, it is the healing bad, and more grieved than when they are broken together. If it is the small fossil that is broken alone, it is necessary to extend it gently, and put it straight.
And if it is the great fossil, it is necessary to restrain more strongly; and extend it on one cushion, and keep the pouch of the hand higher than the others, and the small ones lower than the other ones, and let the patient be crossed upon himself, and one cushion in front of him higher, that the patient does not suffer any labor; then extend the ministers of my arm to the part below his hand, or on one linen, and another minister to one other above. And then put the mire straight, according to its best form.
And if in the fracture it is broken into pieces, put each one in its place, and if there is any severed that pricks the heart, and you cannot restore it to its place, then make a support on the bone, as we have said before.
And if with the fracture there is a wound, I have spoken of it in the singular chapter; then take care of it.
And if at the beginning of restoration abscesses arise, glue i.e., a bandage of cerote made of rose oil and white wax, that it be neither too hard nor too soft; and tie i.e., the bandage over it subtly, until the abscesses are appeased. And then remove the cerote, and put on the emplasters of the powder of molin with plenty of egg, then put the splints, and let the splint of the fracture be more close and a little wider than the others; and know that it must have six splints or arms in more dispositions: whether the fracture is in one bone, or two; and restrain it above the fracture more than elsewhere, and every day less receding, as I have said at the beginning of the chapter; and let the bandages that are on the fracture be soft and moist, and not hard nor rough; and let the thread, from which it is bound, be of linen, neither too thick nor too fine, as we have said. And reward the member and the joint after some days. And if any bad accidents happen to the limb, such as itching that comes to the limb, it is necessary that you raise the member with hot water, until the itching is appeased; and leave the member not too tightly rest. And then resume the tightening, and if the ligaments are softened and the bones are dislocated, and similar things, so the address.
And if you take care that the dressings cannot come to the limb because it is too tight, then it is necessary that you soften it, that is, a little, and leave so for some days, until the dressings correct, and then tighten it.
And if none of these things that we have said come to the patient, then do not unbind him until twenty days, or until he can put his hands on his neck, and be his neck equal, and take care of movement and agitation, and sleep on his back; and know that this fracture is restored in thirty days or thirty-five, and perhaps in twenty, according to the compositions and complexities of the virtues.
of the fracture of the hand
Know that on the back of the hand and as we have two there are few fractures, and there comes but only many times a sprain.
And when the palm of the hand is broken or sprained, it behooves the patient to sit crossed-legged, and be straight before him as well; then put his hand upon the board outstretched, and extend the ministers the broken bones, and place them aligned with the mirrors, until they are well joined; and put the plaster and bandages, if abscesses do not come, then put a splint according to the quantity of the place; and be enveloped in .i. linen drape.
And if the fracture is at the base near the belly of the palm, make a sphere of cloths, and command the patient to tighten it to his broken palm; and then strain with a long cloth, and be the splint of  wood as wide as the palm of the hand, and restrain it, as it behooveth.
And if the fracture is in the forearm, it is necessary that you put a splint on top, and another below in the palm, so that the hand be open and straight, then tie it tightly around the hand, and stop the link between the two.
And if the fracture comes to either of the two lower arms, if it is the elbow, set it straight as it should be; and restrain it with the palm, and if you see fit put a small straight splint to raise the fracture, so that it does not move; and if the fracture is in the other arm, such as in the index finger or any of the others, set it straight, and tie it with the healthy one that is next to it; or you tie them all together in .i. holding, which is best, or put a splint on top, like an elbow; and take care in the restoration and in the arrangement of the hot and dry abscess, and treat what comes up, as I have said.
of the broken hip
The bone of the hip is many times broken, and it is well seen when it turns forward and backward; and the restoration is thus one above the fracture, and one below. And the patient lies on his face, then stretches each minister his limb equally; and this is when the fracture is amidst the bone.
And if the fracture is near the root of the hip, one limb is towards the groin, and the other limb below the fracture. And also if it is near the knee, then one limb is next to the knee, and the other extension down; then put the splint bone equally with its two hands, until it is according to its natural figure, and then put the plaster, and the tie, if an abscess does not come.
And if there is a hot abscess, let it be soothed then return to your work and your cure; the ligature is made in such a manner. It is necessary that you wrap on the fracture .i.  a hard bandage doubled in .ii. or .iii., and in keep the superfluities, then turn the leg until the heels come to the root of the thigh, and put .i. long thread between the hip and the leg, near the knee below, and the head of the thread goes above; then turn back on the leg and on the hip the bandage, then put on the fracture splints, and put a splint on the bone of the leg; then employ the place eight between the leg and the hip of cloth soft to put equal the tightening, then begin to tie firmly .iii. or .iiii. on the fracture; and as much as it goes up from the fracture, and less tightens it; then take hold of the .ii. heads of the thread that you have put between the leg and the hip, and tie .iii. splints that are above, then return below to the head of the thread, until you come near the foot; and tighten it, so that it does not move from its place, then leave it so, then k’it comes neither abscess nor inflammation nor other semblance.
And if it happens, so untie it, and address what comes, as we have said many times; and if there are pieces of bone that prick, then it is necessary to extract them, if one can; and if one cannot, then it is necessary to split the place, and drain pus; and cure it as we have said, until it is healthy.
And no times is broken the hip thus if one puts splints on it, as in the shoulder and arm; however, in this restoration thus made does not hurt the patient.
And know that the hip joint is restored in 1 day, or a little less or a little more, according to the diversity of complexions.
of the rut of the knee
Know that in the rut of the knee there are few fractures, but it bends many times. And if it breaks, it is not more than a fissure, or 1 opening, and there are both wounds, and no wound, and this is well felt by all.
And the restoration is thus done by putting equal those things which are rounded to their two sides, as long as they can be assembled and moved, then put the splint on it, and put a round piece of wood on top if needed, and restrain it as is fitting, then follow all the arrangements that we have said in other fractures, such as a hot poultice and similar things; for each accident apply what is suitable to it until it is healed.
Of the fracture of the leg
Know that in the leg there are two bones, so one is called 'mustelz' on the right and the other 'foscile'; and all fractures come as it comes to the arm, and for that reason the restoration is like that of the arm equally, and the work is the same.
And if the two bones are broken together, then the leg turns in all directions.
And if the thinner bone is broken, it turns forward.
And if the large bone is broken, one feels great pain, and it can be seen well; and it turns under. Then administer an extension, and set it straight, and bind the splints evenly; but nonetheless, if the fracture is bad, and there are more pieces, that the extension be less and lighter; and the splint according to your skill.
And when you have completed your work, take .ij. bandages of wool that encircle the leg on one side and the other, and be as long as the leg from the knee down; then wrap in .ij. layers .i. bandage above and below, and tie it in the middle, so that the leg cannot decline to the right or to the left, and thus is well; and none administer .i. splint of wool along the length of the leg, and if it is of wood, and place it on the leg to prevent movement, and properly this is done in the fracture where there is a wound; and move each day the leg, to see if there is an abscess hot or other accident; so care for it until it is healed.
Of the fracture of the bones of the foot
At the ankle there is no fracture, but of the bones of the foot comes never a fracture and to two points, and there is not happened further than in more situations.
And if there is a fracture of the bones of the foot, and you see these bones overlapping each other, put the patient on their foot on the ground, as if they wanted to walk, and then put your foot on theirs, where the bones are raised, then press them until they return to their places; then put the splint and bandages on top, and put under the belly of the foot a small board to 2 fingers wide, then restrain the foot firmly, then that you have wrapped bandages and other things which you need.
And when 3 or 4 days will have passed, untie the bandage, because you will find the bones equal, whether they were broken or dislocated.
And if there are any of the bones broken, restore them, as we have said of the bones of the hand; then put on the broken bone a splint according to the length of the bone, and be one pock more wide, then put under the foot that table which I have said, and strain it well; and if there are .ij. or .iij., or more, broken, put on each bone a splint according to its quantity, enveloped in .i. piece of linen, and strain the table under the foot; and let it stand upon the top of the table far from the belly of the foot, so that it holds it well.
And it is necessary that you do not forget the other things that I have said to the other breaks, since we have said; and secure each accident as it is necessary.
of the fracture of the bone of the finger
When the bone of the woman's nature is broken, then make her sit down enlarged, then incline it to the back part, and be held by behind; then fill the cavity of nature with cotton, and put in as much as one sto; then remove the woman, and lift her back up and down, and then jump the cotton, until it comes to the entrance of nature, and returns the bone with the sto; and when she wants to urinate, she removes the cotton, and when she has urinated, put it back, and thus do for seven days or so: so will be restored the fracture, and if you see, take a bladder of lamb, and tie a cane to its opening, and put the whole bladder into nature; then blow into the cane form, until the bladder is inflated inside: nature will return the fracture; then fill it with cotton, and leave it so for some days, until it is healed.
And when the bone of the hand of the man or woman is broken, restore it thus as we have said in the bone of the hip; and these fractures are not hidden from those who put their study and use into it, and understand my book. For the fracture signifies more than many positions the right way of restoration: therefore understand.
In the phallus, when it is broken, take a goose's throat and put it into the phallus; then wrap bandages around it, and leave it for three days or so, and it will be healed quickly.
of fracture with wound
It is necessary for one who has a fracture with wound, even if it is great, as the bones of the hip or shoulder or similar, that he be healed now, so that the healings that we have said witness it.
And if the wound heals, so keep the vitriol dressing, if you have no other thing, then begin again to restore the fracture in that same hour, or that day, if an abscess does not come.
And if an abscess does come to it, so let the restoration wait until the ninth day, as long as the abscess is appeased, and do not touch it neither on the third nor fourth day, for you would make a bad accident happen.
And if the broken bone is appearing on top of the uncovered heart, then it behooves you to put it in place gently with your hands, with slight extension.
And if the extensions is not fitted for you to put it in place with your hands, then use this instrument which is of iron, which has .vii. or .viii.  of long, and the width is according to the quantity of the wound; and for this, it is necessary that the smith embeds .iii. or iiij., according to what he needs in each cure of a fracture; and let it be round and a little thick, so that it does not bend under compression on the limb in your work, and let it be thicker in front and gradually thinner towards the end, thus:
And it is called "palainche," for which reason the curved piece should be placed on top of the visible bone; and  push once, so that it returns, and let them be equal to each other. And if the fracture is subtle, and the instrument cannot properly take hold of the bone, then you must cut off the head of the bone, as long as the instrument has purchase.
And if you cannot bring back the bone, as we have said, then cut it with a suitable instrument, such as a scalpel or awl, to your power; then clean what remains in the bone of roughness and small splinters.
And when the bone is put back and the patient feels great pain afterward, know that it is not in its natural place. Do this as long as it is in its place, then moisten one cloth in black spiced wine, and properly if it is in a joint; and do not put on the wound any cerote nor anything else where there is oil, so that it does not bring forth rot and corruption; then administer poultices once you have restored the bone, and leave the wound open, and cut away all covering around it, according to the quantity of the wound, and take good care that the wound is not strained with the fracture; and many times fools have done this, and brought upon the patient death or corrosion at any time; and let the straining be softer and more gentle than other fractures.
And if the wound is bad or large, and you doubt that evil accidents may come to it, as we have said, and you find pain in the place, then it does not behoove to put on poultices; but surround it, in place of poultices, with hard cloths, and bind them. And when you see after one or two days pus emerging from the wound, remove what you have put on, and apply healing ointments for wounds, such as ointment tetrafarmacon and similar ones.
And it is necessary that you untie the member two times a day, in the morning and at evening, until it be sound and healed.
And it is necessary that the limb be set apart in such a manner that the bone aligns gently below.
And if each day passes, and it cannot heal but returns to its place, know that there are small pieces of bone; therefore it is necessary that you cover the wound with a tent and remove all these loose pieces which cause pain.
And if a fistula arises in the place, or another manner of corruption, then it is necessary that you treat it, according to what it states in its chapter before. And when the bone is broken and exposed on the limb, such as the bone of the hip or shoulder, and similar large limbs, do not treat it, because many times death comes from it, but let it be until it decays; perhaps it will fall out after 20 or 30 days, then you can cure the wound, if you are able; and if you cannot, leave it.
of bruises that come from the swelling
We come many times after the health of the fracture, even when it is near the joint, and a bad thing to see is the figure of the limb; and perhaps he cannot make the limb its natural works.
Take ward then if it is fresh to us: if he administers medicines stichtics as aloes, incense, and myrrh, and sarcocolla, acacia, and similar others, as you choose any of these things, or all together, and mix them with stichic wine or with the white of egg or with oil; and place them on the wound in poultices, and hold it well, and do not loosen it by hand for a day; and then remove it, and begin another, until the swelling is gone; or you strain on a piece of well-made plank; because the property of wood is that it removes all the swelling from the limbs; and if the swelling has already become hardened like stone, and there is need to remove it, then cut above it, and make the superfluity apparent; or you reapply it to any razor until it is removed, and cure it as long as it is healed.
When the bone fracture is restored, and afterward the limbs are weak and subtle, this happens for many reasons: one reason is because it was bound too tightly, and not properly tied as it should; or because there were too many bandages, and the nourishment could not reach the limb; or from too much irritation; or from too great movements, not at the right time; or because he has little blood in his body, so he is weak.
And the cure is that you feed the patient well, and make his body soft, until the blood multiplies within him; and administer baths to him, and give him joy and lightness; then place poultices on the limb, so that the poultice attracts great nourishment, and the swelling often subsides with water dressings, until the nourishment returns to the limb; and it returns to its natural shape.
Of the member twisted after health
When the limb is twisted after restoration, and the broken bones are apart, and the shape of the limb is ugly, nonetheless it does not lose its natural function: so do not believe the fools who say one must break the limb all over again, and many foolish people have done this in our land; and this work is blamed, and comes great harm, and perhaps death; however, if the nodes and the torture are fresh, it is necessary that they be raised with hot water, or softening herbs are cooked, such as leaves of marsh mallow, and roots, and honeywort, and similar things; and make 1. a softening plaster, such as diacylon well made, and you take the marshmallow muslin, and confit it with goose grease or sesame oil, and make a plaster on top; or you take fig fat, and grind them with flaxseed, and medicines that lessen the swelling.
And never is removed the node by rubbing continuously and lengthily with wet hands. And be administered movement to the limb every hour.
And if the tortuosity is ingrained and hardened, as stone, and needs to be removed by iron, then it is necessary to cut up to the bone, with a subtle and light incisor; and put care and study into the cure.
Here begins the book of dislocations
Dislocation is from a joint out of its place, for which it cannot move, and the limb is misaligned, and the patient feels great pain and great injury.
When dislocation comes to someone, then it should now be brought back without a splint.
Because if one delays, then it swells the limbs, and by chance if one sets it back with pain in place; for this reason it is not right that one moves it to the hour that it is swollen; many times brings on lameness and other pains;
Nevertheless, when this happens, if the patient is bled, then let him be left, until the abscesses are all calmed; then raise the limb with hot water and oil, then move it gently, and cure each member as they come into their place.
And I have ordered the chapters on dislocations of the head down to the feet.
of the jaws
It happens that the jaws are dislocated and the dislocations of both sides are according to .ij. manners: or they are a little bit out of their places, and softened a little; or they are dislocated entirely, and hang towards the cheek, and close the saliva from the mouth so that he cannot hold it, nor can he close his mouth, and encloses his tongue with the speech.
When the dislocation is small, it returns by more than one disposition.
And if it is whole and complete, then you must reset it firmly, and do not hesitate at all;
And in such a manner that the ministers hold the head of the patient, and put his palm into the root of the dislocation of the jaw inside the mouth, if the dislocation is in two parts; and the other hand should be outside, to make it even; and command the patient to soften his mandibles, and move them in all directions.
And the minister places it evenly, until it returns to its place.
And if it is brought back and hurts, even if they are the two mandibles together, then apply hot water and oil, as long as they gently reset; do not delay in bringing it back, as we have said.
And when they are brought back evenly, and the patient's mouth is well closed without softening, then place a soft cloth in a felt made of rose oil and wax, then bind it lightly with soft bandages.
And let the patient sleep on his back, and his shoulders be between two cushions, so that he does not move them to the right or left, nor does he try to chew, but eat light food until the pains are gone and the mandibles are healed.
and then let him eat lightly and do not trouble himself to open his mouth to eat or drink, until the jaw is well knit and healed.
And if the two jaws cannot be set right within an hour and are not converted to their places, then fevers and accustomed sweats come, and by chance a solution of belly, and by chance vomit pure.
And when you see these things, then know that it is perilous; and many times die those who have them within eight days.
of the fork
The fracture cannot dislocate from the side within the continuation of it and of the hip, and it is dislocated no time to the outside, and one feels it well.
And the restoration is that the patient lies often on his back, and extends his arms; and then presses the place firmly with his palm, and it will return; then put on the splint and the bandage, and restrain it;
And the bone which is toward the side cannot dislocate; if it does not, and if it dislocates any time, then reset it to its place, as we have said; then put on the splint and the bandage, and restrain it, and command the patient that he rest until he is healed;
And in the same way is brought back the bone of the shoulder when it is dislocated from its place.
of the dislocation of the shoulder
Know that the shoulder is dislocated in only three ways: one of which is when it is dislocated to the part of the arse downward; and the second is to the part of the breast; and perhaps it is dislocated to the upper part, and this happens rarely.
and is not dislocated behind the shoulder, and not inside for the nerves; and many times dislocated downward towards the arse, especially to those who have little flesh, because in these it comes easily; to those who have enough flesh, it comes with difficulty, and returns with difficulty.
And by chance it happens to some men percussion or fracture, and swells the shoulder with a hot abscess, and they think that it is dislocated because of this.
Therefore you must examine it carefully until you are certain; and then begin the treatment.
And it is known when a dislocation is downwards towards the hip, and makes a difference between the injured shoulder and the healthy one, and you will find between their diversity manifest; And you will find at the head of the shoulder a hollow, and below the hip touching the head of the shoulder, as if it were one bone; and the patient cannot bring his hand back to his side, nor move in any way.
And also, if it is dislocated upwards, it is not hidden, because you find it manifestly touching;
And this manner of dislocation is not amiss to bring back, when it is new, or if the child is weak.
And the manner is that the ministers lift the hand of the sick person upward, then put their fists under the seat, and lift the joint with force upward to its place; and the ministers lift the hand, and extend it upward, then put it down; so they will come gradually.
And if it does not come as we have said with hands for several days afterward, then it is necessary that the sick person be bathed in hot water; and the minister should apply a softening and soothing ointment, such as decoction of aloe and fenugreek and marshmallow in water, and let it be administered.
Then be the sick person laid on their back, and put under the seat a cloth of wool even, neither too soft nor too hard, then put the foot of the sufferer on the cloth, and lift the head of the shoulder gently, and draw the hand of the sick person.
and other ministers hold the head of the patient so that it does not move down; this shoulder returns all now, and if you see it so reset according to this manner:
and it is that you make present i. man who is taller than the patient; and be straight towards the ribs, and put his shoulder under the seat of the patient, and lift the seat up, so that the patient hangs in the air; and other ministers pull the hand of the patient down towards the belly. And if the patient is too light, so he leans with him something heavy, and the dislocation returns now.
And it is reset also in another manner: and is one long stick in earth, whose head be as i. pistol, and be neither too thick nor too thin; Then be placed below the patient, but that he has bandages on his side, and the patient is lying on the long end of the staff; then extend his hand away from the other side, and the joint will return to its place immediately.
And if it does not want to return for all these things that we have said, then do this cure: take one splint of two arms and four fingers wide, which has the head rounded to fit into the middle under the saddle, according to this form:
Then tie above the head of the staff bandages underneath, so that the staff does not bruise the patient, then put it under the saddle of the patient; and extend his arm on the long end of the staff, and tie the shoulder to the staff, and the arm to the head of the hand, then place the arm on one rung of a ladder of the wide, and be extended the hands down, and let the body hang down on the other side: now the joint will return.
And when it is in place, in whatever manner that it is, it is necessary that you put under the saddle a ball of wool even, then put the plaster prepared with powder from the mill, with incense and auburn of an egg, on the whole shoulder and around it, then strain it under the saddle arrangement, and turn the linen on the plaster, and embrace the hand to its collar, and let the hands remain thus.
And it is necessary that he should not move much, as long as the limb is strengthened, because it will heal faster; and then move more after .v. days or .vij., and move it; and if it is hardened and is not softened, then it is healed.
And if the joint is out of place due to moisture that has come, or for another reason, then it is necessary that you administer cautery to three points, as it is described in the chapter on cautery.
And if you do all this, and it loosens after seven days, and the joint does not hold, and cannot raise its arm upward, then know that the nerve at the head of the shoulder is cut or stretched or softened; and know that the joint will never be fixed in place.
The dislocation which is towards the hips, and the breasts, or behind, it is made by impulse, and stretching of hands, and it administers in another place; and care until it is healthy.
And if after the healing comes pain in the limb, and slowness of movement, then use the patient to bathe many times, until that pain is alleviated, and returns to its first nature.
of the dislocation of the shoulder
Know that the joint of the shoulder is dislocated in different ways, and returns in different ways; and it has been dislocated from all sides, even front and back, and the dislocation is not well set, because one can see it well and feel it well; and dislocated according to each figure. And when you join the shoulder of the patient with the healthy one, if you look carefully. Because the joint is locked, and cannot bend the arm, nor touch its shoulder to anything at all.
And it is necessary that you reset it thus as the pus comes out of it, because if the pus did not come out, it would be painful to reset it; and perhaps it cannot be reset entirely in every way, even when it is behind; so it is worse than the other dislocations, and is of greater pain, and perhaps death comes from it.
And the restoration is, when it is such that one can bring it back, that you extend your hand to its two hands; and let its arms be spread, and the hands hold towards the cutting edge, above and below, and put the joint to its shoulders together, or at the root of its palm, until it returns to its place.
And if the dislocation is in front, it returns when it doubles its hand to its hand, and firming the root of the palm the cutting edge which is dislocated.
And if it does not want to return to its place, administer strong extension; and that two ministers extend the arm, and hold it by two ministers, so that it does not move at the extension; then turn the arm from each side, then as you have enveloped a double cloth long and wide;
and when the person of the joint joins its hand, if the oil of any eye to soften the joint, then put the joint forming, until it returns;
and when it is in place, put on a dry plaster with yolk of an egg, and the strain forming, and bend the arm to the neck of the patient, and let it for some days, then untie.
And if the joint is firm in its place, untie the bandage, and let it be; and if you see that the joint is not well set, begin again with the plaster and the bandage, and let it be for some days, until it is firmly set; then untie.
And if he feels pain after the resetting of the joint, and it moves, bathe it and rub it well, and press until it is soothed; or put on the joint a fleece of fat sheep, then let it be for i. day and one night, then remove it, and make him enter into the bath; and when it sweats, rub the joint moderately, then put back the bandage, and then go into the bath; and so do .ij. times or .iij., until he is healed; and if you see, so put on straw of moist chaff heated with butter, and strain over it; it will return to its position.
The dislocation of the hand
The joint of the hand is dislocated, and its return is light, more than the other joints However, it is necessary to bring it back to its place immediately, in the same hour that it is dislocated, so that the limb does not swell, or that an abscess comes hot.
And the reset is that you put the sick hand upon a table, and extend the minister's hand, and he places it equal, so that he puts his palm upon the appearance of the joint, and pushes until it returns.
However, it is necessary that you look if it is well in place; then put the sick one's back of his hand upon a table to extension and retraction. And if the dislocation is on the back of the hand, then put the sick one's back of his hand upon the table, and he puts his hand upon that appearance of the joint. If it returns now, it is well.
If not, then let him strain with soothing plasters of the abscesses shoes, and leave it so without restarting.
And if he cannot bear it, and you cannot put it back in place after several days, the joint remains twisted.
And do no harm to the patient except that as long as the hand is weak and cannot grasp anything at all: then know that the nerve is cut or the artery; if there is no other means except to tighten with a cautery according to the case, and perhaps there is nothing else of value.
And when the hand is in place, put on the splint that we have said, then tighten it and leave it for 5 days, then untie it and leave it so.
And if he cannot move it well, and there is no wound, then bathe it in hot water, and rub it until it is healed.
of the dislocation of the fingers of the hand
At no time are the fingers of the hand dislocated to one side, at no time on the back of the palm or on the belly;
Therefore, are the fingers, and put the dislocation to your pouches until it returns, then support the head of the finger, and lean it towards the part where it is dislocated;
and let it for 2 days, and then put it straight each day; and do not bind it, as we have said, and untie it each day, and make it move, and tie it again. And do this often, until it is tight;
And also do so, if it is dislocated in the palm of the hand, and do as you have done before, until it is healed; and also do so, when it is dislocated elsewhere.
Of the dislocation of the shoulder blade on the back
When the shoulder blade of the back or neck is dislocated, or there are several dislocations, there is no cure, for death hastens the patient.
And the signs of this are that the limbs jump away from their will, cannot be held, and many times are softened one limb, or both hips or both arms or one.
And many times the spine moves in four parts; that which moves at the rear is called "gilbositez":
The cure for this is that you reward if the gilbositez came from childhood; there is no cure or healing of it at all.
And that which comes from a fall or percussion or similar things, the ancients said manners of cures by great pronouncements, or there is not at all much profit in all.
but I have shortened it according to my intention, and have formed instruments in diverse manners.
I say that in the swelling that comes to the breast beforehand, there is no sign of health.
and also that which comes directly on two sides, and one cannot cure except properly the one that comes to the back, as I say.
and it is that the patient be stretched on his face in one even place, and have a strain under him so he does not bleed.
then place one stick at the head in earth forming, and one other by the feet, and tie a linen strip under the arms of the patient, and another from the hips, knees, and ankles;
and the minister knows the ligaments, one at the head and the others at the feet, among the two joints.
and be well closed, the ligaments as we have said, and the minister puts his palms on the spine forming, until it returns.
And if it does not return by this cure, then take a board of 3 arms long, and put it under the arm, and the patient be on his side, and push the head of the board under the arm, then put the middle of the board on the spine; and put the minister his feet on the other end of the board, and press well, until it returns to its place; and if you see, do it with the turning tool that turns by hand.
And it is that you put 2 stakes at the head of the sick person's arm with a great one, and towards the feet 2 others, and have between each stake, outwards and inwards, a palm's width of long.
And have in each stake 1 pierced, where the turning comes, and let the stakes be firmly in the earth so that they do not move; and between each 2 stakes have 1 turning stake, on which the turning lies, and have in 2 turnings 2 small stakes of a palm long, to turn the turning.
And then tie the rope which is among the assels to the turning towards the head, and the other rope towards the feet to the other turning, and each of the ministers turns his turning to the whole rope, and the master puts the spine even as we have said.
And when it is evened out, he puts on a drying plaster with abundance of egg, and then the bandages, and then the bandaging with a tablet of 3 fingers long, which reaches the place of the rib and the part of the healthy spine, then tie it with a bandage, as we have said, and use the patient of subtle nourishment, until he is healed;
And if any thing comes in the end of the healing, it is necessary to administer softening and soothing medicines, with the bandaging that we have said before; and sometimes one administers a piece of wood,
And sometimes the appearance comes in the back spine of the back, and one thinks that it is dislocations; and it is the bone that opens, for which one should not have presumption: by chance it would bring death.
of dislocations of the hip
Know that the joints of the hip and the joints of the shoulder come out only with dislocations, and not like the other joints; and the joint of the hip is dislocated according to .iiij. parts: inside and outside, and front and back; and more inside then, and poc dislocated in front and back.
And the knowledge of this dislocation inside is that when one joins the sick leg with the healthy one, it is longer, and opens more the knee of the sick than the healthy one, and the sick person cannot double his knee to the fire; and it is the swelling that is near inflamed with a hot abscess, because the head of the hip comes there.
And the sign of him to whom it comes to fever, so this accident is contrary to those before.
And the signs of him to whom it happens in front, so are they well his leg according to accomplishment; nevertheless, do not double knee without pain, and if one wants to make him walk, he cannot before, and retains his urine, and swells the groin, and when he goes, he passes above the heel.
And the signs of him to whom it happens behind, so he cannot spread his knee, nor double, and is that leg more twisted than the other, and the groin is softened, and is the hip joint at the place below the ribs.
The treatment of this appearance of dislocation is that you consider if the dislocation is old, and it remains according to its position, then there is no cure; and it is not convenient that he has presumption.
And in those whose dislocation is fresh, and there are .iiij. manners of dislocations, so you haste that you return the joint, and the extension within and without, and the movement to right and left; perhaps it will return, and there is no need for other cure.
And if it does not return in this manner, then it is necessary that you apply one strong minister, and extend the leg strongly with two hands, or with one linen cloth tied above the knee; and another minister extends his hand above in such a manner that he pushes his hands below his shoulders, then the astringent with a linen cloth on the hip; and another holds the head of the linen cloth;
and extend above and below all at once, as long as the patient is lifted from the ground at once, and remains suspended.
This manner of extension is common to four resemblances, and if the dislocation has returned, as we have said, it is good.
If it is not so, it is necessary to pay attention to its resemblance. When the dislocation is at the edge, it is necessary that you support the patient on his healthy side, then put the linen on the root of the hip, and the place which is below the angle, then extend the linen upward toward the angle, and toward the force.
Then seize other assistants with his arms, and embrace the large place of the affected hip, and extend it outward in this form: it will now return to its place; and this manner of dislocation is easier than others.
And if you cannot tighten it in this manner that we have said, then it is necessary that you bind the two feet of the sick person together with a strong rope above the two heels, and on the two knees, and let the injured leg be extended two fingers more than the other.
Then be suspended by the top of a pole, and be two arms long above the ground; then command one minister that he embrace the top of the hip, and let other ministers hang with the sick person, who embrace firmly the hip, because the joint returns now quickly.
And when the dislocation is at the end, let the sick person lie down, as we have said in the one who has gouty disease, and restrain one bandage on the injured leg properly, and on the foot too;
then put two splints, one at the head and one at the foot, then put one splint between the hips of the patient to shape it; and have bandages of moist cloth around it so that the patient does not bleed, then extend each minister toward him, and he puts equal measures in his hand to the dislocation.
If it returns, it is good. If not, put him on a table, and press him as we said in the chapter of dislocations, and lay the patient on his healthy side.
And when the dislocation is forward, it is necessary to extend the diseased leg as far as possible, and according to what I have said; and put his pain on the front of the diseased limb, then press with the other hand, and stretch it down towards the knee.
And if the dislocation is at the back, it is not necessary to stretch the patient down or raise him up on the earth, but rather that he be as if the hip were dislocated at the back, as we have said about lying on his two hips; and be on his face, and the strap extended as we have said before, and one must press on the joint to the table;
and it will be in place when the patient extends his legs, and they will be even; therefore adjust the thighs, and put on the splint, and the strap of a bandage, so that the hip does not move;
and rest for three or four days, then unbind it, and put on the splint again; and if you see that they are even, bind it as before, and let him rest for another three days; then unbind it, and allow him to walk well, as long as the limb is fortified.
of the dislocation of the knee
The knee is dislocated in three ways: that is to say, inside and outside, and behind; and it does not dislocate forward.
And the signs are that you command the patient to bend his leg at his hip, and if he does not stop at his hip, know that it is dislocated.
And the restoration of all this is that you make the patient sit upright, and extend his leg if he can, and place your back on his thigh, and put his foot on your feet.
Then take his knee in your palms, and pull it between your two hands, then bend the two bones that form the knee; and another minister extends his foot, until the knee returns to its place, and the sign is that he can move his leg lightly to his hip.
And put the plaster on top, and make him straighten his leg to his hip, and bind them together strongly for three or four days, then unbind it; and let the patient not try to walk, until the limb is strengthened.
And if the limb is not straight, then administer strong extension, as we have said in the cure of the hip, until it is healed.
of the dislocation of the heel
The heel is sometimes bruised, and sometimes dislocated completely, both inside and outside.
And the signs are that the ankle is swollen, and tender in front of the part where it is dislocated:
The reduction (setting) is light, and one must extend it lightly with the hands when it is only bruised.
And when it is dislocated entirely, then you must make the patient sit straight, and hold him with 1 minister except by the leg, above the ankle.
then treat the foot with your right hand, and then with the left 2 times, then the end on top, and put the foot beautifully up.
and do this 2 times, as we have said, by putting and pulling the foot; if it returns, it is well; if no, then begin the work again, because it will return.
and if it cannot return like this, then make the patient lie on his back on the ground, and put 1 staff firmly in the ground between his hips, and tie cloths around it so that it does not bother the patient.
Then hold the minister's groin, and other ministers extend his foot to their hands or at i. linen, that he ties on the neck of the foot; Then extend each minister equally, and the straps be at the groin of the patient to hold the patient when one extends him.
Then put the mirrors equal in the dislocation to their hands, and other ministers hold the sound leg below, and the dislocation will return gently.
And when it is in place, then put the plaster and bandages on top, and the strain formed, and tie the foot to the leg, and guard the nerves that are on the ankle behind, that the bindings be not too tight.
then let him lay still for 2 or 3 days, and if the ligaments soften, then restrain him; then unbind him on the third day or fourth, and forbid the patient to walk for 4 days; and if he goes before this term, it is not certain that he will not dislocate again.
And if an abscess comes to him, then it is necessary that you soothe it, as we have said elsewhere, until it is healed.
of two
When the hips are dislocated, it is necessary to extend them well without effort, and this is an easy thing.
And if the dislocation is in any part of the back or of the foot, it is necessary that you make the patient sit on one's level place or on a table quite straight, and put your foot on what departs from these joints, then press with your foot firmly, until it returns;
and when it is equalized, and there is nothing departing, then put under the sole of the foot a table to two fingers, then strain it firmly, and leave it for three days, then untie it; and let him rest, until he be healed.
of wounds and dislocations together
When a wound comes with a dislocation, and it is wanted to restore it: many times happens that the patient dies.
If you are not presumptuous in the cure, if you are not wise in the art and have not used it for a long time, and if you are not pitiful and merciful and patient, nor bold.
And at the beginning of things use soothing poultices to the abscesses hot, and leave the patient in God's hands if you do not see hope for health. And when you see hope in it, then reset the limb to its place, so that the abscess chafes there.
and when the limb is in its place, administer soothing things to the hot abscess, and treat the wound as it is necessary, with dried ointments.
and if the dislocation comes with a fracture, and small bones are dislocated, then set the bones, and do what we have said in simple illnesses.
and guard yourself from entering the way of fear, according to what I have said, because it harms you according to your Creator, and for the safety of your weapon and your body. Amen
