O you, three dear sons, I have completed this book which is the end of the science of medicine alongside its fulfillment, and have made the end through its expositions and by its declarations. And it came to me in vision that I complete it with this treatise, which is part of the work of hands, that is to say 'surgery'.
And because the work of hands is fortified in our region and is strange throughout everything, so is the science lost and cut off, and there remains nothing of its strength except for the small descriptions in books of the ancients that have been moved by hands. And from this has come the error and the vanity, and intentions are closed and the science is removed.
Or it seems to me that I shall bring it to life together with the arrangement of this treatise according to the way of exposition and declaration and of abbreviation; and I shall come together with the forms of the instruments of cautery, and of the other tools of the work with the adjustment of the declaration and preparation of them, as is necessary.
And for the reason of those that no good masters of hands are found in our times, the art of medicine is extended. And it is necessary that one who undertakes this should climb in the science of anatomy, as Galen says, to the point that he knows the judgment of the limbs, and their forms and conjunctions and separations of veins, and to have knowledge of bones and nerves and vessels and the number of organs, and the movement and of moving and resting veins, and their place of origin.
And for this Hippocrates says that the name with the name is much, and with the work little; and similarly in the art of hand.
We tell you at the beginning of this book that whoever is not acquainted with the things said before, if he guards himself lest he fall into error and lest he harms men; so I have seen many more of those who meddle in this science and abandon their science and sense of experiment.
For I saw a fool  mire who cauterized i.e. an abscess of scrofula or the neck of a woman, and cauterized the arteries of the neck; for that so much blood came out that the woman died in his hands.
And I saw one other mire who treated a stone of a man's bladder, and the stone was large; so he took out with it a piece of the bladder, and the man died within three days.
And I have already been called for the treatment, and see the disposition of the patient and the size of the stone, and it is well if one cut into it he would die.
And see another case who took care of .i. duke of our land who had a broken leg, and with the fracture had a wound; and the surgeons full of ignorance forced the fracture upon the wound to the stars by strong binding, and did not leave any space for linen on the wound, and left it so; and he commanded him that he should not unbind it; and stayed so long that the leg was all swollen and the feet and came to perdition.
I was called to come to him, and hastened to come untie the leg; and when I loosened it so was he at peace and felt no pain.
But every way the corruption was already confirmed or limb, and could not heal it; and did not cease the corruption to go by the member as long as the member was throughout lost.
And see i. another sore which burst i. an abscess and then inflamed by the malice of its lordliness.
For a sore, when it is pure of melancholic humor, it does not behoove to touch it with iron unless in such a place one can wholly remove what is corrupted.
And for this, dear son, it is necessary that you know the work of hands is divided into .ij. divisions: namely,  work where there is peril in many dispositions; and I shall show in each place of this book where there is fear and peril.
For this reason it is necessary that you guard yourself so that foolish people cannot speak ill of you.
If you take up your arms in caution, and undertake your patients lightly and firmly, and use the best way so that by the grace of God you come to salvation and be praised; and leave the fearsome diseases of grievous health; and remove your arms from those who make you doubt, and have done in yourselves so that you may come from this world to the other of glory.
Galens says in some of his admonitions: "Do not take on a bad illness unless you want to be called foolish by others."
I have devised this treatise according to three chapters.
The first chapter is of fire cauteries and of cauteries of medicine sharp, and is the chapter ordered from the head to the foot; and of the forms of instruments, and the methods of cautery, and of all that which is necessary in the work.
The second chapter is of cutting and probing, and of leeches and wounds, and of the extraction of arrows, and similar things; and is the chapter ordered and the forms of instruments.
The third chapter is of restoring dislocations and twists, and similar things; and is ordered from the head to the foot, and the forms of instruments.
Thus as we remember from the work, it befits me to say the quality of the help and of the discomfort of each complexion.
I say that the qualities of help and of discomfort are the longest speech and most subtle science and the secret answers; and of this many wise men speak and agree to this; and I am content with few words from them, for I fear length.
I say that cauterization helps universally to all complexions where it has matter, except for two complexions: namely hot complexion without matter, and dry complexion without matter.
In hot and dry complexion combined with matter, some said that cauterization is great help; and others said the opposite: that cauterization is not good for illness that comes from heat and dryness.
For the nature of fire is so hot, and it must not be cured of hot sickness by heat, nor by dryness; and he who says the opposite says that cautery does great help to hot and dry sickness that comes in the bodies of men. For when you examine the body of man and his moisture to the complexion of fire, you find the body cold.
And I agree with this word. For I have found it none time by experience.
And in all ways, let no one interfere other than he who has experienced it, and who knows through long usage the chapter of cauteries, and the diversity of complexions of men, and the dispositions and causes of their illnesses, and the occurrences and spacing of time; we have no more fear of other complexions, even in cold and moist diseases. And all the mire assembled and agreed to the cautery.
And know, sons, that cautery assembled fire is of greater secrecy in cures, and of greater goodness than cautery of burning medicine.
For the fire is simple, and does not come outside except to the member that is burned, and harms no other member if it can be named.
The burning medicines come from member to member in moving, and bring to the member sicknesses of bad healing; and by chance kill the patient.
Fire because of its height and because of the goodness of its substance does not do this, unless there is superfluity.
And this I have found by experiment and through the length of service and study that I have put into the art, and it was upon the truth of things; and for this I excuse myself from the length of the speech, because it does not please me that I take away from you the secret which is laid down in fire, and the quality of the work, how it drives out diseases from the body, as the philosopher says when demonstrating; but receive it into your thoughts.
And know, son, that they agree on when cauteries should be done, and the pricking is needed.
And I say that cautery is advisable at all times, because the damages coming are diminished by the help of the cautery; and also if the cauteries are for necessary pains outside and hastening so that they cannot wait for the time when greater malice comes to the limb.
And never think, dear son, as the foolish ones do; because a disease that is cured by cautery has no return; and they say thus; but it is not so as they think, for cauteries are only medicine that changes complexion, and dries the humors which are the cause of pain, and it is more effective than medicine for the hastening of its value, and for the virtue of its work and its power.
And a wondrous thing is that disease comes at times according to the complexion of the patient and the place of the disease and its virtue; and superfluities are gathered in him through the acquisition of meats and similar things, if it isn't cauteries administered where there is little superfluity and moisture, such as cauteries of teeth for pain, and similar things, and such pain does not return; but this happens rarely.
And many people do not understand why cautery is called the last of medicine, and it is so; but they do not believe that cautery is worth after medicine, but their intentions are false, and cautery is the last of medicine because when we administer methods of cures in any disease and they are not worth, then we administer cautery, and it works. Therefore, it is clear that cautery is the last of medicine, not according to the intentions of foolish people.
The ancients said that cautery of gold instrument is better than iron, and they said this because of the quality of gold and the height of its substance; and they said that the lesions of cautery do not cause decay, but that is not true because I have experienced it, and I have found that it is true in some people; and gold cautery works better than iron, as they say.
And nevertheless when you heat an instrument of gold, you do not know when it is heated by the color of the gold, and it is so soon cooled; and if one heats it too much; thus they do at the fire; and thus there is enough impediment.
And for this we use our cautery of fire that we have made apparent in our work.
Or I have ordered this chapter from the head to feet, for that the way be more light to find.
Of olive cautery
This cautery is good for moisture and cold on the head, and there are two types of it made because of a sickness called "soda," and because of many humors that descend from the head to the eyes, and ears, and for many dreams and toothache and sore throat, and also for all diseases that come from cold like paralysis and soda and apoplexy and similar diseases.
The form of this cautery is that the patient be purged by a medicine solutive, modifying the head three or four times, according to what the virtue and age and custom of the patient can bear; and then raise the head of the patient.
And then make him sit cross-legged between your hands, and put his hands on your thighs; after that, place the root of your palm on the root of his nose between his two eyes; and where your two thumbs come together, if it bleeds then extinguish the cautery which is called "olivare," for this is the form:
And place it on the spot marked with ink, and do in descending and pulling your hand poc and poc turning; then lift your hand gently, and look at the place if you see the bone i.e. small; and if you don't see it, so begin the cautery until you see the bone as I told you; after take i. poc of wool, and put in soft and moist cotton inside, and put on the spot, and leave it iij. days; after put above cotun softened in butter; and let it stay until the scalding is gone; after cure the wound of the ointment which is called «tetrafarmaçon», until it is healed.
And they said the ancients, that when the wound stays open longer, the more it purges; and for this reason, it is helped.
And they said any of these that one should leave the cautery so long that part of the bone is burned, and then re-set what is burned of the bone, and be cured.
And they say the other that one should leave the cautery thus, and push it so hard that one lowers the bone as wide as a whorl that women put in their spindles for that the humors may come out moved; and one should leave the wound long uncovered; after that one should clean and soothe.
And these two ways of cauteries do not seem to me to be good in any way, except in some men where there is a way of fear; and it seems to me that I should leave them; for the shoulder is weakened by the continuous resolutions of nature, as we testify in other members; and even when the shoulder of the patient is weak by nature, and the first appearance of cautery is more sound and moved for me, and from this I work therefore altogether salvation.
Of the old pain of the head
When throughout the head comes chronic pain, and lasts a long time, the patient must use herbs and pills which are called "cochie," and of purging of the head and oils and plasters; and if one does to him the cautery that we have said before, and it is not good.
Take heed if the shoulder of the sick person is of a strong nature, and that it be not too cold; then cauterize him below that cautery one point that we have said above.
After make cautery on each horn of the head up to the bone, as we have said before, and make one cautery in its place which is called "vasselz"; and there is one there where one puts leeches; and align your hand so that you do not see up to the bone: the patient feels much more great pain in this cautery than the others, and I will speak of it later; and it is necessary that the cauteries on the horns be more subtle than those with which one cauterizes the middle of the head, and this is the form:
of the cautery of the head When in one part of the head comes sudden pain, and it is extended to the eye, and the shoulder is cleansed by medicinal concoctions, and one has done the other cures that I have said in the division of diseases, and all this does not help: then I make cauteries according to two manners, namely of medicine acute and of fire.
The cautery of sharp medicine is that you take a piece of garlic, and remove the skin and cut it one finger's width to two fingers wide, and then put it on the temple where the pain holds in such a manner that you can place the piece of garlic under the skin; and when it has been placed there bind it well and leave it so for twelve hours; and then unbind it and pull out the piece of garlic, and leave the wound like this for two or three days; then put on cotton padding in butter as long as it permits.
After the cure of ointment until it is healed; and if you see that  you do this of some burning medicines that I have written or in the twelfth treatise on burning medicines.
The iron cautery is made in this manner. Heat the cautery of which is the shape:
And it is called "closed" because the head is made in the shape of a clo or has .i.  pock of curvature, and in the middle a small appearance; and put it on the painful place, and hold your hand and restore the fire a little lightly, until half of the thickness of the heart be burned; and lift your hand that the artery does not burn, which is outside, and flow abundance of blood.
After put cotton in awe of silk, and put on the place for .iij. days; then I put cotton moistened in butter, and then cure the place with ointment until it is healed; and if you want to cauterize this migraine with the cautery which is called "cultellare", all at the point, and guard yourself from covering the artery in this migraine which is not yet ancient.
of migraine
When you cure migraine as we have said before in the divisions of diseases, and it does not profit, and see that the cauteries before mentioned of medicine and of iron do not fit it, then it is necessary that you heat the cautery which is called "cultellare" until it be white; and reign thus on the place wanting a line of half an inch of long, and withdraw your hand once, and restrain that you do not cut the artery and that you do not come to the bone; and guard the mandible that it mutates when one pushes, and that the nerves do not return only that it is mute and that spasm does not come to the patient, and guard the flowing of blood from the artery when it will be cut, or cutting has great fear, and especially to him who does not know, and who is not studying and experienced; and leave the work in half way; but I will tell you how one restrains blood when the artery is cut, and I will show you at the place where it appears in this book.
And if you see that this cautery does not suffice to the illness, and the patient is suffering, cauterize him in the middle of the head as we have said, and cure the wound until it be healed; and if you see, administer the cautery that we have said or chapter of the extraction of the artery, with the cautery which has 2 points; and this cautery is better than that one and more helpful.
of the pain of ears from cold
When pain in the ear comes from cold, and one has opened medicines solutives and other cures that we have said in the division, and the pains do not move, then take this cautery which is called "point", for this is its form:
After pointing all around the diseased ear, or in between the two if the pain is held in both, and you move a bit upward from the root of the ear after you have marked the place to be cauterized; and have ten points around each ear; after cure the place until it is healed.
of the torture of the mouth
Pain that should be treated by cautery is not worse than those that move from phlegm, as we have said in the divisions of diseases; and do not make cautery to resemblances that come from dryness and sprain of nerves.
When you cure this appearance of pain that moves from phlegm of the eyes and expulsions of the head and gargles, and those do not work, then it is necessary that you cauterize the patient with 3 cauteries: one at the root of the ear, and the other a point of fire on the temple, and the third at the adjustment of the two lips; and put the cautery in the part that opens healthy, and make cautery from the head of the ear above a point below the horn of the head, and another on the temple as long as a finger's width; and leave the cautery as long as half of the heart is burned; and this is the form of the cautery:
And it is the appearance of the cautery that we have placed before, but it is a little more subtle and it is necessary that the knife be a little bigger; after curing its place as I have said before, until it is healed.
When apoplexy is old and you treat it as we have said, and it does not benefit, and the patient has no fever, then I make 4 cauteries: 2 on the 2 horns of the head, and 1 in the middle of the head, and 1 where it is called “vasselz” as we have said before, and the last cautery on the mouth of the stomach; and be cured as we have said before.
of lethargy
For this illness it is fitting to give the patient large draughts and pills that sharpen the brain; afterward raise the head of the patient all up, and place on the occiput the ointment of mustard which is written about in the treatise of plasters; and this is the manner of the cautery: if you do it as I have said.
If he is sound, it is well; and if he is not, then you make three cauteries from the middle of the head downwards to the neck, and have a space between each cautery two fingers wide; and cure it like the others, and if you see it joining, and the patient suffers, then you make one cautery in the middle; and if necessary, two others on the two horns, and cure it until it is sound; and let the cauteries be called “olivare”, as I have said before.
of the cold of the head It is necessary that the head be purified with herbs and of what we have said before; after rinse the head of the patient, then you make a cautery in the middle of the head and on each horn, and one behind and three on the spine of the neck; and if you need more, and the body is moist and the patient suffers, and the illness is strong, then you make four cauteries on the spine of the back; and leave it until the most of the heart is burned, and lift your hand; after cure it until it is sound, and let the cauteries be called “olivare” as we have said before.
of epilepsy
The epileptics should not use a fire cautery except that which is phlegmatic, and it is necessary first to modify the brain with herbs and other cures that we have said in the division when the patient is great and suffers from poor medicine.
And if it is a child who cannot endure it, then make gargarismes and mastication modifying the brain often with cooked meats; after which place his head in the middle, and make one cautery according to what we have said before, and one cautery on the vessel, and on each horn; and if the patient is weak and suffers, then make cauteries as I have said to the one who has paralysis and softening of the body, on the spine of the back and neck, and let the cauteries be olive oil according to the manner that I have said.
If the patient is a child, make one subtle cautery according to this manner:
When by the cause of melancholy are the superfluities or the moisture corrupted and phlegm thick, then one should cauterize with these cauteries as we have said to the one who has paralysis.
And if by the cause of melancholy are the superfluities declining to melancholy, and the body of the sick is moist, then give him to drink something by which the brain may be purified, according to what it is before in the division.
After rinse the head of the sick person; after make one tortel of linen well made, as well as one circle, so place it in the middle of the head; and the sick person sit crossed, and be well held on all sides; after present the liniment, and value mude of ram's butter old; and heat it to fire moderately, so that the patient can endure if he puts it; after empty the circle from within the head, and let it cool; and do this to the sick person every week once with other good government, until he is healed.
Or if you see the one being cauterized, making many points throughout the entire cautery. This manner of cautery moistens the brain increasingly; and then puts on cotton soaked in butter and fat of lard.
of the awing of the eyes When awe comes first to the eyes by the signs that I have said in the division, then begin and give the patient something purifying the head, and guarding it from all moisture, and make him sweat or bathe more often fasting.
After that, command him to raise his head, and make a cautery in the middle of the head, and make two cauteries on the two temples if the descent of the awe is to the two eyes together, or one if the descent is to one; and cut with all the cautery all the veins and arteries that are below the heart, and let the cautery be long according to the width of the temple; and guard against the flow of blood, and if you see too much blood issuing, restrain it as much as you can.
And I will teach you in the extraction of arteries and in the incision the caution how to stop it; and no time is made cautery or halter under the .ij. bones behind.
Of the course of tears
When the tears of the eyes are old and accustomed and are on the veins, or near the arteries that are in the appearance of the head outside; and one sees that it is superfluities cold phlegmatic, then I make the cautery that I said at the beginning of the awe descending to the eyes: .i. cautery removes the chief, and .ij. cauteries on the .ij. temples, and .ij. cauteries or halter under the .ij. bones; and if there is need more, so cauterize wisely above the eyebrow to each .i. small cautery.
Of the course of tears from within the eyes
When you medicate according to what we have said in the division, and it does not benefit, then give the patient three ounces of wine; after which put him in his bed, and make a cautery in the middle of the olive cautery; and make two cauteries of the cautery called "clavilis" on the two shoulders, one prick below the cheekbones; and be wary of the artery so that you do not cover it. And this is the form of the cautery called "clavilis":
When the paper of the eye is softened by disease and moisture, then cauterize with this cautery called "olivare". This is its form:
And if you see so make two cauteries on the two eyebrows as long as the eyebrows are; and do not leave the hand except until the third part of the paper is burnt, according to the manner that I have said.
Hair which prickles the eye Sometimes it happens that the hairs of the eyes are converted to the eyelid, and prick the eye, and one makes cauteries according to two manners: that is to say of fire, or of burning medicine.
For the fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
When they are born and even, then put the patient in your health; after sign on the paper of the eyes a figure that is as the leaf of the myrtle, and let it be the beginning of the sign near the hairs; then put cotton moistened in egg white and mucilage of pearlescence over the eye, then heat the cautery of this which is the shape:
After cauterize on the figure that you have signed point and point many times, that the skin be burned in the place; and the sign of the health of the work is that you see the paper retreat, and the hairs raised to the height of the eye; then lift your hand, and leave so .iij. days, then put cotton moistened in butter until the heat is removed; after the cure of ointment until it is healed.
And if after this the hairs come, and the paper is softened then begin the cautery on that same place, as you did first; and if the hairs are far away, so cauterize until the paper is raised to its natural place, and is even, and does not prick the eye.
The cautery of medicine burning is that you command the patient to let the hairs grow long and even, then make from parchment the form of the leaf of myrtle; then take of French soap and live coals, of each one .3., and grind together well; and make it hastily, so that it does not cool, then spread on the form that you have made like the leaf of myrtle, and put under the eyes; and if the malady holds in 1 eye only, so must one work in 1, and if in both as well; and put under the eye cotton moistened in egg white; and the head of the patient be in your lap and put your do showing on top of the medicine, and press 1 peck and the loaf every time that the patient feels the burning of the medicine, for it burns like fire. When you have done this lengthily, so remove the medicine from your hand. And when the burning will have passed, so raise the place of the eye, and reward if you see the paper raised as if it had been raised by constraint of fire or by incision; and if it is thus, then it is well. If this is not so, so put back more of the medicine on the place where the medicine has not worked, until your works are equal, and your eyes set in point; then put under cotton moistened in butter as long as the kernels are dry, after cure the place of the ointment which is called «dyafenis» and another, until it be healthy.
And if it is necessary that you take great care in your work so that it does not fall into the eyes. And if the paper becomes soft afterwards, and the hairs prick the eye, then begin the medicine again on the one which is softened by the paper properly, as you did before; after the cure until it is healed; and this is the form of the leaf of myrtle:
And know that the eyes of men are diverse in size and smallness, and according to these be your constraints; and let not the straight way be returned to him whose study is this art.
of the cure of fistula by cautery
When you treat a fistula as we have said in the division of diseases, and your treatments are not helpful, then it is necessary that you do cauterize it according to this manner.
Instruct the patient to put his head on your hand; and hold his head between your hands in such a manner that he does not move, nor raise his head; after putting moistened cotton in an egg white or in parsley juice on the eye; after heating the cautery which is like this: and it's shaped like the head of a vulture's feather, together with the cautery being sharp; if you see, so that it be pointed from one end to the other, and if you see, as a tent; but nevertheless, this which is shaped is useful for your work.
After pressing the fistula if it is open, and removing the pus, and drying it; and if it is closed, so work on it, and remove the matter from within; after putting on the hot shaped cautery, and hold your hand on the cautery to the part of the root above the eye, that your hands do not make mistakes; and put the cautery in the grease of the eye, and corrupt it.
If you come to the beginning of the cautery to the bone, it would be good. If those are not, restart the cautery once more, and another if you need it, and leave it for three days; after which put moist cotton in butter, and cure with drying ointment until it is healed, and if forty days pass and it is not healed, put on medicine of corrosive aqua as long as the bone is uncovered; and the king according to what comes in his chapter.
And there is a way of cauterizing a fistula that none of the ancients said. Attend to the fistula, and cut it open; after which put in the fissure one thin camel hair of this is the form: and it is made to the quantity of one third of an ounce; and hold your hand or camel hair firmly, and let the patient not move in any way that the melted lead does not run into their eye; and it behooves one to put on the eye of the patient moist cotton in a balm of euphorbium or in aloes: the lead fills the hole of the fistula, and healing occurs by marvelous health.
And if the fistula is healed by the cautery that we have said, it is good. If not, then it is necessary to administer turpentine to the nose and bring the fistula back to the body of the nose according to what is fitting in its proper place.
Of fistulas in lips Many times fistulas in the lips occur that are called “pils,” and also in the lips of children.
When you cure these fistulas of those we have said in divisions, and the cure does not profit, then apply one small surgical cautery according to this form:
And place it gently into those crevices until it comes to the point; afterward, cure the place with cerote until it is healed.
of the abscess of the throat
When an abscess comes in the root of the throat or in the uvula, or palate, or at the roots of the teeth, after it has rotted and grown and is walled off and becomes a fistula; and you cure it as we have said in divisions, and it does not benefit; therefore, it behooves you to have 1 cautery according to the quantity of the fistula; after you have boiled or pierced the fistula, and hold your hand until the iron glows at the bottom of it, and its end; and do this once or twice, afterwards cure it as we have said in cures, until it is healed; and if it is cured thus, it is good; and if that does not happen, then it behooves you to uncover the place and remove the rotten bone, according to what you will find in its chapter.
of the movement of the teeth
When the gums are softened by moisture and the teeth move, and you treat them with medicines and this does not work, then put the head of the patient in your healthy; after heat the cautery whose form will come here after in such manner that you place a chain on the tooth; and put inside the cautery hot gently, and hold as long as the patient feels the heat coming to the root of the tooth; after release your hand and recommence the cautery according to your will; after fill the patient's mouth with salt water, and keep it one hour and spit out.
And in such manner the tooth which was moving is so confirmed, and the softened gums restrained, and the moisture corrupted dried.
of the pain of teeth
When tooth pain comes from cold, or there is cold or dampness, and the remedies of medicine are not worth it, then there is need for cautery in two ways: and cautery of butter and cautery of fire.
Cautery of butter is such that you take butter from a dish, and the end in a spoon of iron or steel; after, take cotton and envelop it on the point of a needle, and soak it in melted butter, and put it on the aching tooth carefully and hold it until it cools; and thus do often as long as its virtue comes to the root of the tooth, and if you see so soaked wool and cotton in cold butter, and put it on the aching tooth, and put on one hot iron until the fire comes to the top of the tooth.
The cauteries assembled fire is such that you take a iron or steel rod, and it be thick so that the fire does not come to the mouth of the patient; after heat the cautery, from which its form will come after, and put it on the tooth and hold your hand until the cautery cools. Do this often, for the pain will be taken away on that same day or the next. And it is necessary that the patient fill his mouth with good butter in the heat of this cautery, and then the root hurt; and this is the form of the cautery:
When the scrofulous sores are of phlegm and cold moisture, and are not obedient to digestion by medicines, then cauterize with the heated cautery according to the form which comes after; and it has two openings for the fumes to issue from one side of the cautery to the other; and put the heated cautery on the abscess once, or twice if need be, until it reaches the bottom of the abscess; and if the abscess is small, put the cautery according to the quantity of the abscess, and leave it so for three days; and put moistened cotton in butter over the burn as long as the burned area is healed; after cure the place with ointments and dressings until it is healed.
When the moistures overcome on the channels of the throat, and also when this comes from a cold complexion, then it is necessary that the patient be first emptied by solutive medicines; afterward make cauterization at the root of the throat, and take care that you do not come as far as the throat, and do not burn more than an inch. Afterward make one other cautery at the joint of the neck to the head of the spine, and let the cauteries be called "clavile" according to our form above; and cure the place as we have said before until it is healed.
of the boil When all and disease of the body are cold, and the patient has neither fever nor dryness, and is the old disease, if he makes two cauteries on the forcele in their veins; and one other cautery between the two breasts; and be the cauteries which are called "clavile" according to the form which is said before.
And if you see, make cautery in pricking at all the cautery which is called "poins" of which the form is before in the disease of the ears; and be the poins up to thirty, or in which it is necessary. After cure the place according to what is said before, and let the cauteries be three reins according to this form:
And for those are the cauteries lighter, because you make three at a time.
of the shoulder dislocation When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first reset the dislocation. Afterwards support the patient on his back and on his ribs; afterwards lift the head which is inside the little bit with your left hand's fingers; and if the joint is dislocated inside, then apply the cautery which has .ij. needles each of which is thus shaped:
and cauterize the head as long as it pierces until the ribs, and would come the figure of the cautery together four cauteries; and for this is made cautery with the cautery which has three needles, therefore the figure of the cauterization are six cauteries; and are the nerves according to the subtlety of a tent and this is the shape of the cautery that has three needles:
And sometimes is adjusted on this, i.e., nerve so there are viii. cauteries.
After put on the cautery for hazel ground with silk; after make rest the patient, and be not moved his limbs by long time until he is well comforted.
And if it is dislocated upwards, which thing happens rarely, then make cautery on the thick of the cautery clavicle, or much cauteries in pricking. For the jointure is refixed, and is removed the moisture and is healed the patient.
of the cautery of pleuresin
The ancients say that one should make to pleuresin cauteres of roots of aristologe, and in this manner: take a root of aristologe long, the largest that you will be able to find, and be dry, and as thick and as long as your fingers; and soften it in oil, and imprint it on the fire, and cauterize .i. cautery between the throat and the neck, and .ij. small cauteries a bit downwards in the part which is below the beard; and .ij. cauteries between the fifth rib and the sixth, declining backwards a bit; and .i. cautery under the breast, and .i. other on the stomach, and .i. between .ij. shoulders, and .ij. as .ij. ribs of the breast downwards from the cautery which is between the two shoulders; and do not press your hand, but make it openly as if smelling.
And said any ancient that no man use cautery of fire seeming like .i. razor, and they heat it and put it between the ribs, until it comes to this abscess; and saut fuers the pain, as we have said in the abscess of the liver. But in this work is fear or the patient dies now, or a fistula comes which cannot be healed.
of the mouse
When you treat the illness of mice from what we have said in the divisions of treatments, and it does not improve, then there are three ways of cautery that are all good.
Of which one manner is that you make three or four cauteries, in line according to the length of the mouse, according to the figure of the cautery of fire that we have said before; and do not hasten your hand to the whole cautery, and let the patient be lying on his back;
And another manner of cautery is that you heat the cautery which has two nubs, as we have shown it in the dislocation of the shoulder; and lift the kernel which is over the mouse, or the skin of the patient comes from the left side, and let the elevation by which you lift the kernel be according to the kernel, according to the length of the body, and the cauteries be according to the width of the body.
After it puts the two burners inflamed until the skin is pierced on the other side, and then pulls the cautery out, and thus there will be four. And if you see, it cauterizes all the cautery to three burners. After the cure when it has gotten rot for a long time, and this is worth more than the other cures before said.
of dropsy
Cauteries are not worth for dropsy, except for the manner called "asclytes". When you cure it according to the manners that we have said in divisions, and your cure does not help, then it behooves you to make four cauteries around the belly button, and one on the stomach, and one on the liver, and one on the spleen, and two behind the back on the spine, and one in the place of the hip; and let the cauteries be well close to the skin's edge.
After leave the cautery open for to kill rot long time, and do not leave the cure of the patient after the cautery; and healing would hasten, and will be together the two intentions with the help of God.
The form of the cautery for the belly is the clamp that we have in front shows; and that for the back is olive shaped, according to what it is put before.
of the swelling of the feet When the feet are swollen in the one who is hydrophic, and are full of  yellow water (citrine), it behooves you to cauterize on the back of the foot between the little finger and the ring finger; and lift your hand with the cautery without turning. And do not enter too deep into its depth, so that yellow water will escape, and let the cautery be according to this form:
After make on .ij. legs .ij. cauteries in each leg at the point of the knife; and let the cauteries be long, one below the knee forward and the other behind, in the middle of the leg; and leave the cauteries open lengthwise without curing, that they may come to be; after the cure of the other cures that we have said.
of the house
When solution of belly comes from cold and moisture, as much as the retentive and digestive virtues which are in the stomach and in the intestine is debilitated, and cannot be cured by ways of cures; and you see the patient suffering well and of great virtue, then make one large cautery on the stomach according to what we have spoken about before or cautery of the stomach, at the circulating cautery; and four cauteries around the navel subtle to each cautery clavicle subtle, and two cauteries on the loins.
And if you see the humors abundant and the patient suffering, make cautery on the groin, and one cautery on each hip, and two small cauteries on the stomach near the great one, because the cure is profitable when there is good aid.
Of the cure of hemorrhoids
When hemorrhoids are at the base or more, and they are old and large humors cold and moist corrupted, and they have been treated as we have said in divisions, and if it does not benefit, then make cauteries: three on the spine of the back, this one which is all outside below the waist a little and little in triangulating, and one cautery below the buttock two fingers.
And if you think that his stomach is chilled, and the meat does not cook, and you see the face swelling, then on the face make one large cautery on the stomach, as it was said before, and one other on the liver, and one other on the mouse to the whole shoulder cauterization; and leave the cautery open long time. After cure the place as long as it is healed.
of the fleshy tissue which is called "thelul"
When you cut "thelul", if the cautery seems like a razor, then put it all blazing on that "thelul" cut; and leave it there as long as the cautery reaches the base of the vein, so the blood doesn't flow; do this once or twice, and if there is much "thelul," cauterize each one as we have said; after the cure of wounds benefitting until they are healed; and if you cauterize with a large cautery on the skin, it will have more help.
of a poorly healed wound
When the patient cannot suffer from cutting or opening, which we will recount in its place, there comes such a sickness that can only be healed by cautery.
When a fistula comes to one, and is filled with putrefaction and corrupted moisture, so the doer must prove with all haste a probe fine, and guard that he knows with all haste the probe how much it has of length. After burnish the cautery which seems as a razor, and thrust it into the fistula according to the quantity that the probe is entered, and re-begin the cautery until that corrupt flesh and corrupted are burned, once, or two, or three, according to the quantity of need; and guard not to wound the nerve that are in there, and the great veins. If the fistula goes to the body of the bladder and the intestine, so guard those places, and do not make those wounds except in their flesh, and think that it is not through; after cure the place as long as it is sound, and if the place is sealed, and the materials are removed long time, then know that the place is sound entirely; and if the materials are not removed, know that the place is diseased, and corrupted the bones at the root; and thus as one of these that we shall say in its place.
Of the sickness of the kidneys When pain from cold comes to the reins, and from great flatulence, and does not take talant of woman, then it is necessary that you make a cautery on the reins on both sides with the cautery clavile that we have said before; and if we cauterize them in the middle, then there will be three cauteries in a line, and they will do more great aid.
of the bladder When the bladder is soft and weak from cold and moisture, so that the patient retains urine, then make a cautery in the part outside above the bladder, where the hairs of the groin begin, and one on the right and one on the left, and let each cautery be as long as a thumb; and make one cautery outside the back, or two if you need it; and let the cauteries be clavil according to the form previously stated.
of the groin When the groin is cold and moist, and does not allow for conception because of it, and the flowers are corrupted and their ends are slow; and when they come, there is great pain: therefore it is necessary to make three cauteries around the mound, as we have said about the cautery of the bladder, and two cauteries outside the back; and let the cauteries be clavil, as we have said.
of the hip
When the viscous humors descend to the joint of the hip, and for this cause it moves from its place, and the sign is that the thigh is longer than the other when one measures them together; and is found the seat of the viscus, then it is necessary that you cauterize the patient on the joint of the hip at i. a cautery resembling the circle, and sign before the place around the joint as she turns, so that the joint be inside the circle; and if so be the cautery such as those with which one has cauterized the stomach.
And if this cautery is not present to you, make iij. cauteries of the olive large, and be the cautery also perfect as all the others; and the cure until it be healthy.
of the pain of the hip When pain comes in the hip joint, and it is from cold and moisture, and the patient is treated with what we have said in the division and the cure does not work, and the illness is old: then it is necessary that you purge the patient of thick humors with fetid pills, or other good-seeming pills.
After the fire cautery; and the manner of the cautery is according to two manners: that is to say, together with burning medicines, and fire cautery. Fire cautery is according to many manners, some of which are such: that you cauterize on the hip joint three triangular cauteries according to this form, and make a good depth and width, and have between each cautery a space the size of a finger, and let the cauteries be olive-shaped; sometimes one makes a cautery in the middle on the head of the hip, so there are four according to this form:
And if you wish, cauterize with the circular cautery that we have mentioned before in the dislocation of the hip; but make it in such a manner that the circle contains the whole hip, and all the spaces of the core be burned.
And this is the manner in which it is done in sciatica, when the pain holds in the hip, and does not reach to the thigh nor to the leg. And if it comes to the thigh and the leg, then one makes .ij. cauteries there where the patient says that the pain holds him, and .i. cautery above the ankle .iiij. fingers, at the left side a little; and let the cauteries be cuticular, and let them be burned with the thickness of the heart; and if the patient feels that the pain extends to two fingers of the foot or near it, then he cauterizes where he feels the pain .iij. points or .iiij. at the cautery which is called «points».
And if the need is, then one does more; and if it seems to him that the pain is below the knee towards the thigh, then he makes cautery with the cuticular or circular cautery, and take good care in all your cauteries that you do not leave any of the cautery there than you burn the nerves and the great arteries, and that you do not make more nuisance and contraction to the patient.
And I myself have seen many who made cautery on the ankle of the foot, and left it so long that the leg was all swollen, and the foot too, and was pierced and corrupted all the foot. After a bellyache of which he died.
And if the pain is in two parts together, make cautery in one and the other, according to this manner. // And the wise men say about cautery of the hip, from this is the manner, make one such iron and be at the head as large as a thimble of a finger, or a little less, and be by interspaces and be from one interspace to the other of space the quantity of a node of the finger; and be the interspaces toward two parts, and be also like nuts, and there be one hand made of iron well; and this is the form:
And be heated until it is all red and you feel it, and then put it on the bone of the diseased hip, and be turned onto the healthy side; and cauterize once one cautery rent and leave it three days; and then make a plaster of butter, and leave the wound covered for a long time; after the cure of ointment until it is healed.
Albucasim says that we use little of this cautery out of fear of its regard, and we see few who use it; and nonetheless these are good cauteries, which he can suffer, and where it is needed.
of the pain of the back
When pain comes to the back, whether by falling or percussion or by too great evacuation, or by seeming of matter spread cold, none of these appearances is worth cautery, except for that which comes from infusion of cold matter.
It is necessary after that the patient is void of fetid pills or other appearances, that one makes on him over his back, where the pain holds, three lines marked with enche, and in each line five cauteries or more according to the virtue and quantity that the patient can suffer; and be made the cautery according to the cautery which is called "poins"; and if you see, make three or four cauteries at the clavile cautery mean according to this form:
Many times this malady comes as to small children, and the signs of the beginning is that they have a narrow  a**l*in when they lie down, and fear; and you find in the last spine of the back and in us the appearance which comes upon the other spines.
When you see this and you view it being cured, if you cauterize it with the cautery of this according to this form.
So that the cautery pricks each part of the spine equally. And if you see it, cauterize around the spine with the pointed cautery 2 or 3 lines, and let the points be near one another. After cure the place as long as it is healed according to what we have said, and beware that you do not bring cautery in a place which is in the nerve's span.
of the pain of the joints
When the pain of the joints is from moisture which are spread to each limb of the body, and when the pain comes in the feet, that the mire call "podagra" properly, and when it is from a cold cause and cures of medicines can not cure it, then it is cured by cauteries in this manner: make the mound of cauteries around the joint of the foot, and let the cautery be olive-shaped according to this form:
And if there is need that you burn on the face of the foot, if to the whole cautery one claims "point". And if the pains come up to the knees and other joints, and this happens many times, if to each knee three or four cauteries of every part, to the whole olive cautery; and if you have need of more, make more, but do not hold your hand away from it for long than the edge of the heart is burned.
And if the pains descend to the knee and back, administer the cautery that we have said in our chapter. And if the pains are in the hands, make points around the fossa two lines; and if there remains no pain in the arms, make points on each joint and on the hair of the hand; and if the pains come up to the ribs or shoulders, cauterize each part, and make good government of the patient and prescribe medicines. Because if you make good government of him and purge phlegm, he will be healed with the help of God.
of the rupture of the sciatica
When a rupture comes in the groin and the bowels descend to the thighs and this is new, it is necessary that when you see it cured, it should not be disturbed on that day; and that he use things which lay the belly flat, so that the entrails descend from his belly; after the fat sits on his back between your hands, and command him to hold his arm as long as the bowels are repaired, and move them to your heels, and sign on under the rupture above the bone of the hip, and at a whole mark which is similar to half a circle above the body; then heat the cautery of which this is the form:
until it is white and that it has felt the heat. Then move the bowels back to their place; and the minister holds his hand over them so they do not return backward; and operate well the thighs of the patient, and put under him one cushion and one bandage on the thighs, and one other on the leg which keeps his hands; then put the cautery on the sign with all your strength, and hold it straight and keep it until you reach the bone, and if you do not reach it the first time, start again another time until you come to the bone; and beware subtly that the bowel does not escape when you make the cautery; so that you do not burn it; and by this means that the patient does not die, or other harm.
And know that when you do not come to the bone with the cautery, your work is worth nothing. And it is necessary that the cauteries of children be subtle according to the measure of them, and of large people also large according to their measure; after three days cure the place of the cautery with butter until the inflammation is removed; after that, cure other ointments until it is healed, and lie the patient forty days on his back until the wound is well joined; and it is necessary that its bandages be laid long so that the bowel does not escape when he gets up to go into rooms.
And after forty days, when he wants to get up, he is given a well-made splint, and wear it for another forty days; and have good rest, that he does not work too much and keep away from excessive drinking and eating, and from too much braiding; and when he follows this teaching he will be completely healed. And I will say here after the treatment of the thigh in its chapter. of the rupture of the belly
When ruptures come in other bellies and are recognized, and you see that they do not grow anymore, make one cautery of the cautery according to its quantity, and be it at the third of the heart; after the cure according to what we have said; and none of the ancients said that one should cauterize with a cautery in three angles according to this form:
but first sign the place of the incision and make a line through the width above the rupture, and another below, and hold your hand over the entire cautery clavicle. But the first cauteries are lighter and more movable.
of old pain in any limb When pain comes in any limb, whether from falling or being struck, and this pain lasts a long time, and the cure of medicine is not effective, then it is necessary that it be cauterized with the cautery called "point," and let the cautery be according to the length of the limb and its smallness and weakness and its virtue and its location of twists and its pain. If it is healed by the first cautery, that is good; if not, begin another cautery above the one, because such is the custom that it must change in the limb that is close to it, therefore you must do the cauteries as long as the patient is not healed.
of melting
The melting are aided some times by cautery with great help, and even the sick person who comes from the putrefaction of phlegm and melancholy.  Since you see them cauterized, take care if the sickness is at the beginning, and if it is cured according to what we have said in the division, and do not send nor stay, and you doubt that the corruption does not spread throughout the sick person, then make .v. cautery on the head: .i.  remove the head to nine, and the other towards the front at the end of the eyebrows; and .ij. on the .ij. horns, and .i. behind on the back of the head; and leave so your hand that the cauteries come until the bone, and as long as the scours exit outwards so that the vapors of the gross humors can issue; and cauterize on the mouse according to what it is before.
And if the melting is spread everywhere; and it manifests clearly, then it is necessary that you cauterize it with these cautery that we have said on the head, and .i. cautery in some of the neck, and .ij. cautery on the spine of the neck, and .vj. cautery on the spine of the back, and .i. large one on the hip and .i. other of the buttock, and .ij. on the .ij. shoulders; and .ij. on the elbows, and .ij. on the tendons of the thigh, and .i. on each joint of the hands and feet, and on the hollows of the hands; and take care of the nerves that are on the back of the heel, that you do not burn them; and sometimes it is done cautery on the bone of the shoulder blade, and .i. other one on the bone of the stomach, and .i. other one on the liver.
And know that when more cautery is done, the more it helps, and it profits them; and know that the patient does not feel any pain from the cautery as healthy people feel it, for the body is already wholly corrupt. And it is necessary that the cautery be large and small according to the members and joints, according to what you will find in manners of irons. After the cure, cover it with flour of quince with honey and other cures until it is healed.
of swelling
When swelling comes in any limb and is cured by medicines and oils and plasters, and it is not healed, then I make cauteries on the limb according to the size and smallness of the limb; and let the cautery be a point going into the thickness of the flesh. Then cure with ointments until it is healed. And sometimes one makes cautery and in the hand and foot and back, at the exit of the nerve that moves the limb, and thus the swelling is removed; but nonetheless, no one should intervene except someone who knows the members and the exits of the nerves moving the body.
of bandages
When the ailment called «albaras» is present and medicines do not help, then cauterize it with a cautery in a place according to the quantity of the sickness, until the swelling is removed, and its color has changed; then treat it with flour of chickpeas and lentils with rose oil and plantain leaves, and blood of colon and blood of alondre, each one part; and mix everything together, and bind it with a cloth, and air it in place until it is healed.
the treatment of syphilis by cautery
When syphilis appears at the beginning, and you want to stop it, then cauterize it with a cautery that resembles a circle, all around the edge of the chancre. And nonetheless, wise men say that one should cauterize also in the middle of the chancre; and nonetheless, this does not seem good to me, because I fear that it will be ulcerated and corrupted, and I have never wanted it to happen any time; and a more correct thing is that it be cauterized around, with the cautery which is called «circule», as we said in many cauteries.
of the swelling which cannot move
When someone has a disease called "adubelati," and it is slow to heal, or because of the superfluity it produces, or because of the blood of the sick person when he is decrepit (that is to say too old) and he has little blood, or because of the tension; and you see it hasten to heal: then cauterize it around with many small cauteries by pricking; afterwards leave it so. For it will hasten to heal.
And if you see it fester all over the cautery, then heat the cautery with what is the shape:
And put your hand in the middle of this disease which is called "adubelati" until the cauteries have pierced the core, and let the cauteries be such that the sick person feels them from outside in such a way that the course of the decay is alleviated. Afterwards cure it as long as it is perfectly healed.
The cure of fire by iron
Another manner of illness there is which is called "corrodens", and is nothing else than a corruption of limb, because it consumes the limbs like fire consumes dry branches. If you see this illness in someone who can suffer cautery together with fire, then sear the cauteries small and large, according to what is fitting for the place where the illness is; after that cauterize all sides until you eradicate all corruption, and nothing of it remains, that all that is corrupted be removed. And then leave him .iij. days, and put on the cauterized places broiled with oil as long as the scours of fire are removed, and all the corruption. After the cure of ointment engendering flesh. And if you see after .iij. days that healthy flesh is born, it is good; and if not, then begin again the cautery on what remains corrupted from the places. And this corruption has been cured at times with medicine ague in place of fire cautery; but nonetheless, fire cautery is of greater help, and I have already said the cure of the medicine ague in the division: take it when you need it.
Of  spurts that come to the feet
Many times it happens that on the feet by fire is born a disease which is called “clos” according to our understanding, and it is a big thing faulted that bleaches the foot. And the cauteries of this disease are according to .ij. manners. This is to know cautery of fire, and cautery of hot water. Cautery of fire is that you heat .i. cautery like it is a feather of vouteul, and it be made of good iron at the measure that it can support the nail on all parts, and that it has subtle margins; after it puts all hot above the nail, and turn your hand around the nail until it comes to the bottom of the nail; and let it like this for .iij. days until it begins to get rotting; then I make a poultice of wild malves crushed with oil, and leave the poultice on all night, and the nails will fall and will be uprooted from their roots. Then cure the place with ointment healing flesh until it is healed.
And if they are converted by fire the body, and many times happen in hands and feet, then it is convenient that you bring them cautery of hot water; and is in this manner: take a can of iron or a feather of vouteul, and put on the nail and the althelul, that is to say pores warts; and put the can on so that it supports all around, then I put a pot of hot water, and hold your hand well, and press your hand turning so that the edge of the can comes to the root of the nail, and can find the hot water path deep until the root; and suffer the patient a little the burning of the hot water for an hour; then let it be like this, and it will break away from all its roots. Thus do one after another, as long as you eradicate all those who are in the body, then cure them with ointments that generate flesh.
The cure of trembling
When some tremble from cold or quartan fever or another, it is fitting that you make .iiij. cauteries or .iv. on the spine of the back, .i. cautery between each spine; and .i. cautery or pez, and .i. on the stomach at the olive cautery; so he will leave trembling, and hasten his health from the cold sickness.
of pus-filled pustules
Sometimes pustules appear by fire on the bathed body, or pus-filled pustules, which come from large corrupt matters. If at first when they appear that one makes a cautery on each head of the pustule: a subtle cautery of myrtle wood, so that the point is taken to the fire, or of a long aristolochia root, or at the lentil cautery. And sometimes those are cauterized at the beginning when they appear, according to this manner, and they cannot grow further from them, but the superfluities from which they come are broken up, and they are healed; but it is necessary that this be done after the evacuation of blood.
when the artery is cut Many times there are great hemorrhages of blood from the artery that is cut at the wound that comes to the outside, or in the incision of the abscess, or in the cautery of the limb, and similar things; and it is a very grievous thing to prolong.
And nevertheless when this happens to anyone, hasten to place your finger index on the wound of the vein, and restrain it as much as possible until the bleeding is appeased under your finger, and no drop comes out anymore; then put the olive cauteries to the fire more small and large until they are all red; then take one, or a large one or small one according to the wound and its place where the artery is cut, and put the cautery on that vein where you hold your finger, and hold the cautery there as long as the bleeding is restrained.
And if it jumps out when you lift your finger from the vein, and the cautery is extinguished, then take hastily one other of the cauteries that are in the fire.
And do not cease to do these one after the other until the vein is stretched; and guard that you do not burn the nerve which is beside it, and that another malice does not come upon the patient; and know that when the vein runs short of the artery, one cannot well stretch it even when the artery is large, unless by one of the .iiij. ways that we have said: or by cautery, or by extraction when it is not treated, or by a strong tying of thread, or by medicines put upon which have power to stretch the vein; and be bound and strained well.
Who will bring tightening of ligatures or tightly wrapped bandages, or putting hot things on, or similar things, if it does not profit them no.
And if this happens to anyone and they do not have any medicine present, then he must put his finger over the wound of the vein as we have said, and well tighten until it is stretched above the wound and above the vein; and do not move the finger, but frequently moisten with cold water so that it is very cold until the vein is frozen and thickened and stretched; and do those things in advance that are needed for cauteries and medicines.
We have told you in the first chapter all diseases for which it is necessary to use fire cautery, or burning medicines, and the incisions and causes and instruments and forms of the cauteries; and I placed that chapter from the head down to the feet, and I will go in this chapter by the same way for those who find more easily what they want.
And so, as I begin this, it is necessary, dear student, that you learn that in this chapter there is more danger and fear than in the first of the cauteries, and for that reason, greater caution is required.
For in the work of this chapter, there is often the evacuation of blood when opening a vein, and incising an abscess, and in the treatment of wounds, and in the extraction of arrows, and in cutting into stones, and similar things; where there is doubt and fear, and many die.
And I warn you that you do not undertake folly. Because many kinds of people come to cures. There come those who are so consumed by their illness that they die easily because of the ignorance that they find in their sickness, and the greatness of their malice; and of these one must have fear. And of these there are those who give you their sense, and say: "Wait, I am cured"; and the illness is deceitful. It does not behoove that you consent to those who come to you who have this manner, but put more great caution in your honor than in your covetousness, and do not open blindly but wisely of those whom you are certain of, and whom you can have taken and praise; and use prognosis and indication in cures of your sick so that health may be converted; and these things will help you to acquire good reputation, and glory, and memory of length.
Very dear son, our Lords give you good understanding and rightness, and if you wish to aspire to the holy inspiration of His hand, Amen.
Or I have ordered you this chapter in dividing by chapters, according to that which it is before or chapter of cauteries, that I have devised them from the head to the feet, for that you may find more easily those which you will need.
the head full of water
Know that this illness comes many times to children at birth, and when the midwife pulls the head of the child too hard; and sometimes it comes from a cause unknown.
And I never saw this illness outside of children, and to all those that I have seen it hastened death; and for that reason it seems to me that it is better to leave the treatment in such cures.
And I saw one child whose shoulder was full of water, and the head grew larger each day until he could not support it; and thought so much the moisture that he died, and this moisture is assembled below the bone on the scapula, between the heart and the bone; and the work is such if the moisture is between the heart and the bone, and the abscess is small, that you open a cut in the middle of the head wide; and as long as two fingers, as long as the moisture runs; and see here the shape of the spatula:
If the moisture is thicker, and the abscess is larger, make two cuts in the shape of a cross, according to this form:
And if the moisture is below the bone, and the signs that you see are the commissures of the head open on each side, and the water leaps out forcefully when you press it with your hand inward, and this is not returned to you: then you must make three cuts in the middle of the head according to this manner:
And after the incision, take out the moisture entirely. After that, insert bandages and powders, and put wine and oil in it, and leave it so until the fifth day; then undo it, and treat the wound with tents and ointments, and leave the chief bandage to remain, and then give the patient dry meat of poc of moisture as long as the limb is strengthened and healed.
And another way of incision is that you look where the abscess opens large and the assembly of liquid; for sometimes it is in front; sometimes behind; sometimes on the right; and sometimes on the left.
Therefore, take it where the abscess opens and the filling of liquid, and make the incision according to what you are able; and beware that you do not cut the artery; and vein flow of blood, so that the patient dies from the loss of blood and the evacuation of moisture.
of sum
When it happens to anyone a disease which is called «catarre» in the eyes or at the breast, and the patient is old, and the medicine cure does not help, then the last cure is cauterizing with those one covers the two arteries.
It is therefore necessary, when you see them to cover, that the patient make back his head; after rub their place with a rough cloth until the arteries appear, then constrict the patient his neck with one cloth; then look where the vein beats, and the places of one and the other are after the ears, and so they are returned; then sign their places with ink, then cut one and the other with a sharp spatula of two parts. As long as the width comes up to the bone, and that be by the wide part of the head.
And if you see, thrust the spatula below the artery and cut it above, cutting also like two fingers across.
And when the vein is cut, blood jumps out continuously upwards.
And if the artery does not open at the feeling, it is necessary that you measure the quantity of space of three fingers, then rule by drawing a line until the bone; and what it is necessary to put out of blood is six ounces, and perhaps a little more or less according to what the patient can suffer, and the fullness of the artery; then look at the wound: if it remains on the bone point without any sphagnum, cut it so that pus does not come, then strain the wound and tie it, and the cure of ointment until it is healed.
of migraine
When old migraine comes, and acute catarrh, because of the moisture of tears and heats in the temples and ancient soreness and similar things, and it is medicated by manners of cures of medicine and all that does not benefit them, then we strain the arteries of the temples and cauterize them, as we have counted.
And the manner of their extraction is that the patient makes back the hairs of his temples, and attends to the artery which opens in the temple, because it opens well by its beating, and is poorly returned outwards than in certain men who are too cold; and if it is returned, then restrain the neck of the patient with some cloths, then rub the place with some rough cloth, and raise the place with hot water until the artery appears manifestly; then take the spatula which here is the form:
then scrape the skin lightly until you come to the artery, then treat it upwards with pincers, and depart well from the tissues that are under each part; and if the artery is subtle, turn it back with the point of the forceps, then cut it on that part according to the quantity of two fingers. For if it isn’t cut, it doesn’t jump out the blood all at once.
And treat the blood from six to three fingers; and if the artery is large, it is necessary that you tie it in two leagues with a strong double thread of silk, so that putrefaction doesn't come before the closing of the wound, and there comes bleeding; then cut the superfluity which is between the two liens in the same hour, and then, if you wish, cauterize it with the cuticle cautery up to the bone until the fingers are cut; and this is the middle work, if the patient doesn't have fever and he is of a warm complexion.
For the cautery is aid to finish the moistors: for this reason it is of more great aid against the moistors. Where it is necessary for the extraction of arteries that one fills their bed with old cotton and places on them well-made tents; and when one unbinds them, so be cared with dry medicines that cause flesh to rise, and with tents, until it is healed; and if without a splint of the artery as long as you work on it, so hasten to close it by cautery, or you put in its place vitriol and strain it in your hand that the wound is stitched; and if you do not have this present, so put on its bed your finger until the wound freezes, and raise the bed with cold water until the bleeding stops, and be constrained as is necessary; and what is more mature and lighter in the extraction of the artery is that you cauterize the vein of this cautery trenchant by .ij. parts, but the trenches be well spaced to keep longer their heat. For when the instrument is too hard, it holds less its heat. And must have between the two knives one should of great space, and then when you have signed in their two sides, and you place the red hot iron until it comes to the bone, and cut the vein in two lengths; and be separated between the two shoulders because it is not well joined by this cautery at all; and this is the form of the cautery:
of tears
When the tears of the eyes are descending from the veins that are on the forehead above the head of force, and it does not benefit any medicine to be done there, and you see the face of the patient turning in, and they feel pain in the front like a shivering; and where the eye is covered and moist so that the hair of the eyebrows falls, and the eyelids are chapped, and scorched by the ardor of tears, then this cure is necessary.
And they called it in the old days "contused cure," and that you do to the patient who has this illness the hairs that he has on his forehead, then he makes .iii. incisions on the forehead evenly according to the length of the forehead; and let one incision be as .ii. so as to completely remove the forehead, going down to the nose, and the other .ii. as .ii. ribs above the cheekbones, and keep yourself from the incision of the arteries that are as .ii. ribs above the cheekbones; and keep your hand away from the continuation of the .ii. jaws, and let each wound be the quantity of .iii. thumbs across joins.
from the incision that is under the temple up to the second incision; and scrape all the kernel that is between the two incisions to the whole syfac that is on the bone, then do another one from the middle incision up to the other second, and then extract further this spatula.
If it is inserted in the first crack the instrument which is called “cultellaire”, and is very sharp on one side, and on the other side is blunt, not sharp, and this is its form: And put the sharp edge towards the flesh toward the heart, and the blunt edge toward the bone, and put it in until it comes to the middle crack. And cut all the vessels that descend from the head to the eyes as long as the incision is continuous until it reaches that which opens toward the heart, and then on the other side make in the middle crack until the other end; and then extract the blood equally, and express the wound for the blood taken; then put in each crack a tent of old cotton, and put above cloths moistened with wine and oil and aisil, and guard that an abscess does not come there; and on the third day untie the linen, and there administer abundant plant poultice, then the cure of basil ointment with rose oil, and other cures which one uses for wounds, as long as it is healed.
of the eye's
When a certain catarrh comes acute by custom, and you see the eyes watery and small, and weaken the sight, and the papers burned; and the hair falls out, and where the chief partakes in a sharp pain, and the patient sneezes; therefore you know by these accidents that these matters and this catarrh come from many veins, and the cure that is there, if it is this.
And it is that you command the patient to push back his forehead, then make a great incision in the middle of the forehead, and another wide one. And begin from the left temple incision to the right temple, and be the incision until the bone; and keep your hand away from the nerves of the temples which move at the touch; and when the bone is uncovered, wipe all the blood with a sponge, and then sew between the two lips of the incision and put old cotton there, and bandages of linen; then tie above cloth soaked in wine and oil, and guard against a hot abscess; when it is removed, you should rub the bone until pus begins to appear, then treat it with drying things that make pus dry.
In this manner: take 2 parts of wheat flower and 4 parts of colophony, and make a poultice with it; and administer it in these wounds to dry pus completely.
of the plugging of the ears
All that which falls into the ears is one of the four things: or grains, or beast, or stone of mine or similar thing like iron; or seed, as beans, lentils, peas; or flowing thing as water and such and similar things.
When it falls into the ear stone or another manner of thing that does not join to the ear, nor grows in the ear, put the ear to the sun. If you see the stone, instill a drop of violet oil or sesame oil, then administer extraction; and have him sneeze with condiment, and plug his nostrils when the sneezes come, and put around the ear pieces of cloth or wool; and keep the ear upward. Many times it comes out by this cure; and if it does not come out, administer extraction with fine pincers, of which this is the form:
If it comes out with the pincers, it is good; if not, administer extraction with a fine instrument of small double curvature; and if it does not come out by this, make a chain of iron and insert the head of the chain or through the ear hole strongly, and plug what is around the chain with soft wax so that the liquid cannot enter with the chain; then pull it out forcefully, for many times it comes out as we have said; and if it does not come out in this manner, take a glue of what they use to catch birds, and put on some instrument that is pointed for this purpose, and put a little cotton around it; then press the glue on the stone or whatever thing it is, and pull it out. And if it does not leave all these things that we have said, then hasten to cut open the ear so that an abscess comes out, and spasms; and the manner of cutting is that you first make the patient bleed from the head, and extract blood according to the measure of his virtue, then make the patient sit between your hands and turn the ear upwards, and make a small cut at the root of the ear in the fat or where it depends; and let the cut be like a crescent moon, until you come to the bone, then the bone according to your power, and suck it diligently with your mouth; and the cure as long as it is healed. And if it is grains that are inside and it swells, then administer extraction; and if it cannot exit, then administer i. spatula thin according to this form:
and administer an incision to that grain. But do not do this when you think that the grain is moist due to the moisture of the ear, until you have made many pieces of it; then extract with fine pincers and suction, as we have said, so that the extraction be aligned.
In the ear water therefore that falls, it befits the patient to use the external of conditions first, and widen the ear with old cotton. And let him lie on that same ear where the water is. If it comes out by this means, that's good. If not, then take many stones according to the length of your finger tenuous and light, and heat them a bit at the fire; and put them in the patient's ear one pierced, and let it rise up on it. from his feet of another part, and fire from one stone upon the stone that is in the ear; and do not cease to do this of stone after stone until the water comes out entirely, and thus it shall come out entirely; and if you see, take .i. reed, and put one end in the ear, and the other end catch on fire until the more tender reed burns; then redo the other part with other reeds until the water comes out entirely, as we have said in the stone.
In the extraction of the beast, if it is of small body, as a flea and similar thing, cure it as we have said in the division; but if it is of great body which one can feel, administer extraction of pincers; and that is the lightest thing to remove that is in the ear.
In the extraction of worms in the ears, when you cure it as we have said in the division and where we treat distillations, and the cure does not benefit, then it befits that you look at the ear to the sun: if there appears any worm, then you treat them with subtle pincers, and if they do not appear, then take the cane of which this is the form:
And it should be narrow below and wide above. And put the most subtle chief in the ear according to the quantity of the suffering of the patient, then succeed form to all the cane; do this often until all the worms come out. And if they do not obey to come out, then stop around the cane with cotton as I said in the stone; and if they do not come out further as we have said, then administer distillations that the ancients have proven in the excision of worms, and you will find them or treat with distillations; and if you distill your oils and medicines in the ear to all this instrument, of which this is the form as you see:
And let it be of silver or iron, narrowed below at one small hole, and wide above for distilling; and for pressing inside the distillation, one instrument of iron well made for this, and if you see take one razor and wrap around the tip evenly cotton; then put your oil or your juice, and what you want of your medicines in the cane, and the cane in the ear; then put inside the razor to all the cotton, and press your hand temperately until the oil is distilled or finished at the end of the ear; and let the patient feel it inside, and be the distillations one pock heated at the fire so that once distilled into the ear; and guard that it be not too cold, for the medicine would not be so good.
Of the stopping of ears
No child is born who does not have a hole in their ears; and this same thing happens to men by the swelling of a wound, or of flesh born inside the ear, and this swelling comes sometimes from within the ear, so that one cannot see it; and sometimes it happens i.e., point of fire, and one sees it well.
That which comes from within so that one cannot see it, is of grievous healing in more dispositions, and in this one ought to put the ear of the sick person in the sun; and look inside: if you see the opening apparent, then the work has all this spatula-like thing of this kind:
And be straight and trenchant in front and behind all plain so that it does not blister the ear; if the opening is of flesh born or a body of the ear, then hold it with subtle pincers, and scoop it lightly, as long as that flesh is completely removed.
And if the opilation is in the ear, then take one razor subtle light and heat it a little in the fire, then put it into the flesh of the ear. If you feel the opilation that the patient feels greatly in the ear, pierce lightly, and keep that you do not wound the nerves of the ear; then put in the ear a tent according to the width of the hole, and moisten it in Egyptian ointment.
Do this until the wound is healed, or you take a tent and moisten it in rose water, and powder on powdered vitriol; and if you see the ear inflamed, then it is necessary that you withdraw the tent and move another tent moistened in cerote which is made of rose oil and wax, until the inflammation is removed; then cure it until it is healed.
And if bleeding comes, then dip a sponge and drape it in cold water, and put it on the ear, and use other cures that remove the bleeding which are or treat distillations.
of the sheet of paper
This althule that comes from the papers of the eyes when they are moist and are dry, then you should extend them with tweezers and pincers, and the root of a spatula; then put on their place ground vitriol.
And if without it decored, then cauterize with a subtle lentile cautery, and after the incision the cauterization is worth to use; and many times they are repaireed, because nothing remains of their roots; and when they are cauterized by fire, those roots are burned and do not come back.
of the  grease
Many times come in papers the eyes some things that seem brittle in its form and in its hardness, and for these is this disease called "hail", and is a gathering of moisture large in the paper above and below; the works are such: take heed if the hail moves from one part and the other, and it's a light thing to know; then make the wide, then the skin of each part lightly, then take with the pliers, and the cut. If you cannot cut without piercing a bit the paper, so do not grieve the patient; and if the fissure is great, so assemble a suture, and cure until it is healed; and if it is small, do not make any force, for the ointment restore it soon and creates flesh.
And if the hail is descending into the ear towards the upper part, so reverse the paper, and being the hail to pliers, and the cut and press from one side and the other; and if the paper is separated by the incision, it grieves nothing; and when the hail is cut, leave the eye of salt water, and cure the place of that which creates flesh until the patient be healed.
of the fat of the eyes
This is grease that is engendered in the fabrics of papers above, and this happens more to children than anyone else, and grieves their eyes much, and they come the catarrh in the mornings, and cannot look at the light of the sun because the tears hasten to their eyes; and because of this they lie down on their faces sideways, and sleep on top, and are their fabrics under their eyebrows moist that the swelling and appearance have covered with the exinach which opens in the eye. And when you press it with your fingers and feel the exinarch between them.
And the manner of the work is that the patient puts his head in your breast; and then take one draping of linen, and prepare a tent in the manner of a circle according to the quantity that contains exinarch from each part, then put it on top; and press with your fingers on one side and the other, so that the exinarch is assembled within the circle; then make in the middle of the moisture with the spatula cutting a fissure of wide, and not be more than the wound one makes in the vein; and make the leather in full force until you come to the exinarch; and in more dispositions comes exinarch from the fissure, according to the form of a piece of white fat.
Extract then with one piece of cloth charpit between your fingers at the outer edge, and turn your hand to right and left until it is spread; and guard that you do not add in the fissure, that you do not come to the whole spatula up to the eye, that you do not bleach it.
And if the incision does not open at the beginning of the split, then widen the split slightly until it opens; then extract as we have said, then moisten drapes in water and wine, and put them on top, and bind with bandages.
And if there are such men who grind flax and put it on top to corrupt that moisture that remains. Then treat it until it is healed. And if it comes back to the place as a hot abscess, then treat it with soothing plasters until it is healed.
of hairs of papers
When hairs on the papers are born adjusted other than nature's, and they become old, they harm the eyes, and bring manner of maladies as tears accustomed and softening of the papers and albuginea, until it is cause of the destruction of the eyes; and it is cure according to .iiij. manners: or by cautery altogether fire, or by medicine ague according to what it is before or chapter of cautery, and it is done by incision and suture or by canes, according to what I will say.
It behooves you to put the head of the patient in your breast, then turn the paper of the eye to your left hand; if it is turned, it is good; if not, there puts an needle at all .i. thread above; and let it be by the edge of the paper where the hair grows near these hairs, and treat .i. thread up to the whole paper, and turn it to the razor; then make in the part below the paper, below the hairs adjusted, to the entire spatula copant, from the great tearer to the small; then extract .i. thread, and put under the paper a small tent of cotton and drapery, then place on top of the paper a figure of an enche, like the leaf of myrtle, and nonetheless it behooves that the figure be according to the quantity that you see raise the paper which is divided to all.
And if to him who needs it one cuts a great quantity of the paper according to what the paper is softened; then make at the entire spatula above the .ij. lines that you have signed, and commence from the great tearer to the small; and let it be one of the cleavages near the natural hairs in the thickness of a root, then put the oncine in one of the .ij. angles of the heart, then exfoliate all of it; then assemble the .ij. lips with a suture of a needle at all .i. thread of fine wool, and wipe the blood, and make airdré the superfluity of threads on the .ij. eyebrows to nothing sticky, if you wish to do this; and if not, have no care, then leave the suture and the threads until .iij. days or .iiij.; then cure the wound without a suture with things drying and constricting, because the paper revives at the closing of the wound and the assembling of it, but the suture is muedre (as they say the ancients), and this work without fear;
and if in another manner: and is that you mark the paper with a figure which is as well as the leaf of myrtle, as we have counted, at iii. ounces separated according to the form which is here:
then cut what rises above the small forces equally according to the form which is here:
And if you do not have the power to hold the pliers, and the thing is not equal, then take a needle which has i. thread, and put it in the middle of the figure; and put one other thread near the large tear, and the second thread near the small one, and assemble between your two threads equally; then lift your hand equally, and lift all the skin above what you have marked, as we have counted, then assemble the two lips of the wound with stitching, and cure it until it is healed; and if an abscess comes to your incision, then soothe it with cerote and similar soothing ointments;
and sometimes it happens that the hair of the paper are converted: so it is necessary that you use those that we have said of the incision; but the suture on one and on the other is more artificial.
The cure of the cauteries is in this form: and that you convert the paper and the felt inside according to those that I have said, and then make two cautery by art, and two subtle ligatures as long as the paper and the width of the spatula are; and cut the two handles of two parts where you hold the threads; then assemble one and the other subtly on what surmounts the paper of the eye, and strain the two cauteries of the two parts forming; and leave it thus for some days, and the skin which is strained will die and shrink and carry, until it comes away by itself.
If it tarries, then cut it with more force, then cure it until it is healed; and when the wound is soldered, and if it has been raised the paper, and they will no longer prick the hairs; and this is the form of the two cauteries that you will make according to this figure, and according to this quantity of length and width:
The work is such that you prick an awl, fine and I put one thread of silk, thin and fine; then assemble the shoulders and knot them together subtly, and let the length of the threads be a palm long; then arrange in the chase another fine thread of silk short, and knot its ends together; then put the patient's head on your shoulder; and be facing the sun so that the work is clarified, for it is a subtle and delicate work; then put the awl into the entire chase in the root of the hair just above, and make it pierce through the paper gently as long as you draw it from above the natural hair; then extract the hair up to the chase and put in the chase that hair, if there are one or two or three or more; then extract your hand so that the hairs come out through all the chase into the paper with the natural hair.
And if the chase is treated and the hairs do not come out with it, then you will draw the chase down to all the thread that you have arranged in it, until the chase comes out through the hole above and you see it by the eye; then you will draw the chase and the thread, and close the eye and let it be closed for two or three days, until the hair hardens in its place and grows the flesh above; and if the hairs are small, accompany one long hair from the natural ones, and leave it raised with that one as long as it is elongated and then raise it.
of the rotting of the eye
When this sickness which is called «aleacrati» or the rot comes to the eye, if there are two manners: one natural, and the other unnatural. And happens by suddenness of wound, or cutting or cautery, and by similar things.
And the manner of working on it is that you split that suture, and loosen the lips of it, and put inside tents of linen, and let it be until it is healed; and it does not behoove that you use in the cure of it things that dry and restrain. For if you do this, so returns the illness worse than the first; but work of softening things, such as fenugreek; and the rose of water or aloe and seed of flax are cooked, and oil of diaquilon melted in any of the oils, and envelop a tent, and cure with that.
And the treasures of your cure is that you take care that it does not close again according to the form that it was before; and this work that we have said is nothing but the addressing of this illness, so that it does not return according to the form that it was before.
of the matter that comes into the eye
This disease that is  dislocation which is truly called “axacrati,” and it is natural and accidental. The accident comes from wound and cut and cautery and similar things; and the way of the work in this is that you prick a needle, in which there is one double thread, and you put it into the matter, and you make it pierce from the left tear duct to the right, so that the threads come into two channels of the matter; then you raise the matter above the whole needle, and the cut at one spatula wide.
And if the figure of the matter returns according to what is right, it is good; if not, then you take one razor and put it in the split, and turn the paper, and make two splits where the cost inside the paper; and let the channels of the two splits be at the two angles of the incision that you have cut, and make two angles so that when they are assembled, the figure is as the figure of a letter which has no “j” griesche”; then remove that matter, according to the quantity that its cost is pulled out from below, of those who follow the paper, then join the two separated parts, and sew them with a thread of linen; then cure it with those that we have said about softening medicines, and bandages, until it is healed.
And if the ailment comes from a cut or suture or cautery, then it is necessary that you make a plain incision below the hairs of the papers, and according to what is before; then sew between the two leaves of a tent, as I have said; and one must do the work according to the form of the malady, because it is very diverse in form, and the wise masters equip everything of all their power how it makes return the figure to its natural form; and the patients themselves, according to what is necessary for the operation and instruments in more dispositions.
Of the padding of the paper
When this suturing happens to a human hand in such a manner that the paper above is sutured with the white of the eye, and it cannot move or do its natural workings, then it is necessary that you put the tip of a razor under the paper, and lift it up; and keep it as pins, until you cut what is adherent to the spatula, which should not be too blunt nor too sharp, so that the patient does not suffer because the spatula is too blunt or bleaches the eye; and let your incision, from which you have excised that assembly, be gentle, so that the paper returns according to its natural form; and it is healed all of that assembly, and no time in salt water for the eye, and the rise of fresh water, and of collyrium; then put between the paper and the eye a tent of linen, and put on top of the eye moistened wool in abundance of an egg; and after the third day use collyrium and things soothing until it is healed.
of the angle of the eye
Know that the angle is in .ii. manners: it is nervous and seeming to .i. hard syfac, and another which is not nervous, but is seeming to white moistor congelee, that when one touches it with iron and one bakes it panre as pincers, one cannot; and the one and the other semblance commences toward the great tear, and crosses poc and poc until it covers all the view and all the light and the movement of the eye.
And the manner of incision is that the patient puts his head in your hand, then opens his eyes; and raise the paper with your hand, then coil the angle as pincers with a small doubleure, and lift it up; then take a needle, and put on it .i. hair of horse, or of calf, or of ox, and .i. strong thread; and double the point of the needle a poc and stick it into the angle, and pierce it all the way with the needle, and bind the angle with a thread and lift it up, and scrape all the hair on the side of the angle that follows the prunele and silk to the hair until the head, then cut off the remaining in the root of the tear all over the spatumile subtle and as small forces, and leave the char natureil or tear, so that by the incision does not come the body of tears acostumeement; and no times have the angle at the oncine alone, and to the thread, as we have said; then the scrape on all the spatumile souef of this is the form:
And guard that the spatula does not touch the fleshy tissue and tear it, and that the needle is not pierced; and after the incision place in the eye a bit of silk ground, and of the collar made of litharge, and let it stay until the next day; then cure it as much as is needed until it is healed.
And if the nail is not nerved, and you cannot put in the needle, and the tweezers cannot enter, many times this semblance of a nail is cured with medicines; and they grow as I have recounted in the division, and if you see it covered, work the eye of the patient, and take the spatula lightly pointed according to this form:
And remove the nail carefully, and if you see that it does not diminish and the root is rapid, then distill from your mouth into the eye a collar made of litharge and red lead and silk ground, and plug the eye until the next day; then begin the other work according to this same operation, until it is completely removed.
If nothing is contrary to you in the eye, as a pustule, then milk it, and first cure the pustule hot until it is healed, then resume the work as before, until it is healed.
And if the appearance of the flesh due to the tear hurts in the eye by great annoyance, then suspend it with a bandage, and cut a part and not half entirely, that body of tears does not come; then distill into the eye red colic which is made of litharge.
Of the flesh which arises on the pupil
The eyes of some men are born at times with red flesh, and it covers the pupil and restrains upon the eyelids and turns them outward, and seems like a rosebud; and the work is that the patient puts his head in your hand, then you open their eyes, and coil all that flesh with suitable tweezers to this, and sustain it with force; then cut the first flesh, and go cutting all the way down to the end, and guard that you do not blind the eye during the work; and let the incision of the spatula be as we have said in the incision of the angle and the small forces from which we remove the sebum, as the form after this chapter demonstrates.
and when the incision is complete and all the flesh is removed, then apply the oil of silkworm crushed or distill there red coral and similar corrosive medicines, and put on top of the oil of fire cotton with yolk of egg, so that it be assured of a hot abscess; and if it remains nothing, and the skin covers over, and you doubt a hot abscess, then leave the oil and cure the abscess with things soothing a hot abscess; then return to your work as long as it is healed, and thus do until flesh is joined in the eye by this manner.
But nonetheless it is necessary that you follow the cure of each weak eye of the natural way; and of the accidental way, in work of iron; and do not put your hand into any of these works as long as you see that this limb suffers from that work.
of the veins of the eyes
Veins are red that are covered over the eye, and they take from the sight their work and weaken the eye every day.
And let two threads by degrees in one body according to this form:
then coil as forces those veins subtly, and wipe the blood hour after another, until you see removing those veins from the eye; and guard that you do not prick the eye with the points of spatulas, and make this work at the hour of noon in front of the sun, and be very fervent in your work so that you do not cut further than those veins; and when you will have done this, then distill into the eye collyrium green and red to corrode what remains of the veil.
And if you have not the power to collect all these in this hour, make a poultice on the eye of things that soothe the pain of the eyes, and let it lie for several days until the pain is appeased and there is assurance of a hot abscess, then recommence according to this manner which is before as long as it is healed; and this is the form of forces:
of the fistula of the eye
The mire are called "arissati" fistula: when you cure it by cautery and by medicine burning according to those that I have before said, and it is not healed, then there is something in it that you cut on the abscess, where it must die, and treat all the moisture that is there, until the bone is uncovered.
And when the bone is uncovered, and you will see the corruption and blackness, then the king has all the tools of this one form; and it is called "asper chief", and it is made from iron at one head rounded, and it is pointed like a file as it is in this present form:
And place it on the place of the corrupted bone, then turn it between your two hands, and press your hand a bit until you know that that corruption is reset; and do this several times, then restore the place with medicinal drying agents.
If the bones are joined, and flesh grows, and the body of the bone is joined, and remains like this for 40 days, and it does not renew and is not inflamed, then know that it is healed; if this is not so, there is no other way than to bring the fistula back to the opening according to this form: and it is that you uncover the bone a second time by iron, and by sharp medicines, and when it is uncovered take one forest according to this form, and let the head of iron be at three angles, and the shaft be tapered up to the head as you see here.
Then place it upon the bone beside the tear duct, and move your hand away from the eye one finger's width, then turn to all the forest until it pierces the bone and the patient feels it through what comes in this if he holds his hand on his nose; and then return the place of dry medicines, as I have taught you, and when the flesh is born and hardens the joints, so goes the matter into the nose; thus is it a lighter thing for the patient.
from the exit of the eye
When the eyes are open and throughout, and there is no disturbance in the nose or decrease, then you must bind the patient; then heal, then place suction cups or aaterel without harming to suck, then put on the eye one linen made of acacia and aloe and frankincense and sarcocolla, and then strain the eye, and embalm it with bandages and cloths; and the manner of the cloths is that you take cloths soft enough, and double each in four, and then put one upon the other according to the quantity that the eye has need for; then strain it from above with a hard bandage-shaped, and reapply the suction cups to suck without harming; then remove the suction cups and leave the eye strained day and night, and if the linen softens, then you must strain it much; then remove the linen after the day and night, and if you see the eye healing, it is good; if not, then repeat the embalmment and bandages and linen and suction cups until it is healed.
of the displacement of cloth woven
When a disruption comes in the woven cloth, then it opens, and comes forth like pieces of resin, and it is astonishing to see; therefore if you see this covered, the work is such that you push a needle into the root of the lower part until the upper one, then push another needle where there is one double thread from the part of the winder; and make it pierce, and leave the first needle according to its disposition; then cut the place of the double thread and tie one part of the vine around, and restrain it well, then extract the needle and put on the other half-eye oil in abundance of an egg; and let it remain as long as the threads fall with the vine, then cure the eye with comforting things until the wound is healed; and sometimes the wound is restrained by the vine each side of a circle of cloth, until it is healed.
And if the eyes show a great appearance, then pierce it with a subtle spatula that comes from the eye, and correct the albuminous moisture and descend the eyes, and enter in forthwith; then extract it as long as it is healed.
of the eye’s socket
This disease which is called "alcunnati" is nothing but the socket of the eye being assembled in the eye, resembling water descending, and it is not water; and the manner of appearance of the work is that you make the patient sit on a .i. well-prepared and straight seat, then take the head between your hands from .ii. parts, and move it until you see the socket coming up to your eyes; then be it fixed, and do not descend and let the light be dispersed, and the patient sees things as he used to; and if it does not descend below, know that it is water, and if the descent of the socket is not well prepared as we have said. So make the patient sit between your hands, then take the subtle spatula and make on the cornea .i. pock by the continuation of the conjunctiva with the cornea and the crown, until the socket is issued; and when it is issued, so distill into the eye hot water mixed with honey, or water or fenugreek is boiled and honey, then be cured of other cures until it is healed.
of the waters of the eye
We have seen the appearances of the eyes in division, and what is required to examine; so in work according to the health. It is necessary that you make the patient sit between your hands crossed, far from the light of the sun, and tie the healthy eye and restrain it very strongly; then put the paper of the eye to your left hand if the eyes are left, or to your right hand if the eyes are right; then take in your right hand, if the eyes are left, the instrument which is called "almagda," or to your left hand, if the eyes are right; then put the point of the instrument beside the crown by the width of a fingernail in that whiteness of the eye at the part of the smallest tear, then push the instrument which is called "almagda" virtuously, and withdraw your hand until it pierces into the whiteness of the eye, and feel that almagda comes to the empty thing; and it is necessary that the measure of the way almagda is at the end of the measure of the space which is from the pupil to the end of the blackness; and this is the crown of the eye; so you will see the bone in that paper for the clarity of the corneal fabric, and then put the instrument until it reaches where the eye is, then express it under one way after another. If the eye comes now out, if the patient sees before him and the instrument in his eye.
After rest i. little, and if the eye returns the second way, put the force with the instrument, and when it is ens fixed and it does not rise, extract almagda gently by turning your hand back and forth; and then put in eye a bit of silk gem, and leave from that the oil inside. Then put outside the eye stopper or cloth moistened in rose oil and in abundance of egg white, and tie with the healthy eye. We, and those who are of our time, put on top as coming ground with abundance of egg white.
And if almagda cannot enter the eye because of its hardness, for there are some men who have eyes too hard, it is necessary that you take the instrument which is called "alberit," from which this is the form:
And pierce therefore the conjunctive alone, and do not pierce too deep in it, but make .i. small, then put almond, as we have said; and at the completion of the work, equip the patient .i. dorteur forward, in which he sleeps on his back in .j. dark place; and be free from all movements, and take light meats, and do not move his head neither to the right nor to the left, and be tied according to his disposition until the third day; then untie it in that same dark house, and examine his sight, and let him see some things, and then put back the bandage until the seventh day; and it is not necessary that you do this during the hour of the cure or after the incision now, but it is necessary that you do this, for that reason that the water rises hastily.
And if the abscess comes, that you untie the eye before the seventh day, and the address of this who soothes the abscess; and when it is appeased, then untie the sight and put on his face .i. orilliet to cover any day, and be in that same dark house. And then go out of the house little by little, and convert into your cases; and know that no disciples should interfere in this case.
And one came to us who was from the Yrach, who told us that in their country they did almond pierced, so that one sucks the water, but nonetheless I have never seen any in our land, nor have I ever read it in books of the ancients; and by chance it is a new thing.
And these are the resemblances of the forms of almonds, because those who do not know them see them; and be from properly grain.
And let the head of these same subtlety, and the rear in three angles acute.
of the flesh upon the knee
Sometimes knees are born or grow with diverse flesh attached, because of which some appear like scorpions with many legs; and if there are such ones where the flesh is cracked a dark color, and some with flesh soft of good color.  In that one then of these fleshy parts which is soft and not cracked, it behooves you to make the patient sit between your hands against the sun; and open their nostrils, and blow into those fleshy parts, and rub them hard; then cut what you can sustain with a subtle sharp spatula on one side, until you know that the flesh is completely removed.
And if any thing remains that one cannot cover, then open it all, i.e., with instruments subtle and light, so that nothing remains; and if there are no sores, or abscesses, cleanse them as it is fitting; and if it is malignant abscesses, then hasten and cauterize it until the blood is extinguished and all the pus is removed, then giete or new oil or wine.
If the nose works and moisture comes as far as the palate, know that it is clear; and if the moisture does not pierce as it should, know that there is new flesh in the bone above, so the instruments cannot come to cut: therefore, you must put into it i.e., a thread of linen a bit thick, and be knotted by hands ours, and have between each knot a space i.e. an inch or less; and place the patient's head of the thread in his nose at its root, and pull gently until it comes through the nostril inside the mouth; and many times do children in school this, and it is a light thing to him who wants to do it; then hold the head which comes through the nostril with one hand, and the other head which comes through the mouth with the other hand, and feel each one after the other while you are at us who are or thread. Do this until you know that the knots have corrupted that flesh, then pull out the thread, wipe the blood, and moisten the thread in Egyptian ointment, and put it back in the nose as before; do this for three days or more, until the ointment corrodes all that remains of flesh; and then put on the nostril a poultice of wool for some days until it is healed, and if it needs drying medicines, use them; and this is the form of the instrument for purging the head, to which one distills the oils and medicines in the nose:
And let it be of silver or iron, resembling an open lamp, like a basin, and conduct it so also; and if you see fit, make a closed basin, and let the instruments be full for purging the head; and have one handle at the top for holding it when one heats the oil or any liquor.
of the bone upon the joint
Many times a disease named “telul” is born upon the joint, and it grows and becomes great, so much that it is a frightening sight to look at; and for this reason it behooves you to cut it from the beginning, and remove all the bone, then place upon its spot the cautery or burning medicine; and if one delays in cutting until it is large, beware if it is hard, of dark color, without feeling; do not touch it with iron because it is a festering abscess, for when one cuts it even once, great harm comes to the patient; and if the abscess is soft to the touch, not of dark color, and you see that one can cut it completely, then reassure the patient and cut it without fear, and treat the spot with things drying and constricting.
when the joint is cut and closed
Know that when a solution of continuation comes in one of these worked cartilages, it benefits little, because in no men. Therefore, when this happens to any man, see if the wound is fresh with all its blood; and then join the two lips with a stitch, then cure it until it is healed; and if the lips are already separated on both sides, then you must scrape all parts of their core until they heal, then bring the two lips together with a stitch, and restrain them, and powder on top of each other dragon's blood powder, and incense ground; and put on top of the powders a piece of strong plaster or another plasters binding, and let it remain until it dries by itself, then cure it with ointment until it is healed.
The manner of stitching is that you assemble the solution: either by needles, as we have said in the stitch of the belly; or by thread, as I have told you.
of abscesses of the lips
To men's mouths happen inside the lips abscess hard, seeming to grains of grapes, and smaller and larger; therefore it is necessary that you turn the lips, and fends upon each knot, and take with tweezers and cut in each part; then apply there after the incision of vitriol ground, as long as the blood is stained; and then the leave of air, and cure the place of dry things until it is healed.
of the flesh of the gums
Many times flesh grows on the gums, which the ancients call "albulus"; therefore it is necessary that you hold it with tweezers and cut it at its root, and let the blood flow out; then put on the place vitriol ground, or other restraining and drying powders; and if that flesh returns after the incision, and this happens many times, so cut it a second time, and cauterize it: if it does not return after cautery; and these are the forms of instruments for cutting.
of deafness
Sometimes are assembled at the head of the teeth, inside the mouth between the gums, scabs that are ugly and rough; and sometimes the tooth is black and yellow and toward, as long as corruption comes to the gum, and the teeth stink; so you must make the patient sit between your hands, and his jaws be in your saint, and remove the teeth or scabs appear, as long as nothing remains there; and thus do of blackness and verdancy, and jaundice and other spots, as long as they are cleansed; and if one removes that which is at the first reason, it is good; if those no, then starts again on the second day and the third, until you have all removed; and know that teeth need diverse forms of tools to remove, according to what the work shows, because the scraper with which one removes outside the teeth have other forms than those with which one removes between the teeth; and these forms and others be with you equipped.
It is necessary when you cure the tooth of its pain that you take care to draw as little as possible, because one must not do otherwise; for it is a very high substance until one has no excuse for scraping. Therefore when the patient is constrained to be treated, it behoves you to be certain about the tooth aching. Many times the pain of the patient deceives, and he thinks that it is a tooth of saint, and makes treat the good tooth; and nevertheless it departs not the pain because of this, as long as the bad remains, for we have already seen it with our own kin; and when you are well certain about the aching tooth, it behoves you to scrape around the tooth to all its. spatula firm in order to ward the gum from all parts; then moves it to your two or pliers subtle to the first point and point, until it is well dislodged, then firmly affirms the pliers; and be the chin of the patient in your saint between your knees, and hold it well so that it does not move.
After having extracted the tooth straight without breaking it, and if it does not come out for sure, take any of these instruments and put it inside each part gently, and move it as you have done first. And if the tooth is pierced and broken, it behoves you to fill it with drapes, where the perforations are; and if it is extracted subtly with pliers, that it does not break when extracting; and it behoves very sagely to work around the gum in order to dislodge the tooth.
And be well guarded that you do not break it, and remain a part of it, and return to the patient by the malice of the root greater pains than the first. And guard yourself that you do not act as the ignorant kin do, who by their haste and boldness break sometimes the tooth, and do not bring about what we have recounted; but often bring about by the consequence of these great illness for the roots that remain, or for the tooth that they break, as we have often seen; and when the tooth is pulled, wash the place with wine or oil and salt; and if there comes a discharge of blood, which often happens, put on the place vitriol ground; and if this does not suffice, cauterize it.
The forms of the instruments, as to which one moves the teeth first, should have long points and large handles so that they do not double when you pull the tooth; and these are the forms:
And be of thick members so that they do not bend when pulling, and be made of well-made iron, and be toothed for good hold.
from the root of the teeth When the root remains in the tooth, then it is necessary that you put on top of it cotton moistened in butter, for one or two days, until the gum is softened, then put the pliers which are called "algefri," because the jaw seems like a beak of care; and be inside made as well as a file and this is the form:
And if the roots do not want to come out with all these tweezers, it is necessary that you uncover the flesh all around the root, and put in the instrument called "althali", which is to say a chisel, because this is its form:
And let it be strong and thick so that it does not break, and if the root jumps out with these, it is good; if these do not, then help yourself with all the instruments, of which the forms come after:
And if one helps oneself with this instrument that has two prongs, of which this is the form:
and other iron instruments that are in front in the ratio of teeth, and of this instrument that resembles large tweezers, of which here is the form:
And be this instrument so that it cannot break, and know that many instruments of teeth are; and also other instruments, which are not mentioned; and the wise masters subtle find by himself his instrument, according to what his works and the disease show him, for there are such diseases where the ancient do not teach any instrument for the diversity of others; and if one breaks not the bone or other bones, or it is possible, then seek the instruments that it befits, which I have told you, and help with gestures, for this is the form: And let them be thick and well-fitting to hold the bone, so that it does not escape, but it can hold and remove; and then restore its place with medicines suited to this, and if there is in the bone rot, and it is small, then use all this instrument:
When the tooth appears not according to the body's natural form, and the shape is ugly, and even in virgins, it befits that you know if the tooth is newly grown after the tooth, and is not in its right place, and it cannot be filed or shaped; then use a file; and if it is stuck with the tooth, then take this instrument whose form is here, and is similar to one small beak, and let it be of sharp iron at its summit:
And the coping little by little in hands days for the hardness of the tooth, and because you do not move the others, and if it appears that one can be filed, if the file of a piece of file as this is the form:
and is also like the file of which one makes the needles; and in file the tooth little by little in hands days lightly, so that it does not move until it falls; then the plain at the end to all any shavings, and if the teeth are too sharp and it bleaches the tongue, then it is necessary to file the sharpness until it be equal, so that it does not bleach the tongue nor corrupt the speech.
when the tooth loosens
When the tooth in front is loosened, either by percussion or by falling, and the patient cannot press on it so that it moves without paining him, and you have cured them with constricting medicines, and this does not help; then it is necessary to restrain it with a gold thread, because the silver thread becomes green and rots, but gold never changes; and let the thread be neither too thick nor too thin, according to the quantity of space between the teeth; and if you see the teeth are misaligned, take the thread and pass it double between the two healthy teeth, then put the jaws between the teeth, if there is one or more, until you come cleverly to the healthy tooth on the other side; then begin again the covering up to the part where you began, and strain your hand subtly and wisely, so that it does not move at all; and let the ligature be at the root of the tooth so that it cannot escape. Then cut the ends of the thread with pliers, and join them together, and place them between the healthy teeth, and set it so that it does not touch the tongue; and then leave it as tight as it can remain, and if it unties, or the thread breaks, then bind it with another thread; let it remain and serve thus throughout its duration, and this is the form of the teeth and the figure of the alignment of the two healthy teeth, and the two loose ones, as you see:
And when the tooth falls out, then it is replaced in its place, fresh against fresh, as we have said; and let no one interfere who is not wise and experienced, and sometimes one makes the form of a tooth from the bone of a calf, and puts it in the place where the deficiency is, and binds it as we have said, and it remains and serves thus for a long time.
to cover the ligament of the tongue
At no time is this ligament which comes from under the tongue or nature, that one is born thus; or by accident of a wound joined; and the work is such that you operate the mouth of the sick person, and have his head in your hand, and raise the tongue; then cut the nervous ligament wide, until the tongue is displaced from its place, and if there is hardness or knot, and this is from the joining of a wound, so put the probe and cut the wide ligament; and guard that the cut is not too deep, for the artery which is below; and when you have done, raise the level of rose water and of easy, or of cold water, then put under the tongue a tent of linen; and bind the sick person each night, so that the wound may not be joined. And if hemorrhage occurs, so put on the site vitriol ground; and if the bleeding does not stop, so cauterize it with the lentiginous cautery, which is good for this; then cure it with another cure until it is healed,
And if you see it of black or hard color, and the sick person does not feel it, so do not touch it, for it is a chancre; and if it is declining towards whiteness, and there is moisture, so put the probe, and cut it with a sharp spatula, and deliver it on one side and the other; and if the bleeding does not stop to your work, so put on top ground vitriol until it is bleached, then return to your work as long as you draw out everything; then raise the level of rose water and of sage, and cure it with other cures until it is healed.
of abscesses of the throat
Sometimes there come inside the throat boils which are called "godath," and they call them properly the two almonds, and when you cure them, as we have said in the division, and they are not healed, if take care: if it is abscesses hard of small sense and fusse color, if do not touch it with iron. And if it is red and the root is thick, if do not touch it with iron, also for the flow of blood; but leave it until it is dead, and then you will split it, or it would break by itself; and if it is of white color reont, and the root is subtle, have prepared the instrument to cover, but first look if the abscess calz rests and is appeased. Then make the patient sit in front of the sun, and his knees be in your health, and the work opens the mouth and the preigne the serjans between his hands, and press the tongue below all the instrument, of which is the form; and be of silver or arrain subtle as a knife:
And you press the tongue to all this instrument, and you see the abscess, if take the oncine and put it in the almond, and the pull upwards more than you can; and pull nothing of the cloths with, then the cope to the instrument, of which is the form, that seems some forces; and although the chief are curved, and one place the other, and are very sharp, and is made of iron inde or d'andainne:
And if you do not have this instrument present, if it is cope with pliers, of which is the form:
And be trenchant on one part, and the other part no; and when you have cut one of the almonds, cut the other according to the same manner, and after the incision gargle the patient with hot water, and water and vinegar, and if a decorremens of blood happens, gargle the patient with water, or peels of pomegranates that are cooked, or leaves of myrtle, and similar things, as long as the san is stained; then cure it until it is healed; and no times are born in the throat other abscesses than the two almonds, so cut them then as well as the two almonds equally.
And I medicated a woman from an abscess that it was born inside the throat, that is to say one abscess of small sense; and I had well pressed closed all the throat, so that the woman could not expire through the conduit which was stopped up, and could neither eat nor drink, and would have died if she remained thus one day or two. And the abscess was to me so mounted that it had been put two reins by the two openings of birth. I then immediately, and fitted in one one incision, then pulled out the track and a large portion of pus; then refit another piece in the other opening of birth, and opened the mouth and pressed the tongue; after fitted the incision into these abscesses, and cut a part, and only a little bit of blood came out; and thus was unstopped the conduit of the throat to the woman, and she began now to drink water and then wine, and did not cease to cut from this abscess for a long time; and the abscess grew back again, and filled up the place that I had emptied, until it became very big; then I ignited it and cauterized it inside the throat: thus remained without growing; and I departed from these parts, and know only that God did of her after me.
of the grape
When the grape is ripe and it is long, it is called "perpendicular"; and if it is short and round, it is called "grape". When it is treated as we have said in the division, and the treatment does not help, and you see that the abscess is calmed, and it is subtle, then you should cut it; and the one which is rounded assembled and is not long; and it is sanguine or of fusse color or black, then you should avoid the incision of it. Because there is great peril on the patient. So therefore, when you see it, according to the manner that I have said, by its whiteness and its length, that you make the patient sit before the sun, and press the tongue to the instrument of which we have made remembrance before; then insert the needle into the grape, and remove it below, and cut it at .i. of .ij. instruments that I have said in the incision of the .ij. almonds. And it is necessary that you do not cut more than the superfluity which is beyond the natural limit; because if you cut more, it grieves the voice, and the speech; and after the incision, use what we have said in the incision of the .ij. almonds, and cure until it is healed. And if the patient has fear to be cut, then it is necessary that you use an engine for the cauterization of the sensitive fear. And the manner of the cautery is sharp and acute. And it is that the patient puts his head in your hand, and then presses the tongue to the instrument which we have said or chapter of cautery, and confis with live fire so that it is not too thick nor too clear; and in employing the point of this instrument, by which this is the form:
And have or chief a hair or one puts the medicine in, as the handle of a spoon, and put the instrument to all the medicine on the grape; and the patient be lying on his side, so that the saliva and the muscle move from his mouth of the medicine within, so that it does not descend to the throat, and the neck; then hold your hand to all the medicine and press it on the grape, the quantity of half an hour, as long as you see it burn and the irritations of the medicine be calmed; and if you see, take cotton and envelop it on any instrument, and moisten the cotton in the medicine, and put the instrument to all the cotton in the canal above, as long as the cotton hardens on the grape; and do this often, as long as the cautery is perfect, then let it dry, and fall after .iiij. days or .v.. And if you have need to recommence the cautery of the medicine, so commence it again, and after the cautery wipe around the grape, with cotton smeared in butter, and purify what is around the medicine; and be rinsed with cold water, and be cured with gargles as long as it is healed.
This cure is more safe than incision, nor the cautery; if it is cured by fumigation according to this manner, take calament and hyssop and oregano and rue and chamomile and wormwood and similar herbs, and put them all together or any of them in one pot, and put it inside, and make it boil; and the pot should be well glued with strong earth, and inside the pot have one instrument head according to this manner: And be it of silver or iron, and be the one of the heads put into the mouth of the sick person as long as the steam rises to the grape through the cane, until the grape is mortified; afterward he begins again, until the grape dries, and guard that you do not make this at the beginning of the coming of the hot abscess, for many things happen; and do not make this cure except at the declination of a hot abscess. And if this instrument is not present, then take a cane and put inside its head a piece of egg, so that the mouth of the sick person does not have too much heat; for the piece of egg does not let the steam weigh down the mouth, and it is a good cure altogether health.
Many times a thorn or fish spine gets stuck in the throat, or some other thing; so it behooves you to pull out what you can see, and press the tongue to the sun with all the instrument, so that you see move the thing; and what does not appear to you and is put back in the throat, it behoves you to make the sick person vomit as soon as the food is cooked in the stomach; perhaps if this will take the thing out by vomiting; or the sick person swallows a piece of sponge, or a piece of navel, or a root of lettuce, or one morsel of dry bread; and tie to the sponge one thread, and then swallow it; and when it comes to the place, it gets stuck, and then you pull further; and if it does not come out from what we have said, then take one instrument of wood according to this form:
And let the instruments be curved at the head so that it may more easily enter into the throat, and have the head held high lifted; and guard that you do not touch the epiglottis, lest it come to life, nor push in the bone; and it is better that the patient pushes the instrument, because he will know if it is well or the thing is difficult; so if he pushes down, or he draws it up all of the instrument equally, until it is pulled.
of the cutting of the throat
At no time is medicine for the cutting of the throat, as I have said in the division, by the cure of medicines; and when those do not help, then look at the throat of the patient in the sun, after which you press his tongue to the instrument that I have told you. And if you see the cutting, then treat it with one small pin, or with fine tweezers that are suitable for this purpose. And if this does not work, then take a sheep's wool, and put it in the throat of the patient, then push in the end of the wool .i. hot iron, and do this often. And if the patient remains thirsty all day. Then take full .i. cup of cold water, and open his mouth, and pour it into the throat so that he does not swallow, and move it with your hand often; and as soon as the cutting feels the water, it will fall.
And if it does not fall as we have said, so fumigate the patient with asafoetida, using the instrument that I have said in the fumigation of the grape; do this many times, because it will come out without failing. And the manner of the fumigation is that you take one pot or it has burning coals, and let the pot be covered with a coverlet pierced in the middle, and in that pierce the head of the instrument; then put your fumigation there, and the patient puts the head of the cane in his mouth, and closes his mouth, so that the smoke does not go out, but comes up to the sinus; and the sinus will now come out, and if it does not fall, so begin the fumigation again many times; and let the patient suffer thirst, and eat salty things and such like, and do not drink water; and then it is necessary that it is gone by this governance.
And the shape of the instrument with which one treats the sinus is, when you can see it, like tongs bent so that they can enter into the throat; and it has the appearance of a bird's beak, and there are asperities of lime so that what it takes, it cannot let go; and see here the form:
The chapters of abscesses
Many resemblances of abscesses are, according to those that remembrance comes after from one and the other in this book, and are diverse in perforation and in size; and this is in two ways, of which one is in its very semblance, and of those that it holds moisture. And the second manner is for the places where they are on the body. For the abscesses of the head are other than those of the foundation, and the abscesses of the fleshy part are other than those that come in joints, and each has its judgment in the work.
And if to abscesses one should not pierce, as long as the boil is mature according to its accomplishment; and if there are such that it is necessary to pierce when they are ripe, and do not die according to their accomplishment, such as abscesses that are near joints. For when abscesses come near joints, and one lets it stay as long as it is ripe inside, by chance the ligaments and nerve of the joint are corrupted, which is the cause of contraction in that limb. Or if the abscess is near the principal member, and you delay piercing until it is mature, it will harm the principal member; or if it is near the foundation, pierce it then as long as it is ripe; and it is not necessary that you pierce a ripe abscess without complete digestion, except that which is near the foundation, so that it does not pour out by force, and be lengthened inside, and there comes a fistula; and cannot heal in a long time.
And it is necessary that you know the hour of piercing the abscess which is mature according to its accomplishment, and this is when the pain has subsided, and the fever departs, and the lessening of the pain and the redness, and the swelling and the softening of the head of the abscess, and the other signs; and it is necessary that you make the piercing where more dependent place of the abscess, and where it opens out pus; and be the piercing long in the body, and if the abscess is at the hands or feet, or in joints and nerves and arteries, and in all places equal where there is no puss.
In these that boil, according to the member. And when an abscess is in its flesh place, it is worth doing that you leave the perforation until it is confirmed in digestion accomplished, as we have said. For if you pierce it before then, the body of the venom will flow from it, and it is full of much filth; and by chance harden the lips and the depths of it. And in any abscess that are pierced according to the width of the body, according to what the member needs.
Those who have no chief, like a superficial abscess, it is necessary that you pierce it fully; and it is necessary when the abscess is large, and it has collected much pus, and you pierce it, then do not draw out all the pus in that hour, but drain a part; then plug the abscess until the next day, then drain nothing directly; do this many times, little by little, until all the pus is gone; likewise if the patient is of weak strength, or pregnant woman, or small child, or old man decrepit. For the spirit trembles at any time with the discharge of pus, that by chance kills the patient, and you do not take care of yourself. Therefore, escape this chapter with great caution, and when you have pierced your abscess, then wipe the wound, and look if the wound of the abscess is small; and if it is a flat cut, then put bandages of linen or old cotton; and if it is a large abscess, and there are many punctures, it is necessary that you put in each one a bandage so that it comes against the other; and if you have cut into the abscess part of the skin, and you have covered it around, then it is necessary that you fill it with old cotton or lint shred from linen without moisture, and tie it until the third day; then remove it, and cure it with ointment until it is healed.
And if there is bleeding in your work, then administer cold water and so on, and moisten one drape, and put it over the bleeding place many times.  And if the bleeding persists, then administer governance and cure, and the powders that I have said in this book, and if it is in winter, and the place where the abscess is is very nervous, then it is necessary that you put on bandages and drapes moistened in wine and hot oil; and if it is in summer, and the place is fleshy, then it is necessary that you put on bandages moistened in water and oil, or in wine and cold oil, until the third day, as we have said; and then untie the abscess and wipe it and cure it, as it is fitting, until it is healed.
And this it is necessary to know universally in treatments of abscesses: which I have told you how one must go before the treatment of abscesses, and see here the chapter.
of ulcers
Of ulcers which are like those in the cloths, as well as the joiner's of a garment, and many resemble them. There are some fatty ones and such that have moisture like poultices; and there are some that are hard and stony to the touch, and there is no doubt if the artery does not go against it. And the work of the tailor is that you suspect all one instrument which is called "entromissoire," because its form comes later, what thing it contains. For if it contains moisture, then let it be driven from above through the long way. And when the moisture is emptied, it peels without leaving the skin that contains that moisture, for it returns to its place when you leave it alone; then dip cotton in Egyptian ointment, if it is present; if not, in water and wine, and apply it to the wound, and let it stay until the next day; and then continue doing this which remains of the night. And then begin again with the cotton, as before, on the second day, and the third, until you know well that it does not remain of the night; then cure the wound with ointment as is suitable, until it is healed. And if the abscess holds one greasy one, so cut it according to this form, through the long way; and lay your incisions, and peel it from all sides, and put all your care to draw out the cotte where it lies; and if the artery goes against you, then do what I told you after. And do also for the abscess if it is stony, and in shape and in curing as I have told you.
And the boils on a pus-filled abscess are lighter because they have less blood. And some of these abscesses or chiefs where there is no moisture, and from these I had one chief from an old woman; and I found the abscess like a hard, rough, white stone, and could not break it; and if one had made any incision in it, one would have done as well with a wound. In other abscesses coming or chiefs, whether they come from the chiefs of children or the roots of the ears, the opening should always be at the lowest point, so that pus can flow out; and treat them as is necessary.
Of scrofulas
Many times these abscesses occur on the neck, under the arms, and in the armpits, and sometimes they come from other parts or body parts, and are many, and are joined together. And each scrofulous boil is properly within its own skin, like the others and the boils of the head, as we have said; and the appearances of these scrofulas are many. There are some that contain moisture, and some that are malign that do not want to obey health. So in the one you see that has a good disposition, touching it lightly, and appears like the color of the body, and is flat on all sides, and does not irritate the nerves of the neck nor the artery nor the vein, and is not too deep; then it is necessary that you cut it from above, and scrape it on each side, and are the two lips of the key as we have said in boils of the head; and treat them little by little, and be sure that you do not cut the nerve or the vein, nor should the spatula be too sharp, lest your hand slip, and do not look too far ahead so that you do not cut what you should not.
And if you cut the vein or artery, and it will not let you work, put in the wound pounded vitriol, or any powders that restrain blood, and hold back the wound; and leave it until the abscesses are calmed, and the wound is softened, and begins to rot. And when the bleeding is stopped, return to your work, as long as you complete it; then look at your index finger if there remain any small pustules, cut them and heal them. And if it has in the root of the pustule a vein large, it is not necessary that you cut that pustule at its root, but tie it with a strong double thread, and let it hang by it, without hurting; then apply the wound to old cotton dipped in Egyptian ointment, then cure.
And if you cut the whole pustule, it is necessary that you bring together the two lips of the wound, and sew them now, then as long as there remains no superfluity for the size of the pustule. It is necessary that you pay attention to cutting the root of it, and draw out pus, and sew it as we have said. Those pustules that hold superfluity, pierce where it appears more; and pierce it like the one before said, depending, then administer tents with ointment and similar things, so that it rots what remains of the corruption; and when the wound is well cleaned, cure it with ointment encouraging flesh, until it is healed.
of squamous cell carcinoma
The ancients said and spoke of cutting the throat; but I never saw anyone in our land who did it, and this is the writing of their word.
For those who have squinting (?), it is necessary that the throat cut which is called "epiglottis" be avoided; and do not help them because all the veins and the pores of the sick person are at those who have an abscess hot in the mouth, or in the throat, or in two almonds. When the illness is in the channel of the pore, it is necessary to cover the epiglottis to avoid the perdition that comes from strangulation.
Therefore, when we want to cut the epiglottis, it is necessary to cut it below three circles or four with a small incision across, between the two circles or by the quantity of the incision of the syringe, not in the cartilage;
and those their are comparable to the section of the epiglottis that there is no flesh, and the vessels are long from it.
And if the master is fearful, then it is necessary that he stretch the skin of the throat to all of the neck, then cleave the keel until it comes to the channel; and avoid the vessels of blood, if you see no thing, and then cut the syfac, as we have said.
and it is demonstrated by the section of the phlegm of the neck that leaps from the place that is broken, and by the lack of voice;
and leave the wound open a piece.
And when the hour has passed of which one doubts strangulation, assemble the .ij. lips of the wound of the heart, and cut all alone sense the cartilage; then administer medicines that make flesh grow, until it is whole.
Albucasim says one should not do this until the throat is completely stopped up, and the patient is judged to be dead, and the fault lies with the wing. Therefore cut open the epiglottis because the patient cannot breathe, and he breathes through the wound, and thus is kept from death;
and for this the ancients commanded to leave the wound open until the malice of the disease has passed, and it has passed in three days or four. And therefore they command to sew the wound and care for it, until it was healed.
And I will tell you what I saw. I saw that a young lady took .i. knife, and plunged it into her throat, and cut part of the channels of the windpipe.
And I was called by her to cure her, and I found her just as dead.
I discovered the wound, and found the blood that was issuing from it, and well that it had not pierced a vein nor been led except to the throat, and the veins were issuing through the wound.
I bandaged it, and thus I closed the wound, and I treated it until it was healed.
and it happened to the young woman that she was hoarse of voice, and returned after that to her usual state.
for this reason I say that in the cutting of the epiglottis there is no fear.
of the large throat
This abscess is called "throat hernia," and is a large abscess in the color of a boil, and is very common in women;
and it is according to two manners: natural, and accidental; the natural one has no cause.
And the accidental one is according to two manners, of which one is similar to a fatty lump, and the other manner is similar to an abscess that comes from our artery. and there is fear, and it does not behoove to work of fire except in this which is small, and the prove and searches at all the introitor: if you find it also as our fat, and cannot at any vein, if the cut, as we cut the ours, and the train to all its cap, if there is any of it; and encircle well soon, and the cure as it behooveth, until it be perfectly healed.
of ours
Many ways are to us, of which I will say all the appearances;
and therefore it is necessary that I say all the difference that is between ours and theirs.
I say that an issue is sometimes and fever-bearing, as long as the boiling is not passed, and the rotting is accomplished; therefore the fever and heat rest.
With ours there is neither heat nor fever nor pain, and it contains one issue, which is its own sac, and is according to the color of the body, and begins as a boil, and becomes swollen.
and are according to two appearances, or greasy, or moist, and very colored as I have said in the division.
It is necessary, when you come to the treatment of a new injury, that you first examine and inquire with all the instruments which are called "entroissoir," according to what its form comes from the chapter that is after.
And the manner of examining abscesses is that you prick or moisten the most moist place that you find in the abscess, and turn your two points (poc) and point (poc), as long as you know that the instrument has pierced the core, then according to the size of the abscess.
Then withdraw the "entroissoir," and take care in those who jump out.
If moisture runs short, whatever color it has, treat it as I have said of other abscesses.
And if after the incision moisture comes out again, know that it is fatty, so treat it in a cross shape, and take it with forceps, and lightly scrape it on each side, and cover the wound where it lies so that you pull it clean with the thread.
And if you cannot pull it clean, then remove it in pieces so that nothing remains there.
Because if anything remains there, it returns to us many times.
And if it remains for a little while, and the pain does not trouble him, apply to the wound some sharp corrosive powders, and hold the wound closed, and put soothing things on the abscess hot, and cure it with other cures until it is healed.
And if it is large, then sew together the two lips of the wound, and cure it with those things that cause flesh to grow.
And if the vein is beating against you or otherwise quickly, then apply the powder of vitriol to it, and let it lie for two or three days until the wound purges, and rests the boiling of blood; then return to cover those things that remain from it.
See here the forms of the instruments for introducing, and they are in 3 manners: large, medium, and small; and there are 3 squares that are called "albaret," and 1 which is called "breb," and there are 3 manners: large, medium, and small, to surround the abscesses of fistulae.
and they are also like the needles with which one sews sorceresses, and are of citrine iron, or silver, and those that are yellow are more valuable, and are more proven from black pitch to surround the curves of fistula.
and they are in 3 manners: large, medium, and small, according to the quantity of the breadth of the openings.
The forms of the pincers are of many resemblances, as you see here: large, medium, and small; and there are pincers that have two curves in three ways also;
and there are pincers that have three curves, and are also in three ways; and there are pincers that have two curves, and pincers of a single curve, and are in three ways; and all these are necessary in their place.
The head of these is what one uses to cut, and there are some that do not cut further than one side, with which one scrapes the nerves, because this way one does not cut the vein nor the nerve;
and of these there are also instruments with handles, so that the patient does not feel it when opening abscesses.
and there are of three kinds: great, small, and medium, as you see;
and one should not use it except in fleshy places, such as legs, arms, nipples, and genitals, and similar parts;
and never is made one other instrument small, seeming to shavings of fists, according to this form, with which one stanches blood;
and it is put never in the place which bleeds from a cut of veins, and arteries, and never returned according to this great form:
Sometimes the breasts of some men swell when they begin to rot, so that they seem like women's breasts.
and remain disfigured and swollen, and whoever wants to cure them, he should follow this form according to these lines from... up to ...: then scrape the fat, and apply medicine to the wound preventing decay, then stitch together the two lips of the wound, and treat it until it is healed;
and if the breast leans down and is softened due to its size as women have, then make two incisions above, in two similar places; of which one is holding the other at the end of one and the other, so that the larger line contains the smaller according to this form, from this line .b. until the line .g. then scrape the skin that is between the .ij. lips, and remove the fat, and there administer those things that we have said of sewing and powders, and those which are necessary in the cure, until it is healed;
and if it is not healed, or the incision is not fully made, because the patient does not want to rest, or for the loss of blood, then it is necessary that you fill the wound with cotton moistened in corrosive ointment; and leave it until it absorbs the remaining and fat, then cure it until it is healed.
of abscesses of the buttocks
These abscesses that come from under the buttocks are kinds of hard scrofulas that have ribs, and there are some that contain moisture.
Those therefore that contain moisture ought to be cut according to this form, from the line b. until the line g.: And when all the pus that is in the abscess is drained, then apply to the wound old cotton, and leave it until the next day, then remove all the cotton, and care with ointment appropriate to this until it is healed.
And if the abscess is of the likeness of a scrofulous lesion, then treat it as we have said for incisions of scrofulous lesions, and if the wound is curved inwards, apply cautery as we have said before.
Of the rupture of the artery
When the artery is ruptured and the skin above it is sewn together, abscesses often occur, and this also happens with an inflamed vein and abscess.
And if the expert knows that it is due to the artery, then the abscess grows long by making incisions into it. and when you feel it at your wrists, that is to say, constriction; and when this is for the vein, then it is reason to defer appearance of fire;
and it is folly to cover this abscess, and even when it is below the armpits and around the groin and neck and in many other places, and is very large. It therefore becomes necessary to shun the treatment of iron, and whoever is at the head it also becomes necessary to shun, and in him who has an inflammation of artery made from above the skin down long.
It therefore becomes necessary to shun the treatment of iron, and whoever is at the head it also becomes necessary to shun, and in him who has an inflammation of artery made from above the skin down long. then work the opening in the intestines, and beautifully separate the artery from the tissues, as long as it is uncovered;
Then put under it a needle, and make it pass until the other side, and strain the artery with a double thread in 2 lengths, according to what I have taught you in the extraction of the 2 arteries that are in the temples.
Then point the place which is between the two links with an introducer until the pus that is there comes out, and let the abscess be drained.
Then administer the cure that bowe [or Boethius?] prescribes, as long as the link sticks. Then cure those with ointment following this, as long as they are healed.
and if the abscess is for the size of the vein, then it behooves you to seize with your hand as much as you can of the abscess to all the skin. then thrust the needle under the place that you hold in your hand, and have it pierced, and let there be one doubled thread, so that you draw it from the other side. then tie the abscess, as I have told you, or bind it with one of two parts of the two ends of the thread;
and if you doubt that the thread is not strong enough, then put another needle through all one thread under the whole abscess at the incision of the first needle, and strain the threads in four places;
Then cut the abscess until the superfluities issue from it, then cut the superfluity of the core and leave what is joined.
Then put on one cloth moistened in wine and oil, then administer treatments of poultices and ointments until it is healed.
Of abscesses of the nerves
Just as abscesses come in the artery and vein, abscesses also come to the nerves when they are chafed, or by too much work, and similar things.
And this happens more often in the shoulders and hips and in all the places where there are joints, and that is to say abscesses, and its color seems like the color of the body, and is in many positions without pain.
And when it is restrained forcibly, the patient feels pain, and it is not quite in the middle of the body, but below the heart;
and it moves well in all directions, and does not go forward or backward, nor down or up, and the one who is in joints should not be covered with iron: for fear it would go into contraction;
And he who is on the head or on the forehead, makes the skin taut on the spatula. If the abscess is small, then hold it with pliers and cut it at its root.
And if it is large, then suspend it with a thread, and flay it, then purge it and close the wound with sutures, and treat it until it is healed.
Of large boils hanging At times they appear in the belly and nowhere else, and it is a disease which is called "fungus" because of its resemblance to ears, and it has fine roots, and a large head; and there are some small ones and some very large.
and I saw one man who had two in his belly that were more like mushrooms than anything else, and there was no difference, and they were white, and they had a small root, and they were somewhat split, and some moisture came out of them.
I cut them open and found in one 18 ounces weighing, and in the other 6, and the work in incision is that you look to see if the patient is moist, and the color of the artelul is white and moist and of a subtle root.
if you cut with the spatula wide, and have the fire cautery in your presence. For when cutting there often comes too great a flow of blood, and if the blood does not stop, then hastily do cauterize;
and if you see the patient frightened and fearful of the incision with iron, then take one thread of lead well made, and bind the joint as we have said, and leave it for two days;
and then restrain it, and do not cease to restrain the lead thread until it covers the joint, and ceases by itself without effort; and if the roots are thick, fear to cut even for the belly, but you may well cover half.
then cauterize it so that it does not return; then cure the wound, and guard that you do not cut the part which is of fox color and poor sensation and with milky appearance.
For it is an abscess suppurating, and I will come to the treatment of chancres after this.
when the head of the
If the appearance of the head comes from a cautery wound or fissure of the skin, and is on the belly and has some of the bumps, as it happens in other injuries, or of blood which cuts veins or arteries according to what is before, or of windiness;
and if it is from the rupture of the skin and the discharge of the pus, then the color of the abscess is similar to the color of the body, and it is a light thing without pain, and opens from various exits. And if it is from the issue of the intestine, then it is more diverse, and when pressed at its two ends it rebounds, and then returns, and perhaps it is scarred, and grows much at the entrance of the bath and for strenuous work.
And if it is due to moisture, it is a light thing, and it opens well when you press it with your hand, do not constrain it at all; and if it is due to blood, it opens by these signs the abscesses large and hard, and are filled according to a quantity;
and if it is due to windiness, it is soft to the touch, and the work is that you look if its appearance is for the blood of the artery, or of the vein, or windiness. Then you must leave the cure. Because there is doubt and fear in it, as I have told you or chapter of abscesses, for the artery and for the vein.
And if the appearance is for the intestine or the boil, then it behooves you to command the patient to hold his arm, and be stretched straight, then seize it all around the boil; then command him to squeeze often between your hands, then go around the place that you have marked with all the spatula, then extend half of the abscess upwards to the whole great incision;
Then work the middle of the abscess extended over the thread, and put your index finger in it, and seek the intestine. If you find it caught on the thread, untie it, and push the intestine out through the belly.
And if you find the boil, take it with the forceps and cut away the excess.
and if the artery opposes you, or the vein, then go well around it, then return to your work and take 2 needles, and put 2 strong threads through them, and put the 2 needles around what you have done in the shape that you made visible.
then strain the abscess in 4 lengths on the needles, and if you see it, remove the needles, and leave the wound as long as it purrs, and let the dead flesh fall away by itself. or you cut it when it is subtle and purrs, then treat it as needed, and heal the abscess as we have said.
or you cut it when it is subtle and purrs, then treat it as needed, and heal the abscess as we have said. and draw out the blood or moisture that you find, then treat the place with what is fitting, and suture the place.
of the ulcer
We have said in the division the similarities of ulcers, and how one should work on them with medicines, and how one should avoid the cure of iron; and let us say that an ulcer arises in the marshes, and great caution is needed in its treatment, and they said the ancients that when an ulcer is in a place where it can be scraped like an ulcer that is in the breasts, and in the groin, and similar places, then one should take it all out when it is at the beginning; and when it is large and old, it is not fitting that you approach it, because I have never cured any of them; nor has anyone else ever cured any before me.
And the work, when it is in a place where it can be taken out, as we have said, is that you purge the patient once of black bile; then let him bleed if he has a clear repletion, then make the patient's  good place to perform the operation; then cut your incisions or ulcer, and shave it from all sides, and the bone from all sides without leaving anything; and let the blood flow out completely, and press well the place with your hand or any thing, and if the bleeding counteracts the incision of the artery or vein, then cauterize it as long as the bleeding is stanched; then cure it with other remedies until it is healed.
of dropsy We have said in the division the appearances of dropsy, and in what manner the assembly of water is made, and the signs of each appearance, and the cure which is done by medicines, and that which is cured by iron; thus it is only; and one must not touch iron in these 2 appearances: namely, tympanites and hyposarche, because it is a mortal thing; therefore when you medicate this appearance of dropsy which is called “eclites” by medicines, and the cure does not benefit, look if the patient is weak, or if he has another illness besides dropsy, such as coughs and solution of belly and similar things; if do not touch iron, because there is doubt; and if you see the patient of strong virtue, and he has no other illness but dropsy alone, and he is neither too young nor too old, then you must thus operate: lift the patient right up on your hands, and the minister presses the belly pushing the water to the lowest part of the pelvis, then take the spinal spatula according to this form: And be sharp for 2 parts. at the point, and nonetheless do not be so deep that it can come to the intestine when you insert it, and you cannot pierce it;
then look if the dropsy is  towards the intestines: then it is necessary that you cut under the ribs three finger widths right above the nipple; and if the dropsy is due to the liver disease, then the incision should be on the left side of the ribs three fingers wide; and if it is due to the spleen, then it should be on the right side, and it is not necessary that the patient lie on the cut so that the superfluities do not run to that weak place.
then pierce the entire skin with the instrument, and push it, and lift your hand to all the spatula between the skin and the fascia as if in scraping a quantity of a fingernail or thorn; then pierce the fascia until the spatula reaches its depth, which is the place of the water, then extract the trail, and it puts this instrument that's this form: And it's similar to a subtle silver coin, and it is light iron or archaut, and on the underside there is one small hole; and on one side, three holes; and two on the other side, and one on the other; and the head is cut like a feather, and this is the form of the incision with which the scribes cut the feather:
at the top is the alemel, so that when the instrument comes to the water, it draws now on top of the instrument; empty therefore half or the third part, because if you empty more than it is necessary in that hour, perhaps the patient will die for the resolution of his spirit from the weapon, or he will fall into a coma, or he will approach death;
but in void according to the quantity of its virtue, and according to what the dispositions of the virtue of the patient signify, and his poults; then treat the instrument and hold the water, and it is retained now for the heart that stops the passage which is on the syfac, because of this I have spoken, that you pierce according to this manner; then begin again the instrument the other day, if you see the patient suffering those, and treat of the water a small quantity
do this no day, and keep yourself from following until there remains but a little of the water. And if you doubt about the patient, and you put him much water, so the cure of the burial or hot sand, and by much sweat or bath and sun, and it stains to drink; and the cure of drying medicines as long as he is healed, and cauterize on the stomach and on the liver and on the spleen after the extraction of the water, as I have said before.
of the stopping of the penis Sometimes children are born who have no openings in the penis, or the opening is small, or it is not in its place. If this happens, it is necessary as soon as possible that he be able to pierce a whole i. spatumile very fine according to this form: then put on the opening i. clo subtle of lead, and tie it and hold it thus for three or four days and when he wants to urinate, have him remove the plug, and let him urinate, and then put it back; and by chance it is not necessary, because the urine that comes out does not leave it closed. Those whose opening is small, if they are medicated with the lead plug, as we have said, it will widen. Those who do not have the opening in their place are blueish because none are born who have the opening at the head of the penis, so that they cannot urinate before they raise their penis; and they cannot ejaculate for this reason because the matter cannot come to the glans, and this is a bad disease.
And the manner of the work is that the patient lies often on his back, then is extended the head of the penis and the scrotum as well as the waist of a feather, so that the opening falls in the middle, as it should; and guard against bleeding which comes many times, and if it happens, have the one who stanches blood stanch it, and cure the wound until it is healed.
of the pimples of the penis Many times come these pimples to the penis, and it is a loathsome appearance of flesh; and there are malignant and non-malignant ones; so it behoves you to pick them at .i. one fine thorn, and to cut and cleanse all, then put cotton moistened in Egyptian ointment; then cure with diafinicon ointment until it be healed. And if the pimple is malignant, of foul color and putrid, so it behoves you to cauterize it with fire. When you have cut it open, and if the pimple is within the penis, and has part inside the skin and part outside, then it behooves you to remove the pimple that is inside first; and when it is healed, cure the one outside. For when you cure them together, it is not sure that the head of the penis will not be pierced, and blackness and corruption come in its penis and scrotum; so it behoves to shave all that is black and corrupt, then apply a plaster of honey and flour made of powdered quince bark and vicks, then cure with other cures until it be healed.
And if bleeding comes, so administer the lunar cautery according to this form: The cauteries helps with two dispositions together: namely, to stopping bleeding, and to corruption. And if the head of the penis is corrupted and retracts inward, then it behoves you to put or lead a chain of flax into the penis, and make the patient urinate amidst it; and when the skin is rough at the head of the penis which happens to those who have not been circumcised, or there is an ulcer or abscess, then it behoves you to scrape it with one sharp instrument, until the bonds are loosened, and the head of the penis be delivered from all sides;
and if it is a grievous thing to devise these, then you must scrape it with a spatula of the head of the rod and the peel; then sew carefully between two, and put one fine veil of linen moistened in cold water so that it does not dry.
of circumcision
Circumcision is not a wound that heals like others; nonetheless, when we perform this work by our own will, and especially on children, it is necessary that we make the best work and the lightest to heal.
I say that the ancients did not speak of circumcision for their children because they did not practice it in their law, and we have only what we have acquired through experience.
Because I have wanted the most part of the masters and of the healers who made circumcision under i.e., dal, and forces, and at all a new knife; so it was the keurs because there are .ij. cloths, and by adventure if one cuts that above and remains that below.
Or it is convenient to cut, and is the pain double, and at the purification which is from dal there isn't assured the point of the limb; and at the purification of the angle by adventure escapes the iron, and runs the work, and many times they are born as if they don't have need of purification and I have wanted it.
Of the purification which is done with forces to all the linen of thread I have found the goodness of the experiment, because the forces cut justly as well above as below.
For when you press your hand, so equally in one, all soul tense; but that the threads be well stretched around the skin; and let the manner of the first work be such that you make the child think, if he understands, that you only tie the thread around the member as much, and then allow him to enjoy himself in all the ways that you can; Then make him straight between your hands, and respond the forces between your hands or under your feet that the child does not see them, nor any of the instruments; then put your hand on the member and blow on it, and pull it up until the head of the member is inside; then cleanse it well of the filth that has accumulated there, then tie the place with a double thread, then tie it under one pock to another lien; and hold it as two digits by the second lieneure at the pouch and at the index finger, and cut between the two liens, then lift the head upward carefully and pull the head of the member.
Then make him straight between your hands, and respond the forces between your hands or under your feet that the child does not see them, nor any of the instruments; then put your hand on the member and blow on it, and pull it up until the head of the member is inside; then cleanse it well of the filth that has accumulated there, then tie the place with a double thread, then tie it under one pock to another lien; and hold it as two digits by the second lieneure at the pouch and at the index finger, and cut between the two liens, then lift the head upward carefully and pull the head of the member. Then let it clot blood piece by piece, for that is the way; and put powder on top and on top of the powder one drape made from a yolk of an egg cooked in water tempered with rosewater, mixed with good and fresh rose oil, and leave it there until the next day, and treat it with another cure as long as he is healed.
The form of the forces for the mundification is this: the two shoulders be raised and pointed, and the shoulders also be as large as the hands equally.
The error of the mundification is when the kernel within is at the incision; therefore it is necessary that you extend it to your finger, so that the lesion makes an abscess; and cut it equally, and if you cannot hold it with your finger, then hold it with pliers, and then cut it.
And if it trespasses three days, and that which is below the shaft is swollen, let it alone until the abscess heals, and the scab lightly peels; then cut it as much as you can move, and guard the part of the shaft, it will do it no harm.
Cure therefore the place with some powder wound, which we have said or treated of powders, and if one cuts the kernel beyond measure, and it goes upwards, it will do no harm; cure it therefore, as we have said, until it is healed.
Of the retention of urine
The retention of urine is from an obstruction in the bladder, or of blood clotted, or of a tumor, or of new flesh, or similar things that we have said in the division.
and if the urine is not released, and you see that the retention is due to the stone being in the urethra or neck of the bladder, then it is necessary for the patient to be bent on their knees; and his feet are placed on his back, and his belly is extended from the upper part towards his back, and restrain the patient's legs as much as he can; and thus the neck of the bladder is constrained to express the stone upwards, so that the urine is released.
and if it does not come, as we have said, and the patient feels great pain, then it is necessary for you to administer extraction with all the instrument that is called a "syringe," of which this is the form: it should be a finely crafted light silver one, like the feather of a bird; and its shaft should be a palm long and half, and be fine at the tip.
And the manner of the issue of urine is that you take one double thread, and tie to the head one piece of wool or cotton, and put the head of the thread inside the syringe; and cut the superfluity of the wool and put it up to the head of the syringe, then anoint the syringe with oil or butter and aubin of egg, and make the patient sit on one seat, and raise his bladder and penis with moist oil and oil of olive and tepid water.
then put gently the syringe in the penis, until it comes to the root of the penis, then double the penis upwards towards the pubis; then put the syringe forward up to the bladder, and let the patient feel it coming up to the empty thing, and this is not done according to this order for those who lead or where it goes is twisted; then is the thread at all the wool piece by piece, and the urine follows the wool, then extract it further, and do correct the urine;
and recommence the syringe until the bladder is emptied, and the patient is aligned.
of the bladder diseases
When scabs or blood comes in the bladder, or there is rottenness assembled, and you see it distilling sharp waters and medicines, so do to all the instrument that is called "clepsedre", and this is its form:
It is closed, and has .iij. openings: .ij. on one side, and .i. on the other, as you see; and the leus chevez by which the medicine is poured so that it stops well the penis without addition, so that if one can draw out the moisture, and expulse when necessary;
and when you want to pour your medicines into the bladder, put the chief of the keuster in the moisture, and draw with the tube that is inside; so you will draw the moisture into the keuster, and then firmly replace the tube inside; so the moisture will enter inside, and come to the bladder now, so that the patient will feel it;
and this is the form of the subtle clyster by which one enemas the bladder: it is here:
And it is of silver or of argentium, and the head is higher; and below to one breast or where the shoulder falls; then take a sheep's bladder and put in the moisture which you wish to enemas the bladder, then tie it between the two breasts formed of a double fine thread, and heat one part of the moisture on the fire; then put the head of the clyster into the penis, then strain your hand on the bladder throughout the entire administration of the moisture, until the patient feels that the moisture has come to the bladder.
And if you do not have the bladder, then take a piece of parchment, and make one circle, and pierce it roundly throughout; then put one strong thread into these holes, then assemble the circle as one assembles a dial, and put inside this what you wish of oil and moisture and water, and tie it to the instrument; and do as you have done with the bladder, pressing with your hand until the moisture comes to the bladder.
of the stone
We have said in the division the manners of stone, and the extraction together medicines; and I have said the difference between the stone engendered as rains, and all the signs, and in what stone one must work with a size; and in the bladder, and in the member; and I will tell you it clearly and briefly.
I say that the stone which is engendered in the bladder happens more often as children, and it is a sign that the water leaps from the bladder seeming like water in its subtlety; and it appears hare-like, and grieves the patient his member, and he bends many times, and then urinates; and after many of these leaps it founds the foundations; and it is light the cure of children until they have four years, and it is very grievous in the old, and is to the middle ones, those who are between youth and old age; and the cure is lighter for those who have large stones than for those who have small ones.
And when we come to the cure, it is convenient first to purify the patient by clyster, in order to draw out all the filth that is in the intestines. For it often hinders the searching for the stone.
Then take the patient by the feet, and loosen and move them downwards, so that the stone descends to the entrance of the bladder, and sometimes comes out from its high place; then make him sit between your hands equipped, and his hands be below his hips, so that the bladder is entirely sloping downwards; then the quiver and touch it from within.
If you feel the stone in the space, then hasten now to cut above the stone. And if it does not fall at the touch of all, then moisten your index finger with oil from the left hand, if the patient is a boy, or your middle finger, if the patient is an adult; and put it into its foundation, and feel for the stone, and when you feel it on your finger, pull it to the neck of the bladder; then press upwards on your finger, and push it outwards where you wish to cut.
And command the minister to press the bladder with his hand, and command him to extend with his right hand the testicles upwards, and with his left hand remove the skin which is below the testicles in the part where one makes the cut; then put the spatula cutting, of which this is the form:
And make between what is between the hips and the foundation, not in the middle but at the side of the left hip; and be straight over the stone, and the two sides be either foundation or top, and let the waist be travers so that it is wide outside, and inside narrow, according to the quantity of the stone, nor too large;
By chance the press if the sides which is either foundation, that it leap outward without work; and know that there are such stones which have angles, and margins: if so it is grieved to move; and if there are those which are below, seeming like a glant, and round, whose issue is light.
To those then where there are angles and margins, make the waist larger; and if it does not leap, then it is necessary that you extract with tongs which are also like a file at the chief, in order to move the stone so that it does not escape; or you put under it one instrument subtle curved at the chief; and if you cannot engineer it thus, enlarge one pock the opening, and if the without decortication, then strain the vitriol;
and if there is more than one stone, first bring the largest to the neck of the bladder, then cut above, then the drive it down, and the small ones afterward if there are more. And if she is very large, it should be removed, and make a larger wound. For two things happen to the patient: either he dies, or urine comes back through where the flesh cannot close; but nonetheless you force to drain it, or to break it with pliers, until you draw it in pieces;
and when you have completed your work, apply the wound with incense and aloe and dragon's blood, and hold it together, and put on top one cloth soaked in oil and wine, or in oil and rose water and cold water, to soothe the hot abscess; then bandage the patient on his neck, and do not loosen the bandage until the third day.
And when you unwrap it, moisten the place well with oil and water, then cure it with diaphoni ointment and basil ointment, until it is healed.
And if abscesses come in the wound and corrosions, and congealings of blood in the bladder, and by this is retained urine, which is known in such manner that without jumping with the urine: therefore you must put it into the wound, and extract that blood, for if it remains, they will corrupt the bladder, and it will rot.
Then raise the wound of sharp and smooth and fine, and help him in all the ways that you know, until it is healed; and it is necessary that all the hours that you cure him, that you tie his two thighs together, and assemble the medicines on the place.
And if the stone is small, and it is where the penis leads to, and stuck inside, and urine cannot issue; then cure by what I say also, that you cut it many times, is excused of the cutting through this cure. I have already proved this thus.
Take one piece of iron forest according to this form and have it with three angles attached to one coal:
Then take a thread and tie it around the shaft below the stone, so that it cannot come back into the bladder; then put the forest into the shaft lightly, until it comes to the stone; and turn the forest in your hand on the stone, poke and poke, until you can feel the stone from the other side; then soon the urine will come, then press your hand on what remains of the stone which is inside the shaft. It is then broken, and jumps out with the urine, and the patient is healed;
and if you cannot do this for any reason that prevents it, then tie one thread below the stone and another above, then make the shaft straight against the stone between the two threads, then extract it, and untie the thread, and clean the congealed blood that is in the wound; and cure it until it is healed.
of the stones of women
It happens that stones are found in women, and if it happens at any time, the cure is difficult, and it is forbidden for three things: one is that perhaps the woman is a virgin; and the second is that one cannot find a well-knowing woman who unveils the privy parts, especially when she is chaste.
And the third way is that perhaps one cannot find a woman well-knowing in this art of hands; and the fourth manner is that the stone of the woman is more profound than the stone of the man, for which it is necessary to make a deeper incision, and there is great fear.
And if necessity arises to this, it is necessary that you seek a midwife well-knowing, and if you cannot find one, then do not seek a single chaste woman subtle; and present her with a wise woman in the life of women, or a woman who knows part of the art, and command her to do what you command her from the inquiry of the stone;
And look well if the woman is a virgin: then it behooves her to put her buttock or foundation and seek the stone; and if she finds it, constrain it under her buttocks, and recommend that she puts her buttock on the sick person, and seeks and presses her left hand on the bladder.
If she finds it, then it behooves her to move it from great to little from the entrance of the bladder until it comes to the root of the thigh; then cut on the stone at the root of the thigh opposite the middle of the buttocks, where it is seen appearing, and feel the stone in that part; and do not move her buttock on the stone or under, and let the waist be initially a little.
Then put the root in the waist, if you feel the stone so near the wound until the stone can possibly issue forth, and know that many kinds of stones are: namely, small and large and rough and smooth, long and round, and which have veins. Know these similarities to know the outcome.
And if the stone does not want to come out, put vitriol ground at its place, and hold it for an hour until the stone is softened; then return to your work, as long as the stone is removed, and have the instruments that I told you about in the extraction of stones for men to help you in your work.
And if the stone does not want to come out, and it is the artery that is cut, put the powder on the place and strain it with bandages and strips, and do not begin again those, and leave the stone and do not try it any more, for fear of death; then cure the wound.
And when the heat of the blood is appeased, and the area is dry, then return to your work as long as the stone is removed.
of fleshy hernia
Ramice aquouse is nothing else than an assembly of moisture or white syfac, which is below the heart of the testicles, which contains the egg; and it is called "syfac," and sometimes it is properly in the membrane of the egg, if one thinks that it is i.e., another egg; and it is the skin of the testicle between the white syfac that we have said; and those did not have this pox no.
And the generation of this ramice is so weak that it comes to the testicles, and that matter is spread out.
And sometimes it comes from a blow on the testicles, and this moisture has many colors: either it is declining towards yellow, or it is without red, or black, or aqueous white, and this happens more;
and these are the signs to know this assembly, because if it is or white such as we have said, then the abscesses are ripe, that is, about long as the figure of an egg, and does not open the corners, because it has moisture all around.
And if it has moisture in the proper cloth, then the abscess is ripe with a part of the egg, and for this reason one thinks that it's another egg;
and if the moisture is between the skin of the corners and the white such as, then one feels it well; therefore when you want to know the color of the moisture, one probes at all the intromissoire quarrelit, because its form is as before. According to this therefore which comes after the introducer, judge of that which is within.
According to this therefore which comes after the introducer, judge of that which is within. And when we cure it with iron, it is necessary that the patient be healthy according to his power and the fullness of his body; then lay him on his back, on a thing a little high, and put under him much of blankets;
then sit on his left, and command the minister that he sit on the right, and extend the rod to one of the two ribs near the heart of the bones;
then take the pointed knife, and cut the skin of the bones among them from the long one to near the armpit, and let your incision be straight dividing the skin of the bones until the white fat, and the peel it carefully according to your power;
Then pierce the abscess with clean water to 1 inch wide opening, and draw out all the water, and then put your bandages on, and raise the abscess; and do not touch the root of the boils, but only the abscess; cut everything or in pieces carefully the side of it subtly, that if you do not cut it wisely, it will return the water.
And if the boil is healed after your work, then set it in its place when you have completed the work of the abscess; then join the two leaves of the root of the boils with a stitch, then cure it like other wounds until it is healed.
And if you find the boil corrupted by another illness, then it is necessary that you bind the vessels that are suspended, fearing the flow of blood; then cut the boil all the way to the suspension, and draw out the boil, and cure it as we have said.
And if the fluid is assembled into two parts together, know that these are two roots; so cut the other part as you have done the first equally, then wipe away the blood, and put in the wound a cloth moistened with rose oil.
and put on top another piece of cloth moistened with wine and oil, and place the two cushions on top, and put doubled cloths above, and tie it over the entire length which is according to this form:
Then take two cloths, and make them into a lamb's wool padding according to this appearance, and be assembled by stitching at the waist of the breeches, and one of the shoulders rests on the foundation until the back, and the other on the armpit side; and the other two on the two angles, and let the entire restraint be assembled in the loop of the breeches;
And sometimes this ram's horn cautery is used in place of a steel scalpel, and you should take one subtle cuttlefish cautery, and cut the skin of the scrotum, and be heated as we have said, so that the white syfac which contains the fluid is uncovered;
If you take the cautery according to this form, and pierce that syfac with one quickness, and scrape it with this subtle heated cautery:
And the scrape in all ways that you can, as long as you scrape everything; and keep that the fire does not touch the egg; and know that this work is more safe; and moves guarding of blood loss, and moves that the works of scalpel;
and if nothing goes against you, or abscess or discharge of blood or other thing, so treat what is going against you, according to what is said before.
And if the patient is fearful, and does not want to endure this work because of its horror, then administer the perforation as I have told you, and it is that when you are certain by the signs we have said that the watery root is there,
if you make the patient sit on a raised seat; then pierce the abscess in the lower part to all the breadth of the spatula, and put the perforation deep into the body; and let the opening be wide so that all the water flows out;
then put cotton on the spot, and bind it, and let the remaining water run out, then treat it until the wound is healed;
And if the white cloth does not let the water go out of the mouth of the wound, then it is necessary to put in a pen or the instrument with which one treats the water of the dropsy, for whose form is before; and enlarge i. poc the wound, and know that the water returns, and is assembled after six months or until later, and when it is assembled like before, and thus will pass the patient his days.
of the abscess of the testicles
Know that in the section of this branch there is fear in many dispositions, for which I think it is better to leave it.
and I will tell you the work and likenesses of the abscess.
I say therefore that many abscesses come to the body, and even to the testicles; and this is by many causes.
That is to say by excess of sour and acrid, which is spread to the testicles, or from percussion;
and the color of the abscess is according to the color of the body; and it finds no pain, and it is a grievous abscess;
And by adventure is one abscess grievously and terribly painful, and of dark colour, and sometimes comes from our artery, or an inflammation of a vein.
When it is by an artery, then it is known by the disposition of the hot abscess, when you press it with your fingers. and it does not behoove you to touch it at all.
He who is made from an inflammation of a vein is known by its disposition at the expression of touching with fingers
and one can well do this operation on these kinds of things, and on other similar things. and it is that you cut the heart of the onions, then being the head up, and the body toward white side, and deliver the suspension from all sides of the head.
If the onion is already cut with these kinds of cuts, then it is necessary that you pull out the onion, and cut it.
and if it is adhered to the white side, or in those who are inside the vessels, then it is necessary that you deliver all of that part, and cut it roundly.
And if the birth of the bone is or its rear, it behooves you to cut it all and extract the egg, as we have said.
And when your works are accomplished, smear the wound with wool moistened in rose oil and wine, then dress it with other dressings until it is healed.
of the boils of the privy parts
This is one boil enclosed in an envelope resembling a certain kind of husk, along with the softening of the genitals. and the patient moves loudly when he walks;
and the cure of this disease is as well-prescribed as fearsome as the one before.
and nevertheless, we will tell you the work of it, according to what the ancients did.
It is necessary that you make the patient sit on one elevated seat, then tie the suspensory of the testicles down to your two thighs, To all the vessels which are near the penis, and the masters braid them, and the extenders form them;
then cut with a sharp trowel wide through the vessels, until they are uncovered,
and then peel from each side, as we have said in the extraction of the arteries which are in the temples;
Then insert a needle where there is one double thread, and tie it at the first place where the vein came, and tie it straight to the other end; then the blade is placed in the middle straightly, according to the length of the body, and in treating the corrupted moisture
then heal the wound as with the others where one avoids bowe, so that no vessel is punctured that nourishes one of the corners;
for by these no harm comes, and to all vessels comes life, so it is necessary to treat the corners of all vessels; so that the flesh does not lose its nourishment through the incision of the vessels, and dries up and cannot be helped.
of the rupture of the thigh The events of this malady are by the section that comes to the thigh, or the extension upon the belly in the part of the groin, for which reason the intestines descend from that rupture to one of the groins.
And this rupture is in the thigh or from the extension of it, and these 2 manners of wounds come from many causes: either by percussion, or jumping, or wrestling, or lifting a heavy load, and similar things.
And the signs when it is an extension of the thigh, are that it happens in little stages over a long time and does not come suddenly; and is the abscess even up to the root, because the sifac presses upon the intestine.
And the signs are when it is of the section of the sifac, that it brings sudden pain at the beginning, and is the abscess various appearances, under the skin near, and this for the issue of the intestine and the body to the outside of the sifac.
And at times they send the intestines with the sifac, and are retained within, and causes great pain to suffer the patient, even when it is pressed.
And in these cures of iron there is fear, so one must avoid them.
And the manner of the work is that you command the patient to put the intestine into his hand within the wound, if he can enter it. Then either support it on his neck between your hands, and raise the hips.
Then extend the core upwards, and cut all the skin of the scrotum along its length; Then put inside the folds of the waist a pair of needles according to what you need to open the wound, and such that the entrails can issue forth;
Then scrape the substance that is under the skin of the groin, until the white substance hard be uncovered from all sides.
Then put your index finger into that which follows the groin, in that which is between the white substance which is under the skin of the buttock, and between the second substance.
And depart that which is behind the buttock, and between the second substance; and then move with your right hand into the heart of the groin, and keep the white substance on top in your left hand, and lift the buttock over all the substance towards the waist. And command to the minister that he extend the buttock upwards, and loosen that which is above behind the ligament.
And if there is any piece of the intestine enveloped or white syfac hard, and if you find none of these things, then put it in the belly below;
Then take a needle or it has one thick thread made of ten threads, and put it in the back part of the syfac, which is after the skin of the buttocks; after the waist, then cut the hairs that appear from the threads, until there are four threads; Then assemble them one above the other in the manner of a cross, and bind the syfac, which we have said is below the skin of the buttocks, with a strong band of two parts; Then envelop the hairs of the threads, and bind them forming two parts, so that none of the vessels that nourish them can enter in, except for an abscess if it comes; and set straight the linen according to the first linen long two fingers of that one, and after these two linens leave about the space which is below the heart of the loins the width of a finger;
and after all the other according to the roundness that the egg bears; then cut in the part which is below the skin of the loins, as much as the sinew, and the bone, as we have said before;
then administer wool moistened in oil, and put it into the wounds, and put in the linen that we have said. And at no time is the white space that we have said cauterized after the incision, out of fear of bleeding.
For this happens many times, and let the thread as long as it falls through; and if it delays at falling, be raised with hot water, and put on what we have said, until it falls;
then cure the wound with other cures, until it is perfectly healed.
of fleshy hernia
In this branch I have never seen anyone who dared to make the cure with iron.
And the ancients said that it is made like the root which is assembled with the wood, in such a manner that you tie the vessels after the cut above or slightly below;
then cut it in two, and cure the abscess of those who work on it, as long as the vessels bleed; and cure it as we have said, until it is healed.
Sometimes a rupture comes in the bowels, as we have said, and open them; and do not pull any of the intestines out to the sides, and if any are pulled out, it is bad, and repair them immediately;
and nonetheless if they remain too long in this spot, the wound or ulcer grows, as long as the intestines are pulled out;
and this happens by the extension of the sinew which is at the angles, as we have said, for it is extended, then softened and swollen its joints and open;
and the cure of this is by cautery, as we have said before; and sometimes it is cured by iron in this manner:
and it is that the patient lies soundly on his back between your hands, then cut the place of the rupture inflated by a breadth according to the quantity of three fingers;
and then extract the sinew which is below the skin that the following, then take the root and place it on the apparent place of the sinew;
And he presses at the front of the belly, then counts two apparent limbs of the siphon upon the head of the waist, and counts one and the other.
Then he removes the head of the waist, and does not cover the siphon nor extend any other thing, as I have made known to you in the cure of the intestine's root.
Then he cures by the cure of wounds. And when you cover the filaments, if it is purified and heals the wound, as long as it is healed.
The siphon is constricted, and has no appearance in the rupture, and the cautery is moved in this place, and closer to salvation.
of the softening of the skin of the testicles
Many times the skin of the testicles is softened in some men, because the sacs that are inside them are softened, and it is seen; and it is necessary, when one wants to heal it, that one make the patient lie on his back, and one cut the skin which is softened on the natural skin; then assemble the two lips with a seam, and if you see, sew first the superfluity of the softened skin with three or four stitches firmly; then cut between the stitches, and treat the wound as other wounds, until it is healed, and remove the thread.
of the strapping
Know that strapping is common in our law, and for that reason I would like not to speak of it much in this book; and it is necessary only for two manners: one of which is that the wise respond when asked, and know the cure; and the other because we often need strapping of some animals to aid us, such as goats and sheep and calves and other beasts. I say therefore that strapping is done in two ways: either by attraction, or by cutting.  In that which we do by attraction, we make our sit the beast in hot water, until the testicles are softened and pliable; then take them in your hand, as long as they are put back and you no longer feel them.  As for strapping the tail: it is necessary to hold the beast, and press the skin of the testicles with your left hand, then tie the suspensory, and cut on each side one cut, when you have well scratched them; and leave no prick of the sheath and the fine sheath that is on the vessels; and this manner of strapping is more mature than that which is done by attraction, because in attraction remains perhaps some thing from the testicles, by which the beast desires lust; then cure the wound until it is healed.
Of the hermaphrodites
Hermaphrodite is according to .ij. manners as men: one if it is that between the .ij.  parts appears also as the figure of nature of a woman, or it has hair, and sometimes in short the urine. And the other manner is in women, and has on the pubis also like a penis and .ij. parts. And the cure of the man and the woman is that you cauterize the joined parts all, and the cure them as other wounds; in the second manner, of men whose urine jumps out by the skin of the parts, there is no cure.
Of the tenting
Tenting is a joined part on the natural part, as long as it is too ugly to see; and some women have it as large as a hand, and that is the cure. It behooves you to shave off the superfluity of the tenting with your hand or tweezers, and lightly cauterize; and don’t go too deep, so that bleeding doesn’t come out, then cure the other cure until it is healed; and to another part that is born at the mouth of the anus, and the temple, and perhaps jumps out, and is according to the resemblance of a cow, and for this they called it by the ancients “cow disease”. If it behooves you to cauterize it, as we have said about the tenting, and cure it until it is healed.
of wandering
of wandering if it is when the nature of the woman is not perceived, or the opening is small; and is natural by birth, or accident by illness that has come to it; or it is by a charm joined, or by subtle or thick syrup, and is made in the belly, or in the ribs, or below, or wherever it may be; and prevents conception, and pregnancy, and by chance the flowers to have; and the knowledge of these is by the gaze of the bailiff. If the obstruction is near apparent, if you wish to its two sides or to the back. If it is subtle syrup, and it is near two fingers' breadth, hasten, and do thus: put your two fingers together, and let the woman be on her back, legs spread; then being the two fingers formed, as long as the subtle syrup is round, and is over the obstruction; then take wool, and moisten it in oil, and put it on top, and lie the woman to home each day, so that he may not sweat. And if the syrup is hard and thick, it is necessary that you chop it with a spatula similar to myrtle leaf. If the obstruction is of flesh born, suspend it at the armpit and cut it; and have the medicines stanching blood, as acaice, dragon's blood, incense, together with an abundance of egg; then administer a poultice of broad plantain, so that the wound may not close; and thus for a long time, and administer a poultice of dry linen; then cure it with other cures until it is healed. And when in the belly comes flesh born, it is necessary to cut it according to this manner, unless it is inflamed abscesses. For the inflamed abscess that is in the belly, one must not touch to make.
of hemorrhoids
Hemorrhoids are openings of veins which without custom, and when hemorrhoids are old they become hardened; and we have said in the division the resemblances of those, and the signs, and I will say here those which resolve healing. I say that hemorrhoids and the hardening, when they are cut within the marsh, and they do not appear to the touch, unless it is cured by iron. Those who are at the mouth of the marsh, one can feel them, are those one can cure. It behooves therefore that you put the woman in a cold house, then after the hardening is taken with tongs, and the cope at its roots, then powder on medicines restraining blood, such as acaice and dragon's blood and incense, and similar things; then put her feet to the air for one hour, then put her in cold water; and if bleeding comes from it, then have her sit in a decoction of sumac and bark of pomegranates and galangal and similar things, and then take barley flour, and bind it with honey and oil, and make one plaster on her back. And if it hardens, it is good. If this does not, then have her apply leeches to the back and breasts without iron; then take linen, and soak it in plantain juice or in elderberry juice with old wine, and apply it there. And when the abscess rests, cure its place with ointment until it is healed; and the one called "albathir" is red, and resembles one sharp chief, so it must be cut as I said the hardening; and then cure it until it is healed.
Abscesses of the marsh
Many kinds of abscess come to the marsh, such as chancre and pus-filled abscesses, herpes, estiomenes, fistulas, hemorrhoids, and hot abscesses, and more diseases that I have said in the division. It behooves therefore that I say in this treatise the hot abscess that comes in the marsh, which is not of abscesses that boil; and if you want to know the work of iron, see if the abscess is agitated at the beginning of its arrival, and full of heat and fever, and if it becomes red you can see it.  Therefore do not hasten to pierce, but let him die until the pain is appeased; and then have the patient sit on one seat, and two small seats where he leans, and support his back and bring his legs together towards the outside of the leg; and be his thighs spread apart, and put his arms below his knees, and bind them well with a good linen cloth; then gently lift him to the right side, and administer the instrument with which one works the mouth of the marsh, from what comes after its form; and it is necessary that when you see to administer this instrument, that you first insert the point in order to know the depth of the marsh, so that what enters into the instrument does not go deeper than it should, and that it does not injure the patient; and if the instrument is larger, it is necessary to cover the depth of the marsh with cloths, so that the instrument does not hurt him; and it is necessary that he put the cone of the instrument on top, and hold the instrument. And when the abscess opens, and one helps it with a soft hand, it must be covered at the head, at the spatule; and when the boil is emptied, it is necessary to put into the wound tented moistened cloths in rose oil, or in green sec oil; and put the tent further from the wound to the bottom of the marsh, and put outside over the marsh and over the knife clean linen cloth moistened in water or malves are cooked; then cure it after two days of ointment coming before these, until it is healed; and at no time lift the marsh and the wound by clyster of water and honey, and then of water or roots of lilies and long aristolochia that are cooked; then return to the ointment. And if the wound is renewed in the marsh, it is necessary that you guard against cooking iron, but cure it as we have said in the division.
of childbirth
It is the midwife's first duty to know the figure of natural childbirth, and the signs of it are when you see the woman press her abdomen and desire to smell the air: then she hastens for the child to come out; therefore you know that this birth is according to nature, and it is the head first, and the second after him; and when you see these signs, you must gently press her belly so that the child comes quickly; because when it comes out on its head, the second comes after it, and the world is cleansed of its superfluities by good purification; and this which comes otherwise does not come naturally.
If the child comes out on its head by natural birth, and the woman is giving birth loudly, and her strength is weak, then have her sit on a saddle, or the women hold her; and anoint her nature with oil or fenugreek that is cooked, and then put the midwife between her thighs the little spatula whose form is here: and cut the perineum, and chop at its nail until the moisture that is inside is gone; and grasp the belly of the woman as long as the child descends, and if it does not descend, then it is necessary to cleanse the woman with fenugreek mullein with sesame oil; then make her inhale and sneeze from condyment, and hold her mouth and nose for an hour: thus now the child will be delivered. And if the two hands come out, then you must gently reset them bit by bit; and if they cannot enter, then put the woman on one seat, and raise her feet up; then turn over the seat to the ground, and hold the woman so that she does not fall during the turning over; and if the hands cannot enter, and the child dies, then chop the hands at the knife which is before put, and extract the child, and reset them equally.
of the delivery of the child on its feet When the child comes on its feet, then it is necessary to push upwards; And then turn it back and forth, until it is even.
Then prick one of the feet and extend it back and forth.
Let him jump as far as his hips, if he is commanded to take it, and make him sneeze from the conditions. If he jumps, God willing.
And if it is not as we have said, then turn it back and forth, until it is according to the natural figure. For therefore it is easily done.
And if it does not come out as we have said, then take a mixture of alum, and sesame oil, and melted gum, and grind all in one mortar; and put upon the nature of the woman inside and outside this ointment, Then make him sit straight upright until below the ribs;
and when it is softened below, give him one coil of myrrh, and place it below, and leave it for an hour; then make him sit on one seat, then make him sneeze and restrain his mouth and nose, and take his belly lightly, for the child now leaps. from the issue of the child on his knees When the child comes in this form, he puts his hands hand over hand.
of the issue of the child who comes out with one hand wide open it is necessary to contrive to bring back the hand: if one cannot bring it back, then make the woman get up and leave;
If she cannot walk, put her on a bed of straw and straighten her legs.
Then administer the poultice that I have recounted.
And if she does not give birth, put her on a seat, then study to bring back the hand. And guide the child according to its natural form, and make her sneeze, and command her to strain until the child comes out.
of the issue of the child on its neck, and has spread its hands, and its face turned towards the back of its mother It is proper that the midwife holds his hand, then turns it little by little, and the egg gently.
and when it is equal, it puts on the soft and oily cloth of the altar as we have said, then commands her to move little by little.
And when you have done this, make her sit on one seat and command her to sneeze; and let her sneeze. in this same manner to all the secondine
in this same manner to all the secondine When it comes to be done in this manner to all the secondine, so cut the secondine at your fingernail, until the moisture is gone.
and if the child can sit on its face and neck, so cut from the bud, that it is not held back, and die the child.
then put the child inside, until you have placed it as is fitting, and command the woman that she refrain at all times.
of the issue of twins Know that twins are born many times, and sometimes three or four; and this is not a strange thing, and it happens often. Two are a strange thing, and they do not live, if at all.
I know these, that they are multiplied, and are loosened by the faculty which divides them, which is joined to the body.
And at times they issue as naturally as one all underneath, as we have said.
And if they issue violently, then the cure as we have said, and let the discharge be subtle, and do quickly and lightly what it does; and thus do as it is worthy of healing. of many children
of many children Never are formed in the marsh i. or ii. or iii. or iv. or v. or vi. or vii., or more until xv., and they are all formed in the shape of a child by the measurement of his glorious sage,
and it is necessary that the bailiff knows all this, because by chance seeming things happen to him; so it is done according to what is fitting.
of the dead child
When you cure the woman of the dead child or belly, as I said in the division, and it does not come out, and you are constrained to work with your hands; it is necessary that you know if the woman is of sound virtue, and has no accident or she has fear of death;
it is necessary that the woman be laid on her back, and her hips inclined downward, and her legs raised;
And the minister lays the band of two parts, where it is tied to the bed so that it does not touch the descent of the child;
Then rub the mouth of the mare with moist oils with mucus of althea and fenugreek and flax seed, then anoint the bale its hands with these oils and these mucus. Then put it in the mare lightly, then take one (measure) where she puts the oats that be suitable to those
And take heed if the child is appeared that it descends upon its head; if he sets the pins in his eyes or in his neck or in his mouth or in his palate or under the beard or in the throat or near the ribs
and if the descent is on feet, he sets it or pierces and at the sides;
and it is necessary that he hold the pin in his right hand, and place the curve between his two fingers of the left hand, and he thrusts it with all his hand lightly, and sets the pin into any of these places that we have said, until it comes to the empty thing;
Then place against one another, or the third one if you need it, so that the extractions are equal
And then make them equal by moving from one side to the other, so that they may move easily, and let the edges of the bones be toothed so that they may hold, as it is in this form.
And if a part remains, then oil the groin of some of its joints with oil and put it in that part, and pull the other part.
And if none remain, then put this bone or higher up its place and do this until it all moves out.
And if one hand comes before the other, and it cannot be brought back for constriction, then it is necessary that you envelop it in a cloth, until it is whole;
then wrap the bandage at the joint of the wrist or elbow, and in this way you should do for the other hand, and at two feet.
And if the child's shoulder is swollen and it is sticking out, or it has a sharp peak assembled, if it is necessary that you put the pointed spatula between your two [parts], and make the head and extract the water. or you take it to the instrument which is called "almidach," because its form comes with the instruments or chapter which is after this one.
and in the same way, make it if the child has a large natural head; and then draw out the bones with the forceps,
and if the head jumps out and is strained with force, it may be split, as long as the moisture that is or worse has come out.
and if it cannot be brought back in, cut it into pieces as much as you can.
and if it is swollen in the belly or below the ribs, then it is necessary that you pierce it until the moisture runs out.
And if the child is on its feet, the traction is light, and the pressure at the mouth of the birth canal is slight.
And if it is outside in the belly or at the breast, then you should extract it with i.e., wrapped cloth placed above the hand; and make the belly or breast, as long as the moisture that is there dries;
and if the other members are removed, and the head remains, then bring the patient's hand with force out of the marrow, and draw it up to the mouth of the marrow; then he puts one or two, and the treatment is done;
and if the mouth of the abscess is narrowed by the heat that came to it, then it does not need to be worked on; otherwise moist and fatty things must be administered; and administer plasters, and soak in softening and moisturizing water.
And if the child is on his side, and you can put him straight, so administer what we have said in a living child.
and if one has no power over it, then the body be treated by pieces, and leave nothing of the secondary part.
And when you have done this, if it comes to an abscess as we have said in the matter of boils.
And if blood flow comes out, then put it in a cool restraining bandage, and administer other treatments to it.
And I saw a woman in whose belly one child had been stillborn, then conceived another on top of that, and refused to miscarry the other. After a long time it came upon her an abscess in the abdomen, and it swelled so much that it opened, and began to drain with great pus.
I was called to heal her, and I thought long about it, and could not sew up the wound.
I put on a plaster of strong attraction, and out came one bone, and after some days another. I was much amazed, for this reason because the belly has no bones.
If I thought that it was the bones of a dead child.
I examined the wound, and in treating the bone, until the woman was in better condition. and I visited the woman for a long time thus, and it appeared to her a little bit of bowel from its place;
and I have recorded this chapter only for those who when the masters find a strange thing, that he knows how to help.
how to bring the bone back to its place
Here comes the form of the forceps, which is written in books; and two turns at two handles of the two arms. However, the horns should be more subtle of the restrictor, and made of ebony or boxwood;
and let the mouth of the staff be i.e., two wide, and the margin of the trees i.e., one, and in length one palm and a half and in the middle of the two limbs be two joints of this same staff, which be joined together and in one another, of half a palm in length or one jot more;
and these two joints be put into the mouth of the marrow to open when one turns the two horns.
Another form, similar in appearance but more subtle and lighter, be made of ebony or boxwood staff, according to the likeness of pliers; and have as two bones two joints, as you see, of one palm long, and two digits wide;
and when you see to open the mare with all the instrument, so make the woman sit on one bed, the feet hanging and the legs open, then put the two joints together in the mare, and hold the head of the instrument below between her hips; then work your hand on the instrument, as you have done with the pliers equally, according to the quantity that you see to open the mouth of the mare, until the bail does what she wants.
This instrument are all mounted, and they multiply their likenesses; and when the eyes have appeared them, so much is more hasten the work, and more high to men for their quantity.
If you do not despise the instrument that you have not appeared it, because their necessities are not excusable.
When the secondine is held during childbirth, it is necessary that you command the woman to retain her breath, and then make her sneeze with condiment, and restrain her hands at her mouth and nose. And if she jumps because of this, well it is.
If this does not work, then take one pot and make one hole or cover, and put in herbs that can open the mouth of the marsh, such as calamint, rue, anise, chamomile, cassegrain, and centaury.
All these herbs, or none of them, be cooked or put in water on the fire; then put one end of a rope or pierced hole into the pot, and the other end in the mouth of the marsh.
And hold it until the vapors come from within the marsh; then let it be blown out, as we have said. If the secondine is thrown hastily. And if it remains after this cure and there is no fever, command the midwife that she soak her left hand in oil of sesame or in liniment of arnica, and then put it into the womb.
and she feels for the second one; and when she has found it, she seizes it and stretches it slightly back and forth so that the cord does not break off during extraction. but she must move it gently to the right and left, and then pull; it will come out and unwind itself.
And if the baby's mouth is too narrow, we have said the cure of sneezing and fumigating with herbs;
and if it is not of all that we have said, so guard that you do not apply to the breast.
but it is necessary that he who is at the mouth of the marsh, you tie him to the hip of the woman, then clysterize him with ointment tetra-pharmakon.
if she will bear and return, and come back for more; but nonetheless, when she bears it comes ill-smelling to the stomach and head, and pales the patient.
So it is necessary then for fumigations fitting to those: none of the ancients have experienced fumigation of watercress and dried figs.
The form of the instrument for which one fumes the woman to retain the flowers and the afterbirth is this:
And it is of glass resembling a dog, and one puts the tip subtle into the vagina, and the handles wide over the fire;
and let the fumigation be over the embers, and the reed as long as it is burnt, and begin another one.
to examine the foundation
Many children are born who do not have the foundation perceived, but it is stopped by subtle artifices. It therefore becomes necessary for the midwife that she pierce that artifice to its proper place, and does not pierce it with a sharp spatula, and guards the wound so that she does not touch it.
then put on linen moistened in wine and oil, then the ointment dressing until it is healed.
And if you doubt that it will not return, then put in the opening a piece of cloth, and leave it there for many days, and remove it when the child wants to go into the chambers.
And sometimes this stoppage comes from a wound or abscess; so it is necessary to cover that stoppage; if it be cured, as we have said of the cautery of iron.
of the fistula of the foundation Fistulas that come from under the foundation are nodules, and larger than those that come from near the outer foundation, or in the space of two parts,
If there is one fistula or more; and when that nodule is old, it works, and still moisture brings white or subtle boils,
and sometimes these fistulas are closed; and they are known by those who have them or by evacuation or venting when the patient defecates, and by chance some go out.
And if fistulas that pierce to the bladder, and to half the penis; and reach to the junction of the hip, and to outside of the buttock.
And thus one knows the fistula piercing to the base, and not piercing. and it is that you put your thumb or base, and put a subtle needle of iron or steel into the fistula when there is no twistiness.
And if there is a tortuosity, put a tent of fine sponge or a horsehair thread, as long as you feel the tent or hair at your finger;
and if you do not feel it, and it does not come out through the opening nor with a puff nor wind, as we have said: know that it does not pierce; so hasten to cure it.
And when the fistula is pierced up to the bladder or up to the urinary duct, then urine leaks out, and it cannot be stopped by medicine.
If it is pierced up to the junction of the hip, then the tendon comes to the place. If there is no twisting and the pain is only in the surrounding area, then it is that it has a bend here, and there is no use of medicine or ointment.
And in these fistulas, there is no cure other than labor, and vanity of the foolish mirrors that interfere with them.
In the one that is neither pierced nor old, there is hope of healing by iron, as I have experienced.
And it is that the patient lies between your hands on his back; and lift his legs up to his hips, and have his hips inclined to his belly. Then put a tent of iron, or of lead if there is tortuosity, as long as you know where the tent comes from.
If the patient feels it around the base, then it behooves you to put your index finger on it.
And if you then feel that the tent has pierced it; and whether uncovered or you feel between your finger the skin or flesh, then you know it is through. if one does not work on it, it cannot be cured.
It is said however that one can cure some well, but this rarely happens.
and the help one gives is if one carefully applies the subtle cautery according to the width of the fistula, as it was said before. and he sears the whole thing hot into the fistula until it reaches to the base; and do this two or three times, as long as you know that these charred bits are burned, which look like an eye feather.
and then the cure of damp tents in butter, until that it shall be healed, and then the cure of ointment comforting flesh and welding.
If it is thus healed, it is well. If not, it cannot otherwise be healed.
and if the tent goes in and does not reach to the point that is the foundation, and there is between your door and the tent a thick covering of flesh or of fat, and you see the fistula at what follows the covering of the heart. If you cut at the beginning of the fistula, and push ahead before the tent, and then cauterize after, as long as it reaches to the head of the tent.
And will be delivered the tent, and will shrink; then bind those hairs that seem like a feather of an owl, and do not leave any.
And if the blood goes out and comes between you and the work, then cauterize it with fire or with medicine sharp.
For the fire cautery brings together two good things: that is to say, the burning of those hairs joined together, and the stopping of blood and the drying of moisture;
Then the cure with tents moistened in butter or in a thing ground, as long as the wound lies raw, and if the hairs are burned in the raw;
then cure the wound of the eyelids inside by inflaming hard flesh, and are the medicines dry.
For when it is restored, it is healed and does not return.
And if a fistula comes all the way up to the bottom of the foundation, and is removed from the body, it is sealed with that opening or foundation, and inquire there.
If you feel the tent and between 2 is the cloth or silk or leather where it is about to pierce through, if there is no other way except by faith and hope, then by administering one of these three ways:
or you cauterize it as we have said, or you cut it to the bottom, or if you can put dressings there and treat it as first;
and do not go too deep in by cutting, that you do not cut the tissue which holds the foundation, and let the excrement come out by its own will; then treat it, as we have said;
then treat it, as we have said; perhaps then it will be healed, or you remove that covering and the wound since it is cut near its foundation, or by dressing or by some other pointed instrument; Then remove carefully the flesh which is in the wound, as much as you can.
Then study to restore the wound, and keep the fistula in the part outside the foundation: so it is lighter for the patient.
And sometimes fistulas are like this: and it is when you put the tent in the fistula, and it is or rests against the foundation near the skin above, if you take a tent pierced at the top according to this form: And it puts one twist thread into two, and puts the tent to all the thread in the fistula until it is at the head.
If it is pierced at the edge of the bottom inside, then extract the thread from that which is pierced, in this way that you put your two or foundation.
And treat the head of the thread, and assemble the two ends together, and hold one to another, and let it be for one or two days;
and restrain it no time, until the thread's chops that are between them close, and stick together;
Then cure the wound until it is healed and sound.
If the fistula does not pierce, then make it pierce in all the ways that you can, if it is not too deeply embedded.
For it does not behoove to do for the lacing cover if too deeply embedded, and then cure it, as we have said, until it is healed.
The form of the pointed spatula with which one makes the fistula is very useful, in one part and sharp; and on the other hand no, because one does not cut what one should not cut, as you see here:
Hemorrhoids are according to two manners: or they are within the foundation, as much as grains of resin, and some are small and large, and in short they bleed. and there are one or more, and they are outside the foundation and at the top of the foundation; but those that are outside have little moisture,
and then again it is added with a bit of citrine water or a little blood, and has the color of the body.
and the treatment of those who have them in the foundation, if it is that you command the patient to stretch so as to go into chambers, until the foundations are gone and the threads appear. if you hurry, and can hold it with pliers, or you hold it with your finger, then cut it at its roots;
and if the tweezers cannot hold them because of their moisture, then take them with one drapery, or with cotton, or with a piece of felt. and restrain them to your hands, then cut them, and powder above any hot powders that be in their place of cautery; or you cauterize them as is said in the chapter of cautery, then cure them with other cures until they are healed;
and if the foundation cannot issue, then cleanse the patient with a harsh and biting enema so that what is in the foundation may be washed out, so that it can issue openly;
and if the patient feels pain, and if the threads are strong from the foundation, then the cure is light; And it is that you prick them with your finger or with tongs, and cut them, then cure them as we have said, until they are healed, and he fears the incision by iron.
If it is necessary that you administer the suture in this manner: take one twisted thread, and put it into a needle, and then draw the thread upward and make the needle pierce from the other side, and turn the two ends of the thread below the needle. And if it is of a wide size; and tighten the thread firmly, then knot the thread, and extract the needle, and do the same with all others, and leave one to correct the superfluity of blood;
Then place on the foundation one layer of moistened cloth in rose oil or in cerate, and place it on the foundation, and instruct the patient to rest;
and then leave it until it bleeds, and when it is healed, then cure with ointment and other cures, until it is healed.
of the drying of the wounds or foundation Many times there is drying up of wounds in the intestine, and by constriction of nature, and when the disease is old and medicine is of no use.
Then it is necessary that you scrape to the point of a spatula or with your fingernail the bark on top, which does not let it moisten. then treat until it is healed as is fitting
and if it cannot heal, then begin the scraping more strongly than before, until it heals well, and is scabbed over then treat until it is healed.
about trembling An ant is a small creature made before the body, and it goes much by itself.
And sometimes it is found cold, and one feels it as dead from shivering, and comes throughout the body, and more to the hands than any other part.
And the cure is that you take a cane of an ostrich feather, or a raven's feather very strong, and put that cane on the shivering, until the purple circles chase away the shivering all around. Then turn your hand to the whole cane until you draw all around the shivering, and put it by itself, and root out the shivering from its roots.
And if you see, so do those of a dog of iron or steel according to this form, and be subtle below and trailing above:
do not pierce it, for to keep it in the two, and move pressing And if you see, so cauterize the edge, as it is before or chapter of cautery.
of the form of the clyster At no time is made a clyster of silver or pewter, or iron melted or wrought; and at no time are these instruments made small and large, according to those to whom they are administered.
Those therefore whom one administers in the care of children and who are weak and painful, are small.
The shape of the clyster small and large is as above wide where the belly is tied according to this manner:
and there is a severance where the belly is tied, as you see, and the shoulder is inside pierced; and on one side 2. pierced, and on the other 1. ;
and the belly is where one puts the medicines of a bladder of beast or parchment, and it is pierced all around with small piercings,
and between each pore one should put space, then put into these pores one strong thread of wool twisted in ten or in whatever way it turns, and assemble the belly as if it were a ram; and when the medicine is inside, then tie the linen to the instrument with a strong thread, then clench it; and this is the shape of a circle.
And let the medicine be neither too hot nor too cold, and anoint the head of the clyster with oil or egg yolk, or something similar, then insert it gently.
Then squeeze the minister with his two hands together, until it is all expelled, then remove the clyster and lift the patient's legs to the side.
and if the medicine wants to work, then let it rest as much as possible; and if it sleeps one whole night, it is more helpful.
And if you clysters him in the sickness of a rumbling belly, and the medicine hastens to work, then he begins again until he is cured.
And if the hemorrhoids are at the foundation or an abscess, then be the clyster as subtle as for one child;
and this is the form of the subtle clyster on which the skin should be restrained:
of wounds
We have already said in the division the treatment of wounds; now we will tell you the treatments of hands and medicines, according to completion.
I say that wounds are diverse according to how they are made, and according to the places where the wounds are made, and from what they are made.
The things by which wounds are made are by blows of stone, and cuts of sword and knife, or by spear or staff or arrow, or similar things.
or which are made according to the parts of the body, such as a wound that falls on the neck, or on the head, or on the chest, or on the belly, or on the liver, and similar members.
and I will tell you the cure of each wound, and I will begin with simple wounds of the head, because remembrance comes in its chapter.
I say that when a simple wound comes to the head and the bone is not broken, if you take care if it is from a stone or similar things, and the skin is entirely torn and the wound is large, and you doubt strongly of a hot abscess: if it does so soon bleed from the cephalic itself even if it comes little blood from the wound, and be the bleeding on the contrary of the wounded part;
and avoid the patient repletion of wine and large meats.
And if he does not want to bleed, then let his meat be less, and he shall drink no wine, nor eat any flesh.
and put on the wound, if an abscess comes there, a cotton moistened in rose oil only, or in spiced wine.
and if there is no abscess hot, then put on the wound, if it is fresh and all its blood is present, and it is not moved by air, powder, which I shall say a bit after;
and if the bone has been moved, then put some ointment on it, until it is healed.
And if the wound is large, like a sword cut and similar, and the edges cannot be brought together by tenting, then assemble them by suture, like I will say about wounds of the belly, with stitching.
If the wound is open to the bone, and hanging, and holds only by a piece, then cut it away; then cure the wound with medicine, and restore hard flesh in its place of skin. And command the patient to eat thick meats, like beef and cooked wheat, also as poultry, and similar things.
And if you find oneself or skin rot, and it does not reach to the bone, so cut out the rottenness all, and throw it away, then cure it.
And if there is an artery in the wound or vein, which without cutting, and it cannot be stopped by medicines, so seek the artery, and if you find it dislocated, tie it with a thread. And if that does not help, then cauterize it.
And if these wounds are small and simple, then the cure is light: and that you put in this powder which closes as though the sun had dried it.
And the manner of the powder is this: take frankincense one part; dragon's blood two parts; quicklime three parts, and grind the powder finely. And apply it to the wound, and hold it firmly in place, until it dries well and closes with all its blood.
And then cover it well, and leave it uncovered, unless it swells; for the medicine is not removed until it is healed.
And no times is this made with only quicklime, when one has neither frankincense nor dragon's blood, but that the fire has not cauterized the wound.
And if the wound has moved the flesh, even in its state, do not put on this powder.
But place on some ointments digested, or poultices of barley flour made with water and honey, as long as it weeps pus. Then treat with other treatments until it is healed.
And if the fracture of bone comes with the wound, and it is small, then extract it with subtle pincers;
and I shall tell you hereafter the fractures of the head.
of the wound of the neck
The wound comes to the neck and it is simple, if there is no difference between it and that of the head, but if the nerve of the neck or the artery is cut.
If it is the nerve, there is nothing else to do but leave it to heal, and put nothing restraining upon it, for it harms the nerves and causes them to retract. and do not put on the wound anything cold, because the substance of the nerves is cold, and the continuation of them is with the brain, which is the highest member;
but let it be the medicine warm, as calx washed in sweet water, and mixed with rose oil, and cupped water also in sweet water, and other stones of the mine according to this manner, and moist ointments.
And if the wound is large, then sew it up and bind it with bandages, and keep dressing it until it is healed.
And if the wounds are deep and it is broken and full of bowel, then pierce or lower them.
And if the artery is cut, and there comes bleeding, then close it, and stop it with a ligature, and cauterize as needed.
And if the spine of the throat is cut, or the guts, and the conduit is kept, so that the meat goes. Then sew the heart upon the neck of the throat, and do not touch the throat but put it back according to its natural form; and then he strains it carefully, and leaves it for several days, then cures it with ointments that are drying until it is healed.
And if the wound has made an impression in the bone, then you must [do something]. And if there are pieces of bone, you must treat them all as best you can, and those that you cannot get, leave them until the wound decays. and be careful and align the edges.
and if the wound is fresh, so powder on the powder that I have said. And if there are bones in the wound and there is a fistula, then treat it as I have said in my chapter.
of a wound from a lance or knife
If it is a wound from a lance or knife, and the wound is deep, then look if from the wound there is wind blowing where the patient breathes; know then that the wound is mortal;
and if it is not deep, and it is fresh with all its blood, then in the first hour do not put any powder on it, nor tie it up so that the blood does not clot. and return to the heart, and instruct the patient; but I put attractive ointment, and tie it twice a day;
and if you do not have ointment, then put old cotton in the wound to suck out the moisture,
and make the patient sleep on the wound for 3 days, or 4, or more; if there comes not a spasm, nor ill trembling of heart nor dragging of the arm; and when you see good arrangements, then you know that the wound is saved. Treat it then with tents and other dressings, as long as it heals;
And if it cannot heal, and work, know that there is a fistula; thus treat it as one should.
And if the wound is from a sword or knife incision, and it is simple, or worse or on the back, then treat it as before.
If it is large, suture it; and if it is small, treat it with powder; and if it is pressed into the bone, and has broken pieces, then sew the wound, and pull out the stray fragments. And if they are not dislodged, let the wound rot, so it will lighten the extraction
and for other wounds on other limbs, judgment is made as we have said.
of the stomach's displacement
The stomach's displacement is great and medium and small;
From the large wound no organ or nerve of the intestines ever leaps out, by which their intrusion is prevented.
and the suture is more troublesome, and sometimes worse the small wound than the large
for this reason one puts back the intestines in, if one does not put them back hot in hot. because the intestines swell immediately when they feel cold, so they enter less easily.
and for this reason the smaller wound is worse, for this reason one resets the intestine to its place as others do.
And know that the rupture of the belly is according to 4 manners:
The 2 common sutures occur in the suture of the belly,
and the sutures of other wounds of the body and 2 other special sutures are common to other wounds;
and nonetheless they are closer with the suture of the belly, and I will say one of each and declare.
I say that when the wound is small, and nothing of the intestine is outside. and the thing grazed is to put back, this is by one of the two manners: or for the smallness of the wound, as we have said. or because the intestine is swollen from the cold.
And when it is cold, warm it in such a manner: Soak a sponge or a soft cloth in tepid water only, or you cook it in water by adding and boiling  juniper and spice. and raise the intestine until the swelling is gone;
and sometimes do this by restraining it, and let it move only a little to deflate.
And when you see the swelling depart, moisten the intestine with water or wine and let them be cooked. because by this it is aligned the entrance to little things;
and if it cannot enter, then make an opening in the wound with the instrument with which hemorrhoids are cut.
and the first cure is to move the tail, that we should not cut it without great necessity there be;
and that is the tool for splitting it:
if it is cut within the curve and not outside, and see here the form:
And when the wound is enlarged, and the entrails are thrown out, if it is put back in place according to its natural form in its proper place, if you have the power, because it matters much.
When the wound is wide, and it is in the part below the belly, So it behooves you to make the patient lie on his back. And put his legs higher than his head; and if it is in the lower part of the belly,
and also if the rupture of the belly is in one of the two parts if you put attention to this that the sunken part be higher than the other;
and thus it is necessary to administer what I say in great and small wounds.
For small wounds, put that which has appeared to you,
Then hold in your hands i.e., minister pitiful who holds all the rupture with his hand, and bring together the lips; and that is the common manner of suturing,
and that is the common manner of suturing, and that you pierce a needle or more, according to the quantity and width of the wound, then leave from the head of the wound i.e., two of space, and there put a needle where it has i.e., a good strong thread; and pierce the two pieces of skin with the two pieces of sheepskin;
then the strain of a double thread wound around the needle of two parts then assemble the two ends of the wound together
and then leave one-two of space, and insert another needle; then tie the thread like you did with the first needle, and do not cease to do this according to what you need of needles, until all the wound is restrained;
and be the needles medium, between subtle and large, for the subtle needles cut all the flesh, and the too large ones cannot well enter: for this reason they must be made shorter
and it is not fitting to push the needles too far from the flesh and skin
so that they do not pierce and open the wound before the soldering;
and then blunt the points of the needles so that they do not prick the patient while sleeping and there I put tents or cloths at the head of the needles to keep them moving and let them stay until the wound is healed.
and this manner of suturing with needles is more advisable for small wounds because one or two needles are sufficient there
The second suture is common and it is that you assemble the two pieces of skin and the two pieces of flesh together with a needle or thread which has strength medium; and when you will have pierced these four pieces together,
and when you will have pierced these four pieces together, then withdraw the needle to the place where you began, in the manner one sews draperies;
and put space between each stitch the thickness of a man's finger.
this suture should be for the man
and I stitched a wound that a man had on his belly,
which was slashed with a knife, and the wound was more than a palm wide, and it was two palms of width across.
and the wound was in the middle of the belly. I returned the intestine to him after it had been  twenty-four hours.
and the wound was sutured for xv days, and I treated it, and it healed.
And the onlookers had judged that he would die, and it was a miracle;
and I did not treat him with ointment, because I was in one place where none could be found, nor any medicines; and put half a handful more on the wound of cotton twice a day, and washed it with water mixed with honey until it healed.
Or I will tell you the two proper ways of stitching:
Take the needle and thrust it from the outside part to the inside;
when it has pierced the middle of right to right, then lay the head upon the siphon or sewing or where you have thrust the needle.
and make it pierce from the other side from the inside to the outside;
And the understanding of this suture is that you sew as the furrier does furs, and that you leave once the thread on one side, and take it on the other, as long as the suture is entirely completed.
The second manner of suturing, which Galens states properly,
is like how any one joins the two parts together naturally, and apply one end of the stick to each other end, in such a manner:
Insert a needle or piece of wood near the root, and have him feel only that. and leave the two ends of the stick; then turn the needle, and have him feel from the outer part to the inner part, as the two bones of the shoulder
then make each one be measured from the outer part until the inner one, in two other bones of the shoulder that are on the opposite side
and this is the most common and usual way of suturing.
The Gauls call this word thus, and no one testifies to it.
one must sew the belly with two needles, or there is thread in each
and one must insert one needle on one side, and the other on the other, in the manner of those who sew corsets;
and know that when the rupture is in the middle of the belly, it is the stitching more dangerous than the other parts of the belly.
The judgments of the wound are such as the judgments of other wounds.
and it is that when you find the wound fresh with all its blood, then as the pain has moved then put back the intestines and the gut; then put on top of it powdered charcoal powder
then put back the intestines and the gut; then put on top of it powdered charcoal powder and if the pain has moved, then put on top of it any ointment that is present, as long as the wound bleeds; and tighten the thread, and weld together the fascia, and the periosteum; then treat the wound as with others, until it is healed.
and if you lack medicines, place on it, as soon as it begins to fester, old cotton. and change it two times a day until it is healed.
Because you do not need other medicine in several dispositions when the wounds are simple;
and if you doubt that the wound does not make community with principal members; then it is fitting that you moisten the linen lightly in oil of temperate heat, or in rose oil, and place it around the edges, and beneath the buttocks;
and if he feels pain or rot in the bowels, and this happens often if enemas of black wine help, and similarly if the rot comes to the intestine;
and you pierce within it, and know that when it is the large intestine, it is easier to heal than the small one.
The intestine which is called "jejunum" cannot heal when it is rotten, And this is because of the position of the veins that are, and for the subtlety of the whole body, and the proximity of its nature to the nerves.
And if the worm jumps from the wound, put it back in as if it were an intestine, while it is fresh;
and if it is old and has turned to worms or black, then you must tie the place that is black, so that bleeding does not come from it. for there are veins and arteries there;
then cut what is between the joint, and put the two heads during from the part below the wound until outside to align the extraction when the bones fall, and the wound bows.
of the rupture of the boil
When the intestine is round, and the wound is small, if one can restore it in some men
because I saw that a man was struck or pierced in the belly by a lance;
and the wound was on the right side of the stomach, and it became infected and turned into a fistula, and through it he expelled excrement and flatulence;
I set the cure according to what I could, and did not cease to work on it until it was healed, and the bones joined.
And when I saw it join, I doubted that the patient would be unwell in his belly; and there was no ill, but he remained in better dispositions, and eating and drinking;
and said any experimenter that when he has a small wound in the intestine, it should be bound in such a manner: Take fresh thread with large stitches, then assemble the lips of the wound and when the thread has covered the mouth, place it on top of the two lips,
Then put another bandage after it in the same manner as before, until the wound is completely covered.
and cover the wound. If this chief [refers to a medical tool] is burned inside the intestine, and no harm comes to the patient,
and if it can be bound to the intestine with a fine thread that is cut from the intestine of an animal,
in such manner: take the head of this thread of intestine that is very cleaned, and then tie to the head of this thread one thread of fine linen twisted, then put the thread in the needle, and sew the intestine, and stitch it in the rupture;
and this manner of sewing of fringes is not worse than according to the way of hope and trust;
and if the wound is great and wide, even when it is in one of the intestines, there is nothing else needed, except for subtlety.
of fistula or wherever it may be Know that every wound or abscess, when it opens up, is universally called "fistula," and also when she is raised and bent back.
And a fistula is according to truth a knotted false swelling hard and white, where one does not feel pain, and is also raised like the feathers of a bird;
and sometimes clear and bright in jump, and other times thick; Some times much, and other times enough;
and I have spoken of it in the division of wounds, that any wound that is not healed, and there is no flesh, it is only due to one of the eight causes:
that is to say, by the smallness of blood or flesh; or because of its wickedness; or because within it there is hard flesh and on the lips that do not allow flesh to grow; where there is too much swelling; or the  flesh is rotten and the material is of poor quality; When the medicine is not good in the cure. Or because the corruption is a manner of pestilence; or because the property in the region is late digestion and late health, and swollen by nature; or there are veins or bones:
and I have already shown all these causes, and signs, and cures of medicine in the division.
It is necessary that I make you know the cure for fistula which is done by the work of hands.
Know that fistula occurs in all parts of the body; for there are fistulas that come from large veins, and arteries, and nerves, or to the spleen, or to the intestine, or to the bladder, or to any of the ribs or to the spine of the back, or to any joint of the hands or feet;
And all fistulas that are of this kind are of grave healing, and there is only labor, and ignorance;
and if there is any fistula that does not come to the place I have said, and you have faith in the cure, and if you see it is known, then take a tent of linen or iron, if the fistula is straight, if the other way around;
and if the fistula is crooked, then circle it with a fine tent of wool; for wool can be molded and follow the curvature;
and if the fistula is pierced with hands and you cannot well search it with probes, then clysterize it by one of the openings,
for the moisture goes from one opening to another and cleanses it;
then carefully feel with your power, so that you know if there is bone or nerve and whether it is closed completely;
and ask the patient well about the pain he feels when pressing his hand, and where he feels it.
and when you will know truly the place where it is, and if it is far from a joint, or a nerve, or an artery, or a vein, or in any of the places that I have told you, if the cut according to what I have told you,
or in any of the places that I have told you, if the cut according to what I have told you, and has removed the fracture and the corrupted matter that is within; and then the care until it is healed,
and if the fistula is deep from right place, then you must cut it deeper, as much as you can, then put moist sponges in medicine ague, and push them to the top of the fistula,
then put moist sponges in medicine ague, and push them to the top of the fistula, as long as the medicine corrodes the excess that is at the bottom;
and then he puts on ointment strengthening sinew, until it is sound
And if it is not sound by this, then cauterize it as we have said.
and if the bone is rotten from the fistula, then cut it away. If a vein or nerve strikes or touches principal members as we have said;
and if the bone is uncovered, and there is corruption and blackness, then let the king cleanse as long as all the corruption is removed. then cure the flesh wounds until it is healed.
and if it is not healed, and returns bowed as before, know that you have not gone all the way yet.
if you uncover and want as long as you are at the bottom, and remove all the corruption, then restore its place;
and if it is thus healed, that's well. If this does not happen, know that the corruption is too deep, that you cannot succeed there; if there is no other thing than to leave to nature;
and if there is a small bone corrupted, and you can draw it out with pliers, if the extraction with a suitable instrument  is done
and if there are many bones, draw them all out together, and leave none behind.
and if moisture opposes you, and there is no error or fear, if you cop and moisture and flesh, and deliver the bones.
And if you cannot remove them in an hour, then put on the wound something preventing rot, and leave it until the flesh is rotten around the bones,
and therefore they will have more easily the bones;
and if it is a large bone, like of the leg or thigh, if you remove only the corruption as long as the blackness is totally removed, then restore the wound;
and if there is a great part of corruption, and comes up to the flesh of the bone; if it is necessary to be clean and cover everything up to the corruption, and then cure it until it is healed;
and I will tell you of a fistula that happened to one man in his leg, so that you may take it as an example and help in your work.
There was one young man around thirty years old, who had pain in his leg from a cause that came from within the body,
as long as the materials came to the leg, and was swollen with a large abscess, and had no external cause to open;
but the surgeon by his foolishness opened it so much that the abscess opened, and in corrupting a lot of matter, it became a fistula, and there came out much pus that all reeked and was moist from the body;
and many a miracle is cured within  two years, and there is no sage in the art of hands
as long as I was called upon, and saw his leg and the medicines with which he was treated, and those that were running through the cuts to great length; and becoming red the body of the young man, and had a citrine color.
I placed a tent in one of these holes, and then I searched all the holes.
and found that some came against each other from all parts of the leg.
I then pried it open and dug into one of the holes until I uncovered a part of the bone, and found it rotten and pierced, and the corruption came all the way to the bone inside.
I was that one who appeared to me of the corrupted bone, and I thought that there was no other corruption except that which I removed;
and began to restore the wound with medicinal ointments for a long time, and it could not heal;
and then I began again, and discovered the bone as before,
and found the corruption continued in the bone, and I removed it, and then I removed it again, and I tried to solder the place;
but I could not reach as far as one palm of the bone, and the vein was drawn to its full extent. then I restored him with medicines; and he was healed and soundly joined together.
and it was no longer necessary to begin the work except for the weakness of the patient, who could not endure it. and because of the fear of death that I had for him. For often blood evacuation happened, but he was made whole entirely.
For often blood evacuation happened, but he was made whole entirely. and there grew in the place of the bone a hard cartilage, and he was of good disposition and had no nuisance nor contrary from all or to all, neither in walking nor coming.
and extend the head so that you pull the corrupted flesh down. and uncover the skin in the place where you want to see that it does not bleach the skin; and put one coal or a board under the bone to cover the corrupted flesh; And it is necessary to be as careful as one can see and feel the corruption, and to be even more careful other times.
And if the bone is corrupted, and does not open, and the corruption is in the middle or in one part, then uncover all the flesh; then put one coal under,
and then there is the corruption from one part to another, and be the silk thread long of the corruption that is to say, as we have said;
and if the corruption is in the joint, cut the corrupted joint, and tie the bone on which it lies from the other side;
and if the corruption is in the continuation of the two joints, there is nothing else to be cut;
and if the corruption is in the finger of the hand or the finger of the foot, then it is a very serious thing, but nonetheless, it is necessary that you inquire about that corrosion, how it opens to you. and purify it in all the ways that you can, but that the vein or nerve do not make you contrary.
and know that the instruments and threads for covering these bones are many, according to the arrangement of the bones and the appearance of each one. and their thickness and fineness, and their size and smallness, and their hardness; And for this reason, it is necessary to prepare each kind of work with its instrument.
and know that the work will show you the instrument which you will need, according to the knowledge of this art, and the testimony of the ways of the illnesses; so consider the instrument which you need according to what is fitting.
of fire The shoulder can be dislocated due to internal or external causes.
and when you will have treated that corrosion by the use of medicines, and they do not benefit then it is necessary to cover that limb up to where the corrosion comes from, so that the patient escapes by this from death, or by the malice, which is greater, of the fault of the limb;
so that the patient escapes by this from death, or by the malice, which is greater, of the fault of the limb; and the signs are that the limb becomes black, so that it seems to be burned by fire. and then after the blackness, then goes that corrosion of limb from limb, and takes hold throughout the whole body; if you hasten to cover it,
and if it is by the percussion of some venomous beasts, such as scorpions of the sea and viper and similar.
if the corrosion is at the head of the thigh, so cut it, and do not give him any space to come up to the hand.
And if it comes up to the hand, so cut at the joint, so that the corrosion does not come up to the arm.
And if it comes to the arm, so cut it at the elbow; and if it passes the elbow, it is death. and there is no worth of administering forces other than the quantity of its virtue;
and thus entirely do as when the corruption comes or foot; if it comes in the first joint, so after the other joint;
and if it comes on the foot, so cut all of the foot; and if it goes up into the leg, so cut at the joint of the knee;
and if it comes from above the knee, there is no other remedy but to let the patient die.
And the manner of covering or soothing the limb is that you bind it above and below, and extend some ministers one on the lower binding, and others ministers the other binding above, and you should sever the flesh which is between the two bindings to one span wide, so that the bone is uncovered;
then the coping or soiling, and put on each side one drapery of linen, so that the soiling does not touch the healthy place. and bring to the patient another lesion and abscess chaus.
And if bleeding occurs when you work, then cauterize the place carefully. or you put on any powders restraining; then return to your medicine until it is completed,
then tie the limb with a suitable bandage, and treat it until it is healed.
and I will tell you that it happened to one man in his foot:
He had a blackening that looked burned by fire,
and that corruption first came in the heel of his foot, until it encompassed the whole foot;
and when the man saw the corrosion, he tried to cover his foot, and was healed;
and long time after he returned the corrosion on two of his hand, and he came to me,
and I put upon him things  receptive after the purification of the body, and could not cease the corrosions;
and he wished that I would cut off his hand, and I did not want to, because I had hope of repelling the matter; and also fear if he cuts his hand, that he will not die, for the virtue of the man was weak; and he despaired of all, and returned to his land, and took courage to cover his hand, and became healthy;
and I have set this tale down for this reason, that if one has need of it, they may do something similar.
Sometimes an abscess comes to its fleshy place, and remains so long that it causes great gathering of bowels; and then bursts and pierces, and the bowels jump out, and remain in their place, like a vessel. And the skin that is above is as fine as one sheet of delicate linen; and it does not reach down to the bone, nor to the nerve, and such a disease is called "clean";
but if it is so long that it comes to the bone and pierces through it, then it is called a "fistula";
and the treatment for this is that you cut all around the skin, and also when it is thin, like a little cloth; and does not become infected because of its corruption.
And if you have faith that the skin is hard, and the corruption is not yet complete, and the skin is thick with flesh, then treat it with this enema:
look if the breasts are large, and the belly that contains them is of foul odor, then administer a clyster made with Egyptian medicine, which is prepared as follows: Take thus, and oil, and litharge, equally, and put to cook in one vessel over the fire, until the medicine is red and becomes as thick as honey;
and then take of this according to your need, and make it in water and honey, and in clysters the womb, and extract the pus; and let the medicine remain in for 2 hours, then remove it by pressing.
do this many times, until the breast is defined, and the fear is removed;
and never once is it cleansed with water of ashes when this medicine isn't present, and is that you take ashes from grapevine wood, and pour water on top,
then the colure, and in a clister, as long as you know that the breast is well-closed.
and if the patient cannot bear it, neither Egyptian medicine nor the water of ashes, then clysterize with water and honey or where there is a piece of litharge ground. or you clysterize him with honey and sweet wine, that the honey may have the property of purifying and washing, and wine makes blood red;
and when you have done this, and you have faith that the breasts are well purified, if the clyster of those makes flesh grow in them,
and is that you prepare a plaster diaphinct [thin and transparent], and make it with rose oil and wine; or you cleanse it with some medicines and unguents, about which I have spoken of the properties or treating ointments;
and if the opening from the breast is small, and the tube of the enema cannot enter there, if you enlarge it with an iron a bit, and place inside a tent of Egyptian ointment, or basil ointment, until it is enlarged;
and if the wound is too wide, so the cloth and it leaves only as much .i. there where the clyster can enter
and if the opening that protrudes is above, so the cup or lower there than it is. For when the bowel is in full form, so do not let enter flesh; and if you cannot cover the breast below as you see. if it is arranged in such a manner that the bowel goes to the lowest place that it is.
and if you cannot cover the breast below as you want, if it is arranged in such a manner: that the bowel goes lightly downwards, and nothing of the bowel remains; and take medicines consolidating to put upon the chest,
and place over it one linen cloth that covers the whole chest; then make a strong bandage on top of the wound of the chest,  one finger wider than the first, then place upon it another cloth smeared with ointment according to the quantity of the wound, and place it on the chest hole to align the rib, and do not remove the great curtain outside until after many days once.
and he who is out of the chest hole, often removed to remove the rib, and know that which runs from the rib, if it is venom or pus or enough, or digestible, or indigestible;
and take care if the patient feels pain or no, and if there is an abscess or not,
and when your medicine has spread in such a manner and you see nature rising above the chest wound, if you know that the chest will close quickly, and approach health;
and then unbind it in the morning, or the third day, and when you unbind the wound, if you change one other bandage, and renew the ointment.
And if the breast lies bowed indigested after many days, know that the breast does not heal well. And if subtle venoms cut after a long time, so do not despair of health.
For health approaches. For there are men whose  healing in their wounds is slow, and some who do the opposite.
And if it is bowed and indigested from the breast after many days, know that the breast does not heal well;
and if the breast is late to heal, and is swollen, then apply drying medicines moist in substance and dry in virtue, as for example diaphinit ointment, because it contains a great part of vitriol, and that is the last medicine;
take diaphinit ointment, and make it with rose oil, and the rose of old wine equal in substance;
then mix it and use it; and the same thing, cooked honey mixed into it, when pain has been eliminated
and you take myrrh and aloe and incense, and grind it, and powder it on honey when it is over the fire; and then you smear it with one cloth, and place it upon the chest, and once administered you apply an elongated licorice and roots of celestial lilies, which is also as flour of wormwood and centaury.
and roots of celestial lilies, which is also as flour of wormwood and centaury. and in use of simples or composites: grind them, and make it into powder, and put on the honey that I said, and in use; and if the cure is prolonged, and is not cured by this cure,
and if the cure is prolonged, and is not cured by this cure, then know that the corruption has entered deep, and makes impression in the bone, or the hard members, or the limbs; if the cure of fistula, as we have said before.
of the abscess of the joint
Pustule is an abscess that arises below the joint of the hand's finger or in the foot, or by chance it arises in other places
and when it is neglected and one doesn't take care of it, then it becomes  one abscess and it is stretched and laid down as long as it stretches the root of the bone, and perhaps all of it;
And the corrosion comes to the bone, as long as there is a painful throbbing pain, and the head of the joint is double its size, and the color is livid.
When you treat it as we have said in the division, and the treatment does not help; then it is necessary that you cut with iron all the superfluousness which is hanging from the bone; then cauterize the wound after. The cautery is a great help if the bone is healthy and the joint is healthy;
and if the joint follows the flesh inwards, and begins to prick, and the white part then it is necessary that you place a cloth under the joint that pricks the flesh and the top part, and cut this carefully and lightly and put on the rest of the medicine hot and corrosive to remove all.
And if the corruption is in the bone, then cut into it and treat it thoroughly, because as long as the bone is corrupted, it cannot heal.
and if you see the two do corrupt, so cut it in one of us as it is said before then cure it until it is healed;
and if it is broken and swollen, and he feels great pain, then you must first heal it. then cut the angle of the spatula sharp by cutting across from above,
and guard that the hip does not come up to the bone which is below the angle, for the patient would feel too great pain;
and if it happens, put something on top that soothes.
The two joints which are born in the hands of some men by chance are all fleshy, And by chance there are some where there are bones, and sometimes there is a nail.
And none of them are born at the root of the joint, where the birth is in no one of us two. Those who are born in any of our two do not move. And those who are born at the joint of the two, by chance may move;
The waist of one who is fleshy is light, in such a manner: cut it at its root with a wide spatula.
He who is born in the root of the joint, there is grievous to cure; so keep it from being cut.
In one who is born or must be at the back of the buttock, it is necessary that you first cut the flesh around until the bone, then set the bone with a suitable bandage to it, then treat it until it is healed.
The sores that come to the two assemblies come by birth, or by welding of a wound, or by burn of fire, or by similar things.
If it is necessary that you set that sore, so that the parts rejoin according to their natural forms; then put between two tents or cloths moistened in rose oil, so that it does not close up; or you put between two pieces of fine lead, until the bones are united, as is fitting.
If the soldering comes to none of its two with the palm, then cover that soldering as is fitting.
Of evils
Veins are large and full of melancholic superfluities, that come into more members of the body;
and more often happens in legs of those who go on foot and who work and carry, than in others.
Therefore it is fitting that you administer to him once purging of mucus, and then the salve of the basilisk.
The cure with iron is according to .ij. manners: one is when they cut open and draw out the black blood; and the other manner is that you open up the vein and draw it entirely out.
The waist is treated in this manner: first raise the leg with very hot water, so that the large joint becomes soft. Then restrain the leg of the patient from above the hip to the part below the knee; then cut open a vein in one place, or in two or in three, with a wide incision,
then lift and draw out the black blood with your hand, from one end to the other, as much blood as the patient's strength allows.
and then the boil, and command him to bathe in black poultice.
And restart the evacuation and bloodletting when the veins are full, and it harms the patient.
The raising of the leg from the sick person is according to this manner: raise the leg of the sick person, if there are many hairs, then put him in a bath, and raise the leg with hot water until it becomes red, and the veins swell;
and if you have no basin, heat it over the fire, and then apply it to the vein where it is long from the arm to the knee, or in the part below to the ankle;
then work the skin with the knife, and scrape the vein from each side, until it appears as you can feel it;
and you see it red and black, and when it enters the skin, it looks like a white cord;
then push the end below, until it is lifted from the skin, and then cut it lightly with the knife;
then the cut in one other place above three fingers; then scrape the skin above the vein until it appears then raise the vein to the source, like you have done, and apply it to another incision, like you have done first;
then cut another size, or more if you need them, then raise the vein, and cut at the two-finger length,
then trace and lift it up to the second size; then extract it size by size until it is entirely free, then cut it;
and if you cannot draw it out and raise it up, then put a needle through the whole thing, and tie it and draw it out, and put it below one rib, and turn your hand from one side to the other, as long as it comes out; and keep it so that it does not break, because if it breaks, then one cannot draw it out or raise it, and it causes great pain to the patient;
and when you have drawn it out completely, put on top of the wound a woolen cloth soaked in wine and rose oil; and keep it covered until it is healed.
And if the bone is contracted and twisted and wrapped together, and it is not straight, as we have said, if it is necessary that you cut it crookedly, but do not cover it; and treat it as we have said before.
if it is necessary that you cut it crookedly, but do not cover it; and treat it as we have said before. The shape of the iron with which you cut the bone is curved, and does not cut, so that it does not cut the vein;
and is of a thick curve, because if it were subtle, it would cut the vein, but be thick as we have said, and here is the shape:
Of the civil vein
This vein is found in legs, in hot parts where it does not give birth to herbs nor tree, and in earth where there is no moisture.
And by chance it is born elsewhere than in legs, and this happens because of the rot that comes from under the skin,
as it comes from within the body of serpents and worms,  growing between skin and flesh.
And if the signs of the beginning of this vein are that there comes in the leg a very great inflammation, then the veins change, and the vein begins to burst forth, like the root of a plant.
When the shoulder opens, then you must wrap around it a piece of plank from one and a half to two inches, and knot,
and leave the plank on the leg, and all times that it aches in the fire, then wrap around the plank, and knot it; And if it is too long, cut a part of it, and wrap the remaining part, and do not cut it at its root, until it is all emerged. For if you cut it, it will go back into the flesh, and cause an abscess and rot there, and a bad illness.
Therefore for that reason it is necessary that it be treated carefully and bit by bit until the head, and nothing of it remains in the flesh.
And it sometimes happens this vein when it is treated to be .v. palms long, or .x., and one man came to me, who had a bone that was 10 palms long, and when you cut it, it shoots out 1 spear or thrusts, and the pierces to the bottom
so that all of it exits; and empty the material which is inside, and administer to the place medicines preventing rotting any day, then cure it like abscesses.
And no times at this vein mains veins, and also when it opens in the joint of the foot, or foot, and there comes much blood, and from which it jumps veins; cure it therefore as we have said before.
Of worms that are born between skin and flesh
This disease is called in our land "ox's malady", because it often happens to oxen,
and is a small worm that is born between skin and flesh, and goes throughout the body going up and down, and one feels it well as it moves from limb to limb, until it reaches the skin where it goes, and leaps forth;
and it is caused by rotting of some humors, such as come serpents and worms and ascaritides in the belly.
and one doubts its evil, because when it goes through the body, and it ascends to the head, and it comes to the eye. by chance enters, and destroys the eye; and this happens many times.
When you see it being cured and drained, there is nothing to be feared but when it goes:
so then it is necessary that you bind the place above and below with a strong linen very tightly
then cut on top of it and bring out the thread, and if the arrow is buried deep in the flesh, and you don't find it then cauterize it with fire until it dies.
and the greatest harm that it can do is that it corrupts the eye, as we have said;
and if you see it coming or near the eye, hold under it the eyebrow shape, then cut above and the treat further.
And it is necessary to use the patient of purification of body of medicines solutives for the bad humors corrupted.
and if there are rotten meats preventing putrefaction.
Of the pain that comes from windiness This illness is called "vakirir" in our land, and it is a pain that comes in certain limbs. and then moves from limb to limb; and I have seen what I tell you.
I was called to a sick woman, and she uncovered her arm, and I saw a small swelling in the vein of the arm;
and just a little after, I saw it rise as if a worm to the shoulder, Sooner than anything else, as quickly as living silver when it departs from its place;
The pain departs from that place and goes into the shoulder.
And then a little while after it spreads throughout the body, until it reaches the other arm;
then she told me that it returned to its original place around her body, as I saw it.
I marveled greatly how she moved thus from limb to limb, for I never wanted this sickness in this manner. However, I had seen many that well moved pain from one place to another, but I had not seen it like this, as I saw it in the woman;
and I thought to myself that it was because the woman had a dry body, and veins uncovered, and because of this appears that constraint of windiness;
and do not appear according to this reason to those who are delicate and have moist bodies and veins full.
And when you see curing this disease, and the patient feels that pain, if it appears to you as we have said, if the  lump above and below evenly, and then cut until that windiness constraint in its place has disappeared; And cauterize the place; and if you do not see it with your eyes,
if you treat this by those who expel wind, such as foul pills, and pills of serpent, and similar others.
Of arrows
Arrows are diverse, according to their appearances and according to the places in the body where they lie.
The diversity of them is that some have large points, and small, and hairy, and soldered. and some which have two angles, and those which have tongues, and those which have pieces; and those which fall in any member if they fall in two ways: either in the principal member it falls,
such as brain, heart, liver, stomach, lungs, intestines, bladder, and similar members. When it falls therefore in any place of these limbs, and the sign of death, which I shall tell you afterwards, appear to you: if it is necessary that you take care of the extraction of this arrow, because death comes afterwards in many dispositions; and when this bad sign does not appear to you, and the arrow is not deeply embedded, then treat it, and care for the wound.
And the sign of the brain when the arrow falls and pierces the bone, and leaps the dura mater which is above the brain, is when there is scotomia and sode and esvertin and redness in the eyes, and inflammation and redness of the tongue, and spasm and confusion of understanding, and vomiting of bile. and perhaps it is without fever of the nostrils, or of the ears; and perhaps he loses speech and voice; and leaps from the wound moisture white seeming to pus, and leaps also like burning of flesh;
and if this sign appears to you, then hold back from the cure, and treat the arrow if it is not yet inside;
The sign of the seventh when it falls or heart, are that it is near the left breast, and it feels as if it were tied in something hard, not empty. and by chance the seventh moves like the hand, and in short black blood, and comes coldness and cold sweat, and syncope: know then without doubt that death approaches.
And the sign of the seventh that never moves is that without pains, foam leaps from the wound, and the throat swells, and the patient turns blue, and gasps loudly and seeks cold air.
And if the arrow falls into the covering of the hip, it is near the ribs; and throws great pain and great pain and sighing; and they move all the members of the shoulders.
And if the arrow falls into the stomach, perhaps it leaps from the wound any thing indigestible flesh.
And if the arrow falls into the belly, and leaps no point of straw through the intestine rout, it has no hope in the cure, nor in the extraction of the arrow.
And if the arrow falls into the bladder, and the urine leaps out and comes outward, and the patient feels great pain: know that the wound is mortal.
The other member, such as the arm and neck and throat and shoulder and auxiliary and spine of the back and hip and legs, and the similar members, are safe according to more dispostitions. When the arrow is in the nerve or artery, and it is not venomous, as I will tell you that it happened to me, for that reason that you do otherwise.
It happened to one man with an arrow lodged or fell into the root of the nose: I tried it, and pulled it out from the other side below the fat of the ear, and was healed without any trouble.
And treat one wound with an arrow that fell in the fat of the eye under the eyelid and the arrow was positioned, and one could only reach its tip towards the shaft and the arrow was large as a Turkish bow, with one and a half light iron without ears; the wound was sound, and no bad accidents befell him.
And treat an arrow from the throat of a Christian, and the arrow was Arabic with ears:
I shaved the bristles, and subtly so that I tricked him, and he was healed among Christians.
And tricked an arrow into a man, who it was in his back or belly, and thought that he would die.
and then when he had passed thirty days, he did not change his condition; I cut above the arrow, and I enwrapped it, and I drew it out, and there was no bad accident.
And if you see a man who has an arrow shot or through his back, and the wound was sewn up above;
and the arrow remains inside him, and does not change its natural position, nor feels any discomfort in any of its natural works.
And see another man, to whom an arrow was shot into his face, and the wound was sewn up;
and endures thus suffering great pain; and many other similar things.
And treat an arrow in the head of Prince the king, who it was stuck in his middle and was slightly leaning toward the right side; and the arrow was completely retracted
I was called to treat it after three days had passed. I found the wound very tight.
I took it with a whole fine tent, and did not feel it at all. And he felt pricking and pain below his right ear. I thought that it was from the tip of the arrow
I put on its place a plaster atramentous and digestive, because the lesion did not swell; and appeared to me the tracks of the arrow.
and appeared to me the tracks of the arrow. I laid the plaster on it for some days, and closed up the wound directly, and kept the patient there a long time.
until he felt the arrow i.e., one day inside his flesh; and he told me this. I put on the wound a corrosive medicine for some days, until it was open.
and feel the head of the arrow which hardens in place; then I adjusted it in the opening of the wound with that sharp medicine, until the head of the arrow appeared visibly to me;
and pierced well the extremities for four months;
and then widened so the wound that I put tweezers in it, and mine on one side and the other, and it could not exit;
Therefore, do not cease to subtlety and devise ways of instruments, until I took one day pliers well made according to what its form will come at the end of this chapter, as long as I treated it and restored the wound.
And the wise judge that the cartilage of the nose cannot be restored: I restored it then, and the wound was closed, and the patient was healed entirely.
I have said to you the quality of the extraction of some arrows, so that you put your care on those that I do not say, because the books cannot take in everything;
but the wise masters compare well only on a few things, and those that are present and lacking find new works, and new instruments, for the arrangement of strange things which happen in this art.
I say that arrows are not removed from limbs where they are lodged except according to two ways: or by the place where they enter, or by another side;
and that which must be removed by the place where it enters is an arrow that has entered into the flesh, and must not be removed at any other time.
And if it cannot be removed now, then let it remain until the flesh is healed and the opening closes;
and also if it is fixed in the bone, and it cannot move, leave it like that for some days, and move it every day.
and then if it does not jump out, pierce around it to all i.e., the forest fine, as long as the surrounding tissues are spread wide open, and then treat it.
And if the arrow is returned to its place in the body so that one cannot see it, then search all around. and if you feel it, treat it with no suitable instrument;
and if you cannot because of the narrowness of the wound, and the depth of the arrow, and there are no bones or nerves or veins, then widen the wound as much as possible. and treat the arrow if you can, and if it has ears at its base where it holds
and treat the arrow if you can, and if it has ears at its base where it holds if remove the bone that is embedded in two parts as much as you can and then break or bend the ears of the arrow, as much as you can draw it out;
and then break or bend the ears of the arrow, as much as you can draw it out; and do it carefully so that you don't break the arrow, but rather draw it out more easily.
And if you cannot at one time, then let it stay until the place is healed, then treat it, for the extraction hurts. And if the flow of blood opposes you, then administer what we have said in the treatment chapter.
and guard yourself from cutting into the nerve and vein, and put  everything you can to remove the arrow without danger.
Whether quickly or slowly, whether firmly or gently; and put the patient according to the form that he was in when the arrow struck him. because this is the greatest help that it is, and if you cannot, place it according to what the signs show you.
The arrow that comes from another part, or where it does not appear anything of it, or the skin is swollen in the place if one sees it or feels it apparently:
Cut then above, as long as the pliers can take hold, and then extract it: if it jumps out now.
And if it is held in the bone, then turn your hand roundly, until it enters the bone, and enlarge the bone, then extract it.
And if it cannot move out, leave it there still, and then begin the extraction again until it moves out.
and if the arrow shaft is in it, pull it out with all your strength.
and if the shaft has fallen, and you see to administer pressure, then administer one instrument which is pointed, so that the point of the arrow enters into the opening of the instrument, and then pull it out.
And if the arrow is lodged, thrust one instrument with a point entering it, to aid extraction.
And if the arrow is encircled, then it is necessary that you cut all the flesh around where the venom is, if you can. then treat the wound as is fitting.
And if the arrow strikes in the leg or abdomen or bladder or ribs and is close (to the surface), and you can cut into it, then cut.
and keep yourself from covering the vein and the nerve, and then extract it, and then sew the wound, if it is necessary; and treat it until it is healed.
The form of the pliers that one treats arrows with are similar to an eye's beak, and see here the form:
And there are many ways: large, medium, and small, according to the quantity of the arrow.
of the veins of the common body There are thirty-one veins from which one heals, of which there are sixteen at the head.
That is to say: two bats that are after the ears, which are called the two "herbesch"; and the two arteries that are in the two temples appearing; and two veins that are in the two tear ducts of the two eyes, which are called "aspirates"; and the vein that is at the forehead; and the vein that is at the top of the nose; and the two veins that are on the neck; and the two veins that are in the lips above the mouth, and these are the veins called "augeherich"; and two veins that are under the tongue.
The veins which are commonly used are five in each arm:
One is the cephalic vein, and it is on the inside of the arm, and the common people call it “vein of the head”; And the middle one is called “median”, and it is composed of the cephalic and the basilica. And the common people call it “vein of the heart”; and the basilica is on the outside of the arm, and the common people call it "vein of the belly," and is on the hollow and is the one that is opened, which clearly appears on the pouch.
And the sap vein is the vein between the little finger and the ring finger, and it has two veins;
and in the leg and where the foot is there are three veins: one is below the curve of the pouch of the left side; and the second saphenous vein which is at the ankle of the right side; and the vein which is called "nevus," that is in the ankle of the other side.
and in the other leg there are three veins below those.
The vein of the veins that are after the ears so helps with old catarrhs, and migraines; and the qualities of the vein, as I tell you, and is that you raise the head of the patient,
and the qualities of the vein, as I tell you, and is that you raise the head of the patient, and rub the place where the veins are with a rough cloth; then tighten the patient's neck with a vise until the two veins appear behind the ears in two lengths depending on the head: who then to your back, and where you feel the pulse below your back, reign it in;
then take the lancet and insert it beneath the vein to the bone, then lift your hand all along the vein upwards, and scrape and the skin and the vein well two times to traverse, and make blood flow as much as you see.
then restrain and bind it, until it is healed.
and I have already said about incision and cautery in the first book.
The  blood letting of the two arteries that are in the two temples, is good for ancient migraine, and suddenly, and habitual squinting, and on the body of sharp tears to the eyes;
and the qualities of the vein are so as I say: and that the patient stretches his neck so that the two veins appear clearly; and feel the pulses below your back, and then he will know which one to open;
Then lightly place your finger on the vein above your right index finger, and thrust the lance underneath. And lightly raise the vein above, and cover it, as you have done with two other veins, and make a cut of blood according to your need;
Then unbind the patient, and place your hand on the vein for an hour, then put cotton on top;
And then form a bandage, and leave it until it is healed; and we have spoken about their covering and extraction, as the beginning of this book.
The bloodletting of the vein of the forehead is worth as much as the bloodletting of the cephalic for illnesses of the face ancient, and to migraine, and to redness.
and the qualities are that the patient strains their neck by twisting, until the vein appears; then take the instrument which is called "fossor", whose shape is:
And place the point on the vein, and steady it with your hand, or something else, and let the blood flow according to the quantity that you see. Then bind the patient's neck, and tie the vein until it is healed and never once work with a wide flame.
However, it is not proper for the flames to be too large; and the healing across, because the bone is close, and by chance breaks the flames when they are subtle.
The healing of the two veins that are in two tear ducts helps the eyes, and the beard, and the redness, and the oriflamme in the eye, and illnesses of the face;
and the qualities of their healing are that the patient strains his neck by twisting with a rope, as before;
then make it sound, and whether it is healed through the traversing, one part of the long of the flame one part wide, because there is no flesh.
And if the flames are subtle, by chance it breaks; then make correction of the blood, as much as you have need, and then tie on cloth, and tie it well.
The  opening of the vein of the needs is good for fever, and for snake bites, and for diseases of the face such as migraine and redness that comes in the face, and even when it is old.
And the qualities of the vein are such that the patient constricts his neck, then strains his nose to your left hand And takes a subtle long flame, and inserts it between the two nostrils in the space. For the vein does not open well then, and the blood will now begin to flow;
And do not allow it to go too far in depth, and make blood flow according to your need, then tie it up for the night because it is very quickly restored;
The blood of the two reeds helps in the treatment of burns, and at the beginning of leprosy, and many diseases, and scabies, and erosion, and herpes, and boils.
and the qualities of the blood are that the patient extracts his neck under both, as we have said. and let the master be standing above the head of the patient, and the patient sitting on one seat,
then heal the vein long a little widely, then treat of blood moderately, or as much as is necessary;
then redo the other side in the other vein, then untie the linen, and strain all the veins moderately, so that the patient does not strangle; and leave it until morning, so that the wound is healed.
Of healing the veins The blood of the veins of the lips above helps to heal in the mouth, and corruption of gums, and splits of lips, and wounds and sores.
And the qualities of the blood is to make the patient sit before you, and restrain his neck as I have said; then turn the lip, and look at the two veins, one on the right lip and the other on the left, and you will recognize them by those that are black, and by those that around them have small black veins: cope therefore one and the other, and if you do not know them, and you are in doubt,
cope therefore one and the other, and if you do not know them, and you are in doubt, if cope the largest of each part, and also make two veins that are above and below, because it is a same manner.
Of the vein below the tongue The vein below the tongue is helpful after the cephalic vein, and it is for the treatment of the throat, and diseases of the eye, and diseases of the mouth;
and the qualities of the veins are such that the patient lies between your hands before the sun, and lifts the tongue, and looks below on each side a black vein:
then prick both, and do not pierce too deep, for underneath are the arteries.
The veins of the arm which are commonly pricked are punctured in two ways:
either by pricking at one flame, of about an inch wide, or with an olive-shaped subtle lancet as the surgeons use, and it is called "anesis"; and are wide and subtle according to the width and narrowness of the veins. The form of the flame mirror is very renowned, and is wide as you see:
And it is necessary for opening the veins that are deeply knotted with large, visible blood, and that contain large, turbid blood; and this is the form of the olive flame:
And it is more subtle pointed, and is for healing veins subtly, where there is subtly citrine blood.
The vein of the basilica, which is one of these veins, so helps with illnesses that are under the throat, and neck, and chest, and belly.
And it is necessary for the healer to heal sagely, and that he avoids the artery that is under (it). And if he cuts the artery, and a flow of blood comes, then it is necessary to staunch it, as I have said; and the flame must not sting but cut like a knife.
And if the basilica does not open manifestly, then you must restrain it, and change another one. or you want no vein from it, or you drain in its place the vein in the arm: it opens manifestly; and the cautery to the knife, as we have said.
And if you see to know the place of the sinew, then thus it is fitting that you draw out the arm, that you touch the place as long as you know the pulse; then mark the place with an incision, and then tie the arm, and cut the vein of the flame under.
And guard that you do not wound the artery when you see the place inflamed, because it is from the artery: therefore avoid it.
And if you see it rising high like the urine of a child, and the blood is red and fine, know that it is blood from the artery: Haste yourself therefore, and put your hand upon length, then take your hand off if it without ache, that many times happen.
Bind his arm, and leave it so, and let not the patient move it; and be on fear, and do not move it until it is sound.
And if the pain is not aching, and he weeps, and the medicine is not present, then cauterize the artery if it opens, for the head of the retreat; and staunch the blood.
And take a strip of fig bark, and break it, and take one of the halves and tie it well until the next day.
If the wound is clean, that is good; if not, cure it, as we have said, with powders that staunch blood.
And the stanching is not always good in many arrangements for the small place of the wound, and the strength of the arm's ligament.
The vein in the middle is so helpful that it draws blood from the head above, and from the body below, because it is composed of the basilica and cephalic, as we have said;
and it is necessary for the healer to feel along for the nerve which is beneath, and if it is not too much in pain, and he finds the nerve and he swells and the healers are grieved, and by chance cannot heal;
and this nerve is opened many times, and if it does not open in any men for its subtlety, then it is necessary that you cleanse it with the instrument anaesthetic; and carefully remove the nerve from your power.
And if he has a vein between the two nerves, then make a cut along the length of it.
The cephalic vein so aids, that it draws blood from the head, and aids the eyes;
and it is necessary to vein by pricking the olive flame or the myrtle flame, because it is the safest of all veins, because it does not have nerves nor arteries.
However, it is necessary to seek the lightest place, and it does not matter if one fails the first time, and one begins again; and by chance inflates the places in some men, when one fails the first time, but it does not matter. The quality of the blood is according to your thinking.
The first thing you must know about bleeding, is that it is administered only for the sake of health.
and to ward off diseases to come; and let the bloodletting be done in one of the three veins that are or should be used: namely, cephalic, femoral, and basilica; And one must bleed at the beginning of Lent, in autumn, and in winter after eating, when the sign of repletion appears.
And one must bleed on the first day or the third, after two or three hours of the day.
The bloodletting that is administered to illnesses has no determined hour, but when need is of the day or of the night, at all hours and in every time.
And it does not behoove to bleed children until fourteen years old, nor women carrying fruit from the fourth month until the seventh. Do not bleed those who are past .lx. years old.
And when anyone wishes to be bled, in whatever manner, it is necessary that they cleanse the bowels with a light clyster. If he has much phlegm retained, so that the veins do not draw the harmful impurities from the bowels to the principal limbs;
do not bleed those who are too full of meat, nor who are drunk, as long as they are still intoxicated, nor the dropsy-stricken;
and if one is harmed after colic passion, and vomiting, and swelling of the belly, and multiplication of labor in women, and travails, of watching and fasting, and those that by all virtue, or by thing of the arm or of the body;
then subtly thin the humors, if one is fat, by meats and by drinks and by medicines, if you have their power;
then go into a bath, if nothing forbids it, to subtly thin the blood;
and heal of the vein of the lower arm about the third [part], as we have said;
and keep yourself on that day from work, and from pointing [at things], and from lust, and from similar things;
and be bound and joyous, and let the hand of the one who heals be higher than that of him who is healed, and rub his arm two or three times.
then stretch the ligament in the middle, because when it is too tight or loose, he cannot cure without it.
and then rub that place with your hands until the veins swell and are felt.
Then moisten the vein with a drop of old oil, then place his finger of his left hand upon that vein below its location one spot where he wants to bleed. so that the vein does not be and fail at being pierced. For there are veins that are as thick as cords for bleeding, and some that are full of windiness, so that when one puts the cautery upon it, it retracts from the heat, and cannot open the vein, and thus is one of these.
And if he works the vein, if the wound is too tight, for this it is necessary that the healers be advised in these things.
And if the vein is worked for the first time, it is good; if not, begin again a little below where it was, or above slightly, if the area is not inflamed.
And if the area is inflamed and the patient fears, let him leave it for one or two days, and do not bind up his arm: for fear perhaps an abscess will come; nor let him enter into a bath, then resume the bloodletting if he desires.
and if the opening is small, or the vein short and subtly, and you doubt that it is not as much blood as you see, then fire in that same opening to the entire flame straightly.
and work a little gently, so that the eyes are swollen; for this happens many times when the wound is small.
If you see the place swollen, then do not begin the bloodletting again, and put on a little bit of olive oil, for it calms the body from blood, and is applied in this place the olive oil;
and thus administer the olive oil in each bloodletting that you bleed the veins, to stop the flow of blood;
and the same thing happens triple and bows of them, when one puts it back in its place; so subtle the sinews are and separate when it is too large.
And if there comes an abscess large, which happens many times, even when it is not drained further than at the time when the opening of the vein is small, if you hurry, and put on top a sponge moistened in water and in some salt a little hot, and hold it for an hour;
and it is necessary that you do this after the blood has flowed from the vein, and if it stays in place afterwards for a few days without any blackening or greening, then it does not harm him; and if you see, put on nothing of aloes or myrrh mixed with juice of calamine, mustard, or similar.
And many times abscesses and appearance at the shrine of the basilica happen: put therefore your hand upon it, and if you find the place soft to the pressure of the hand, then is that appearance bad. Therefore shun that you put on anything of those things we have said, for perchance it comes without the artery; but do apply one plaster dry to harden the place, then its cure with another cure, until it is healed.
And treat each wound according to the quantity of its virtue, and the color of the blood.
For if the wound is black, let it drain until it is red; and if you see it swelling, let it drain until it is smaller; and if it is too hot, let it cool.
And for one who is pale and weak, and needs bloodletting, it should be made into a larger wound, and the flames should be wide.
And for one who is weak, do the opposite, and it should be bled frequently and often, and it should be bled by cutting crosswise, not by pricking.
And this manner of bloodletting is safe from the decrease of blood and cutting of nerves, and it is better than bleeding from the long or wide (vein).
And to one whose body is lacking in blood, it is necessary to give soft bread in pomegranate juice; if it is dried, treat with blood three or four times.
And if he is of cold complexion, mix soft bread before the blood with syrup made from figs, or with aromatic honey syrup with spices, such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and chickpeas, and a well-smelling syrup.
And if he faints after the issue of blood, it is necessary that he suck broth of meat, and subtle fragrant syrup.
and use the other things we have said in the division or chapter of fainting, for the evacuation of blood.
And if he wants to bleed his arm, and bleed another time, if it is necessary, when he is weakened by great bleeding, that he bleeds little by little, according to the quantity of his strength continuously.
And who wants to bleed his arm after the first bleeding, and he has a strong body, then he bleeds seven hours after the first bleeding, or after the ninth hour.
And who wants to be bled from another part, then they must be bled on the second day or the third.
Because he has much blood within the body which is already exhausted and brings on fever; so it is necessary to draw a great quantity, and enlarge the opening until it flows in streams. Since you have treated all the conditions of health, and put your hand upon his pulses when he is healthy, that death may not come in place of pain. And this happens many times, when the healer is negligent.
And it is not right when you see that the arm is dislocated, and make blood flow the second time, and the wound is closed, that you press strongly on top. And if it is curved, let him extend his arm as much as possible, for this would be bad.
but let it alone until it heals the second time; or you point it to the tip of the flame, as long as the vein which is frozen from opening up does not return. and put upon it i. piece of silk moistened in water, and press lightly.
And if the vein is swollen, leave it alone and do not constrict it at all, until the abscess is calmed.
And if necessity requires drawing blood a second time, let it be done in the same place, or in another vein, or in the other arm.
The vein in the arm is bled in place of the vein in the neck because it is composed.
And the manner of bleeding it is that the patient puts his hand in hot water until the bone is red;
then be bound moderately so that the vein appears well, then bleed now across, not through wide or long;
and let the puncture be wide, and bleed well near the joint of the hand, and if without it can issue, then put the hand back in hot water, and leave to drain the blood in the water, until you have enough;
and if it is in this state, do not put the hand back in hot water, for one puts it more in winter than in summer.
and the vein of this vein is safer from all other veins, that there is neither artery nor nerve in it.
The vein of the salvation of the right hand is good for all diseases of the liver, and this is the way:
strain the hand, and put it in hot water, until the vein is swollen, if one can see it. and if it is broken crookedly, and if you cut it all around completely, it will not harm anything.
and do not make it too deep in cutting because the nerves are beneath all without flesh,
and then put the hand back into hot water if it has become frozen in the wound and cannot be pulled out.
And when you have treated the blood as much as is necessary, then put oil and silk on top of the vein to hold it together firmly, and do so for each vein.
The bloodletting of the hand on the left side is as good for the disease of the mouse, and do everything as I have said to you towards the right.
The bloodletting of the spleen is as good for all diseases that are below the body. as for diseases of the bowels, and retention of fluids, and diseases of the hips, thighs and old legs, and similar diseases.
And the qualities of its bloodletting is that the patient puts his foot in hot water and rubs on the vein until it throbs. and bind above the joint of the foot; and the vein is at the ankle, and above the foot go many veins;
so then take the larger vein, or at the ankle, that you judge best.
And if you cut it on the foot, guard the nerves that are below, and cut through as when cutting; and let the flames be unyielding.
And if he cannot feel it, put the foot in water, and let the vein bleed well.
And if the first time the incision is needed, it must be started again above a little, because the salt is present. Do not doubt the nerve, as we have said, and do likewise with the sophian of the other foot equally.
The vein of sciatica is at the ankle of force, and its incision is worth to the pain in the hip, when it is for hot blood.
And the qualities of its incision are that the patient enters or bathes, and is strained above the ankle four fingers in twisting,
for otherwise it does not open the vein; and if it opens, then seal it in all ways that you can, and across and it is better that you cut it, because the flesh is dry, and it is very full of blood in men's hands
and it is better that you cut it, because the flesh is dry, and it is very full of blood in men's hands And if you do not find it, then seal any vein that opens or below the foot, and towards the small toe, and guard the nerves;
and do as much bloodletting as you see fit, and then untie the bandage, and put on cotton and restrain it; she is now healed.
Of leeching wounds
Leech cups are made of horn, or wood, or glass; and ventosaion is done in two ways: either by piercing and drawing blood, or without piercing.
And this ventosaion which is without piercing is done in two ways: either it is applied with heat, or without heat;
and two others in two ribs of the neck; and the windpipe below the chin; and the windpipe at the two shoulders; and the windpipe above the hips; and the windpipes amid the two arms; and the windpipes of the two legs; and the suction cups on the two ankles; and the cupping does not treat blood, except for the small veins that are scattered in the flesh.
and therefore it does not weaken one as much, as is done with bloodletting from a vein; and it is not appropriate that it be administered, neither to hot nor cold fire, in any illness that comes from repletion, until the whole body is emptied.
And if by necessity of illness it is necessary to cupping, or by custom, then we administer it each hour at the beginning of the month, or at the end, and in any time between.
because there are some who, when they need to wind, have heavy head;
and there are some who bloat and redness in their face, and in their head, and in the neck, and darkness in their eyes;
and some who have a drop of blood in their mouth, and have a swollen tongue, and spit blood; and there are some who dream, and see through blood and nausea and death and similar things.
And when we see these signs, and even if it is in the middle of the month, we command them to fast after three hours of the day.
The bloodletting from the temple helps with the great pain of the head… that comes to the eyes, and it does not befit that it should be after the evacuation of all the body;
and this fasting is in place of bloodletting from the head,
and it does not befit those who are of cold constitution to use it, or who have a catarrh, for this does great harm to them;
and for this reason it is not fitting that the old people use it, nor those who have or head colds diseases.
And those who become cured of it often, they become oblivious, and for this reason it is necessary to place the suction cup a little lower due to the fear of oblivion.
Suction on the neck is in place of the vein from the head and basilica, and for this reason it is good for the treatment of phlegm. and to the fissure of the channel of the groin, and to all boils, and to swelling.
And there it is necessary to not put too much pressure, because if it holds too firmly, it can cause obstruction or stomach and heart.
The two ribs of the neck, when they are ventilated, are worth it for the pains of the head, and ophthalmia and migraine, and in strangulation, and the pain at the roots of the teeth.
and it is in the place of the basilica's vein; and it is necessary that you command the healer to be careful when putting it on, that he does not cut the artery and does not bring a hemorrhage of blood.
The cupping below the chin is good for mouth diseases, and gum rot, and similar illnesses that are in the mouth; and it is in the place of the veins of the two lips.
The ventilation of the shoulders is good for illness that comes from heat and congestion.
The ventilation of the armpits is as good as three veins of the arm. because it draws blood from those large veins;
and instructs the healthy one that he should not hit it too hard, because the skin is thin and lies above nerves and arteries.
The suction cup which is on the rump is good for hemorrhoids of the foundation, and for diseases of below, and it is necessary that the suction cup be large, and be of iron, that it has need to well suck; and by chance, if it were subtle, it would break; and there makes great wounds.
The suction cups of the legs are used openly, because they attract blood from the whole body, and are good for old pains of the hips, and of the thighs, and of the bladder, and soften the flowers; and are in their place at the two shins, and the two ankles, and nonetheless they weaken the body after long use, and bring weariness in more dispositions.
The manner of putting the suction cup is that you put it first empty, and succeed moderately, and put it carefully, and move equally, and do not cease to do so until you see the place red and inflamed, and appear the color of blood; then firm, and put back the suction cups, and take ward in the disposition of the body, because there are such who have tender flesh, and clear pores: so it is necessary to strike only once, and it is necessary to make large wounds, and a bit deep; and suck lightly.
And if the vein is thick, it is necessary to prick it twice: the first time to make a path for the thick blood.
And if the vein is very thick, it is necessary to prick it a third time; and when we want to draw blood little by little, we prick only once.
And if we want a lot of blood, we must often return to it; and if the vein is thick, prick it deeply, and the end is that the needle should be pierced firmly,
and it is necessary for those who have thick and tough skin, and whose pores are obstructed, that you anoint the places where the blisters will be put with oil that is aperitif and dissolving: If it is in this state, of violet oil, or sweet almond oil, or oil of pumpkin seed;
And if it is in summer, of cresson oil, or lily, or chamomile, or something similar.
And if the superfluity is thick and cold, then take wormwood oil, or balm, or anise oil, and similar ones.
And if the one whom you are treating has loose skin and large pores, then it is not necessary to put any oil on them;
but it is necessary to wash after the suction of rose water, or cold water, or mulberry water, or gourd water, or porcelain water, or something similar.
And he who has much moisture, let him rise of myrtle water, and of sumaq, and of similar things.
And those who have large superfluities rise from old wine, or of succory water, or decoction of fennel or chamomile, or other similar things;
and it is not necessary to  cupping before the bath or in the bath, but after the bath an hour or two; and do not sleep after cupping,
and it is necessary that he wear it when he must be bandaged and when he is bandaged. And guard those who are jaundiced in health, and if their skin is too much inflamed and swollen; if it is necessary that they eat cold things, such as pomegranates and endives and lettuces at the waist, and similar things;
and  soft turnips, and broth of mutton, and moist meats.
And he who has a cold complexion, take syrup of honey, and fragrant wine, which is between old and new, and quince, and quince seed, and small onions, and pigeons.
And on the day that he will be purged, he must drink more than eat.
And it is necessary to give no one at any time triacle or musk before or after the purging, in order to strengthen the principal members. And let it be subtle the wine, but it is not fitting that those who are hot drink it.
The suction cups that are applied without harming are those that are placed on the liver, and on the spleen, and gout, and on the belly and the chest and the hips and the groin, because these members do not suffer being pierced.
and it is done only to draw blood from limb to limb as we place them on the breasts when they are nursing; to remove the viscosity that is in the limb, as we place suction cups on the belly and on the chest to reduce the swelling of the member
and remove the pain when there is an obstruction or stone, as it removes by its attractive virtue perhaps the obstruction, or dislodges the stone from its place;
and thus it is done when one puts it upon the liver and upon the mouse when there is wind retention,
and these cupping glasses are administered empty to suck only thus; and sometimes they are administered together with fire, and sometimes filled with warm water.
as in illnesses of the pleura, and in this way one fills the cupping glass with hot water alone, or with water which has boiled herbs suitable for it.
The form of the cupping glass administered with fire is as follows:
And have 2 pieces of wood of width half a palm and length a palm's breadth, and have or cost at the middle one small hole, as for putting a needle.
and let it be of wood so smooth that it does not prick the patient when placed upon the limb;
and in the middle have a crosspiece of wood or iron to put a burning candle in,
and let them be both large and small according to the illnesses and the age of those who take them;
for the suction cups of children are other than of the old, and of the thin ones than of the fat.
And must one thus place this suction cup upon the limb:
take the handle of wax or one linen wrap and place it inside the suction cup across from the stick that is inside the suction cup, so that the brightness be at the bottom of the suction cup so that it does not burn the patient.
And then place it on the limb, and you must do so on the opening that we have said, so that when one wants to, the vapor goes in, and one removes the cupping glass;
And apply the linen as before, and repeat it often if you need to.
In the cupping glass which is administered in disease of pleurisy, for all kinds of pain, there is no point nor opening, and it is administered only when it is full of water, and it is placed on the limb only so long.
and this is its form:
Suckings are not administered except in members where one cannot put cupping glasses because of their small size, such as lips and gums, and similar ones. And in their naked flesh, such as two or the like, and others similar;
And the qualities of the user are that when you find suckings that are in clear fresh waters without rotteness, take them;
and place them in fresh water until they become accustomed and have nothing in their bellies; and then be drained of bloodletting and cupping, then rub the limb until it is red, and put on the poultices.
and when they are swollen, and fall, if it is their place where one can put cupping, then put it, because it is very good afterward.
If those are not there, lift the place with ease, and then with water, very well, and then squeeze it;
and if the place is healing too much after the poultice, moisten one cloth of linen in cold water and put it on top until the swelling subsides;
and if the wounds are multiplied, put on crushed vitriol, or saltpeter, and similar things, until they are stretched.
or you put on the site half of peeled beans, and let them until they dry out on the site, then it will now stop.
and if you need more of this, take other bandages.
And if the bandages do not want to be taken, rub the site with fresh blood, or you put a needle there until the bandage comes out. and then place them on top, and as soon as they feel the blood, they flare up;
and when you see that they are bleeding, put some powder of alum and willow bark crushed, or ashes, on top, now they will stop.
Here begins the book of fractures
This chapter is many times necessary in the art of medicine, and it is the restoration of a fracture and dislocation.
Know this, dear son, that the fools who mock this chapter will never see anything in any of the old books, nor have they read a letter from them.
And for this reason the science is hidden in our land, because I never found any good one.
And I know nothing of it, except by the science of the old books, in which I have studied so much that I have mastered its science, and by experience, and by the custom of my life;
And I have described to you in this chapter what is contained therein, and have abridged it at the end, and have clearly shown the forms of the instruments that are brought, as I have done in these two chapters before.
It therefore behooves us to say in the prologue of this book the sums of words and chapters where the wise puts his understanding, and remains on truth, so that those who are experienced know and learn this noble art, and teach it to others.
I say that when fracture or dislocation or torsion or sprain comes to anyone, it is necessary for you to hasten to heal the patient on one side and the other, if nothing hinders him, such as weakness of body, or infirmity, or old age.
or if his constitution is not very strong, or too cold; and avoid cold foods, that is to say, cold meats, and venison, and mutton, and do not drink wine, nor consume any fatty meats, and do not overfill himself with meats which fill the veins with blood, until you have doubts of a hot abscess, or expansion of matter in the limb; so that the patient returns to his first government as he used it.
And when the broken bone begins to heal, it is necessary that one nourishes the patient with meats that make a thick nourishment, or there is viscosity, such as wheat cooked in water, and rice, and testes, and pies, and belly of calf, and eggs, and fresh fish, and strong wine, and similar things. For with such nourishment they recover strength and the fracture heals more quickly.
And know that broken bones of the old and the decrepit do not well recover or heal according to their nature because of the dryness of the limbs, nor those that are too soft, such as bones of small children;
but if there is no cure, reset the broken bone that is, large splints which are set and join the limb together, as much as it was before; and don’t let any part of its work, and for this reason it must be nourished with coarse meats, as we have said.
And know that fractures are diverse in many ways.
For the fracture of the head is different from the fracture of the leg or hip, and I will tell you in this chapter all kinds of fractures. For there is a fracture that goes into a groove, and another in sharpening, like the edge of a pen for writing.
For there is a fracture that goes into a groove, and another in sharpening, like the edge of a pen for writing. And if with fracture and wound, and fracture to a small crack all around.
And in every manner have its tool, and its proper instrument in the restoration, according to what memory comes in its place;
And is known the fracture of the bone by those that are twisted, and open well from outside, and felt by pressure of the hand;
And when there is no torsion nor feeling upon touching, and the patient feels no great pain, then there is no fracture;
but it can well have twisting, or rupture, or small fracture. If you must not move it by hand, but put on the medicines that come after here, and then restrain it subtly.
And know that the fracture that goes in a circle, and are the two parts disjointed, you must now put them together equally, so that abscesses may not come.
And if abscesses do come, then let it alone for no day, until the abscesses are appeased; Then place it straight in the joint as you can easily and wisely, and know that the restoration of this is lighter than the restoration of the one which has pieces; then restrain, as it is necessary here after.
And if the bone is broken into pieces, if it's two parts, if it's hands or feet, or at your hand if it's a small limb, or two cords, or one cord and at your hand;
and place the limb according to its natural form, so that when the parts of the broken limb are separated, you carefully put all the pieces back in their places in the joint as much as you can, and make sure that through your work no injury or pain comes to the patient.
and adjust well the two ends of the bones according to the best forms.
And he feels it well by the hand if it seems to you that it is not well: if he arranges it well and does not restrain it too much, nor press as those do who bring it by their work abscess hot and contraction to the limb, as we have wanted many times.
And when the member is in place, so chaste the patient well that he does not move it, neither watching nor sleeping, neither turning, nor in any other way. and ward well that the member be so assured that he feels no pain at all. For when he feels no pain, it is not yet in place, and it behooves to put him in such a disposition that he feels no pain.
For when he feels no pain, it is not yet in place, and it behooves to put him in such a disposition that he feels no pain. and guard that it is placed straightly, that twisting does not come when it is restored.
And the qualities of the broken limb are according to what I tell you.
Know that broken limbs are diverse in smallness and in greatness and in form.
For there are small limbs, such as arms and legs and similar ones: so it is necessary to wrap them with cloths of soft and fine linen;
and those that are thick, such as the thigh and leg: it is necessary to wrap them with a wide and hard bandage, because the wide bandages embrace the whole large limb, and restrain it from all sides evenly, so that there is no gap;
then tie lighter wrappings, three or four turns according to the limb, and restrain your hand a little on the whole bandage, then go above the fracture and restrain it less, than the fracture then distances a little from the fracture;
and soften the bandage a little by little, until you reach a large part of the healthy area, then take another bandage, and turn it again directly above the broken area;
Then return to the part below the fracture, and restrain it moderately, not too hard nor too lightly, as we have said in the first place above.
Then place between the splints of linen or cloth, until it is all equal, then bind everything above with a bandage, and then put your well-made dressings on top, if there is no abscess or swelling.
And if there is an abscess or swelling, put something soothing on top of the abscess that warms it and removes the swelling, and leave it like that for several days.
Then restrain the top dressing, and be of half a wide cane cut neatly, or of wood from which they make flutes, or of palm leaves, and be according to this figure.
but it is necessary that the splint that one puts on the fracture be a little larger and wider than the others;
and also as long as is necessary for the limb of smallness or greatness;
then bind on the splints also as you have done at the first hour, then tie above with a thread evenly, as in the first hour on the fracture;
tighter it is above, less below; and it is necessary that the thread be medium, neither too thick nor too thin, and be of soft linen;
for if the thread is thick, as I have seen in works of fools who make their stitches with linen cords twisted, and this is a great error, because the stitch cannot be even if it is too thin, and it should not have between each star less than two fingers' width of space.
And if the patient is sore at the sites of the stitches after the tightening in their healthy parts, put under them poultices of linen, or wool felt, so that it does not become blistered.
When the wound is with a fracture, and the bone is broken, I will say its cure here after.
And know that it does not behoove to straighten all the broken limbs on the first day. For when the limb is great, it does not behoove to set it straight sooner than after five days or seven, or more according to your surety of an abscess that comes hot.
And see here the manner of ancient plasters for restoring fracture, dislocation, and torsion: and it is that you take flour that is kept at the walls of the mill, and mix it with plenty of egg, and put this mixture, neither too thin nor too thick, and use it, and this is the common way of the plaster restoring fracture in many dispositions, and even to women and to small children, because it is not too hot nor too cold.
Another manner of plaster restoring fracture and dislocation and torsion: take  three ounces of barberry, ladane, and rue, and asafetida, and gum arabic, ana .x.  oz.; myrrh and aloes, ana .v. oz.; alechil .viiij. oz.; and make it into powder, and mix it with the white of an egg; if the complexion of the man is hot, use this plaster, because it is of good composition, and restores broken bones quickly, and is worth to many men.
Another manner of ointment that is good for torsion: take mugwort and wormwood, ana x; myrrh and aloes, ana viiij; acacia vi; Armenian bolus x, and grind well, and confit with water or white of egg, and administer it.
Another manner of ointment for joints and bones dislocated from their places, and it soothes the pain that arises, and the use of bone, and the sprain: take new linen, and moisten it in oil and cooked butter, and put on the sore place. This plaster does not restore [the joint or bone], but it is good for soothing a hot abscess, and properly taking away the pains.
Another manner of ointment that restores broken bones: take dried fig leaves, and ground ivy leaves, and grind them together, and make a plaster.
Another manner of plaster for the restoration of the fracture of the bone and to lessen the remnant of the abscess. Take root of wormwood, chamomile, flowers of violets, flour of beans, of each one part; and grind, and cook with wine, and if the limb is dried, cook it with coriander water, or water, and use it.
Another manner of plaster more potent than the first, when a hard abscess comes to the restoration of the limb. Take roots of wormwood, and flaxseed, balm, melilot, and henbane, and flowers of violets and chamomile, of all one part; and grind, and cook with water of salt, or sweet water, or with wine, according to the heat of the limb, and its rest.
Ipocras says in his book that one should not put on the broken limb for restoration other than a certain one made of wax and oil, and nothing else more, and he says that it should be between two, neither too soft nor too hard.
And it seems Galen one must put on the broken member, to restore, things dry and a little warm, such as myrrh and aloe and incense and similar things, as we have said.
Another manner of poultice that is good for the wound and pain: take mugwort and  chevolz of sheep decocted, or feathers of an owl, and vismalve, and equal parts of these, and grind them up, and make a poultice of it and apply it.
And then loosen the bandage a little after, and take care if the patient feels no pain, nor has the bone moved from its place; so don't loosen it for many days.
And if pain comes to the place, or itching,  lack of rest, or swelling, then haste, and loosen it, and remove the poultice now; and take light cloth, and a sponge of sea moistened, and dip it in water, and raise the place, until the itching ceases, and the pain is appeased. then let the member rest for an hour, then put dry cloth, soaked in water or rose oil, and tie it on with a nut, as long as you are sure of a hot abscess.
and let the inflammation of the member rest, and remove the pain, then begin the subtle binding, and a little bit of emplastrum, and do not constrain it as strongly as before; and be subtle until it is healed.
And if you see that the abscess is hot and red, and the pain and swelling are all gone, and you need emplastrum and binding, then begin it again, just as you did at first.
And if nothing of what we have said comes to the member, then do not unbind it until after three days or four or five or seven; and never leave it for twenty days, according to what you see, as long as the bruise heals, and the joining of the flesh approaches.
therefore you restrain it more than before, and thicken its flesh, as I have said before; and if you see the place drying more than is necessary, know that no nourishment can come there then apply hot water, every time you untie it, and moisten the part a little.
By this work, the nourishment returns to the limb and quickly mends what the foolish mire do, who leave the limb twisted: it is bad, and this work is dangerous, and I see nothing else but to let it be and work it straight.
of diverse ways of breaking (bones) Many ways of fractures are, and various forms, and the causes are destined.
For there are fractures that are made by the percussion of a sword, and the bone's neck all the bone until its face which is under the bone, as done high or shaft; and for this reason this kind of fracture is called "haitchure".
Or the sword cuts through the bone from above without piercing, and this kind of fracture is called "absolute"; and the wound of these two fractures great or small.
And if there is an enmeshed percussion, or a split or of the bone's neck, or of the head on a bone, or similar things.
And if it has a fracture penetrating, which approaches up to the skin that is below the bone, or it is above the bone, and this wound is great or small.
And if the wound that is rejoined in the bone as subtle as a hair, and it is the fissure small, and for this reason this fracture is called "capillary";
and if the wound that is made either by a blow of stone, or by falling, or by similar thing, and makes enter the piece of the bone inward, and it is the joint like how they make the blacksmith when they forge on the cauldrons; so enters the piece inside.
And this happens more to those who have or chiefs moist bones, such as those of a child;
and there occur in all these ways of fracture that pieces are scattered into small parts like stars; and I shall speak of it in its place.
And let us know all the ways of fractures by retracting upon them, and by probing with probes, and by the corrupted flesh that is on it.
The seeming capillary is known by this: when one has uncovered the bone, and rubs upon it, the fracture appears black.
In the cure of a fracture, take care of the accidents of the patient, and if you see no bad accident, such as vomiting of bile, and loss of understanding, and extension, and paleness, and fever ague, and eyes becoming inflamed and red, and other similar things in more dispositions, then it cannot heal without doubt.
And if you do not see an escapable accident, and you hope for salvation, so commence the cure.
And when the fracture comes to you first, and it is in winter, then it is necessary to remove the bone before the fourteenth day as much as you can.
And if it is in summer, then hasten to remove the bone before the seventh day, so that the tissue under the bone does not rot, and comes the accident that we have said.
And if the fracture of the bone comes right up to the tissue that covers the brain, then it is necessary that you split the broken part like this: and it is that you place the head of the sick person navreit [I'm unsure what "navreit" means in this context], and uncover above the bone in all the ways that you can, and on the figure of the wound more carefully than you can.
And if blood flows when revealing the bone, or abscess is opened, help with what is necessary, and that you fill the space with soft cloths soaked in rose oil. And let the wound rest until the opened abscess is calmed and be sure of the blood flow; then begin to remove around the bone, and this is done in two ways of work: one way is that you cut with a narrow incision in front, and this is the form:
And then put another incision larger than the first one.
And the second way is that you have a number of diverse incisions, some narrow and others wide, and pointed, and made of iron; and in work lightly, so that you do not bruise the bone.
And if the bone is hard and stiff, then it is necessary that you pierce it around, so that you administer splints with tarers, not so deeply that they go beyond the bone of the test, and it must have above the point a margin or circle, which does not allow the point to pass beyond the bone; and it behooves you to have more than one, so that each comes in its place from the thickness of the bone, so that you have tarers for all tests; and this is the form of the three kinds of tarers:
The qualities for piercing around the broken bone are that you put one tarer on the bone, and turn to your two hands until you know that the bone is pierced; then put the tarer elsewhere a little after, and thus do all around, then cut with the incisors the space of the bone which is between the pertu, and make them more subtly as you can, and lightly, as we have said, until you draw the bone to your hand, or to any of the instruments that you have such as tongs, pliers; and guard that you do not touch the marrow nor the sifac.
And when you will have the bone pierced, and treated, then it behooves that you remove the appendage which is adhered to the bone with any other instrument resembling an incisor, but it behooves that it be more sturdy and more subtle than the other incisor;
and if it remains nothing of the small bones, nor any scales, then lightly with instruments to the bones. Then cure the wound of tents and bandages as we have said.
And the other manner of work is that which Galen says, which is drier; and the load very strong, and that is his word. It is necessary first that you uncover a part of the bone, where the fracture appears to move, so that when you have uncovered that part, then place under the head of this lentil-shaped incisional instrument, for this is its form:
And do not cut from one part, and it is the sharpened side in two coasts, so that the cutting edge is towards the bone; then strike with a small mallet above, so that you gently chip away at the bone all around, and take good care of the cloth that is underneath;
If it is caught to the bone, gently loosen it, for one loosens it well without pain, and without fear.
And if the bone fracture does not reach the skin, and the bone is broken only from above, and there are small pieces, it is necessary to first apply this asperity, and remove the scales with a fine rasp which you must have in various quantities, to administer in each place the most suitable one, according to the work and the figure of the fracture.
If you begin with coarse rasps, and afterwards with finer ones, and do not cease doing this until it is well.
In each of the other capillary cuts and subtle fractures, it is necessary that you administer  cause according to its place; and this thing is not replied to by him who has put his study into this art.
And if the ulcer is uncovered, it befits you to take one linen cloth, according to the quantity of the wound, and moisten it in rose oil, and place it on the wound; Then take another cloth doubled in two or three, and moisten it in wine and rose oil, and place it on the first cloth; and do this more gently than you can, that you do not injure the ulcer, then administer by above one other linen, and do not constrain it more than enough so that it only holds the wound.
and let it so for one or two days, until the abscess is calmed, then untie it, and administer medicines such as roots of lilies, and powdered vetiver, and incense powder, and aristolochia, and similar things; and of these things make a powder, and put it on the wound, and administer additional medicines compounded without mordication;
And guard that the wound be always clean, that you do not leave any ointment there, nor let any bowe assemble there, because when bowe assembles on the cloth of the brain, it corrodes and pierces, and brings great malice to the patient; for when one puts on top of this thing biting, it bites from above.
Take ward then, if no bad accidents come to the patient, as we have said, so it is doubtful without doubt.
And if no other blackness comes there except from the medicine we have put on, that it has virtue, then you must take one part of honey, and three parts of rose oil and in glue one drapel, and put it on the thing. then the cure of manners of cures that it is fitting, until it is healed.
Know that sometimes the two parts of the lower jaw are broken, or one by the other alone, because they are two bones; and this one below is cartilaginous, and does not break unless forced to bend or twist, and then heals.
And if one of the two parts is broken, it is necessary that you put your little finger or point of the index finger into the mouth, and place the broken piece inside with your index finger, and to the pocket outside, until the jaw returns according to its natural form; and do this gently, and guard that the patient does not feel pain from your work.
And if the fracture is in the part above the nose, and it cannot come to its place, then you should put it even on top of a rail a little thick.
And if the fracture is of two parts, do so again, and hasten to restore it the first day, if you can.
If not, after the seventh or tenth day, when the abscess has calmed, then bandage to the top of the nose ten sheets of linen, if the fracture is in one part.
Or you put one on the other side if the fracture is there; and let the sheets be so thick that they fill the nostrils.
And some restorers say that one must moisten the tents in butter, and change each day. It does not seem good to me, but it is necessary that they be moistened in the confection of albumen of egg, and powder of mill; then leave the tent, as long as the bone is hard, and the cartilages hardened.
And sometimes one puts goose feathers in their place, and so i.e., one sheet of drape around it, and it holds the blister, and blows the patient among; do what you see fit.
And if an abscess comes to the new while you work on it, put cerote or cotton moistened in rose oil, or in i. p. of diaquilon.
And if an abscess occurs there, place a plaster from outside, of sesame flour and incense powder, cooked with egg yolk, then put light bandages on top, and do not bind it tightly at all.
And if the bone is broken in small pieces and fractured, then extract it with suitable instruments, then sew the fissure together, and cure it with things like cartilage and soldering, and suitable plasters and ointments.
And if there is no wound inside the bone, then cure it with splints and put bandages of linen inside, until it heals.
Of the jaw fracture
When the jaw is broken below, and there is no external wound, and the fracture is only outside, and is not broken in two, except for a bulge inside, if one knows it lightly.
It is necessary, if the fracture is on the right side, that you put your left index finger in the mouth of the sick person; and if the fracture is on the left jawbone, put your right index finger, and push the fracture inside lightly, and make it with the other hand outside, and put it straight.
And if the jawbone fracture is broken in two, it is necessary that you administer an extension of two parts, until it is straight.
And if movement of the teeth happens, or breakage, so restrain with a thread of gold or silver or silk, then place upon the broken jaw carefully, and place one double cloth; and place upon the cloth a great star well made, or a piece of leather equal, long and wide according to the jaw, and tie it up on the as much as you can, and command the patient that he rests himself, and eats light meats.
And if you see that the figure changes, so untie it on the third day, and then re-apply what has changed; and place a plaster on top, of powder from the mill with plenty of egg or sesame flour, after that you have removed the cerote; and place a light cloth over the plaster, and if the plasters adheres, and the disposition of the patient does not change, leave it as long as it is healthy; many times it is healed in three weeks.
And if an abscess comes, administer what we have said many times.
And if there is a fracture and wound together, reward no piece of the bone is removed; so subtly of the removing with instruments suitable to that.
And if the wound is narrow, then enlarge it with flame according to your need.
And when you will have removed all these pieces, and there is none remaining, then cover the wound, if it is wide, and put upon it one plaster suitable to that, in order to hinder flesh, until it is healed.
of the forceps The fracture breaks many times in front, towards the shoulder, and the fracture is according to three ways: or it is broken and severed in two, and there are pieces, and it is the lightest to restore; or there is a fracture with a wound.
And the work is like this when the fracture is without a wound, that you have two ministers, so that one holds the shoulder that feels the broken bone; and the other stretches the neck towards the part; then put equal the fracture with your hands, so that the form is as it should be, and there is neither appearance nor misalignment.
And if you need to extend more, put under the shoulder of the patient a round sphere of cloth or wool, and be it large according to your necessity; and being and lightly raising the bone, and restraining the sphere with your hand, so that you put equal the fracture, as it should be.
And if you cannot draw the head of the shoulder with force because it comes back in place, then it is necessary that the patient lie prone on his arm and place below the shoulder 1 hour glass, and push the ministers' shoulder down until the bone of the shoulder is lifted.
And then address the fracture to your two, and if you find it fragmented, it is necessary that you split further; and treat the pieces gently, and if the bone cannot join by any elevation, so cut to one of the incisors that you have; but that you put under the shoulder this instrument, in order to guard the shaft:
And it seems like a spoon, and is not at all hollow, and be also wide as it is convenient, according to the size of the bone and the strength of the work; and have two heads, as you see, and one broad, and the other narrow, as is the rupture of the wound that you made when treating the bones;
and when you are sure of the hot abscess, if cut the wound, and if the rupture is small, or you doubt the hot abscess, then apply the wound with bandages and tents, according to its quantity.
And if a hot abscess comes, then moisten one bandage in rose oil and in honey and in wine, and place it on top.
The strapping of the bone, when it is without wounds and without cuts, is that you put on top of the bone the plaster of ground flour and yolk of egg, and put light bandages on top, and put a spear underneath the ass-  if you need. Then take a very wide bandage of one palm's width, then put one double bandage on top of the bandages and plaster; then take a strip subtly of three digits wide and long, and wrap it around that bandaged one so that the head of the bandage hangs down; And put the splint on the fracture, and turn the bandage around the neck, and below the healthy shoulder, and below the broken shoulder; and move each part, and when you see that the splint holds the fracture properly, and you clearly see that the splint does not move above the fractured bone, then reward them every day, and when the ligaments loosen, then restrain it.
And make the patient lie on his back, and put him when he sleeps 1 small pillow under the shoulder, to raise the arm up; thus it will lighten the fracture of the clavicle by the elevation of the shoulder, or you tie the arm to the neck, and do not untie it unless a bad accident occurs, until 20 days;
then begin the plaster again, if you see that he needs it, and restrain him and leave him so, until he is restored; and it is restored in at most 28 days, and in less for some people.
of the fracture of the shoulder
It happens that the shoulder breaks or dislocates far from its place, and it is not known whether by force; so, according to the shape of the fracture, and set it according to its natural form, in all the ways that you can; then put on the place powder of the mill with abundance of egg, and light bandages, and put over .i. double drapeil; then put on a large and fine splint, a little wider than the shoulder, and if the splint is chafed in any part of the shoulder, so use the chafing of linen bandages, so that the splint lies evenly; and then bind it with a strong bandage firmly, so that the splint does not move from its place, and watch the joint every day; and whenever it softens, bind it again, and put back the splint if it is out of place, and make the patient lie on his side; and the shoulder is restored in .xx. days or in xxv, and when this number is completed, unbind it, and be sure, for it is not bone that easily sets itself apart.
And if a piece of bone protrudes forward, and not below the joint, so do it above, and the bone, and do what we have said in the fracture of the collarbone to soothe the hot abscess.
of the fracture of the leg
The leg is sometimes broken in the middle, but this happens little; but it breaks often at the outside. And when it is broken in the middle, it leans to the lower side, and the patient feels great pain, and loss of strength, and all, and perhaps vomits blood, and the veins open in the broken bone, and it feels well all over.
And the restoration is that the patient lies often on his back, and he puts 1 cushion between the shoulder blades, then presses the shoulder blades, and he assembles the ribs of the 2 ribs with your hands, and subtly does put it equal in all ways that you can, until the figure of the bone is as it ought; then puts above plasters and bandages above the subtle layer of salt, or another light husk, and enwraps it in 1 drape, and lays it on top of the broken bone, so that it doesn't move; and turn the bandage round to the back, and strain it well, and reward each hour the bond, and if it softens, then strain it; and if it comes to him to loosen, for corrosion or for itch that comes to the place, or pain or abscess, then hasten, and loose it, and wipe the plaster, and address what has come there by ways of cures; then put back the plaster, and strain it until it is healed.
of the breakage of the ribs
Know that the breakage of the ribs comes only in their thickest parts after the back, and at the head inside, and they bend only for that reason because they are brittle; and one feels it well at the examination of the two sides.
And the restoration is that you put the breakage equal, as it is right. And then put the bandage, and restrain with a splint, if you have need of it.
And if the breakage of the ribs is leaning inwards, the patient feels very great pain, and sharpness, as well as from pleurisy, because the bone pierces the membrane; and besides pains, and coughing, and vomiting a large quantity of blood, and this is a serious illness, and the ancients have put much care into it.
And if some say it is necessary to administer meats that swell the belly, to expel the wind outward.
We do not do this, except for hot abscesses, if they have not yet come. And if it has come, then treat it.
And some of us say that one should put suction cups on the area to draw out fluids strongly, and this seems reasonable; nonetheless, there is doubt that the suction cup draws the superfluities to the area for the sake of weakness.
And they say any one of you should cover the place with a woolen cloth in hot oil, and put tents between the ribs to make equal the lying wound, then be cured of the plague of pleurisy, meat, and medicine.
And if the patient feels great pain that he cannot bear because of the bone pointing through the cloth, and there is doubt in the patient, it is necessary to cut above the place of the broken rib, and it is necessary to put under one instrument to ward off the syfac; and then must one trenchier the bone, and draw lightly, and then sew the two lips of the wound, if it is large, and cure it with plasters, until it is healed. And if an abscess comes, then put on soft cloths in rose oil, and put on the place; and cure while the place of that which it is necessary to abscess, and be lying still upon the side where it must, until it is healed.
of the breaking of the neck
Sometimes comes a break of bones of the neck, and sometimes it happens that it bends; and also in the spine of the back. And when this happens to anyone, and you want to know if he will be healed or not, then take heed if you see his hands softened and swollen and dead, and he cannot move them nor stretch them, and when you prick them with a needle, he does not feel it. Know that he is mortal in many dispositions, and if he moves them and feels well when they are stretched and pointed, know that the joint of the bone is saved, and that the patient will be cured, if one puts care to him.
And if similar things happen to the spine of the back, and you want to know if he will be healed or not, then take heed if his legs are softened, and if the accident is in his hands, and on his back there is a sauteness and excretion without will; and when one supports him on his belly, there is an excretion without will. And when he is supported on his back and wants to sit up, he cannot. Know that he is mortal: if he does not labor well in his cure.
And if this accident does not happen to him, then the thing is lighter.
And the cure is that you reward it if there is an abscess hot, so put on the spine rose oil or egg yolk of an egg, until it is appeased; then put on a comforting and drying plaster, and bind it with a bandage, and command the patient to rest; and do not sleep on that part where he feels pain, as long as he is healed. And if any bone is broken, it is necessary to cover the wound; and remove the bone, then assemble the two edges of the wound, if it is large, with a suture, then treat it with ointment that promotes healing, until it is healed; and if the head of the bone is broken, which is called the "head of the cow," put your thumb of your left hand in it, and place it equal to the other hand at your power, then put the plaster and splint on top, if you need it; then restrain it, and if there are bones that have been displaced, do this again, remove the bone, and treat the wound until it is healed.
of the break of the bone of the hip
It happens that the bone of the hip is broken, and if it happens, it should not have been for a little weakening at the top; and making long, and declining to the sides, and coming to the patient pain in the place, and prickling, and swelling that breaks.
And the restoration is that you extend your hand above, as long as you are on the fracture; and know which is the fracture and its figure; and if the fracture is at the top only, so put equal the fracture, as long as it is to a natural figure.
And if the fracture is long, or it declines inward, so make the patient lie on his belly, as long as the restoration of that fracture be apparent to you. And when you have put it even, place it on the emplasters, then place a splint of wood or of horn, and restrain the fracture so that it does not move; and apply the plaster below the ribs, as long as the limb is even.
And command the patient that he sleep on his healthy side or on his back.
And if an abscess appears there, do not touch it until the abscess is calmed, and put on what we have said before; and then return to the restoration, and restrain it as appropriate, if there is no bad accident; and this is the manner.
of the fracture of the shoulder
The adjuitor is that which is between the shoulder and the head of the shoulder, and if it is broken, one should restore it according to one of the two ways: one of which is that you take one staff of medium thickness, according to this form:
And tie the two ends of .two. strings together, and lift them up, and place the patient on one seat; then put his broken arm upon the staff, until it comes to the armpit, and has a curve of staff in the middle, then put upon any heavy thing or minister its extension down; then put the hands of the fracture equal together, as long as the fracture returns as it should.
And the other way is that one supports the patient on his bed, and ties his hand to his neck, then commands two ministers that one holds what is above the fracture in their hands, and the other holds below at all .i. point, and extends each to its part.
And if you see that the extraction is more forth, constrain  that is, the linen under the bruise, and on the bruise, and extend each of the ministers to its part. And if the bruise is near the head of the shoulder, it behooves that you put one linen in the middle under the arse, and one other towards the outside, under the bruise; and also if the bruise is towards the outside, then it behoves to put one linen lightly, without labor, until the bruise is equal on the top, and on the outside; then set the bruise equal, as it behoves, and constrain it, if an abscess does not come.
And if an abscess comes to the place, do not constrain it until seven days, and put on linen moistened in oil of roses, as long as the abscess is appeased; then constrain it, and the manner of constraining it is that you put the bandage on the bruise, then assemble the arm upon the shoulder, and put your hand upon the shoulder or upon the breast; and put the cloth, and constrain upon the shoulder, and upon the arm, so that the arm is in its place, unless anything prevents you, or if the bone is not moved.
And if you doubt that the bone is moved, use splints, and put on the bruise a splint wider and stronger than the others, and have between each splint one digit of space, and let each splint be so large that it passes over the bruise three digits on each side; then constrain upon the splints, as I said at the beginning of the chapter on the bruise, more strongly and less widely.
And if you see the position of the bones, and the constriction, as we have said, in the hour that you restore the broken limb, and you doubt the hot abscess, leave it tied until the seventh day, as we have said; then look every three days the ligature, that pricking nor swelling does not come to the place, or that the purulence may not come to the member for because it is too inflamed. If this is the case, as we have said.
And if no such accidents come to pass, do not untie it before three days or more, and have the patient sleep on his back, and place his hands upon his stomach; and put under the shoulder one cushion full of wool evenly, and look each hour of the day or of the night that the figure of the broken limb does not move, or that the ligaments are not softened; if this is so by virtue of medicine, then give him the meat as we have previously set forth, in such manner that the meat be at first subtle; and when he begins to recover, it should be thick. And it is customary that the shoulder and leg ought to be recovered in forty days of all; and thereupon one must untie it and administer bath and medicines of emollient for the place to be healed.  And if the constriction is ugly and encumbered, it remains untied for one day or two months.
of the fracture of the arm
The arm is composed of .ij. bones, which are called the two "fosciles", because one is small, and that is the one that follows the pouch; and the other is large, and that is the one that is below, towards the little joint; by chance breaks the large foscile alone, or the small one, and by chance both together.
When the small foscile is broken, the restoration is light, and the healing; and when the large one is broken, the healing is bad, and more grieved than when they are broken together. If it is the small foscile that is broken alone, then it is necessary to gently stretch it, and put it straight.
And if it is the large foscile, then it is necessary to pull harder; and place it on one cushion, and hold the pouch of the hand higher than the others, and the little joints lower than the other joints, and let the patient be crossed on himself, and one cushion in front of him higher, so that the patient does not suffer any labor; then extend the ministers of his arm to the part below his hand, or at one line, and the other minister at another above. And then put the pieces straight, according to their best form.
And if in the fracture there are pieces, put each one in its place, and if there is any detached that pricks the heart, and you cannot restore it to its place, then do as and the bone, as we have said before.
And if with the fracture there is a wound, I have spoken of it in the singular chapter; so take care of it.
And if at the beginning of the restoration an abscess arises, glue i.e., a bandage of cerote made of rose oil and white wax, that it is neither too hard nor too soft; and tie i.e., bandage over carefully, until the abscess is calmed. And then remove the cerote, and put on the plaster of the mill powder with plenty of egg, then put the splints, and let the splint of the fracture be placed in more, and a little wider than the others; and know that it must have six splints or arms in more dispositions: whether the fracture is in one bone, or two; and restrain above the fracture more than elsewhere, and every day less distancing, as I said at the beginning of the chapter; and let the bandages that are on the fracture be soft and moist, and not hard nor rough; and let the thread, by which it is bound, be of linen, neither too thick nor too fine, as we have said. And reward the limb and the ligament after some days. And if any bad accident happens to the limb, such as itching that comes to the limb, it is necessary that you raise the limb in hot water, until the itch is appeased; and let the limb not at all rest. And then begin again the stretching, and if the ligaments are softened and the bones dislocate, and similar things, so the address.
And if it happens that the numbing cannot come to the limb, because it is too tight, it is necessary that you soften it a little, and leave it so for some days, until the numbness passes, and then restrain it.
And if none of these things that we have said happen to the patient, do not release him until 20 days, or until he can put his hands to his neck, and his collarbones are equal, and beware of movement and agitation, and sleep on his back; and know that this fracture is restored in 30 days or 35, and perhaps in 20 days, according to the compositions and the complexities of the virtues.
of the fracture of the hand
Know that on the back of the hand and on us there are few fractures, and it comes but rather often a sprain many times.
And when the palm of the hand is broken or sprained, it befits that the patient sit cross-legged and be straight in front of him equally; then put his hand on the table outstretched, and extend the ministers the broken bones, and put them equal to the sides, so long as they are well joined; and put the plaster and the bandages, if an abscess does not come, then put a splint according to the quantity of the place; and be enveloped in one cloth of linen.
And if the fracture is in the palm towards the belly of the hand, make a sphere of cloths, and command the patient that he grasp it to his broken palm; then strain it with a long cloth, and let the splint be of hard wood as large as the palm of the hand, and strain it, as it befits.
And if the fracture is at the forearm, it is necessary that you put a splint on top, and another below in the palm, so that the hand be open and straight, then tie it tightly around the hand, and seal the linen between the two.
And if the fracture comes to any of the bones of the arms, if it is the arm, put it straight as it should; and restrain it with the palm, and if you see fit, put a small straight splint to raise the fracture, and do not move it. And if the fracture is in another finger, such as the index or one of the others, put it straight, and tie it with the healthy finger that follows; or tie them all together in one band, which is better, or put on top a splint, like the pouch; and take care in the restoration and arrangement of the hot and dry abscess, and cure those who come to it, as I have said.
of the broken hip
The bone of the hip is often broken, and it is well seen when it turns forward and backward; and the restoration is by one ligament above the fracture, and one below. And the patient lies on his face, then each minister stretches his limb to his equal part; and this is when the fracture is committed into the bone.
And if the fracture is near the root of the hip, then one ligament goes towards the groin, and the other ligaments below the fracture. And also if it is near the knee, and therefore let the ligaments be beside the knee, and let the extension be down; then put the mirrors the bone to its two hands, as long as it is according to its natural figure, and then put the splint, and the tie, if an abscess does not come.
And if there is a hot abscess, then let it be calmed and then return to your work and your care; the ligation is made in this manner. It behooves you to wrap on the bruise .i. with a hard bandage doubled in .ii. or .iii., and keep the superfluities, then turn the leg until the heels come to the root of the thigh, and put .i. long thread between the hip and the leg, below the knee, and bring the head of the thread upwards; then turn back on the leg and on the hip the bandage, then put above the bruise splints, and put a splint on the bone of the leg; then employ the space between the leg and the hip with cloths soft to put equal tightening, then begin to tie firmly .iii. or .iiii. above the bruise; and as you go higher up the bruise, and less tighten it; then catch the .ii. heads of the thread that you have put between the leg and the hip, and bind .iii. splints that are above, then rise downwards to the head of the thread, until you come below the foot; and tighten it, so that it does not move from its place, then leave it so, until it comes neither abscess nor inflammation nor any other semblance.
And if it happens, untie it, and address what comes out, as we have said many times; and if there are pieces of bone that catch, it is necessary to remove them, if one can; and if one cannot, it is necessary to split the place, and drain pus; and cure it as we have said, until it is healed.
And no time is the hip broken in this way if one puts splints on it, as in the shoulder and arm; however, in the restoration made this way, the patient does not complain.
And know that the fracture is healed in one day, or a little less or a little more, according to the varieties of constitutions.
Of the rue of the knee
Know that in the rue of the knee there are few fractures, but it bends many times. And if it breaks, it is merely a fissure, or one split, and there is both wound and no wound, and this is well known.
And the restoration is done this way: one puts it straight what is rounded to its sides, as much as it can be assembled before moving it; then one applies a splint, and puts a round staff over it, if you have need of it, and restrains it as is fitting; then restore all the arrangements that we have said in other fractures, such as hot poultice and similar things; put to each accident what is necessary for it, until it is healed.
of the fracture of the leg
Know that in the leg there are two bones, so one is called by right "mustelz," and the other is called "foscile"; and there are all kinds of fractures as it comes to the arm, and for this reason the restoration is like that of the arm equally, and the works are all alike.
And if the two bones are broken together, it turns the leg in all parts.
And if the small bone is broken, it turns forward.
And if the large bone is broken, one feels great pain, and it is clearly seen; and turns downward. Therefore administer extension, and set it even, and tie the splints evenly; but nonetheless, it befits that if the fracture is bad, and there are more pieces, that the extension be less and lighter; and the splint according to its virtue.
And when you have completed your work, take two strips of woolen cloth that support the leg on both sides, and be the length of the leg from the knee down; then wrap in two lengths one bandage above and below, and tie it in the middle also, and at this juncture, the leg cannot decline to the right or to the left, and thus is well; and none administer one stick along the leg, and if it is of wood, and put on the leg to ward off movement, and properly made one's in the fracture where there is a wound; and move each day the leg, to see if there is an abscess hot or other accident; so treat until it is healthy.
of the fracture of the bones of the foot
At the ankle there comes no fracture, but the bones of the foot come at any time fracture and to two places, and there is not there been other than that which causes in many positions.
And if there comes fracture of the bones of the foot, and you see these bones overlap each other, put now the patient's foot on the ground, just as if he would walk, and then put your foot upon his, where the bones are raised, then press it until they return to their places; then put plaster and bandages above, and put under the belly of the foot a small board to two fingers wide, then restrain the foot well, then that you have enveloped bandages, and other things which you need.
And when three days or four will have passed, undo the bandage, because you will find the bones equal, whether broken or dislocated.
And if there are any of the bones broken, restore them, as we have said about the bones of the hand; then put on the broken bone a splint according to the length of the bone, and be a little more wide, then put under the foot that table that I have said, and restrain it well; and if there are .ij. or .iij., or more, broken, put on each bone a splint according to its quantity, enveloped in one cloth of linen, and restrain the table under the foot; and let it be standing on the head of the table further from the belly of the foot, so that it holds well.
And it is necessary that you do not forget the other things that I have said about other fractures, as we have said; and support each accident as it is necessary.
of the fracture of the bone of the hand
When the bone of the woman's nature is broken, make her sit with her legs spread wide open, then incline her to the back part, and hold her there; then fill the vagina with cotton, and put in it as much as one stone; then turn the woman over, and lift her back a little, and then remove the cotton, until it comes to the entrance of nature, and the bone returns with the stone; and when she wants to urinate, remove the cotton, and when she has urinated, put it back, and thus do for seven days or more: so will be restored the fracture, and if you see it, take a bladder of lamb, and tie a straw to its opening, and put the whole bladder into nature; then blow into the straw until the bladder is inflated inside: nature will return the fracture; then fill it with cotton, and leave it like this for several days, until it is healed.
And when the bone of the finger of the man or woman is broken, restore it as we have said about the hip bone; and these fractures are not hidden from those who put their study and practice into them, and read my book. For the fracture signifies to more dispositions the right way of restoration: therefore listen.
In the member, when it is broken, take a goose's throat and put it into the member; then wrap bandages around it, and leave it for three days or until healed, and it will be healed quickly.
of fracture with wound
It behooves him who has a fracture with wound, even if it is great, like the bone of the hip or shoulder or similar, that he be healed now, so that the healings that we have said testify to it.
And if the wound heals, then let the restraint of vitriol remain, if you have nothing else, and then begin to restore the fracture in that same hour, or on that same day, if an abscess does not come.
And if an abscess does come, then leave the restoration until the ninth day, as long as the abscess is calmed, and do not touch it on the third or fourth day, for you would bring about a bad accident.
And if the broken bone is appearing on the uncovered heart, then it behooves you to put it in place gently with your hands, by small extension.
And if the extension is not readily available to put it in place with your hands, then resort to this instrument which is of iron, which has .vij. or .viij. finger-lengths long, and the width according to the quantity of the wound; and for this, it is necessary for the one who makes it to engrave .iii. or iiij., according to what he needs in each cure of a fracture; and let it be round and a little thick so that it does not bend under compression on the member during your work, and let it be pointed at the front, and thicker from the middle forward, thus:
And it is called "palainche", for which reason the curved piece should be placed on the head of the visible bone; and thrust in once, so that it comes back up, and be equal one against the other. And if the fracture is subtle, and the instrument cannot well grasp the bone, then it behoves you to cut the head of the bone, as long as the instrument has possession of it.
And if you cannot bring back the bone, as we have said, so cut it with a suitable instrument, either incisor or saw, to your power; then clean those which remain in the bone of roughness and small splinters.
And when the bone is brought back, and the patient feels great pain afterwards, know that it is not in its natural place. So do as much as it takes until it is in its place, then moisten one cloth in black stippling wine, and properly if it is in a wound; and do not put on the wound any cerote or anything else where there is oil, lest it cause rot and corruption; then administer poultices when you have restored the bone, and leave the wound open, and cut the covering all around, according to the quantity of the wound, and give yourself well in guard that the wound be not strained with the fracture; and many times fools have done this, and have brought upon the patient either death or corruption at any time; and let the straining be softer and more gentle than other fractures.
And if the wound is bad or large, and you doubt that bad accidents may come to it, as we have said, and you find pain in the place, then it is not necessary to put poultices on; but wrap around, instead of poultices, hard cloths, and tie them. And when you see after one or two days an opening toward the wound, so remove those that you have put on with all wine, and put healing ointment for wounds there, such as ointment tetrafarmaçon and similar ones.
And it is necessary that you untie the limb two times a day, in the morning and in the evening, until it is united and healed.
And it is necessary that the limb be supported in such a manner that the bone goes down gently.
And if the next day, and it cannot unite anymore but returns back bone, know that there are small pieces of bone, so it is necessary that you cover the wound with a bandage, and remove all these loose pieces which bring that pain.
And if a fistula comes to the place, or some other manner of corruption, it is necessary that you cure it, according to what is said in his chapter above. And when the bone is broken, and open on the limb, such as the bone of the hip or shoulder, and similar bones of the great limbs, do not treat it, because many times death comes from it, but leave it until it rots; perhaps after 20 or 30 days it will fall away, then cure the wound if you can; and if you cannot, leave it.
of the boils that come from the swelling
We often come after the health of the bruise, even when it is near the joint, and it is a bad thing to see the figure of the limb; and perhaps it cannot make the member its natural works.
Take ward then if it is fresh: if it has administered medicines styptic, such as aloes, incense, and myrrh, and sarcocolla, acacia, and similar others, in such a way that you take any of these things, or all together, and you concoct them with styptic wine or with white of egg or with oil; and put it on the bruise in poultices, and restrain it well, and do not loosen it in the hands for days; and then unloosen it, and begin another one, until the swelling is gone; or you restrain it on a piece of plank that is well made; because the properties of the plank are such that it removes all the swellings from the limbs; and if the swelling is already converted into hardness like stone, and it is necessary to remove it, then cut above it, and make the superfluity apparent; or you return it to any razor, until it is removed, and the cure until it is healed.
When the bone fracture is set, and afterward the limb remains weak and subtle, it happens for many reasons: one of which is because it was bound too tight, and not tied as it should; or because there were too many ligatures, and it cannot come to the nourishment of the member; or due to too much rubbing; or because of too great movements, not at the right time; or because he has little blood in his body, so is weak.
And the cure is that you make the patient eat, and to make the body tender, as long as the blood is multiplied in him; and administer baths to him, and give him joy and leisure; then put poultices on the limb, so that the poultice draws to great nourishment, and the rub often with a wet cloth, until the nourishment comes to the member; and returns to its natural figure.
the limb after the healing
When the limb is twisted after restoration, and the broken bones are open, and the shape of the limb is ugly, nevertheless it does not lose its natural function: so do not believe the fools who say that one must break the limb anew, and many foolish people have done this in our land; and this work is blamed, and comes great harm, and perhaps death; nevertheless, if the nodules and the torments are fresh, then it befits that they be raised with hot water, or softening herbs are cooked, such as leaves of marsh mallow, and roots, and honey, and similar things; and the one makes a softening poultice, such as diaquilon well made, and you take the vismalve fleece, and confit it with goose fat or sesame oil, and make a poultice on top; or you take figs and grease them, and grind them with flaxseed, and similar medicines that lessen the swelling.
And at no time is the nodule removed by rubbing continuously and lengthily with wet hands. And be sure to give movement to the limb every hour.
And if the twisting is ingrained and hardened, as with stone, and need is to remove it with iron, then it befits to cut up to the bone, with a subtle incisor lightly; and put cussing and study into the care.
Here begins the book of dislocations
Dislocation is an exit from any joint from its place, for which it cannot move, and the limb is badly shaped, and the patient feels great pain and great injury.
When dislocation comes to anyone, it should now be brought back without splinting.
Because if one delays, the limbs swell, and by chance if one puts it back in place with pains; for this reason it is not good that one moves it an hour when it is swollen: many times it brings on a spasm and other pains;
Nevertheless, when this happens, if you have the patient bleed, then leave him, until the abscesses are each calmed; then raise the limb in hot oil, and then gently reset it, and treat each member as the wound comes to its place.
And I have ordered the chapters of dislocations of the head to the foot.
of the jawbone
It happens that the jawbones are dislocated and the dislocations of both are according to .ij. manners: or they are a little removed from their places, and softened a little; or they are completely dislocated, and hang towards the cheek, and cut off saliva from the mouth so that it cannot hold it, nor can it close its mouth, and envelops its tongue with speech.
When the dislocation is small, it returns by the many more dispositions.
And if it is whole and complete, then you must reset it carefully and do not boast at all;
and in such a manner that the minister holds the head of the patient, and puts his middle finger into the root of the dislocation of the jaw from within the mouth, if the dislocation is of two parts; and the other hand should be outside, to put it straight; and command the patient to soften them, his mandibles, and move them in all directions.
And the finger puts it straight, until it returns to its place.
And if it is brought back with pain, even if it is the two jaws together, then apply hot water and oil, as long as you gently reset them; do not be afraid to bring them back, as we have said.
And when they are brought back evenly, and the mouth of the patient is well closed without softening, then place on damp cloth in a felt made of rose oil and wax, then tie it lightly with soft bindings.
And let the patient sleep on his back, and his shoulders be between two pillows, so that he does not move them to the right or left, nor does he try to chew, but take light food, until the pains are gone, and the jaws are numbed.
And then gently move it and let him not make an effort to open his mouth for eating or drinking until the jawbone is well joined and healed.
And if the two jawbones cannot be set back in an hour, and are not brought back to their places, then come fevers and accustomed swellings, and perhaps a solution of the belly, and perhaps vomiting of cold phlegm.
And when you see this, then know that it is a deadly sign; and many times those who have it die within eight days.
Of the fork
The forceps cannot dislocate from within the side of the rib and from the hip, and it is dislocated no time at the outside, and well one feels it.
And the restoration is that the patient lies soundly on his back, and extends his arms; and then presses the place with the palm of your hand, and it will return; then put on the splint and bandage, and restrain.
And the shoulder that is toward the rib cannot be dislocated; if not, and if it dislocates any time, reset it to its place, as we have said; then put on the splint and bandage, and restrain, and command the patient to rest until he is healed.
And in the same way, is returned the shoulder of the scapula, when it is dislocated from its place.
of the dislocation of the shoulder
Know that the shoulder is dislocated in only .iij. ways: of which one is that it is dislocated to the side of the breastbone downwards; and the second is to the side of the chest; and perhaps dislocated upwards, and this happens little;
and it is not dislocated behind for the shoulder, and it is not dislocated inwards for the nerves; and many times dislocated downwards towards the breastbone, especially to those who have little flesh, because at these it goes readily; to those who have enough flesh, it goes with difficulty, and enters with difficulty.
And perhaps it happens to some men percussion or fracture, and swells the shoulder with a hot abscess, and they think that it is dislocated because of this.
Therefore it is necessary that you prove it, until you are certain; and then begin the cure.
And it is known dislocation when it is pushed towards the seat, and puts a difference between the sick shoulder and the healthy one, and you will find between their variety manifest; And you will find at the head of the shoulder a hollow, and under the seat to touch the head of the shoulder, as if it were one piece; and the patient cannot bring his hand back to its place, nor move from any movement;
And also, if it is dislocated upward, it is not hidden, because you find it manifestly by touching;
and this manner of dislocation is not amiss to bring back, when it is new, or if the child is sick.
And the manner is that the ministers lift the hand of the sick person upwards, then put their thumbs under the armpit, and lift the joint with force upwards to its place; and the ministers lift the hand and extend it upwards, then put it downwards; so it will come back gradually.
And if it does not come back as we have said in the hands shortly after, then it is necessary for the sick person to be bathed in hot water; and the minister must apply ointment softening and soothing, such as decoction of aloe and fenugreek and honey in water, and administer it;
then the sick person should be laid on their back, and put under the armpit a cloth of wool equal, neither too soft nor too hard, then place the heel of the shoulder on the cloth, and lift the head of the shoulder virtuously, and pull the hand of the sick person;
and other ministers hold the head of the patient, so that it does not move down; that shoulder returns all now, and if you see so reset it according to this manner:
and that you have a man present who is greater than the patient; and he be straight towards the side, and put his shoulder under the seat of the patient, and lift the seat up so that the patient hangs in the air; and other ministers pull the hand of the patient down towards the belly. And if the patient is too light, so hang with him something heavy, and the dislocation returns now.
And reset it also in another manner: and is on put one long stick in the earth, whose head be as much round as a pistol, and be neither too thick nor too thin; then let the patient be placed underneath, but that he has a cloth above, and the patient is standing from the long of the staff; then let his hand be extended down on the other side forming, and the joint will return to its place quickly.
and if it does not want to return for all these things that we have said, then do this cure: take one splint of two arms and four fingers wide, which has the head rounded for it to enter in through the bottom of the ass, according to this form:
then tie on top of the staff cloth above, that the staff does not sting the patient, then place it under the buttocks of the patient; and extend his arm on the staff of the long, and tie the shoulder to the staff, and the arm to the head of the hand, then put the arm onto one rung of a ladder wide, and let the hands be extended down, and let the body hang from the other side: the joint will return now.
And when it is in, in whatever manner that it is, it behoves you to put under the saddle a sphere of wool even, then put the emplasters prepared powder from the mill, with incense and auburn of egg, on all the shoulder and around, then restrain it under the saddle evenly, and turn the linen on the emplasters, and embrace the hand to its neck, and let the hands remain thus.
And it behoves that he move little, as long as the limbs are strengthened, because it will heal faster; and then move more after five or seven days, and move it; and if it is hardened and it is not softened, then it is healed.
And if the joint is far from its place because of moisture that has come, or for another cause, then it behoves you to administer cautery to three punctures, as it is put before or chapter of cauteries.
And if you do all these things, and he unties after .vii. days, and the joint does not hold, and cannot lift his arm up, then know that the nerve at the head of the shoulder is severed or extended or softened; and know that the joint will never be fixed in its place.
The dislocation that is towards the hip, and the breasts, or behind, is made by impulse, and extension of hands, and it administers in another place; and cure until it be healthy.
And if after the healing comes pain to the limb, and slowness of movement, then use the patient baths many times, until that pain is alleviated, and returns to its first nature.
of the dislocation of the shoulder
Know that the joint of the shoulder is dislocated to many places, and returns to many places; and it is dislocated from all sides, and even in front and behind, and the dislocation is not replaced, because one sees it well and feels it well; and dislocated according to each figure. And when you join the shoulder of the patient with the healthy one, if you can see it clearly. Because the joint is locked, and cannot bend the arm, nor touch its shoulder to anything.
And it is necessary to reset it thus as if abscesses come from there, because if abscesses came from there, it would be grievous to bring it back; and by chance, it may not be able to be brought back completely at all, even when it is behind; so it is worse than the other dislocations, and it is of greater pain, and by chance death comes.
And the restoration is thus, when it is such that one can bring it back, that you extend your hand to its two hands; and its arms should be spread out, and the hands touch according to the blade around, above and below, and push the joint to its breast together, or to the root of its palm, until it returns to its place.
And if the dislocation is in front, it returns when it doubles its hand to its hand, and fire of the root of the palm the blade which is dislocated.
And if it does not want to return to its place, administer strong extension; and is that two ministers extend the arm, and hold it with two ministers, so that it does not move during the extension; then turn the arm on each side, then that you have enveloped a double long and wide drape;
and when the mire puts the joint to its place, if the oil of any oil to soften the joint, then put the joint together, until it returns.
and when it is in place, put on a dry plaster with the white of an egg, and hold it together, and hang the arm to the neck of the sick person, and leave it for some days, then untie it.
And if the joint is firm in its place, untie the bandage and leave it; and if you see that the joint isn't well set, begin again with the plaster and bandage, and leave it so for some days, until it is firmly placed; then untie it.
And if he feels pain after the resetting of the joint, and it moves, bathe it and rub it well, and press until it is soothed; or put a fleece of fat sheep on the joint, then leave it for 1 day and night, then remove it, and let him go into a bath; And when he sweats, rub the joint moderately, then put the bandage back on, and then go into the bath; and thus do it two or three times, until he is cured; and if you see that it has not returned, put on a layer of moist wool heated with butter, and strain it over; and it will return to its place.
The dislocation of the hand
The joint of the hand is dislocated, and its return is lighter than the other joints. However, it is necessary to bring it back to its place immediately when it is dislocated, so that the joint does not swell or become inflamed with heat.
And the return is that you put the sick hand on a table, and extend the minister's hand, and the mire puts it even, so that he puts his palm on the appearance of the joint, and pushes until it comes back.
However, it is necessary that you look if it is well in its place; then put the sick person's back of his hand on a table at extension and return. And if the dislocation is on the back of the hand, put the sick person's back of his hand on the table, and the mire puts his hand on the appearance of the joint. If it comes back now, that's good.
If not, if the straining of soothing plasters is applied to abscesses, and he leaves it so without restarting.
And if he cannot bear it, and you cannot put it back in its place after several days, the joint remains twisted.
And it harms the patient nothing except that as long as the hand is numb, and cannot grasp anything at all: therefore know that the nerves are cut, or the artery; if there is no other way except to restrain by cautery according to the case, and perhaps there is no other remedy.
And when the hand is in place, put on the splint that we have said, then restrain it and leave it for 5 days, then untie it and leave it so.
And if he cannot move it well, and there is no wound, then moisten it with hot water, and rub it until it is sound.
of the dislocation of the fingers of the hand
Sometimes the fingers of the hand are dislocated on one side, sometimes on the back of the palm or on the belly.
Therefore, are the fingers, and push the dislocation into your pouches until it comes back, then support the head of the finger, and bend it towards the part where it is disjointed.
and leave it for 2 days, and then put it straight each day; and do not tie it, as we have said, and untie it each day, and make it move, and re-tie it tightly. And do this often, until it is tight.
and in the same way do, if it is dislocated in the palm of the hand, and do as you have done before, until it is healed; and in the same way do, when it is dislocated elsewhere.
of the dislocation of the spine of the back
When the spine of the back or the neck is dislocated, or there are several dislocations, if there is no cure, because death hastens the patient.
And the signs of this are that the legs jump or move involuntarily and cannot be held, and many times they soften some limbs, or both hips or both arms or one.
And many times the shoulder moves to four parts; that which moves at the back is called "gilbositez":
The cure for it is that you reward if the gilbositez came from childhood; if there is no cure nor healing of all.
And that which comes from a fall or percussion or similar things, the ancients said methods of cure by great words, or there is no great profit in all.
but I have abbreviated it according to my intention, and have formed instruments in various ways.
I say that in the swelling that comes to the breast before, there is nothing that heals.
And also that which comes straight in the two sides, and one cannot cure it except for properly that which comes to the back, as I say.
And that the patient be stretched on his face in one level place, and have strain under him so that he does not turn over.
Then place one splint at the head in earth forming, and one other at the feet, and tie a linen cord between the shoulders of the patient, and one other at the hips, and knees, and ankles.
and the minister knowing the ligaments, one at the head and the others at the feet, among the two bones;
and be well closed, the bone as we have said, and the minister puts his palms on the spine forming, until it returns.
And if it does not return by this cure, then take a board three arms long, and place it under the body, and the patient lies on his side, and push the head of the board under the body, then put the middle of the board on the spine; and put the minister his feet on the other end of the board, and press well, until it returns to its place; and if you see it, then do it with the turner that turns by hand.
And it is that you place 2 rods on the head of the sick person from one arm and towards the feet 2 others, and there should be between each rod, above and below, a palm's width of length.
And there should be in each rod one hole where the turn comes, and the rods should be firmly in the ground so that they do not move; and between 2 rods there should be 1 turning rod, for which the linen turns, and there should be in 2 turning rods 2 small rods of a palm's width long, to turn the turn.
And then tie the linen that is among the axles to the turn towards the head, and the other linen towards the feet to the other turn, and each of the ministers turns his turn on all the linen, and the master puts the spine straight as we have said.
And when it is even, put on a drying plaster with abundance of egg, and then the bandages, and then the support of a tablet of .iij. inches long, that reaches the place of the gibbosity and the part of the healthy spine, then tie it with a linen cloth, as we have said, and let the patient use subtle nourishment, until he is healed;
And if anything comes in the end of healing, it is necessary to administer softening and soothing medicines, with the support that we have said before; and sometimes one administers a piece of cork,
and sometimes the appearance comes in the back spine of the back, and one thinks that it is a dislocation; and it is the bone that opens, for which reason one should not have presumption; by chance could come death.
of dislocations of the hip
Know that the joints of the hip and the joints of the shoulder come out only dislocations, not as other joints; and the joint of the hip is dislocated into .iiij. parts: inside and outside, and front and back; and more inside then, and less dislocated front and back.
And the knowledge of this dislocation inside is that when one joins the diseased leg with the healthy one, it is longer, and opens the diseased knee more than the healthy one, and the diseased person cannot double his knee to the fire. And it is the place which is near swollen with a hot abscess, because the head of the hip comes there.
And the sign of him to whom it comes on the outward side, is that this accident is contrary to those before.
And the sign of him to whom it happens in front, is that his leg is well aligned according to its completion; nonetheless, he does not double his knee without pain, and if one wants him to go forward, he cannot before, and he retains his urine, and swells his anger, and when he goes, he passes over the heel.
And the sign of him to whom it happens behind, is that he cannot spread his knee or double it, and his leg is more twisted than the other, and his anger is softened, and his hip is at the place below the ribs.
The treatment of this kind of dislocation is that you examine if the dislocation is old, and it remains according to its position, then there is no need for any treatment; and he must not have any presumption.
And in those whose dislocation is fresh, and there are .iiij. ways of dislocation, so haste that you return the joint, and the extension inside and outside, and the movement to right and left; by chance it will return, and needs no other cure.
And if it does not return in this manner, then it behooves you to apply one strong minister, and extend the leg strongly with two hands, or with one linen cloth that is tied above the knee; and another minister stretches his hand above in such a manner that he pushes his hands below his shoulders, then tightens a linen band over the hip; and another holds the head of the linen cloth;
and extend upwards and downwards all at once, as long as the patient is raised from the ground at once, and remains suspended.
This manner of extension is common to four similar things, and if the dislocation has returned, as we have said, it is good.
If this is not the case, it is necessary to take care of its likeness. When the dislocation is at the back, you must place the patient on his healthy side, then put the linen on the root of the hip, and the place which is below the groin, then extend the linen upwards towards the groin, and towards the thigh;
then get some other ministers to grasp his arms, and embrace the large area of the diseased hip, and extend it outwards in this way; it will now return to its place; and this manner of dislocation is lighter than the others.
And if you cannot tighten it in this manner that we have said, then it is necessary that you tie the two feet of the sick person together with a strong ligature above the two heels, and above the two knees, and let the sick leg be extended two fingers more than the other;
then be hung on the top of a pole, and be two arms long above the ground; then command to one minister that he embraces the hip, and let another ministers hold with the sick person, who embrace firmly the hips, because the joint returns now quickly.
And when the dislocation is at the end, let the sick person lie down, as we have said in the one who has sciatica, and strap one ligature on the sick leg properly, and also on the foot;
Then put two splints, one at the head and one at the feet, then place one splint between the hips of the patient in the shape; and put a plant of wet cloths around it, so that the patient does not bleed, then extend each minister toward him, and he puts the dislocation equal to his hand;
If it returns, it is good. If not, put it on one table and press it as we have said in the [previous section], and lie the patient on his healthy side.
And when the dislocation is in front, it is necessary to extend the injured leg as far as possible and according to what I have said; and put his pain on the suffering angle, then press with the other hand, and guide it down towards the knee.
And if the dislocation is in the back, it is not necessary to stretch the patient down, nor raise up the ground, but he must be as if the hip was dislocated in the back, as we have said about lying on the two hips; And be on his face, and the bond extended as we have said before, and one must press on the joint to the table;
And it will be straight when the patient extends his legs, and they will be equal; therefore adjust the thighs, and put the splint on, and the strain of a bandage, so that the hip does not move;
And rest for 3 or 4 days, then untie it, and put the splint on; and if you see that they are equal, strain it, as before, and leave it for 3 days; then untie it, and let him walk well, until the limb is strengthened.
of the dislocation of the knee
The knee is dislocated in three ways: namely, inside and outside, and behind; and it does not dislocate in front.
And the signs are that you command the patient to bend his leg at his hip, and if he cannot bring it to his hip, know that it is dislocated;
and the restoration of all these is that you make the patient sit upright, and extend his leg as much as he can, and place your back against his thigh, and put his foot on your feet;
Then take his knee in your palms, and draw it between your two hands, then bend the two bones that form the knee; and another minister extends his foot, until the knee returns to its place, and the sign is that he will feel his leg easily at his hip.
And put the plaster on top, and make the leg rest at the hip, and tie them together strongly for three or four days, then untie it; and let the patient not work to go, as long as the limb is strengthened.
And if the limb is not right, administer strong extension as we have said in the treatment of the hip, until it is healed.
of the dislocation of the heel
The heels are sometimes dislocated and sometimes completely dislocated, inside and outside.
And the signs of this are that the ankle is swollen and tender before the part where it is dislocated:
The resetting of this should be gentle, and one should extend it gently with their hands when it is merely dislocated.
And when it is dislocated completely, then it is necessary that you make the patient sit upright, and hold him by one leg from below the ankle;
then treat his foot with your right hand, and then with your left two times, then bring it upward, and push the foot beautifully upward;
and do this two times, as we have said, pushing and pulling the foot; if it returns, that is good; if not, begin the work again, because it will return;
and if it cannot return this way, then make the patient lie on his back on the ground, and put one stake firmly in the ground between his thighs, and tie blankets around it so that it does not hurt the patient;
then hold the ministers the hip, and other ministers extend the foot to their hands or at one linen, that they tie above the neck of the foot then extend each minister equally, and the straps be at the hips of the patient to hold the patient when one extends him
then put the mirrors equally the dislocation in their hands, and other ministers hold the healthy leg at the bottom, and the dislocation will return quickly
And when it is in place, then put the plaster and bandages on top, and strain it firmly, and tie the foot to the leg, and guard the nerves which are on the ankle behind, that the ligatures not be too tight.
then let him rest 2 or 3 days, and if the ligaments soften then restrain it; then untie it on the third day or the fourth, and forbid the patient from going out for 4 days. and if he goes before that time, it is not certain that he will not dislocate again.
And if an abscess comes to it then you must soothe it as we have said elsewhere until it is healed.
of two
When the hips are dislocated, it is necessary to extend them well without effort, and it is a light thing.
And if the dislocation is in any part of the back or foot, it is necessary that you make the patient sit on one flat place or on a table perfectly straight, and put your foot on what separates those joints, then press with your foot firmly, until it returns.
And when it is aligned, and there is nothing separating it, then put under the sole of the foot a table at two fingers' width, then strain it firmly, and let him remain for three days, then untie it; and make him rest, until he is healed.
Of wounds and dislocations together
When a wound comes with a dislocation, and it is wanted to restore it, many times it happens that the patient dies.
If you are not presumptuous in the cure, if you are not wise in the art and have not used it for a long time, and if you are not compassionate and merciful and patient, nor too bold;
and use at the beginning soothing things to a hot abscess, and leave the patient in God's hands, if you do not see hope of health. and when you see hope [in the patient], then reset the limb now, so that the abscess may heal.
And when the limb is in place, administer soothing things to the inflamed abscess, and treat the wound as necessary, with dry dressings;
And if the dislocation is accompanied by a fracture, and small bones are displaced, set them, and do what we have said in simple fractures;
And guard yourself from entering the path of fear, according to what I have said, for it will harm you according to your Creator, and for the safety of your weapon and body. Amen
