Ayssi comensan las paraulas de Albucasim .	"Thus begins the words of Albohali."
O, filhs, pus yeu he a vos complit aquest libre, le qual es le derier de la sciencia de medicina, per le compliment de lu so consequit la fi en lu, e per las exposicios de lu, e per las declaracios de lu, es a mi vist que yeu complesca aquel a vos am aquest tractat, le qual es partida de la operacio am ma, so es cyrurgia.	"Oh, sons, since I have completed this book for you, which is the last of medical science, in completing it thus ends its course, and by its explanations and declarations, it seems to me that I fulfill what is lacking for you with this treatise, which deals with manual operation, that is surgery."
Quar la operacio am ma es prostrada en nostre regio e en nostre temps de tot privada, entro que fort leu peric la sciencia de lu, e le vistigi de lu es ostat; e no romasero de lu sino alcunas petitas descripcios en les libres dels Antics, les quals mudero las mas e endevenc ad aquels error e heyssitacio entro que son clausas las entencios de lu e es elonguada la forsa de lu e l’art.	For the manual operation is prostrated in our region and time, entirely private, except that very few remain who possess its science, and its signs are lost; there would remain only a few small descriptions in the books of the Ancients, which have changed their meaning and ended up being guided by those errors and hesitations so that their intentions are closed and its strength is prolonged and its art.
E es vist a mi que yeu vivifique aquela am ordenacio de aquest tractat en aquela segon la via de exposicio e de declaracio e de abreviacio; e per que vengua am las formas dels ferramentz de cautheri e dels autres instrumentz de la obra cum sia per addicio de la declaracio, e per preparacio de lu, la qual causa es necessaria.	"And it seems to me that I will revive this with an order according to the treatise's method of exposition and declaration and abbreviation; and also that it comes with the forms of the cautery instruments and other tools for the work as it is for addition to the declaration, and for preparation of it, which cause is necessary."
Mays la causa per la qual no es atrobat bo artifex am la sieua ma en aquest nostre temps, es quar la art de medicina es longua, e que cove le sieu actor denant aquo esser excercitat en la sciencia de anotomia la qual recontec Gualia entro que sapia les juvament dels membres e las formas de aquels, e la conjunctio e la separacio de lor; e haia la conoyssensa dels osses, dels nervis e dels lacertz, e·l nombre de aquels, e la egrecio de lor; e de las venas pulsatils e de las quietas, e dels locs del eyssiment de lor.	"But the cause why there is no good artisan with his hand in this our time is because the art of medicine is long and its performer must be practiced beforehand in the science of anatomy, which includes knowing the structure of members, their connections, separations, the knowledge of bones, nerves, and tendons, their number and their function; and also about the pulsating veins and quiet ones, and the places of their discharge."
E per aquo ditz Ypocras que am u nom es mot, mays en l’obra petit, e majorment en la art de la ma.	"And therefore says Hippocrates that with great words but little work, especially in the art of surgery."
Mays nos ja avem dit de aquel en l’introit de aquest libre; quar qui no es scient aquo que li avem dit de anotomia, no es evacuat que no caia en error per la qual siran mortz les homes, ayssi cum yeu he vist trops de aquels, quar alscus son formatz en esta sciencia e gettan se de aquela ses sciencia e ses experiment.	"But we have already said about this at the beginning of this book; for whoever is not knowledgeable about what we have said about anatomy will certainly fall into error, causing many deaths among men, as I have seen too many cases where some are formed in this science but lack its knowledge and experience."
Quar yeu vi un metge folh e enperit aver incidit un apostema escrophilos en le colh de una femna, e incidic alcunas arterias del colh per que fluic gran sanc entro que la femna cazec morta entre las mas de lu.	"For I saw a foolish and inexperienced doctor incision an abscess in the neck of a woman and cut some arteries of the neck, causing her to bleed greatly so that she died among the masses."
E vi un autre metge que pres que el traguera una peyra d’un home le qual avia procesit en sa etat, e la peyra era gran, e venguet a lu e trayssec aquela peyra am un tros de la vesiqua, per que aquel home al tertz dia es mort.	"And I saw another doctor who took out a stone from a man who was in his final state, and the stone was large; he came to him and extracted that stone with a piece of the bladder, causing that man to die on the third day."
E yeu ja apelat fuy a estrayre aquela, e vi que per la grandesa de la peyra e per la disposicio del malaute conogui subre lu que morira.	"And I already warned him not to do it, but he insisted; and I saw that due to the size of the stone and the condition of the patient, I knew right away that he would die."
E vi un autre metge le qual prenia stipendic de un duc de nostra terra per cyrurgia, e endeven a un crastrat negre le qual era deves lu fractura en la coyssa de lu; e perparec le metge am la sua ignorancia, estrayssec la fractura, sobre la plagua, am pulvinas e astelas am forta strectura, e no layssec a la plagua espiracio.	"And I saw another doctor who received payment of one ducat from our land for surgery; he intervened on a black man who had a broken hip joint. The doctor prepared himself with his ignorance and extracted the fracture over the wound using pillows and wedges with great force, not leaving room for respiration."
E aprop le desliet segons los sieus desiriers, e aprop le relieg, e aprop le leyssec per alcus jorns e comandec que nos deslies le liament; e estec ayssi entro que la coyssa e·l pe foro apostematz, e pervenguet a perdicio.	"And he finished according to his desires and then removed the bandages; but soon afterwards he relapsed and died a few days later because the hip joint became inflamed and gangrenous."
E yeu fuy apelat a lu, e aparelhegui a desliar le liament, e conseguida es tranquilitat e enayssi amermet de sas dolors.	"And I was called to him and prepared myself to remove the bandage; finally there was tranquility and easing of his pains."
Mays empero ja corrupcio era confermada en le membre, per que no pogui refrenar aquela, e no cessec perambular la corrupcio en le membre entro que·l malaute peric.	"But nevertheless corruption had already spread to the limb, so I could not stop it; and corruption continued to spread throughout the limb until the patient died."
E vi un autre metge le qual perforec un apostema cancros, e fo ulcerat aprop alscus dias, entro que foc magnificada la malicia de lu am lo senhor de lu.	"And I saw another doctor who pierced a cancerous abscess; soon afterwards it became ulcerated and its mischief was magnified by the patient's master."
La qual causa es quar le cranc caut es pur de humor melencolic, lahoras no cove que pervengua a lu am ferr de tot, sino que sia an membre le qual suffertes que de tot fos hostat.	"This is because the cancerous ulcer is caused by melancholic bile; therefore it should not be treated with fire alone, but rather that member which suffers from it should be cauterized."
E per aquo, filhs, necessari es a vos que la operacio am ma sia devisada en dos devesios: so es en operacio a lu qual es associada salut, e en obra am la qual es perilh en las majors disposicios.	"And therefore, my children, it is necessary for you that the operation with the hand be divided into two parts: one is the operation associated with health, and the other is the work in which there is danger in the most difficult situations."
E yeu ja he exsitat aquo en tot loc de aquest libre en le qual venc opperacio en la qual es error e temor; per que necessari es a vos que guardetz aquo e layssetz aquel, per que les folhs no atrobo via a parlar e a vos desonestar.	"And I have already pointed this out in all places throughout this book where there is mention of operation involving error and fear; therefore it is necessary for you to keep this in mind and let it go, so that foolish people do not find an opportunity to speak against you."
E donc prenetz las vostras armas am sollicitut e am proteccio de Dieu , e les vostres malautes am falicitat e am fermetat.	"And therefore take up your arms with solicitude and protection of God, and treat your patients with gentleness and firmness."
E usatz de la milhor via per la gracia de Dieu perdusent a salut e a lausabla successio, e laysatz las malautias terriblas de difficil sanacio, e ostatz las vostras armas de aquo que vos fa temer, per so que ysitatio en vostra fe e en le vostre nom no vos evasisca: quar mays es remanent a la vostra gloria, e pus aut en le mon e en derier a las vostras sanctitatz.	"And use the best way to obtain salvation and laudable success through the grace of God, leave behind terrible diseases difficult to cure, show your arms against that which makes you afraid, so that confidence in your faith and your name does not fail you: for more remains to your glory, both now and hereafter to your sanctity."
Gualia ja diyssec en alcunas sieuas monicios:	"Wherefore already in some of his treatises he said:"
“No mediquetz malautia mala, per so que mals metges no siatz nompnatz”.	"No cure illness poorly, lest you be called bad physicians."
E yeu ja he devesit aquest libre segontz tres capitols.	"I have already read this book according to three chapters."
Comensa la divisio del libre, e primier de la primieyra partida.	"Begin the division of the book, and first of the first part."
Le primier capitol ordenat del cap entro·s pes, en las formas dels instrumentz e en les ferrementz dels cauteris, e de aquo que necessari es en la opperacio.	"The first chapter orders the entrance into caves, in the forms of instruments and irons for cauterization, and that which is necessary in the operation."
La divisio de la segonda partida.	"The division of the second part."
Le segon capitol, de siccio e perforacio, e de ventosas, e de plaguas, e de extractio de sagetas e de semblantz ad aquelas, tot capitolat e ordenat de las formas dels instrumentz.	"The second chapter, on cutting and piercing, and on cupping glasses, and on plague doctors, and on the extraction of arrows and similar things, all ordered in the forms of instruments."
Divisio de la tersa partida.	"Division of the third part."
Le tertz capitol, de restauracio e de dislocacio, e de curacio de torcio e de semblantz ad aquels; capitol ordenat del cap entro·s pes, e de las formas dels instrumentz.	"The third chapter on restoration and dislocation, and cure of twisted joints and similar ones; chapter ordered with entrance into caves and forms of instruments."
De cauteri am foc e am medicina aguda e rememoracio de la opperacio.	"On cauterization with fire and with medicine applied acutely, and reminder of the operation."
Am aquel comensa le tractat de tot le libre.	"And with that begins the treatise on all the book."
Cove que yeu digua la qualitat dels juvamentz de aquel cauteri e dels noccumentz de lu, e en qual compleccio sia prohibit cauteri.	"You should say what is the quality of the instruments used for that cauterization and their non-accidents, and in which complexion it is prohibited to cauterize."
Donc dic que·l sermo de la qualitat del juvament de cauteri e del noccument de lu es sermo lonc e prolixs, e subtil per sciensa, e secret amaguat; e ja de lu a parlat gran multitut de savis, e de lu se son desacordatz, et a mi abasta un petit dels sermons de lor, temen perlonguacio.	"Therefore I say that the sermon on the quality of the cauterizing instrument and its non-accident is long and prolix, subtle by science, and secret hidden; and already many wise men have spoken about it, and they disagree among themselves, and it suffices me to mention a little bit of their sermons for fear of length."
E donc dic que cauteri comfereys a tota compleccio universalment la qual es am materia o ses materia, exceptat dos compleccios, las quals son compleccios caudas ses materia .	"And therefore I say that cauterization befits all complexions universally, which are with matter or without matter, except for two complexions, which are called complexions cold without matter."
En la compleccio cauda e secca am materia se desecordero; quar alcus dyssero que cauteri es juvatiu ad aquela, e les autres dyssero le contrari de aquel, que cauteri no es convenient en malautia la qual es per qualiditat e per siccitat, quar natura del foc es qualiditat e siccitat, e enconvenient es que malautia cauda e secca am aquo que es caut e sec sia sanada.	"In the cold and dry complexion with matter there is disagreement; for some said that cauterization is beneficial to it, and others said the opposite, that cauterization is not convenient in an illness which is by quality and by dryness, because the nature of fire is quality and dryness, and it is inconvenient that an illness which is cold and dry with matter should be healed by something hot and dry."
E diysec aquel que ditz le contrari de aquel, que per cauteri es fayt juvament en tota malautia cauda e secca que ve en les cors dels homes, quar quan tu comparas le cors de home e las humiditatz de lu a la compleccio del foc, atrobas le cors de home freg.	"And he says that one who says the opposite of this, that cauterization is made beneficial in all cold and dry illnesses which come into the bodies of men, for when you compare the body of man and its humidities to the complexion of fire, you find the body of man hot."
E yeu dic per le sermo de aquel, que esperiment aquo ja a mi alscunas vetz a descubert.	"And I say that this has already been discovered by experience many times."
Mays empero no cove que vengua sobre aquo aquel que ja es exproat e excersitat en le capitol de cauteri per derier exercici, e a conogut la diversitat de la compleccio dels homes e la disposicio de las malautias en lor meteyssas, e las causas de aquelas, e·ls accidentz de lor, e l’espasi del temps de aquelas.	"But however it is not necessary to come back onto this which has already been discussed and practiced in the chapter on cauterization through previous exercise, and knowing the diversity of the complexion of men and the disposition of illnesses in their meteyssas (i.e. seats), and their causes, accidents, and the space of time of those."
Mays en las autras compleccios, no es sobre vos temor, e majorment en las malautias fregas e humidas, quar ja totz les metges se son acordatz sobre aquels, e no so desecordatz en le juvament am cauteri en aquelas.	"But in the other complexions, there is no doubt about it, and especially in hot and humid illnesses, for all doctors agree on those, and they are not disagreeing in the use of cauterization in those."
E sapiatz, filhs, que del secret de curacio per cauteri am foc e de la bontat de lu, so sobre cauteri am medicina comburent, es quar le foc es simple, la accio del qual no perven sino al membre le qual es cauterizat e no notz al autre membre am lu ajustat sino am petit nocument.	"And know, son, that the secret of cure by cauterization with fire and its goodness is much discussed in burning medicine, because fire is simple, whose action does not extend beyond the member being cauterized, nor does it reach the other member joined to it unless with a little harm."
Mays la accio de medicina comburent perven ad aquel en les membres le qual de lu alunhat, e fort leu fa venir en le membre malautia de dificil sanacio e fort leu ausit.	"But the action of burning medicine reaches to that which is near it in the members, and strong fire brings illness into the member with difficult healing, and strong fire often goes out."
Mays le foc, per la sua sublimitat e de la sua substancia bontat, no fa aquo sino que superfluisca E ja es a nos conogut per experiment e per longitut de servitut de studi am l’art sobre le veritat de las causas; e per aquo yeu so excusat de la longitut del sermo E si no fos que no es legut al mieu libre en aquest pausero a vos secret amaguat am le foc, e la qualitat de la operacio de lu en les cors e de la sieua expulcio per la qual expellis las malautias, am sermo philosophic demostratiu, le qual siria acuit en las vostras pessas.	"But fire, because of its sublimity and goodness of substance, does not do anything except superfluously. And it is already known to us by experience and the length of service in studying this art about the truth of causes; and therefore I am excused from the length of the sermon. And if it were not that my book is not read in this place, I would hide from you in this pause a secret with fire, which is the quality of its operation in bodies and its expulsion by which illnesses are expelled, demonstrated with philosophical speech, which would be sharp for your minds."
E sapiatz, filhs, que els se desacordan del temps en le qual es convenient far cauteri e pausan le milhor temps de primaveyra.	"And know, son, that they disagree about the time when it is convenient to perform cauterization and they place the best time in spring."
E yeu dic que cauteri es convenient en tot temps, per so que le nocument per le temps accident es submergit en le juvament de aquo que am le cauteri es atirat, e majorment si le cauteri es per dolors o de dolors necessaries, fortz e fistinas, las quals no suffertan tarditat per so que es temut de aquelas que vengua malicia, que es major que petit nocument entrant per lo temps.	"And I say that cauterization is convenient at all times, because the harm caused by the accidental time is submerged in the benefit of what is drawn by cauterization, and especially if the cauterization is for pains or necessary pains, strong and fistulous ones which do not tolerate delay because it is feared that they will bring malice, which is greater than little harm entering through time."
E aysso no catz en vostras pessas, o, filhs, aquo no estiman sino le poble vulguar e les fols metges, so es que ad aquela malautia que es sanada per cauteri no es redicio tot temps, e pausan aquel consequen.	"And do not put this in your minds, son, for that is only estimated by the common people and foolish doctors, for they think that illness which is healed by cauterization does not have a return at any time, and they place that consequence."
E la causa no es ges ayssi quo els cuydan per aquo, quar cauteri no es sino en loc de medicina la qual altera la compleccio e esicca las humiditatz las quals son causa per que veno las dolors.	"And the cause is not like that which they think for this reason, because cauterization is only in place of medicine which alters the complexion and dries out the humidities which are the cause why pains come."
Mays empero cauteri superflueys sobre la medicina per volicitat de la sua valitut e vertut de la sua operacio e grandesa del sieu senhor.	"But however cauterization is superfluous over medicine because of the desire for its power and virtue of its operation and greatness of its lord."
E es possible que la sua malautia retorne en alcuna hora del temps, segon la compleccio del malaute e la locacio de la sua malautia, e la vertut de lu, e aquo que es preparat en le cors de lu de la agreguacio de las superfluitatz en lu, e aquo que es pervengut a lu en la sua acquisicio en viandas e semblantz de aquelas causas; sino que la malautia en la qual sia aministrat cauteri sia malautia subtil en membre de paucas superfluitatz e humiditatz, ayssi cum cauteri de dent per dolor e semblantz ad aquel, possible es que en lu no retorne aquela dolor, mays aquo se fa en petitz.	"And it is possible that its illness returns at some hour of time, according to the complexion of the sick person and the location of his illness, and the power of cauterization, and what has been prepared in the body for it by the aggregation of superfluities therein, and what has been obtained for it in its acquisition through foods and similar causes; but the illness in which cauterization is administered is subtle in a member with few superfluities and humidities, like cauterization of a tooth for pain and similar ones, it is possible that this pain does not return, but this is done in small things."
E mays sermo vulgar es que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina, e es sermo dreyturier, no ad aquo que els entendo en lu, quar els crezo que no es curacio que aprofieyta am medicina ni am autra causa aprop cauteri.	"And moreover the common saying is that cauterization is the last remedy of medicine, and it is a truer saying than what they understand in it, because they think that there is no cure that profits with medicine nor any other cause that approaches cauterization."
E la causa es en contrari de aquo; e la entencio que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina no es sino quan administram las manieyras de curacio en alcunas malautias, e aquelas medicinas no conferieysso, e aprop en la fi de la causa aministra hom cauteri, e aprofieyta ad aquela.	"And the cause is contrary to that; and the intention that cauterization is the last remedy of medicine is only when the methods of cure are administered in certain illnesses, and those medicines do not help, and therefore cauterization is administered at the end of the cause, and it profits for that."
E lahoras de aqui cat16 que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina, no segon la entencio la qual entendo les vulgars e trops dels fols metges.	"And from here on I say that cauterization is the last remedy of medicine, not according to the intention which the common people and many foolish doctors understand."
E diyssero les antics que cauteri am aur es milhor que cauteri am ferr, e no diyssero aquo sino per la equalitat del aur e sublimitat de la sua sustancia.	"And they said in ancient times that cauterization with gold is better than cauterization with iron, and they did not say this except for the equality of gold and the sublimity of its substance."
E diyssero que le loc de cauteri no fa brac, cum aquo no sia absolutament vertat, quar yeu ja he aquo proat e he atrobat que aquel no fa aquo sino en alcus cors ses les autres, e cauteri am aquel es bo e milhor que am ferr ayssi quo els diyssero; mays empero quan tu fas cauteri am foc am de aur, no es a tu declarat, quar es egnit segon la quantitat que tu vols per la rugor de l’aur, e quar prepara a recebre freg; e si ajustas sobre lu ignicio se fon l’aur per le foc, e caso en le foc alcunas laminas per que le artifex catz per la occupacio de aquel.	"And they said that the place of cauterization does not burn like that which is absolutely true, for I have already proven and verified that this happens only in certain bodies without others, and cauterization with gold is good and better than with iron as they said; but however when you make a cauterization with fire with gold, it is not declared to you, because the ignition is done according to the quantity that you want because of the hardness of the gold, and it prepares to receive friction; and if you place it on the ignition, the gold will melt by the fire, and some plates will fall into the fire so that the artisan catches by the occupation of that."
E per aquo es fayt cauteri am ferr deves nos pus leugerament e pus propdanament a rectitut de operacio.	"And therefore cauterization with iron should be done more gently and more carefully in order to achieve the right operation."
E yeu ja he ordenat aquest capitol en le cauteri segon capitols, et he ordenat aquels del cap entro les pes, per so que aleugo le demandant aquo que vol de lu.	"And I have already ordered this chapter on cauterization according to chapters, and I have ordered those of the head within the weights, so that later you may ask what you want about it."
De cauteri de dolor de cap per frigiditat e humiditat.	"For headache caused by coldness and dampness."
Le capitol primier.	"The First Chapter."
Aquesta cauterizacio confereys a la humiditat e frigiditat sobre le servel accident de la qual so doas causas, so es causa de soda e multitut de flux raumatic, apelat corissa, del cap a las partidas dels huelhs e de las aurelhas fluent, e multitut de dormir, e de dolor de dentz e del guolayro, e universalment de tota malautia que ve per fregiditat, ayssi cum paraliticament, sodo e apoplexio, e semblantz en aquelas malautias.	"This cautery eliminates humidity and coldness, the accidental cause of which is the excessive flow of phlegm (called corruption) from the head to the eye sockets and ear canals. It also removes excessive sleeping, toothache, and pain in the throat, generally eliminating all illnesses caused by coldness such as paralysis, pleurisy, apoplexy, and similar illnesses."
La forma de aquesta cauterizacio es aquesta, que primieyrament comandes al malaute que sia evacuat am medicina lacsativa le cap mondificant, per tres o per quatre nueytz, segon que exhigeys la vertut del malaute e la edat de lu e la sua costuma.	"The method of this cautery is as follows: first, order the patient to purge their head using laxative medicine for three or four nights, depending on the severity of the illness and the age and constitution of the patient."
E aprop comanda li que raza le sieu cap am razor, e aprop fay aquel sezer entre las tuas mas sobre una banca cayrada e que pause las suas mas sobre le pietz sieu.	"Next, command him to shave his head with a razor. Then make him lie down on a heated stone bench, and place his hands on the stone beneath."
E aprop pausa la razit de la tua palma aprop le pous sobre la razit del nas entre les huels sieus.	"Next, place your palm over his forehead, with your fingers spreading out towards his eyebrows, and press gently."
Mays empero, cum le tieu dit del mieg loc es pervengut, signa aquel loc am tenta, e aprop igneys le cauteri olivar del qual aquesta es la forma:	"But first, when your middle finger has reached the spot, mark that location with ink. Then heat the olive-oil cautery, which looks like this:"
E aprop pausa aquel sobre le loc senhat am tenta, a manieyra que descent, am la qual la tieua ma sia constrengida petit a petit, e tu revolveys aquel.	"Then place the cautery on the marked spot, pressing down steadily while twisting it gently to ensure good contact. Keep twisting until you see smoke rising from the skin."
E aprop leva la tua ma leugerament e reguarda le loc, e si veses ja del os esser descubert alcuna quantitat del cap, ayssi cum la quantitat de gra de errs, lahoras eleva la tua ma, e si no torno la tua ma am aquel ferr, am autre de aquel, si es enfrigidat, entro que sia vist del os aquo que yeu he dit a tu.	"Then lift your hand gently and observe the spot. If you see some bone exposed on the skin, like a grain of barley, then remove your hand immediately. But if not, return your hand with the iron and continue until you see what I have described."
E aprop pren un petit de sal e disolveys aquel sobre le loc e leyssa aquel per tres jorns.	"Then take some salt and dissolve it on the spot. Leave it there for three days."
E aprop pausa sobre lu coto enbegut en boder e leyssa aquel sobre lu entro que sia destrusida la scara del foc.	"Next, apply a border of wax around the cauterized spot and leave it there until the burn scar has healed completely."
E aprop cura le loc am anguent tetrafarmacon entro que sia sanat.	"And finally, treat the location with Tetterwax ointment until it is fully healed."
E ja diyssero que quant la plagua roman uberta, tant mielhs geta le brac, per que es milhor e mays juvatiu.	"When the wound remains open, it is better to bind the arm, which is more beneficial and helpful."
E diyssero alcus de lor que sia cauterizada la codena entro al os, e sia tengut le cauteri entro que sia adhurida alcuna partida de la specitut del os.	"It was said by some of them that the spine should be cauterized inside the bone, and the cautery should be held until some part of it adheres to the substance of the bone."
E aprop sia ras aquo que es adhust del os, e aprop sia curat.	"And then what sticks to the bone should be scraped off, and then it should be treated."
E diyssero autres que am lo cauteri pervengua al derier, entro que enprema en le os forta enprecio entro que le os caga, e aquesta es la forma de alphecati petit:	"And others said that when the cautery reaches the end, it should be pressed strongly onto the bone until the bone cracks, and this is the form of the little cautery."
E estiman de aquel loc expiran la vapors del cap.	"And they believe that at that point the vapors of the head expire."
E sia tenguda la plagua uberta per lonc temps, e aprop sia curada entro que sia consolidada.	"And if the wound remains open for a long time, it should be treated until it is consolidated."
Mays a mi no so vistas aquestas doas specias de cauteri de tot, sino en alcus homes segon via de temor; e layssa aquel, deves mi, milhor es am salut, quan es; quar le cap es develitat per solucio de continuitat de lu ayssi cum havem testificat en les autres membres, e majorment quan le cap del malaute es de freul natura.	"But I do not see these two kinds of cauteries at all, but rather in some men due to fear; and leave that, it seems to me better with health when there is; because the head is opened by solution of continuity from this way just as we have testified in the other members, and even more so when the head of the sick person is of frail nature."
E la specia de cauteri primieyra es mays salva e milhor deves mi; e de aquela husi e am aquela obra am salut.	"And the first kind of cautery is safer and better in my opinion, and with that I do indeed agree, because with that it is healthier."
Capitol segon.	"Chapter 32." (This means "Chapter According to the Numbering System")
Del cauteri del cap.	Of cauterizing the head.
Quan en tot le cap accideys dolor cronica e longua e aquo es en le malaute prolonguat, e usa de gerras e de cochias e de capipurges e de emplaustres e de guatz e de cadels e de gualinas e de semblantz, e majorment si ja es cauterizat am un cautere le qual recontam e no aprofieyta a lu deguna de aquelas causas, lahoras considera quar si le cap del malaute es de fort creacio en la sua natura; e no es freul et atroba mot gran freg, lahoras aquel cauterisa am autra cauteri dejos aquel un pauc.	"When the head has chronic and long-lasting pain and this is in prolonged illness, and medicines and plasters and cataplasms and poultices and ointments and catarrhs and similar things are used and even if it has already been cauterized with one cautery which does not help for any of those causes, then consider whether the head of the patient is of strong creation in its nature; and if it is not frail but rather somewhat thin-skinned, then that person should be cauterized with another cautery in addition to that one."
E aprop cauterisa aquel sobre le corn del sieu cap am cauteri entro que la codena es partida.	"And accordingly cauterize him over the horn of his head until the cord is severed."
Incisa la codena e sia descuberta del os la quantitat la qual havem recontat e cauteriza aquel am un cauteri en la partida deriera del cap en le loc le qual es apelat vas, — e es aquel loc en le qual es pausada ventosa.	"Cut the cord and uncover the bone as much as we have mentioned and cauterize him with a cautery at the back of the head in the place called 'vass' — that is where the cupping glass is placed."
Et alleuja la tua ma en aysso, e no descobras le os, quar le malaute per aquo atroba mot gran dolor diversa de la dolor de totz les autres cauteris del cap.	"And do not uncover the bone in this case because the pain caused by it is very different from the pain of all other cauteries on the head."
E yeu diyre aquest cauteri en son loc, quar cove que·l cauteri am le qual so cauterisatz les corns del cap e le occiput es pus subtil cauteri que aquel am le qual es cauterisat le mieg loc del cap; e aquesta es la forma de lu.	"And I tell you this cautery is placed in its location because the cautery with which the horns of the head and the occupit are cauterized must be more subtle than that with which the middle of the head is cauterized, and this is the form of it."
Capitol ters.	"Chapter 33."
De cauterisacio de emigranea no-antiqua.	Of cauterizing against migraine not accompanied by fever.
Quan endeve en la partida del cap dolor sodo, o es stenduda dolor entro al uelh, sia evacuat am medicinas le cap mondificantz, e sia aministrada l’autra curacio, la qual yeu he dita en las devesios de las malautias; e tot no aprofieyta, lahoras cauterisacio en lu es en dos manieyras: o cauterisacio am medicina acuta comburent, o am ferr.	"When sudden pain is felt in the part of the head or a persistent pain in the temple, let it be evacuated with medicines that clarify the head, and let the other treatment which I have mentioned in the sections on illnesses be administered; and if nothing helps, then cauterization should be done in one of two ways: either cauterization with a medicine of burning nature or with iron."
Mays cauteri am medicina comburent es que tu prenguas una dolsa de alh, e escorgas aquela e abcindas las extremitatz de lu de amdos les caps.	"The cautery with a burning medicine is when you take one dram of aloe and scrape it off and cut the ends of it from both heads."
E aprop incideys le loc de la dolor en la templa am una lanceta lada entro que sia en lu feyt loc dejos la codena, entro que sia occultada.	"And then incise the place of the pain in the temple with a sharp lancet until it is in the right location near the cord, but hidden."
E aprop strenh sobre lu am stopada per descent constreccio, e layssa aquel per le spazi de tres horas; e aprop deslia le e tratz le alh, e laysa la plagua per dos o per tres jorn, e aprop pausa sobre lu coto submergit en boder entro que le loc fassa brac.	"And then press it with firm pressure for a descending constriction and leave it like that for the space of three hours; and then remove the cloth and take away the aloe and leave the wound open for two or three days, and then cover it with clean bandages until it makes scar tissue."
E aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia sanat.	"And then treat it with ointment until it is healed."
E si tu voys, fe aquo am alcunas medicinas comburentz las quals yeu he scriutas en le douse tractat de medicinas comburentz.	"And if you wish, do this with some burning medicines which I have written about in the second book of burning medicines."
Mays la cauterisacio am ferr segon aquesta manieyra: igneys per cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma:	"But cauterization with iron is done in this way: ignite a cautery which has this shape:"
e es apelat claus clavilhs, quar le cap de lu es ayssi cum forma de clavel en le qual es alcuna curvitat, e·n le mieg loc de lu es eminensia petita.	"and it is called 'closed nails' because the head of it is like the shape of a nail with some curvature, and in the middle of it there is a small elevation."
E aprop pausa sobre loc de la dolor, e rete la tua ma — per que no sia adhurida la arceria la qual es dejos — e revol le ferr petit a petit am velocitat.	"And then place it on the place of pain and hold your hand -- so that the cautery is not adhering -- and slowly turn the iron with speed."
E si la quantitat de lu que es adhurida per la specitut de la codena ayssi quo la maytat de lu, e elava la tua ma per so que la arteria no sia adhurida la qual es dejos, per so que no vengua flux de sanc.	"And if the quantity of it that adheres to the skin is thus that most of it adheres, then lift your hand up so that the artery which is underneath does not adhere, lest there come a flow of blood."
E aprop enbibeys coto en aygua de sal e pausa aquel sobre le loc, e layssa aquel per tres dias; e aprop pausa coto mulhat am boder, e aprop cura am enguent entro que sia sanat.	"And then wet the wound with salt water and place it on the location and leave it for three days; and then cover it with clean bandages and treat it with ointment until it is healed."
E si voys, cauterisa am la extremitat del cutellari segon cauteri, e guarda te de incisio de arteria en aquesta emigranea propriament no-antiqua.	"And if you wish, cauterize with the tip of the scalpel according to cauteries, and beware of incising the artery in this migraine which is properly not accompanied by fever."
Capitol quart.	"Chapter Four."
De cauterizacio d’emigranea antiqua.	Of cauterizing against migraine accompanied by fever.
Quan tu curas emigranea am aquo que havem dit de la curacio precedent, e aquo que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias, e no aprofieyta la curacio, e vezes per la malautia que no abasta a lu aquo que havem dit del primier cauteri am medicina o del cauteri am foc, lahoras cove que tu igniscas le cauteri cutellar entro que sia albificat, pus que significas sobre le loc de la dolor am linha de longuesa de la qual sia la maytat del dit, o quays aquel; e depausa la tua ma per una veguada e strenh aquela entro incidiscas la arceria e pervengua entro al os.	"When you treat migraine with what we have said about the previous treatment and what we have said in the sections on illnesses, but the treatment is not effective, then sometimes it happens that the illness does not allow for the first cautery with medicine or fire cautery, therefore you should ignite the scalpel cautery until it is heated, because you place your hand on the location of the pain with a line of length which has most of its part, or if you wish, incise the artery so that it enters into the bone."
Empero necessari es a tu que guardes de la continuacio de la mandibula, la qual es mauguda deves la masticacio, e que le lacert no sia adhurit e le nervi le qual mau aquela, e que no s’endevengua espasme.	"But it is necessary for you to guard against the continuity of the jawbone, which is moved during mastication, and that the lacertum does not adhere and the nerves which move it do not suffer spasm."
E si es sobre la custodia e cautela de flux de sanc de l’arteria que es abciza, quar en la abcizio de lu es temor, e majorment ad aquel le qual ignora aquo que fa e no es studios e esproat; e layssa la operacio en lu al comensament.	"And if it is about the guarding and caution of the flow of blood from the artery that is incised because there is fear in its incision, especially for him who does not know what he does and is not studious and experienced; let the operation be done at the beginning."
E yeu vindre am rememoracio del regiment de flux de sanc accident de la arceria segon la sieua manieyra, en le sieu loc de aquest libre.	"And I bring to mind here in this place of this book the regulation of the flow of blood accidentally from the artery according to its manner."
E si veses de aquesta malautia que no abaste aquest cauteri e veses le cors del malaute tollerable, cauteriza aquel en le mieg loc del cap ayssi cum havem recontat, e cura la plagua entro que sia sanada.	"And if you see this illness not responding to this cautery and you see the patient's body tolerating it well, cauterize it in the middle of the head as we have described, and treat the wound until it is healed."
E si voys, aministra le cauteri le qual havem dit en le capitol de streccio de arceria am cauteri havent dos cotels, e es milhor cauterizacio aquesta e mays conferent.	"And if you wish, administer the cautery which we have mentioned in the chapter on constriction of artery with cautery having two tips, because this is better cauterization and more comforting."
Capitol .v.	"Chapter Five."
De cauterisacio de las dolors de aurelhas.	Of cauterizing ear pains.
Quan en la aurelha ve dolor per freg e es curat am causas lacsativas e am l’autra curacio la qual he dita en la divisio, e no es remauguda la dolor, lahoras igneys le cauteri, e es aquest le qual ha nom puncta, del qual aquesta es la forma:	"When in the ear there is pain due to friction and it is treated with laxative causes and other treatments which have been mentioned in the division, but the pain is not removed, therefore ignite the cautery called 'puncta', of which this is the shape:"
E aprop puncta aprop la ignicio, e sia menat al enviro de tota la aurelha ayssi cum roda es revolguda, o en le circuit de quascuna essemps si la dolor es en quascuna.	"And then puncture around the ignition and move it around the entire ear like a wheel is turned, or in the circumference of each one if the pain is in each one."
Alonga te am le cauteri de la razit de la aurelha pauc a pauc pus que aias senhat le loc am tenta.	"Be careful with the cautery near the root of the ear little by little because you have felt the location with your finger."
E si le cauteri de detz puntz en tota aurelha, e quays aquela, e aprop cura les locz entro que sian sanatz.	"And if puncturing ten times all around the ear, and if you wish, cure the locations until they are healed."
Capitol .vi.	"Chapter Six."
De cauterizacio de turtura.	Of cautery for quinsy
Turtura la qual es curada e am cauterizacio no es sino de las specias las quals veno per flecma, segon que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias.	Quinsy that is cured and with cautery is only of the kinds that come from pleurisy according to what we have said in the divisions of illnesses.
Esquiva cauterizacio de la specia que endeve per siccacio o per spasme del nervi.	Avoid cauterization of the species that occurs due to dryness or spasm of the nerves.
Quan tu curas aquela specia de turtura am jerras e capipurgi e guarguarismes, e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas le malaute am tres cauteris: la i deves la razit de la aurelha, e·l segon un petit dejos le sieu templar, e le ters deves la conjunccio de doas labias.	When you treat that species of tortoise with herbs and caperworts and garlic, and your treatment is not effective, then it is necessary to cauterize the wound with three cauteries: first at the root of the ear, second a little below the temple, and third at the junction of the two lips.
E pausa lo tieu cauteri per le contrari de la partida malauta, quar mollificacio no ve sino en la partida que apar sana.	And pause your cautery at the opposite side of the wound's departure, for softening occurs only in the part that appears healed.
E la forma de cauterisacio es que cauterizas aquel am le cauteri en le dreyt de la extremitat de la aurelha pus sobirana un petit sobre le corn del cap, e en le templar autre, la longuesa del qual sia segon la longitut del dit pous, e depausa la tua ma am cauteri entro que sia comburida la quantitat de la maytat de la specitut de la codena.	And the method of cauterization is as follows: cauterize with the cautery in the right side of the extremity of the ear, then a little above the horn of the head, and on the temple, the length of which should be according to the length of the finger joint; and pause your hand with the cautery until it has consumed about half of the quantity of the species of thread.
E aquesta es la forma del cauteri, e es specia del cutellari, la forma del qual es denant mesa.	And this is the form of the cautery, which belongs to the barber-surgeon, the shape of which is like a sickle before the table.
Mays empero pus subtil es que aquel un pauc ayssi co vesas; e cove que cotel en lu de superflua groceza un pauc.	But still it would be better if you saw something like this; and it is necessary that in place of excessive crudeness, there should be a little more finesse.
E aprop cura le loc am aquo que es denant procezit entro que sia sanat.	And afterwards dress the wound with water before it heals completely.
Capitol .vii.	Chapter VII
De cauterizacio de apoplextia antiqua.	Of cautery for ancient apoplexy.
Quan apoplextia es antiquada e curas aquela am aquo que havem dit e no confereys la tua medicacio e le malaute no ha febre, lahoras cauteriza aquel am quatre cauteris: sobre totz les corn del sieu cap; e am cauteri e le mieg loc del cap, ayssi cum havem dit; e am cauteri en le coguot.	When apoplexy is ancient and treated with what we have said and there's no fever, then cauterize him with four cauteries: on all the corners of his head; and one in the middle of the head, as we have said; and one on the neck.
E la manieyra del cauteri es fayta segon que es desus dit.	The manner of cauterization is done according to what is described above.
E ja es cauterizat sobre la boca del estomac; e es mays derier; e aprop sia curat am aquo que procezeys.	And now that the patient has been cauterized over the mouth of the stomach, and it's more serious; then proceed to treat him with what follows.
Capitol .viii.	Chapter VIII
De cauterizacio de obblivio fayta per flacma.	On cauterization for oblivion caused by stroke (apoplexy).
Cove que sian donatz al malaute en le comensament jerras grans e pilulas le servel mondificantz.	First, give the patient large jars and pills made of groundsel.
E aprop ras le cap tot del malaute e pausa sus le coguot de lu emplaustre de cetre descrit en le tractat dels emplastres.	Then shave the head of the entire patient and place on his neck the plaster of centaury described in the treatise on plasters.
E pausa aquel alcunas veguadas, quar aquel es manieyra de cauteri.	And keep applying it several times, because this is the manner of cauterization.
E fay aquo segon aquel meteys orde le qual ja he dit.	Then do as I have described above in that order.
E donc si per aqueles sanat bo es; e sino, lahoras fay a lu tres cauteris en la deriera partida de sieu cap, les quals sian deysendentz de la partida pus sobirana del cap entro a la partida pus dejos del col.	And if the patient is not cured well with that, then proceed to make three cauteries on the last part of his head, which should be descending from the highest part of the head down to the lowest part of the neck.
E pausa entre quascun cauteri la grossetut del dit, e aprop cura lo cauteri am aquo que es procedit.	And pause between each cautery with the thickness of a finger, and then treat the cautery wound with what has been prescribed.
Mays si tu vos addicio e le malaute es aquo tollerant, lahoras fay a lu cauteri en le mieg loc; e si voys major addicio, lahora cauteriza aquel sobre les dos corns.	But if you wish to make the patient more tolerant, then proceed to cauterize him in the middle of his head. And if you wish even greater effectiveness, then cauterize him on both sides of his horns (temples).
Aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat; e sia le cauteri olivar segon la forma denant donat.	Then treat that until it is healed; and let the cauteries be made with olive oil according to the shape given before.
Capitol .ix.	Chapter IX
De cauterisacio de parazili e de mollificacio de tot le cors.	On cauterization for paralysis and softening of the entire body.
Cove que tu procesiscas en mondificacio del cap am jerras e am aquo que havem dit; e aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap, e am cauteri sobre totz les corns del cap, e am cauteri sobre la deriera partida de lu, e am tres cauteris sobre les spondils del col.	If you proceed with the softening of the head using jars and what has been said; then shave the head of the patient, and then cauterize him in the middle of his head, on both sides of his horns (temples), and on the last part of it, and make three cauteries on the vertebrae of his neck.
E si es necessari en la malautia de mollificacio del cors de trops aquel e les malautes tollerantz e la malautia es fort, lahoras cauteriza aquel am quatre cauteris sobre les spondils del dos, e dererament am cauteri entro que sia comborit de la codena mot de lu, e aleva la tieua ma.	And if it is necessary in the case of paralysis and too much tolerance of the disease, which is strong, then proceed to cauterize him with four cauteries on the vertebrae of his back, and afterwards make one cautery on the muscle of the thigh, raising your hand.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat, e aquest sia cauteri olivar.	Then treat that until it is healed, and let these cauteries be made with olive oil.
Capitol .x.	Chapter Ten
De cauterisacio de epilemcia.	De la cauterització de l'epilèpsia
No es cauterizat le epilemtic sino aquella epilemcia es per flecma.	No s'efectua la cauterització en el pacient epilèptic si no és a causa d'un flecma.
E donc cove que mondifiques le cervel de lu al comensament de lu am yeras e am l’autra curacio la qual havem dicta en la divisio quan le malaute es gran e es tollerant la exceperacio de las medicinas.	Per tant és necessari netejar el cervell del pacient al començament del tractament i amb altres cura que hem explicat en aquesta secció quan el pacient té una malaltia greu i tolera els medicaments excepcionalment.
E si es enfant le qual no sufferte las medicinas, lahoras aministra guarguarissmes e mastiguatoris le servel mondifican, denant aquo per motz dias, am bonifficacio de las viandas.	I si el pacient és un nen que no tolera els medicaments, llavors s'administren gargarismes i masticadors al servei de netejar el cervell, durant diversos dies, amb l'ajuda d'una bona alimentació.
E aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop cauteriza aquel am un cauteri en le mieg loc del cap segon la manieyra precedent, e am autre cauteri en le occiput de lu, e sobre quascun corn del cap sieu cauterisa.	I a continuació es rasca el cabell del pacient i s'efectua una cauterització amb un cauteri al mig del cap segons la manera anterior, i amb un altre cauteri a l'occipuc del mateix, i sobre cada un dels còdols del cap també s'efectua una cauterització.
E si le malaute es fort e es tollerant, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteris les quals he ditz, en havent paraliticament e mollificacio del cors sobre les spondils del col e les spondils del dos.	I si el pacient és fort i tolera bé els tractaments, llavors es realitzen les cauteritzacions amb els mateixos cauteris que hem mencionat abans, havent paralíticament i mollificació del cos sobre les vértebres del coll i de la columna vertebral.
E sia cauteri olivar segon qu’es precedit.	I cal utilitzar el mateix cauteri d'oli d'oliva que s'ha esmentat anteriorment.
Mays si le malaute es enfant, lahoras pausa cauteri subtil segon aquesta manieyra.	però si el pacient és un nen, llavors és preferible fer servir un cauteri més suau segons aquesta manera.
Capitol .xi.	Capítol xi
De cauterizacio de melencolia.	A continuació es presenta el capítol xi del llibre "Cautericum": "De la cauterització en casos de melancolia".
Quan las causas de melencolia so humiditatz corrompudas e flacma gros, lahoras cauteriza aquel am les cauteris les quals havem ditz en le havent paralisi.	Quan les causes de la melancòlia són humiditats corruptes i inflamacions gruixudes, llavors és necessari efectuar una cauterització amb els mateixos cauteris que hem esmentat anteriorment, havent també un paràlisi.
E si la causa de melencolia es superfluitat declinant a melencolia, e le cors del malaute es humit, lahoras da ha beure aquo que mundifica le cervel de lu segon aquo que ha precedut en la divisio.	Si la causa de la melancòlia és l'excés d'humor negre declinant cap a la melancòlia i el cos del pacient és humit, llavors és recomanable donar-li a beure una beguda que neteja el cervell segons el que s'ha explicat anteriorment en aquesta divisió.
E aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop fay tortora decentment fayta de li sobre le cercle, e aprop depausa aquela en le mieg loc del cap.	I després es rasca el cabell del pacient i es col·loca una tortuga ben curosa a la seva coronilla i, a continuació, es posarà aquesta sobre el mig del cap.
E le malaute sia sesent cayrat, e sia tengut de tota partida.	I el pacient hauria de ser estirat en una superfície llisa i assegurat per tots costats.
E aprop pausa liniment; et es pus digne de boder antic de ovelhas.	I després cal aplicar un liniment sobre la ferida, i s'ha d'untar amb greix d'ovella antic.
E escalfa aquel sobre le foc per calefaccio temprada per mesura, le qual le dit sufferta quan es mes en lu.	I també s'escalfa el cauteri sobre el foc amb un calent moderat segons la mida de la ferida que s'ha de produir, i després s'aplica al pacient mentre encara està calent.
E aprop vuo’ aquel en le mieg loc del cap de lu en le cercle, e leysa lu entro que sia enfregidat.	I llavors es col·loca el cauteri al mig del cap del pacient dins del cerclle i s'espera fins que hagi refrescat la seva entrada.
E fay aquo am le malaute en tota semmana una veguada, am le autre regiment de lu bo entro que sia sanat; o si vols, cauteriza aquel fazen petitz puntz segon lo mays de lu, sino que tenguas la ma am un cauteri ayssi ordenat: aquesta es specia de cauteri la qual humecta le cervel am equalitat.	I després s'aplica l'oli al pacient amb el mateix regiment cada setmanalment una vegada fins que la ferida estigui sanada; o també es poden fer petits punts amb el cauteri segons la mida de la ferida, mantenint la mà amb un cauteri ordenat d'aquesta manera: aquest és un tipus de cauteri que humecta el cervell de forma uniforme.
E aprop pausa aquel coto enbegut en boder o en grays de gualina.	I després s'aplica aquest cotó embolicat en greix d'ovella o en cotó sobre la ferida.
Capitol .xii.	Capítol xii
De cauterisacio de aygua descendent en le huel.	"Concerning cauterization of descending water in the wound."
Quan a tu es declarat le comensament de aygua en le huel per les senhals les quals yeu he ditz en la divisio, lahoras comensa e dona en beure al malaute aquo que mondifique le cap de lu, e guarda aquel de totas humiditatz.	"When you notice the start of water descending in the wound, as indicated by the signs I mentioned earlier in this section, then begin to give the patient something to drink that will clarify their head and protect them from all moistures."
E fay aquel suzar en banh en degu per alcus jorns.	"And do that same treatment with baths for several days."
E aprop comanda a lu que raza le sieu cap, e cauteriza aquel am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap; e aprop cauteriza aquel am dos cauteris sobre dos templas si es le comensament de ysement de aygua en dos huels, o de la un latz si es comensamen de l’aygua en un huel.	"And promptly order that the patient's head be shaved and cauterize it with a cautery in the middle of the head; and also cauterize it with two cauteries on both temples if this is the beginning of an inflammation of water in both wounds, or on one temple if this is the beginning of water in one wound."
Incideys am cauteri totas las venas e arcerias las quals so dejos la codena; e sian les cauteris en aquela lonh en la latitut de las templas.	"Cauterize all veins and arteries that are near the neck; these cauteries should be placed at an equal distance on either side of a line drawn across the forehead."
E guarda te de fluxs de sanc quan es cauterizat; e si veses de lu fluxs de sanc, osta le am alcuna medicina, la qual es a tu possible.	"And guard against fluxes of blood when cauterizing. And if you see any fluxes of blood, stop them with some medicine that is at your disposal."
E yeu vindre am savieza la qual es en extraccio de arcerias e am abscizio de aquelas e cautela de fluxs de sanc.	"And then come with knowledge about extraction of arteries and about the removal of these and care for fluxes of blood."
E alcunas vetz es cauterizat en le cervitz dejos dos osses am dos cauteris dererament produzitz.	"Sometimes it is necessary to cauterize in the nape of the neck near two bones using two large cauteries."
Capitol .xiii.	Chapter XIII.
De cauterizacio de lacrimas antiquas.	Of Cauterization for Dry Eyes.
Quan lacrimas dels huels so antiquas assuduament e per las venas e arterias las quals so en le loc manifest del cap defora e es verificat que aquo es superfluitatz frejas flecmatiquas, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteri le qual havem recontat en le capitol de comensament de aygua cazent en les huels, e am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap e am dos cauteris en la cervitz dejos dos templas, e am dos cauteris en la cervitz dejos dos osses.	When tears from the eyes are abundant and flow through veins and arteries that are visible on the surface of the head, and it is determined that this is a superfluity of blood, then cauterize that area with a cautery which we have described at the beginning of this treatise regarding boiling water in the eyes. Also cauterize the middle of the forehead, two places behind the temples, and two places on either side of the skull bone.
E si indigeyses de addicio, lahoras cauteriza aquel en tot latz de la coa del huel sobre la extremitat del sobrecilh am petit cauteri.	If further cautery is needed, then cauterize also on both sides of the cheekbone near the outer corner of the eyebrow with a small cautery.
Capitol .xiiii.	Chapter XIV
De cauterizacio de fetor de nas.	Of cautery for removing foul odor from the nose
Quan tu medicas aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no aprofieyta la tua medicacio, lahoras tu aparelha e dona en beure al malaute las cochias per tres noytz; e aprop ras le cap de lu, e cauteriza le am cauteri migier am cauteri olivar.	When you treat that with what we have said in this section and it does not improve, then prepare and give the patient to drink cooked barley for three nights. Then shave his head and cauterize him with a hot cautery followed by an olive-oil cautery.
E aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri clavelh am dos cauteris sobre les dos sobrecilhs dejos les cabels un petit.	Also cauterize him with a clove cautery, and place two cauteries above the eyebrows on either side of the hair.
E guarda te de la arceria que no incindas aquela.	Be careful not to burn that area excessively.
E del cauteri clavilh aquesta es la forma.	And this is how to perform the clove cautery:
Capitol .xv.	**Capitulum XV.**
De cauteri de mollificacio de palpebras dels huels.	Concerning the cauterization for softening of eyelids.
Quan la palpebra del huel es mollificada per malautia o per humiditat, lahoras cauteriza aquela palpebre1 am un cauteri am aquest cauteri lunar; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	When an eyelid is softened by illness or moisture, cauterize that eyelid with this lunar cautery; and this is the method for it:
E si vos, cauteriza aquel sobre les dos sobrecils un petit am dos cauteris en tota partida, e sian elonguatz de las timporas.	And if you wish to cauterize across both eyebrows, do so with two cauteries in total, spaced out along the eyebrow ridge, and elongated towards the temples.
E sia la longitut de quascun cauteri segon la quantitat del sobrecil.	And let the length of each cautery be according to the amount of eyebrow.
E no premas trop la tua ma am le cauteri, mays segon la quantitat que la tersa partida de la palpebre sia adhurida.	Do not press too hard with the cautery, but rather according to how much of the third division of the eyelid is adhered.
Capitol .xvi.	**Capitulum XVI.**
De cauteri de la palpebre del huel quan les pels so convertitz a las partidas dedintz e punho le huel.	Concerning cauterization of the eyelid when hairs grow into the inner divisions and poke the eye.
Quan les pels del huel son convertitz a las partidas dedintz ayssi que pungo le huel, cauteri en aquels es segon dos manieyras, quar cauteri o es am fer o es am medicina comburent.	When hairs of the eyelash grow into the inner divisions so as to prick the eye, cauterize them in either of two ways: either with a cautery or with medicated combustion.
Si am cauteri de lu am foc, comanda al malaute denant aquo que leyse les sieus pels ayssi cum aquels les quals les mundan, entro que sian prolonguatz e engualhatz; e si punho aquel deves le lor naysement, lahoras tu strenh les huels de lu am una benda per so que no sia maugut entro que·ls pels sian nascutz.	If cauterizing with fire, first command the patient to pull out their hairs like those who are being plucked for a depilation, until they have grown long enough; and if they prick at their source of growth, then stretch open the eyelids with a cloth so that no harm is done while the hairs are growing.
Donc cum siran nascutz e engualhatz, lahoras pausa le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop senha sobre la palpebre dels huels de lu am tenta, am senhal le qual sia segon la figura de fulha de merta, e sia le comensament del senhal prop dels pels.	Then, when they have grown and become elongated, pause the head of the patient on a high seat, and then bring close over the eyelid of the eye with the hairs with a tent-like device, shaped like a leaf of a mulberry tree, and place its beginning near to the hairs.
E aprop pausa coto enbegut en album de huou o en mucillatge de ptilli sobre le huel.	And then apply heat enclosed in aloe juice or mucilage of marshmallow onto the eye.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu.	Then kindle the cautery of which this is the shape:
E aprop cauteriza sobre la figura la qual as senhada, petit a petit, em motas veguadas, entro que sia comburida la superficia de la codena la qual es ayssi cum fuelha de mirta, tota aparent propriament.	Then cauterize along the figure which is thus marked out, little by little, in several glances, until the surface of the chain which appears like a mulberry leaf has been burnt completely.
E senhal de sanetat de la tieua obra es que tu vegus la palpebre de l’huel ja esser contrayta e·ls pels de lu esser elevatz deves la punctura del huel.	The sign of success in this procedure is that you see the eyelid of the eye become contracted and its hairs lifted up from the puncture of the eye.
E donc eleva la tua ma e laysa aquel per tres jorns, e aprop pausa sobre lu coto am boder entro que sia eredicada la scara.	Then raise your hand and leave it for three days, and then apply cold compresses with a cloth until the scar has healed.
E aprop cura aquela am enguent entro que sia sanat.	Then dress that with ointment until it is healed.
Mays si retorna per les pels alcuna causa aprop lor naysement e la palpebra es mollificada, lahoras fay autra vetz le cauteri sobre aquel tot ayssi cum avias fayt primieyrament.	But if the hairs return for some cause near their source and the eyelid becomes softened again, then perform the cautery once more upon that place just as you had done initially.
Mays si les pels so en la palpebra dejos, lahoras cauterisa aquela entro que sia elevada al sieu loc natural e sia engualhat e que les pels no punhan le huelh.	But if the hairs grow on the eyelid itself, then cauterize that until it is raised to its natural place and elongated, so that the hairs do not prick the eye.
Mays le cauteri am medicina comburent aquest es que comandes al malaute que leyse les pels entro que sian prolonguatz e engualhatz, e aprop sia fayta de carta de drap la forma de fuelha de mirtra.	But when cauterizing with medicated combustion, this is what you do: command the patient to pluck out their hairs until they have grown long and elongated, and then make a shape of mulberry leaf from cardboard or cloth.
E aprop pren de sabo conogut e de caus viva ana unc. i, o quays aquo, e aprop mescle3 aquelas causas be, e fay aquo am festinacio per so que no sia enfregidat; e aprop expandeys de aquo sobre la carta la qual es fayta ayssi cum forma de fulha de mirtra, e pausa aquel sobre la un huel od amdos; e pausa dejos le huel coto enbegut en album de huou, e el cap del malaute sia en le tieu se.	Then take some known soap and live coals, about nine of each, and quickly mix those ashes well together, and make it quickly so that it does not cool down; then spread that over the cardboard which has been made in the shape of a mulberry leaf, and place that upon one eye or both eyes; and place the eye compress enclosed in aloe juice onto the eye, with the patient's head on a high seat.
E pausa le dit sobre le medicina e prem aquela un petit e no la mauguas entro que lo malaute senta la mordicacio de la medicina, quar mordicacio es en lu ayssi cum de foc.	Then place your finger upon the medication and press it gently but do not move it until the patient feels the bite of the medication, for the bite is like that of fire.
E donc cum percevera aquo que el atrobo mordicacio, lahoras leyssa la medicina e mau aquela am le tieu dit; donc cum cessa la mordicacio, lahoras remau la medicina he lava le huel am aygua; e lahoras considera si vezes la palpebra ja es levada ayssi cum es lavada deves la costriccio am foc o am incisio, quar lahoras esta be; e si no torna sobre aquela de la medicina sobre le loc en le qual no ha empremut la medicina e no se denigra entro que sia engualhada la tua operacio e sia contrayt le huel.	Then when the patient feels that bite, then release the medication and remove it with your finger; then when the bite ceases, then remove the medication and wash the eye with water. Then observe if perhaps the eyelid is raised as it should be washed by the constriction with fire or incision, for then this is good. And if not, then place back upon that again the medication onto the location where it has not taken effect until the operation is finished and the eye is contracted.
E aprop pausa sobre lu coto am boder entro que sia eradicada la codena de la adhustio, e aprop cura aquel am enguent deafinicon o am autre entro que sia sanat.	Then place a cold compress on it until the chain of adhesion has been eradicated, and then dress it with soothing ointment or another one until it is healed.
E es necessari a tu, deves la tua operacio que guardes am pervigil diligencia que en le huel no caia re de la medicina, e si la palpebre aprop alscus dias es mollificada e alcuna causa dels pels punh en le huel, lahoras itera la tua medicina sobre aquel loc le qual de la palpebre es mollificat, e propriamen ayssi quo as fayt al comensament, e aprop enaviro lu entro que sia sanat.	And it is necessary for you, in performing this operation, to guard with unceasing diligence that no dirt from the medication falls into the eye. And if the eyelid becomes softened after several days and some hairs prick the eye for any cause, then perform your medication again upon that location where the eyelid has softened, and especially as you did at the beginning; then continue until it is healed.
E aquesta es la forma de fuelha de mirtra.	And this is the shape of a mulberry leaf:
E sapias que les huels dels homes son diversificatz segon la magnitut e la parvitat, e donc segon aquo es fayta la tua contraccio.	"Know that the widths of men's eyes are varied according to their size and smallness, and therefore your contraction is made accordingly."
E no sira amaguada la via de rectetut ad aquel al qual es studi en aquesta art.	"It shall not be hidden from him who studies this art how to reach the straight path."
Capitol .xvii.	"Chapter XVII."
De cauterizacio de fistula que es en le lacrimal de l’huel.	"On the cautery of a fistula that is in the tear duct of the eye."
Quan tu curas fistula am aquo que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas aquela segon aquesta manieyra: comanda al malaute que pause le cap sieu en le tieu se, e tengua le cap de lu alcun ministre entre las tieuas mas en tal manieyra que no sia maugut ni agitat am le sieu cap.	"When you treat a fistula with what we have said in the divisions of diseases and your treatment does not confer, then you must cauterize it in this manner: Have the patient hold their head steady on the table, and let one servant hold the patient's head between their hands in such a way that it is not moved or agitated by the patient's head."
E aprop pausa coto enfus en album de huou o en mucellage de ptilli sobre le huel de lu.	"And then place cotton soaked in album or mucilage of ptill on the eye of the patient."
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma:	"And then apply the cautery, the form of which is as follows:"
le qual sia conquau, ayssi cum es forma de cana o de pena de voltor, de la una extremitat am la qual es fayta lo cauteri.	"It should be heated, like a reed or an eagle's feather, at one end with which the cautery is made."
E si voys, sia penetrant entro a la autra extremitat.	"And if you wish, it may also penetrate into the other extremity."
E si vols sia sort ayssi cum tenta.	"And if you wish, let it be drawn out like a thread."
Mays empero aquel que es concau es milhor a la tieua obra.	"But nevertheless, that which is heated is better for your work."
E aprop prem la fistula si es uberta, e tra de lu sania et exsicca aquela.	"And then press the fistula if it is open, and draw out of it the sanies and dry it up."
E si no es uberta, lahoras obre aquela e extratz la poyredura de lu.	"And if it is not open, then make it open and squeeze out the pus from it."
E aprop pausa sobre lu le cauteri le qual sia be ignit, e te am aquel la tieua ma un petit deves le cauteri del huel a la partida del nas, per so que no erre la tua ma o le malaute sia enquietat, e lahoras pausa le cauteri en le grays del huel e corrompas aquel.	"And then place on it the cautery which has been well heated, and hold it there with your hand but a little bit away from the eye at the opening of the nose, so that you do not err in your hand or disturb the patient. And then place the cautery on the gray of the eye and burn it."
E donc si al comensament del tieu cauteri perve entro al os, bo es; e sino, lahoras itera le cauteri una veguada o dos, si mestiers era; e layssa aquel ayssi per tres jorns, e aprop pausa sobre aquel coto am boder e enviro lu am enguent exsiccatiu entro que sia sanat.	"And if at the beginning of the cautery it goes into the eye, that is good. And if not, then repeat the cautery once or twice if necessary, and leave it like that for three days. And then apply cotton with a drying ointment around it until it is healed."
Mays si eran passatz xi dias e no es sanat, lahoras pausa sobre lu medicina aguda corrosiva entro que l’os sia descubert e sia ras segon que conveneys en le sieu capitol.	"But if after eleven days it is not healed, then apply a corrosive medicine on it until the bone is exposed and it is scraped according to what is suitable in its chapter."
E es autra manieyra de cauteri de fistula la qual alscus primiers diysero: enten al loc de la fistula e fen aquela e aprop pausa en aquela fissura camaen subtil del qual es la forma de lu: E fon en aquela la quantitat de i unc de plom fundut; e te la tua ma am camaem am bona retencio, e no sia maugut le malaute per so que le plom fundut no pervengua al huel de aquel; e cove que pausas sobre le huel del malaute coto enfus en album de huou o en aygua, quar plom adhureys le loc de la fistula e sana aquela per sanacio meravilhora.	"And another method of cauterizing a fistula which some first described: Enter into the location of the fistula and make it open and then place in that fissure a thread as thin as possible, of which this is its form: And take there the quantity of one dram of melted lead; and hold it with your hand with good retention, so that the patient is not harmed so that the molten lead does not reach the eye of that person. And it is necessary to place on the eye of the patient cotton soaked in album of wool or water, because lead adheres to the location of the fistula and heals it by marvelous healing."
E si la fistula es sanada am aquo que havem dit del cauteri e de la curacio, bo es; e sino, lahoras es necessari aministrar trauc del nas e reduzir la fistula al cors del nas segon que vindra en son loc propri.	"And if the fistula is healed with what we have said about cauterization and cure, that is good. And if not, then it is necessary to administer a trocar through the nose and reduce the fistula into the body of the nose according to what will come in its proper place."
Capitol .xviii.	"Chapter XVIII."
De cauterizacio de la fendedura des potz.	"For cauterization of the split sinews."
Motas veguadas accideysso fissuras en las labias, e majorment en las labias dels enfantz.	Occasionally, fissures occur in the labia minora, and more frequently in those of infants.
Donc cum tu curas aquelas fissuras am aquo que nos havem dit en las divisios e no aprofieyta la tua cura, lahoras igneys le cauteri petit cutellar segon aquesta forma que s’ensiec:	Then if your cure with that which we have said in the divisions does not succeed, then immediately cauterize it with a small iron instrument according to this method.
E sia la conquavitat de lu segon la subtilitat de cotella.	And let its concavity follow the fineness of a needle's point
Aprop pausa aquel init cuytadament en aquelas fissuras entro que·l cauteri pervengua al preon de las fissuras.	Approach carefully with that iron instrument in those fissures until it reaches the center of the fissure.
E aprop cura aquel am cerotz entro que sia sanat.	Then dress it with cerote until it is healed
Capitol .xix.	Chapter XIX
De cauterizacio de fistula en la boca.	Concerning the cauterization of a fistula in the mouth
Quan en la razit de uvula o en le paladar o en las razitz de las dentz endeve apostema e aprop fa brac, e aprop es rompuda, e aprop es antiquada, e corr brac e es fayta fistula, e aprop tu curas aquela e no aprofieyta a curacio, lahoras cove que tu igniscas cauteri segon la quantitat que sia receubuda en la fistula, e aprop met aquel ignit en le trauc de la fistola, e te la tua ma entro que pervengua le ferr ignit al preon de lu, e al derier de lu fazen aysso una veguada o dos; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que nos havem dit de la curacio entro que sia sanat.	When there is an aposteme on the uvula or palate or roots of teeth which breaks open and becomes old and discharges pus, forming a fistula, if you treat it but the treatment does not succeed, then you should cauterize with fire according to the size received in the fistula. Then insert that heated iron into the track of the fistula until the hot iron reaches its center, and do this once or twice. Then dress it with what we have said concerning treatment until it is healed.
E donc si la sania es abscindita e es sanat, bo es; e sino, lahoras es necessari de descubrir le loc e hostar le os corrumput segon que vindra en son capitol.	And if the cure is hindered and it does not heal, then it is necessary to discover the place and remove the corrupted bone according to what will come later in its chapter.
Capitol .xx.	Chapter XX
De cauterisacio de las dentz e de mollificacio de las angivas.	Concerning the cauterization of teeth and the softening of gingivae
Quan las angivas son mollificadas per humiditat e las dentz son maugudas, e curas aquelas am medicinas e no confereys, lahoras pausa le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop igneys le cauteri la forma del qual vindra aprop aysso, enayssi que tu pauses la quanula sobre la dent e entromet en aquela le cauteri ignit festinantment, e te la tieua ma un petit entro que·l malaute cente la calor del foc a la razit de la dent esser pervenguda.	When the gingivae are softened by moisture and the teeth are painful, and you treat them with medications but they do not improve, then place the head of the illness on the tooth, and quickly insert that heated cautery instrument in its shape thus: Place the quina over the tooth and insert it into that cautery iron swiftly. Then remove your hand a little so that the heat of the fire may reach the root of the tooth.
E aprop leva la tua ma, e aprop itera le cauteri alcunas veguadas segon que vols.	And then remove your hand, and repeat the cauterization several times according to what you wish.
E aprop le malaute huompla la sua boca de aygua de sal e tengua aquela per una hora, e pueys stupa aquela, quar la dent mauguda es fermada e la gengiva mollificada es strenguda e la humiditat corrompuda es exsiccada.	"The patient should rinse their mouth with salt water and hold it for an hour. Then spit it out, as the foul tooth is fixed, the swollen gum is strengthened, and the corrupted humidity is dried."
Capitol .xxi.	"The twenty-first chapter"
De cauterisacio de dolor de dent.	"On the cauterization of tooth pain."
Quan dolor de dent es per fregiditat, o en lu es freg o verm, o no comfereys la curacio am medicina, lahoras cauteri en aquela es segon dos manieyras: o cauteri am boder de vacas, o cauteri am foc.	"When tooth pain is caused by coldness, or there is rot or worm in it, and the cure cannot be achieved with medicine, then cauterize that one in two ways: either cauterize it with a hot iron, or cauterize it with fire."
Cauteri am boder es que tu prenguas boder de vacas e bulhas aquel en culhe de ferr , e aprop pren coto e envolopa le sobre la extremitat de la tenta, e aprop enmergeys aquel am boder bulhit, e pausa aquel sobre la dent dolorosa festinantment entro que sia enfregidat.	"To cauterize with a hot iron: Take a red-hot iron, wrap it in cloth at its tip, and quickly press it onto the painful tooth until it gets heated."
E aprop itera aquela alcunas veguadas entro que la vertut del foc pervengua a la razit de la dentz.	"And repeat this several times until the heat of the fire reaches the root of the teeth."
E si voys, submergeys lana o coto en le boder desus dit, e pausa aquel sobre la dent dolent, e pausa sobre aquel ferr ignit entro que·l ferr pervengua al preon de la conquavitat de la dent.	If you wish, immerse wool or cotton in the border of said powder and place it on the painful tooth, then place a heated iron on top so that the iron reaches the root of the tooth's cavity.
Mays empero la cauterizacio am foc es que tu atendas a la quannula de eram o de ferr, e sia en le cor de lu alcuna grocesa e la acuitat del foc no pervengua a la boca del malaute.	However, when performing cauterization with fire, be sure to wait until the iron is red-hot and glowing, so that the sharpness of the heat does not reach the patient's mouth.
E aprop igneys le cauteri la forma del qual vindra, e pausa aquel sobre la dent e te la tua ma entro que·l cauteri sia enfregidat; e fay aquo alcunas veguadas quar la dolor sira remauguda o en aquel dia o en l’autre dia.	And when the iron is properly heated, apply it to the tooth and press down firmly with your hand until the cautery cools. Repeat this process several times until the pain subsides, either on that day or the following day.
E cove que per empressio de aquel cauteri que·l malaute umpla la sieua boca de bon boder e tengua aquel per una hora e aprop scupa le; e aquesta es la forma del cauteri.	And it is necessary that after this cauterization, the patient rinse their mouth well with warm water and hold it in for an hour before spitting it out. This is the proper way to perform cauterization.
E cauteriza am qual que tu voys extremittat segon que a tu es possible.	Cauterize as much of the affected area as you see fit, according to your judgment and ability.
E aquesta es la forma de la cannula:	And this is how to make the cannula:
Capitol .xxii.	"The chapter twenty-two."
De cauterizacio de extrophulos.	"Regarding the cauterization of external hernias."
Quan extrophulos so de flecma e de humors fregas e no so hobedientz a digistio per medicinas e tu voys la digistio de aquelas leugerament, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri conquau la forma del qual es aquesta seguen, havent dos extremitatz hubertas per que yesca le fum deves le cauteri per l’autra extremitat, e pausa aquel ignit sobre aquel apostema una veguada, e autre si indigeyses de aquel, entro que pervengua al preon del apostema.	"When external hernias are filled with phlegm and humors, and do not comply with digestion despite the use of medications and you wish to achieve digestion in that area, then you will cauterize it using a firebrand shaped as follows: having two pointed ends, place one end into the fire until it becomes hot, and then apply the other end onto the tumor for a short while; if necessary, repeat this process several times until the tumor reaches its peak."
E si l’apostema es pauca, lahoras pausa le cauteri segon la quantitat del apostema, e aprop leyssa le per tres jorns e pausa sobre lu coto enfus en boder entro que sia remaugut aquo que·l foc ha comburit.	"If the tumor is small, then apply the cautery according to its size; afterwards, let it rest for three days and apply it again on the affected area at its edges until what was burnt by the fire has healed."
E aprop cura aquel am enguent e tentas e draps entro que sia sanat.	"And afterwards, dress that wound with ointments, bandages, and cloths until it is healed."
E la forma de la cannula o deu cauteri a tal es comveyter.	"As for the shape of the cautery or hot iron, it should resemble an awl."
Capitol .xxiii.	Chapter XXIII
De cauterizacio de rauquiera de votz e de constriccio de ale.	About cauterization of sore throats and constriction of windpipes.
Quan las humiditatz veno sobre le quanal del pulmo, e majorment quan aquo es am fregiditat de compleccio, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia evacuat al comensament am medicinas laxativas, e aprop cauteriza aquel deves la razit del golayro en le loc depremegut.	When humidity comes upon the canal of the lung, especially when it is accompanied by coldness, then the patient should initially be evacuated with laxative medicines and cautery applied to that part of the liver near the pressed area.
E guarda te que no pervenguas am le cauteri al golayro ni no comburas de la codena de lu sino un pauc.	And be sure not to reach the cautery to the liver or burn any part of it, except for a little bit.
E cauteriza aquel am autra cauteri deves la junctura del col en le derier espondil de lu.	And cauterize that with another cautery at the junction of the neck and the last thoracic spine.
E·l cauteri de lu sia clavilh sego la maniera precedent.	And his cautery should be made in this way as was previously described.
E aprop cura aquel am aquo que es precedit entro que sia sanat.	And treat him with what has been said above until he is healed.
Capitol .xxiiii.	Chapter XXIV.
De cauterizacio de malautia del pulmo e de tos.	On cautery for lung disease and coughing.
Quan tos e malautia de pulmo so de humiditatz fregas e le malaute no ha febre ni tisic e es malautia antiqua, lahoras cauterisa aquel am dos cauteris sobre la furcula en les locz depremegutz leontz e buoytz; e am autra cauteri en le mieg loc del pietz entre dos mamillos; e sia le cauteri clavilh segon la forma precedent.	When coughing and lung disease are due to moist coldness, and the illness has no fever or spitting and is an old condition, then cauterize with two cauteries on the manubrium sternum in the areas pressed by the shoulders and elbows; and with another cautery in the middle of the chest between the two breasts; and let the cauteries be made as previously described.
E si vols, sia la tua cauterizacio punctan am le cauteri que es apelat puncta, la forma del qual precedeys en la ponctacio de dolor de aurelhas.	And if you wish, your cautery can be done by pricking with the cautery called "puncta," whose shape has been described above in the punctuation of ear pain.
E sian puntz entro cays ad aquels; e aprop cura aquel am aquo meteys que es precedit entro que sia sanat.	And they should be made thus: and treat him with what was said above until he is healed.
E ya sia le cauteri haventz tres ramps quar cauterizacio es am aquel: am una veguada podes far tres cauteris segon aquesta forma:	And if the cauteries have three prongs, then one cautery can be made thus; with one attempt you can make three cauteries in this way:
Capitol .xxv.	Capítulo XXV. De cauterizacion de dolor de cap.
De cauterizacio de titillic que es le cap del ajutori.	"The cauterization of titillic, which is the head of the assistant."
Quan le cap del ajutori es dislocat per causa de humiditatz lubricas e no es fermat en la hora del sieu retornament deves la sua dislocacio entro que sia a lu aquo costuma de retornar, e aprop per un petit movement es deslocat ayssi que s’endeve, ayssi cum nos havem testificat, lahoras cove que primieyrament redusiscas la dislocacio, e aprop le malaute sia reversat sobre le sieu dos o sobre le latz sa; e aprop eleva la codena la qual es en la partida dedintz del citillic a las partidas desus am les ditz de la tua ma sinistra, si la junctura es dislocada a las partidas dedintz.	"When the head of the assistant is dislocated due to lubricating humidity and it does not remain firm during its return, you should reduce its dislocation before it returns to its usual position. First, gently move it back into place, ensuring that it aligns correctly, as we have witnessed. Then elevate the shoulder blade located behind the titillic with your left hand."
E aprop igneys le cauteri havent dos caps; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	"And moreover, the cautery has two heads; and this is its shape:"
E aprop cauteriza la codena entro que penetre aquela entro al autre latz; e vindra la figura de cauterizacio lahoras de iv caps cauteris.	"Moreover, cauterize the shoulder blade so that it enters one within the other. And here is a diagram of cauterization with four heads."
e so aquel subtils segon la quantitat de tenta; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	"And thus, the subtle one according to the quantity of thread; and this is its shape:"
E alcunas veguadas es ajustat segon aquest comte i per que son les cauteris .viii.	"And sometimes it is adjusted according to this count and for that reason there are eight cauteries."
E aprop pausa sobre le cauteri porys cuytz am sal, e aprop fay adherir le malaute a trenquilitat, e lo membre no sia maugut per alcun temps entro que sia confortat.	"And furthermore, pause on the cautery with hot water mixed with salt, and ensure that the dislocation adheres to tranquility, so that the limb may not be moved for some time until it is comforted."
E si la dislocacio es a las partidas desus e tart es fayt aquo, lahoras cauteriza sobre le muscle am cauteri clavilh o am motz cauteris puntan, quar la junctura es confermada e la humiditat es romauguda e le malaute es sanat.	"And if the dislocation is on the upper side and it is necessary to do this, then cauterize over the muscle with a knife-shaped cautery or with pointed cauteries, because the joint is strengthened, humidity is broken up, and the injury is healed."
Capitol .xxvi.	"Chapter 26."
De cauterizacio del stomac.	"On cauterizing the stomach."
Quan veno en l’estomac freg e motas humiditatz entro que aquel extrazo de la sua compleccio e so multiplicatz raumases a lu, e si tu continuas las manieyras de curacio e no confereyso, lahoras cove que le malaute sia sobre le sieu dos ressupinat, e extenda las suas mas e las suas coysas, e aprop cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris: an un cauteri dejos le pietz per la quantitat d’un dit am cauteri clavilh, e am dos cauteris dejos del dos costatz del cauteri, entro que vengua la figura de cauteri triangulada; e elonga entre els que no sian ajustatz que faran poyredura.	"When there is friction and abundant humidity in the stomach that causes it to become enlarged and its contents multiplied excessively, if you continue with the usual treatments without improvement, then it is necessary for the illness to subside on its own, extending the chest and limbs. Then cauterize [the stomach] with three cauteries: one on the left side of the pit of the stomach with a knife-shaped cautery about the size of a finger, and two on either side of the ribcage in such a way that they form a triangular shape; avoid those areas that are not adjusted to prevent burning."
E si la profunditat del cauteri la quantitat de les dos terses de la grocesa de la codena.	"And if the depth of the cautery is equal to twice the thickness of the skin."
E sia la figura del cauteri segon aquesta forma ses addicio, E si vols, cauteriza am gran cauteri en le mieg loc del estomac segon aquesta forma; et aquest sia un cauteri segon la forma de cercle segon aquesta forma:	"And let the figure of the cautery be according to this shape with addition. And if you wish, cauterize with a large cautery in the middle of the stomach according to this form: and this is one cautery according to the form of a circle according to this form:"
E sia cauterizat l’estomac punctan ad aquel que de aquest cauteri es spaventat: e es que tu senhes sobre l’estomac punt segon la quantitat que voles am tenta, e aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri en les puntz; e aprop cura aquel am la curacio qu’es precedita entro que sia sanat.	"And if the stomach is punctured according to that which frightens from this cautery: and thus, you may make punctures on the stomach with a needle according to the quantity you wish, then cauterize those points with a cautery; and then treat it with the treatment that is previously mentioned until it is healed."
Capitol .xxvii.	"Chapter 27."
De cauterizacio del fietge fret.	"On cauterizing a feverish liver."
Quan endeve en le fietge dolor per fregiditat o per humiditat o per grossa ventositat entro que de la sieua normal compleccio sia getat per egressio superflua, e es curat le malaute am aquo que havem dit e no comfereys, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sua cervitz, e senhes am tenta tres cauteris segon aquesta forma et aquesta quantitat meteyssa sobre le fietge dejos dels ipocondres, la hon perve le decubit de home.	"When there is pain in the liver due to coldness or humidity or excessive windiness causing it to deviate from its normal condition by superfluous evacuation, and if this illness is treated with what we have said and does not improve, then it is necessary for the illness to subside on its own on its own side. Then make three punctures according to this form and quantity evenly spaced over the liver on the left side of the hypochondrium, where a man lies on his right side."
E sia l’espazi le qual es entre quascun cauteri segon la grossetut del dit, e sia le cauteri segon la longitut del cors dreyta.	"And let the space between each cautery be according to the thickness of the finger, and let the cauteries be according to the length of the right hand."
E no compremas la tua am le cauteri mot.	"And do not compress too much with the cautery."
E si la quantitat de aquo que es adhurit la quantitat de la maytat de la specitut de la codena, e no y sia pus ajustat; e si le malaute stant sobre les pes de lu; e si no es estant, lahoras sia jassent, le qual ja ha extendudas las suas coysas, e eleve les sieus brasses.	"And if the quantity of what is adhered to is equal to the thickness of a finger's width, and it is not well-adjusted; and if the illness remains on its weight; and if it is not standing up, then have him lie down, having already extended his limbs, elevate his arms."
E es aquesta la forma del cauteri:	"And this is the form of the cautery:"
E a tu es possible que cauterizes aquestz cauteris am cauteri cutellar, quan es am tu subtilitat e prudencia en l’art.	"And it may be possible for you to cauterize these cauteries with a knife-shaped cautery, if you have subtlety and prudence in the art."
E guarda te que trop no procesiscas en la cauterizacio, e sia adhurida la specitut de tota la codena per que sia adhurit tot le cors e pervengua entro als budels, quar la codena aqui es subtil; e sapias aquo.	"And be careful not to proceed too quickly with the cautery, and let the skin adhere all over so that the entire body adheres and comes within reach of the vessels, for the skin is thin here; know this."
Capitol .xxviii.	"Chapter 28."
De perforacio de apostema del fietge am cauteri.	Perforation of an abscess of the liver using a cautery
Quan endeve excitura o apostema en le fietge e voles saber si aquel apostema es en le carn del fietge o en la tunica de lu, lahoras si es en la carn del fietge, le malaute atrobo gravitat e dolor ses acuitat.	If you want to know if an abscess or swelling in the liver is located within the substance of the liver or beneath its capsule, then if it's within the substance of the liver, the patient will have severe pain that becomes more acute.
E si es en la tunica del fietge, am la dolor es acuitat gran e vezes que ja afatiguatz les metges la cura de lu.	And if it is beneath the capsule of the liver, there is intense pain which often exhausts the patient and discourages doctors from attempting to treat it.
Donc cove que·l malaute sia enversat sobre la sieua cervit; e aprop senha le loc de l’apostema am tenta; e aprop igneys le cauteri le quel es asemblat a rag, la forma del qual a precedit en l’autra pagina.	Therefore, the patient should be placed on their back. Then carefully locate the site of the abscess with your fingers and bring the cautery, which is shaped like a hook, to that place.
E cauteriza am aquel i cauteri entro que tota la codena sia comborida, entro que pervengua al ciphac, entro qu’en yesca sania.	And burn it with that cautery until the entire chain [of inflammation] is burned away, so that it reaches the diaphragm, so that clean flame comes out.
E aprop cura aquel per curacio dels autres apostemas entro que sia sanat.	And then cure the other abscesses as you would any others until they are healed.
E no cove que de aquesta forma de cauteri use sino aquel del qual le estudi en l’art de medicina es prolonguat, e en las mas del qual motas malautias an conogut; mays aquest am esperiment alcunas veguadas sia ardit sobre aquesta operacio, mays empero leyssa aquela deves nos, e es miels.	And this form of cautery should be used only by those who have studied medicine extensively and have had experience treating many illnesses. Although someone may have tried it a few times, it is better for them to leave it to those who are more experienced.
Capitol .xxix.	Chapter XXIX
De cauterizacio de plauresi.	On the cautery of pleurisy
Diyssero les antics cauteri de las razitz de aristologia a plauresi frega segon aquesta manieyra esser fazedor, e es aquest que tu prenguas de las razitz de aristologia longa secca una razit pun longua que es trobada, e sia de la grossetut del dit.	The ancients used cauteries of the liver for pleurisy in this way: you should take a long, dry cautery from the liver and insert it into the hole until it is found. It should be as thick as your finger.
E aprop submergeys aquela en oli e eysen aquela al foc, e aprop cauteriza per un cauteri en aquel loc le qual es entre la continuacio de la furcula am le col; e am dos cauteris petitz dejos guidazi, un pauc declinans a la partida que es dejus la barba, e am dos cauteris en aquo que es declinant entre la quinta costa e la cizena, declinant un pauc a las partidas detras; e am autre cauteri en le mieg loc del pietz; et am autre sobre l’estomac, et am tres cauteris de las partidas detras; et am un cauteri en aquel loc le qual es entre las dos spallas, e am dos cauteris dels dos latz del pietz, dejos le cauteri le qual es entre doas spallas.	"Then immerse this in oil and place it on the fire, then cauterize with a pointed cautery at the location between the continuation of the furcula and the collar; and with two small cauteries leave them guided, one slightly declining towards the departure that is below the beard, and with two cauteries at what declines between the fifth rib and the armpit, declining slightly towards the rear departures; and with another cautery in the middle location of the chest; and with another on the stomach, and with three cauteries on the rear departures; and with one cautery in that location which is between the two shoulders, and with two cauteries on both sides of the chest, leaving the cautery which is between two shoulders."
E no cove que compremas la tua ma am le cauteri, ans sia en le manifest de la codena en obra.	"This does not require purchasing your hand with the cautery, rather it should be in the chain of work in manifestation."
E ja diyssero alscus antics que so alscus dels homes les quals uson de cauteri de ferr semblant a ray e igneysso aquel, e meto aquel en aquel loc le qual es entre las costas, entro que pervenguam am aquel ad aquel apostema e sia foragetada sania, ayssi cum havem dit en l’apostema del fietge.	"And already the ancient authors said that these are the ancient people who use cauteries of iron similar to a rod and ignite that one in that location which is between the ribs, entering until reaching that aposteme and let it be purified healthy, thus as we have said in the aposteme of the liver."
Mays en aquesta perforacio am cauteri no es ses temor, quar hu mor tantost ho accideys en le loc fistula a la qual no es sanacio.	"But in this perforation with cautery there is no fear, for someone died immediately after it happened in that location called fistula which was not healed."
Capitol .xxx.	"Chapter .xxx."
De la cauterizacio de la melsa.	Of the cauterization of the melon.
Quan tu curas la malautia de la melsa am aquo que havem dit de la curacio en la divisio e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cauteri en lu es segon tres manieras, las quals totas son dreyturieras, de las quals la una es que fassas tres cauteris o quatre linhan segon la longitut de la melsa segon la figura dels cauteris del fietge, la figura dels quals ha precedit.	"When you treat the disease of the melon with what we have said about the cure in the division and do not confer your cure, then cauterize in it according to three manners, all of which are correct. The first is that you make three cauteries or four, following the length of the melon according to the figure of the liver cauteries, whose figure has been preceded."
E sia entre quascun cauteri la grossetut d’un dit o un pauc mes, e la manieyra del cauteri sia la manieyra la qual havem dita en le cauteri del fietge engualment.	"And let the thickness between each cautery be that of a finger or a little more, and the manner of cautery should be the same as we have said for the liver cautery equally."
E no compremas la tua ma am le cauteri; e le malaute sia eves sobre lo sieu dos.	"And do not press your hand with the cautery; and let the disease be even on its own side."
E es autra manieyra de cauterizar, so es que tu igniscas le cauteri haventz dos vertimentz, la qual causa havem dita en le capitol de dislocacio del muscle, e elava la codena la qual es en le endreyt de la melsa la hon perve le jazer del malaute sinistre.	"And another manner of cauterizing is that you ignite the cautery having two vents, which cause we have mentioned in the chapter on dislocation of the muscle, and raise the chain which is in the direction of the melon where it reaches the location of the left disease."
E sia la tua elevacio am la qual elevas la codena segon la longuesa del cors, per que sian faytz cauteris segon la latitut del cos.	"And let your elevation be such that when you raise the chain, it is according to the length of the body, so that cauteries are made according to the width of the body."
E aprop entromet les dos vernimentz, ignitz mot, en aquel entro que am aquels penetres la codena de la autra part.	"And then insert the two vents and ignite it quickly in that place where with those you penetrate the chain from the other side."
E aprop extrayt le cauteri; e donc son faytz quatre cauteris.	"And then extract the cautery, and thus four cauteries are made."
E si voys, cauteriza am cauteri havent tres vernimentz.	"And if you wish, cauterize with a cautery having three vents."
E aprop tu cura le cauteri pus que aia laysat de getar brac per trops jorns, quar mays es comferent que las autras causas precedentz en la curacio.	"And then cure the cautery because it has remained to remove the bandage for too many days, for more is conferred that the other causes preceding in the cure."
Capitol .xxxi.	"Chapter .xxxi."
De cauterizacio de ydropici.	"On cauterization of dropsy."
Cauteri no catz en ydropici sino en alcinte3 propriament.	"No cautery is used in dropsy except in certain instances properly."
Quan tu curas le ydropic am las manieyras de curacio las quals havem ditas en la divisio e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que aquel cauterizes am quatre cauteris en le cercuit del embelic e am un cauteri sobre l’estomac, e am autre cauteri sobre le fietge, e am autre cauteri sobre la melsa, e am dos cauteris entre les spondils del dos, e un cauteri en lo dreyt del pietz, e am autre cauteri sobre l’estomac.	"When you treat the dropsical patient according to the methods of treatment mentioned in the division, if your treatment does not succeed, then cauterize with four cauteries around the navel and one on the stomach, another on the liver, another on the spleen, two between the shoulder blades of the back, one on the right side of the foot, and another on the stomach."
E la quantitat de la profunditat del cauteri sia propdana a la spicitut de la codena.	"And the quantity of the depth of the cautery should be proportional to the thickness of the skin."
E aprop layssa le cauteri ubert per so que gete brac per lonc temps.	"And also leave the cautery upright so that it gets cold slowly."
E no evacuas le malaute de curacio aprop le cauteri am aquo que cove per que sian agreguadas a lu doas entencios, e sira festinada a lu am ajutori sanacio.	"And do not remove the patient from treatment immediately after the cautery with something hot, because it is necessary to add two ointments and then bandage it hurriedly with the aid of healing."
La forma del cauteri am lo qual es cauterizat lo ventre sia clavilh segon que la forma de aquel es desus precedent, e es aquel am le qual es cauterizat le dos sia olivar segon qu’es precedent a la sua forma.	"The shape of the cautery with which the belly is cauterized should be like a claw according to its previous form, and that with which the back is cauterized should be olive-shaped according to its preceding form."
Capitol .xxxii.	"Chapter XXXII."
De cauterizacio de pes e de las coyssas.	"Of cautery for the feet and for the thighs."
Quan les pes so apostematz en ydropitz e so repletz de aygua sitrina, cove que cauterisas les pes sobre le dos del pe in nocrati aquo que es entre le auricular e le anular, e eleva la tua ma am le cauteri e no torses aquel; e aprop eleva la tua ma, e no retornes aquela de tot, quar l’aygua satrina rezuda.	"When the feet are swollen with dropsy and filled with turbid water, it is necessary to cauterize the feet on the instep of the foot near where the ear is joined, lift your hand up with the cautery but do not twist it; then lift your hand up again without returning it completely, for the turbid water will drain."
Es le cauteri segon aquesta forma: E aprop fay sobre las doas coyssas dos cauteris, e en quascuna coysa sia feyt cauteri am la extremitat del cauteri cutellar.	"A cautery is made in this way: Then place two cauteries on both thighs and make a cautery on each thigh with the point of the knife-like cautery."
E sia le cauteri segon la longitut de la coyssa: i dejos le denolh e l’autre jos le mieg loc de la coyssa; e sobre quascuna coyssa dos cauteris.	"Make the cautery along the length of the thigh, leaving one below the knee and another at mid-thigh level. On each thigh place two cauteries."
E layssa la plagua uberta ses curacio per lonc temps per so que alcuna aygua resuda de lu.	"And leave the boil open without treatment for a long time until all water drains from it."
E aprop cura le am aquelas causas las quals havem ditas.	"Then treat it with those causes which we have mentioned."
Capitol .xxxiii.	Chapter 33
De cauterizacio de cos de ventre.	"On cauterization of the body below the belly."
Quan cos de ventre es per freg e per humiditat entro que debelice las vertutz, so es la vertut digestiva e retentiva, las quals so en l’estomac e en les budels, e es curat aquo am las manieyras de curacio e no confereys, e vezes le malaute suffertan cauteri de vertut exhiberant, lahoras cauteriza aquel am gran cauteri sobre le sieu stomac segon que a precedit en la cauterizacio del estomac, am le cauteri del cercle e am quatre cauteris en le cercuit del embelic subtils, am cauteri clavilh subtil; e am cauteri sobre le alcatin sobre alozis gran, o am dos cauteris.	"When the belly suffers from heat and excessive humidity causing weakness of the powers, so it is that the digestive and retentive powers are weakened, which reside in the stomach and intestines. It is treated by these methods of treatment without referring to them, sometimes the illness exhibits signs of cauterization, at which time cauterize with a large cautery on the top of his stomach according to what has been said previously about the cauterization of the stomach, using the circular cautery and four subtle pin-like cauteries around it, as well as cauterizing on the spleen near the left kidney using either one or two cauteries."
E si vezes las humiditatz exhuberants e le malaute aquo tollerant, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre le pentenilh e sobre les budels, e fort leu ajustant dos cauteris sobre l’estomac e prop dels inguonas, quar es curacio perficent de juvament de la qual no erras.	"And if sometimes there are excessive humidities and the illness tolerates it, then cauterize him on the diaphragm and on the intestines, placing two cauteries close together on the stomach near the groin, for this is a perfect cure that will not fail."
Capitol .xxxiv.	Chapter 34
De cauterizacio de emorroydas antiquas.	"Regarding the cauterization of external hemorrhoids."
Quan so en la natura derier emorroydas antiquas o una de humors grossas fregas o de humiditatz corrompudas, e son curadas am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no confereys la tieua curacio, lahoras cauterisa am tres cauteris sobre le pus dejos spondilh del dos petit e petit triangular, e am cauteri desus le ombelic cays per dos ditz.	"When there are external hemorrhoids that do not heal or one of the large veins is rubbed or corrupted by humidities, and they are cured with what we have said in the division without following this method of treatment, then cauterize them with three cauteries on each side of the anus, placed small by small triangularly, and place another cautery above the navel for two days."
E si doptas que l’estomac de lu sia enfregidat e la vianda de lu no sia degerida, e la cara de lu vezes apostemada, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre l’estomac am gran cauteri segon que es precedit; e am un cauteri sobre fietge, e am autre cauteri sobre la melsa de lu am cauteri clavilh, e leyssa le cauteri per alcun temps ubert, e aprop cura lu entro que sia sanat.	"If the stomach is cold and the food not digested, and the face is pale or inflamed, then cauterize that area on the stomach with a large cautery as previously described; and apply another cautery to the liver and one with a pointed cautery to the spleen, leaving the cauteries in place for some time until the interior has healed."
Capitol .xxxv.	Chapter XXXV
De cauterizacio de atheyl aprop la abscizio de lor.	"Regarding cauterization after an incision of hemorrhoids."
Quan tu abscindes atheyl, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri que es asemblat a ray.	When you excise the hemorrhoids, then ignite the cautery that is assembled like a dart.
Aprop entremet aquel ignit en aquel atheyl abscis, e ultima la tieua ma entro que pervengua le cauteri al orifici de la vena de la qual ve la sanc.	Next, insert the ignited cautery into the excised hemorrhoid and burn the remaining tissue inside until it reaches the opening of the vein from which the blood flows.
E fay aquo una vetz o doas, quar si achieyl son trops, lahoras cauteriza quascun de lor segon que havem recontat, e aprop cura aquels am aquo que confereys a lor dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And do this once or twice, because if there are too many hemorrhoids, then cauterize each one according to what we have described, and cure them with what is recommended for internal swellings until they are healed.
E si cauterizas am gran cauteri sobre alquatin, es mays derier en juvament.	"If you cauterize with a large cautery over any part of the anus, it will be more painful."
Capitol .xxxvi.	Chapter XXXVI
De cauterizacio de fistolas que son faytas en la natura derie en las partidas de lu.	"Regarding the cauterization of fistulas that occur naturally in the parts of the body."
Quan la natura no obeziys a la obra la qual havem recomtada en son loc, e·l pacient es espaventat per aquo, sia sanat am cauteri.	"When nature does not obey the work we have recommended for its place, and the patient is afraid of this, let it be healed with cautery."
Donc quan ad alcun ve fistola en la natura derier, e es antiquada, corro sania de lu e humiditatz corrompudas, e donc aquo que es pus digne que cove es que proes aquela am tenta subtil, e aprop conoys la quantitat de la profunditat de lu am la devant dita tenta.	"Therefore, when there is some fistula in the derriere that is old and corrupted by dryness and corrupt moisture, it is more appropriate to try to cure it with the aforementioned probe, carefully determining the quantity of its depth."
Aprop igneys le cauteri que es semblant a ray.	"A suitable cautery would be one resembling a ray [of light]."
E aprop met aquel cauteri ignit en aquesta fistula, e segon la quantitat en la qual intrec la tenta.	"And apply this cauterizing iron to this fistula, according to the depth that the probe has reached."
E itera sobre aquela le cauteri entro que sian comburitz aquels cors corrumputz tost una veguada o dos o tres, segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	"Brandish the cautery over that area until those corrupted bodies are consumed entirely in one go or two or three, according to your need."
E guarda te de combustio de nervi e de vena; o si fistula va al cors de la vesica o al cors del budel, lahoras guarda te de totz aquels locz; e no fassas aquo sino quan la fistula es en loc carnos e cogitas que no es penetrant.	"Be careful not to burn nerves and veins. If the fistula is located in the bladder or intestine, beware of all those areas. Do this only when the fistula is in a fatty location and you believe it is not penetrating."
E aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat.	"And then treat the area that needs healing."
E si le loc es sigillat, e so abscindidas de lu las materias, e roman ayssi per lonc temps, lahoras sapias que ja es curat entierament.	"If the location is sealed and all materials have been cut off from it, and remains that way for a long time, then you should know that it is completely healed."
E si las materias no so de lu ostadas, lahoras sapias que es penetrant o en le preon de lu os corromput, o cays aquo de aquelas causas de las quals vindra rememoracio en son loc.	"If the materials are not removed from it, then you should know that it is penetrating or there is corruption in its vicinity, or this occurs due to those causes which will be remembered later in its location."
Capitol .xxxvii.	Chapter XXXVII
De cauterizacio dels ronhos.	"On cauterizing wounds."
Quan en les ronhos endeve dolor per freg o per grossa ventozitat, e per aysso le coyt del malaute es amermat, lahoras cove que cauterizes aquel sobre les ronhos am cauteri sobre quascun ronho am cauteri clavilh del qual precesic la rememoracio.	When pain occurs in the lungs due to coldness or congestion, and because of this the patient's heart is saddened, it is necessary to cauterize that area with a pointed cautery on each lung.
E fort leu cauterizam am le segon un petit dejos, per que vindran tres cauteris liniatz, e donc siran mays deriers en juvament.	And for the second cauterization make it smaller, so that three cauteries will be straight, and then use more cauteries in succession.
Capitol .xxxviii.	Chapter .xxxviii
De cauterizacio de la vesica.	Of the cautery of the bladder.
Quan accideys en la vesica debelitat e mollificacio per freg e per humiditatz ayssi que·l malaute la urina no retengua, lahoras cauteriza aquel en la partida pus dejos sobre la vesiqua, la hon comensan les pels del pentenilh, e cauteriza am un cauteri en la partida dreyta, e am autre en la senestra de lu.	When debility and softness occur in the bladder due to coldness and humidity so that the patient cannot retain urine, cauterize it at its beginning on the right side where the pubic hair starts, and cauterize with one cautery on the right side and another on the left.
E sia la longitut de quascun cauteri segon la cantitat dels not del pous; e cauteriza aquel am cauteri en la partida pus bassa del dos, o am dos cauteris si es necessitat.	And let the length of each cautery be according to the amount of flesh at the mouth of the bladder; and cauterize it with one cautery at its lowest part on the back, or with two cauteries if necessary.
E sia cauteri clavilh segon que es procesit.	And the cautery should be pointed depending on what is needed
Capitol .xxxix.	Chapter .xxxix
De cauterizacio de la mayra.	Of the cautery of the liver.
Quan veno en la mayra freg e humiditatz, e per aysso es prohibida enpreignacio, e son corrompudas las mestruas de lu, e es tardada la provocacio de lor, e accideys dolor deves le haveniment de lor, lahoras cove que·l loc sia cauterizat am tres cauteris en le circuit del ombelic, ayssi cum havem dit en le cauteri de la vesica; e am cauteri sobre le loc pus dejos del dos, o am dos cauteris, e sia le cauteri clavilh.	When there is coldness and humidity in the liver, which inhibits conception, corrupts menstrual flows, delays their onset, and causes pain during menstruation, then that place should be cauterized with three pointed cauteries around the navel, as we have said for the cautery of the bladder; and with one cautery on the lowest part at the back, or with two cauteries.
Capitol .xl.	De cauterizacion del coracoard.
De cauterizacio de la dislocacio de l’anqua.	"Of cautery for the dislocation of the ankle."
Quan humiditatz moucozas so efundudas a la partida de la anqua, e so faytas causas del yssiment del sieu loc, e senhal de lu es que la coyssa es prolonguada sobre l’autre quan so comparadas entre lor.	"When mucus is unduly produced at the ankle joint, and this is due to the displacement of its location, a sign of which is that one part extends over another when they are compared together."
E le loc de la dislocacio es atrobat en lu quays boyt.	"And the site of dislocation can be found in the lower leg."
Adonc cove que cauterizas le malaute sobre la partida de la anqua de lu am cauteri a sercle semblant, pus que tu auras senhat am tenta en le cercuit de la partida ayssi cum es revolguda, e per so que la partida caia el mieg loc del cercle.	"Then you should cauterize the patient above the ankle joint with a circular cautery device, because after having marked around the edge of the joint as it is turned, the mark will fall in the middle of the circle."
E sia le cauteri del qual precedit la forma en la cauterizacio del estomac.	"And the cautery mentioned above has the same shape as that used for cauterizing the stomach."
E si aquest cauteri no es a tu present, lahoras cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris am cauteri olivar gran.	"And if this cautery is not available, then cauterize it with three olive-sized cauteries."
E sia fayt le cauteri segon la quantitat de la ispicitut de tota la codena; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	"And let the cautery be according to the quantity of heat required for the whole chain [of dislocated bones]; and then carefully dress it until it is healed."
Capitol .xli.	"Chapter 41"
De cauterizacio de la vena sciatica.	"Of cauterizing the sciatic vein."
Quan dolor ve en la partida de anqua, e so causa de lu freg et humiditatz, le malaute es curat am aquo que havem dit e no confereys, e aquo es antiquat, lahoras cove que tu lacses le malaute de humors grosses am pillulas fetidas o am pillulas artificials o semblantz; e aprop cauteriza aquel.	"When pain occurs in the ankle joint due to friction and humidity, the patient is cured with what has been said above if it is recent. However, if it is old and confirmed, then you should open the patient's flesh with fetid pills or artificial pills or similar ones; and then cauterize it."
E la manieyra del cauteri en aquela es segon dos manieyras: o cauteri am medicinas comburentz, o cauteri am foc.	"And the method of cautery in this case is according to two methods: either cautery with burning medicines or cautery with fire."
Sira segon dos manieyras scientas, de las quals es la una que cauterizes aquel sobre la partida de l’ancha de lu am tres cauteris triangulatz segon aquesta forma; e fay am aquels bona profunditat.	"Choose according to two known methods, of which one is to cauterize it above the ankle joint with three triangular cauteries arranged thus; and make them with good depth."
E sia le spazi le qual es entre cascun cauteri la quantitat de la grossitut del dit e si le cauteri olivar o gran.	"And let the space between each cautery be equal to the thickness of a finger, if it is an olive-sized or larger cautery."
Mays alcunas veguadas sia le cauteri sobre le mieg loc sobre le cap de l’anquan per que son quatre cauteris.	"But sometimes place the cauteries above the middle of the joint on top of the ankle bone because there are four cauteries."
E si vols, cauteriza am le cercle del qual es precesida la forma en la cauterizacio de la dislocacio de l’anqua, la i que sia cercle continent e comburey la ispicitut de tota la codena.	"And if you wish, cauterize with the circle described in the form of cautery for dislocation of the ankle joint, which should be a continuous circle and burn the heat throughout the chain."
E aquesta es la manieyra de cauteri in ciatiqua quan dolor es adherent al anqua e no es estenduda entro a la coyssa.	"And this is the method of cautery in sciatica when pain is adherent to the ankle and not extended within the joint capsule."
Mays si es estenduda entro a la coyssa, lahoras cauteriza aquel am dos cauteris sobre la coyssa sobre le loc al qual envireys le malaute que es la dolor; e am un cauteri sobre la cavilha per quatre ditz un pauc deves la part cilvestra.	"But if it is extended within the joint capsule, then cauterize it with two cauteries on the capsule above the point where you feel the pain that is causing the discomfort; and one cautery on the heel about four fingers' width down from the shinbone on the outer side."
E si le cauteri cutellar, e sia la profunditat del cauteri segon la quantitat de la ispicitut de la codena.	"And if using a cauterizing knife, let the depth of the cautery be according to the quantity of heat required for the whole chain [of dislocated bones]."
E si le malaute envireys que la dolor es estenduda entro al loc prop les ditz des pes, lahoras cauteriza aquel aqui on envireys am cauteri per tres puntz o quatre o mays si indigeys de aquel.	"And if the pain extends to the point near the said weights [ankle bones], then cauterize it there with cauteries at three or four points or more as needed."
E si le malaute envireys dolor esser dejos le donolh ves la coyssa, lahoras cauteriza aquel aqui am un cauteri cutellar.	"And if the pain extends to behind the capsule, then cauterize it there with one cautery using a cauterizing knife."
E guarda te en tota cauterizacio que no ultimes am le cauteri en tant que comburas nervi o gran arceria, e que per aquo a tu es sobre le malaute mal noccument o contraccio.	"And be careful in all cautery that you do not burn too deeply with the cautery so that you burn large nerves or arteries, and thus cause greater harm or contraction."
E yeu ja e vist un e autre de aquels les quals cauterizero sobre la cavilha e ultimero en la cauterizacio, e la cama foc inflada entro que la tumor aconseguit lo pe, e foc perforat e corromput tot le pe.	"And I have seen some of those who cauterized on the heel and burned too deeply during cautery, and the leg became so swollen that the tumor reached the foot; and it was perforated and completely corrupted [gangrenous]."
E aprop accidic fort solucio de ventre, e aprop aquo la mort.	"And thus a frequent complication of this is a solution of continuity of the intestines, which often leads to death."
E si la dolor es en dos partidas ensemps cauteriza quascuna segon aquesta manieyra.	"And if pain is in two parts at once, then cauterize each one according to this method."
E diysero les savis alcus en la cauterizacio de anqua cauteri del qual aquesta es la manieyra: fay semblant a cercle de ferr del qual le cercuit sia la maytat de un palm; e sia deves le sieu orrifici segon la grossesa de un os de datil o mens un pauc.	"And the wise have said that in cauterizing the ankle, this is the method of cautery: make it like a circular iron ring whose circumference is about half a palm; and it should be deep near its opening according to the thickness of a hazelnut kernel or somewhat less."
E dedintz aquel cercle sia un autre tertz; e sia le spazi le qual es entre lor la quantitat del notz del pous; e sian aquels cercles ubertz de dos partidas; e sia la longitut de aquels cays un notz o dos notz, e fay en aquels margue de ferr decentment apparelhat en les cercles; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	"And then draw another third circle inside that one; and let the space between them be equal to the thickness of a nut from an oak tree. And they should be open at two points, with their length being one or two nuts. Make the edges of those rings smooth with iron decently fitted into the circles."
Aprop sia ignit en le foc entro que s’enrogesisca e gete scintillas, e aprop sia pausat sobre la partida del anqua, le malaute colcat sobre le latz sa.	"And first let it be heated in the fire until it becomes red-hot and throws sparks. And then place it on the part of the ankle where the pain is located, with the malady on its lateral side."
E donc cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris redontz en una veguada.	"And thus cauterize it with three cauteries redone in one session."
E aprop layssa aquel per tres jorns; aprop emplastre aquel am boder e layssa la plagua uberta per trops dias; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	"And then leave that for three days; also plaster it with a border and let the plaster remain open for too many days; and also cure it with poultices until it is healed."
Diys Albucasis : o, filhs, de aquesta specia de cauteri pauc havem usat per la terror del reguardament de lu, e per aquo que paucs havem trobatz les quals reguardan sobre lu.	"Albucasis says: 'O son, of this kind of cautery we have used little because of the fear of causing damage to it [the ankle], and therefore few are those who dare perform it.'"
Mays dels bos cauteris a lu qui les sufferta, et atroba am aquel le loc de lu.	"But many have suffered from those cauteries that dared to apply them to that part."
Mays cauteri am medicinas adhurentz es que tu fassas dos cercles haventz armula perforada en la qual deyssen le guaffo de la porta de ferr; sia la longuitut de la paretz en la nauteza de lor sian dos nozes o quays aquels.	"But cautery with adherent medicines is what you should do: make two circles, having an opening pierced in each of which you insert the tip of the iron gate. Let the thickness of their walls be equal to that of two nuts or slightly larger."
E si le spazi le qual es entre quascu la quantitat de la grossitut del dit; e sian ubertz dejos e desus, e sian que contenguan se entre lor segon aquesta forma:	"And if the space between each one is equal to the thickness of a finger. And they should be open on both sides and above, and let them contain something between them in this form:"
E aprop pausa sobre la partida de la anqua le malaut jasent sobre le latz sa, e comprem la tua ma sobre la partida de la anqua; e aprop pren de aygua cauda e fon la entre dos cercles, e la qualiditat de aquela sia am le foc petit a petit, e te aquela per la quantitat de una hora, e sufferta le malaute la mordicacio e la adhustio de lu — quar aquel atrobo mordicacio ayssi cum de foc — entro que cesse la mordicacio.	"And then place it on the part of the ankle where the pain is located with the malady facing its lateral side, and press your hand firmly over the part of the ankle. And then take hot water and pour it between the two circles, and let that water be heated gradually with fire for about one hour until the heat causes a biting sensation and adheres to it — for that pain is like the bite of fire — until the biting sensation stops."
E aprop eleva la tua ma am le instrument et abstergeys l’aygua cauda de tota la anqua am aygua dousa.	"And then raise your hand with the instrument and remove the hot water from all around the ankle with lukewarm water."
E aprop leyssa aquel per tres jorns e pausa sobre aquel boder entro que sia la negror de la adhustio remauguda, e leyssa aquo per alcus jorns, e correra de lu poyredura; aquest es derier en juvament.	"And then leave it for three days and apply a plaster to it until the blackness of the adhering is removed. And let this remain for a few more days and then massage it gently with oil; this is the last treatment."
E aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	"And then cure it with poultices until it is healed."
E si la dolor es extenduda entro la coyssa o la camba, fay a lu estatua en lu que contengua aygua segon que es feyt en la anqua engualment.	"And if the pain extends to the foot or leg, then do to it as was done for the ankle as described above."
E aquesta es la manieyra de aygua cauda, e yeu ja he scrit aquela en le tractat de la rectificacio de medicinas.	"This is the method of hot water, and I have already written about this in my treatise on the correction of medicines."
Recipe de alcali e de caus no extinta de amdos ana partida una, e trissa les e pausa en una ola nova de la qual la partida dejos sia perforada per un petit trauc, segon la quantitat que intre en lu ray.	"Take some alkali and some unslaked lime from both parts of the anvil, crush them together, and place them in a new earthenware vessel with a small hole pierced on one side according to the amount that enters it through its mouth."
E pausa dejos le fons de la ola autra ola enveyriada, e gete sobre aquel alcali e caus viva de aygua doussa la qual cobra aquels per un dit, e pus que tu compremes aquels am la tieua ma per bona compressio, e leyssa la hola que deyssenda de lu aygua aguda en la partida dejos a la ola enveyriada.	"And then place another earthenware vessel upside down on top of the first one. And pour over it some live water with which it is covered by about half a finger's width. Then press it firmly with your hand, and let the hot water that remains flow out through the hole pierced on its lateral side into the inverted vessel."
E aprop ajusta tota aquela aygua, e geta la sobre autra caus viva e autre alcali renovelatz, quar aquela lahoras sira de mot forta acuitat, la qual es aministrada en motas operacios de medicina e en cauterizacio dels autres membres, quar operacio fa de foc.	"And then adjust all that water, and pour it over more live lime and fresh alkali because its heat will be very strong at this time. It is administered in many medical operations and in the cautery of other members because it acts as fire."
E so de las medicinas alcunas am las quals es cauterizat ancha, ayssi cum tezizic e mel anacrat e caus am sabo enayssi que sian mesclatz.	"And some medicines with which the ankle is cauterized are thus: turmeric and honey mixed together with lime in such a way that they are well mixed."
E Gualia recontet de un home dels antics la operacio e la curacio am la qual es curada dolor de anqua e de vena sciatica, e magnifiquet mot be esser de aquel, e diys que no hac necessitat de autra curacio, e quar es sanat per una veguada ayssi cum recomtec, quar fort leu aquel intrec en banh e eysic ja sa d’aquel.	"And Galen recounts an operation and cure with which he healed pain in the ankle and sciatic nerve. He greatly praises it and says that no other treatment is necessary because it heals in one application as he describes, for his experience in this matter was great."
Et es que sia pres de certarragi vert, e si no es atrobat vert, sia presa figua recent; e mot sia trissada am un pauc de grays e sia pausat sus la anqua en la qual es la dolor, o en la coyssa, o en la camba, e sia liat.	"And if fresh wormwood is not available, then take a fig recently picked; grind it with a little salt and place it on the water in which the pain is located, or on the cushion, or on the bed."
E sia layssat per la cantitat de tres horas o per la quantitat que·l malaute centa cedacio de la adhustio.	"And let him be left like that for three hours or for the quantity that the patient feels the need to reduce the swelling."
E aprop met aquel en banh e donc quan le cors de lu sia enrozat, entromet aquel en le sol, quar la dolor cessa e es sanat.	"Then take him out of the bath and once his body is warm, put him on the ground for then the pain ceases and he is healed."
E sapias que no cove que alcu use de cauteri am aquestas medicinas sino aprop la evacuacio del cors.	"And know that it is not necessary to use cauterization with these medicines except in cases of evacuation of the body."
Mays ja Escorides diysec que quan am fenda de cabra la vena stretica es cauterizada, aprofieyra a lu mo be; e sia le cauteri am lu segon aquesta manieyra: sia presa lana e sia enbeguda en oli antic, e sia pausat entre le pous del pe e entre le fossil.	"But already Aesculapius said that when the goat vein is cut open and cauterized, it will benefit him much. And the cauterization should be done this way: take wool, soak it in old oil, and place it between his hands and feet."
E aprop pren fenda de cabra secca e emflasma aquela am foc entro que sia fayta carbo; e aprop pausa lu sobre la lana e leysa la entro que sia estengida.	"And also take dry goat's hair, burn it on the fire until it becomes charcoal, and place him on the ashes so that he may rest."
E aprop itera aquo, e no cessas far aquo entro que·l scintiment de la mordicacio pervengua entro al anqua e repausa la dolor.	"And repeat this process until the sensation of pain reaches the water and then stop doing it for then the pain will cease."
Et aquesta manieyra de cauteri es apelat cauteri de vaquas.	"And this method of cauterization is called cauterization of goats."
Capitol .xlii.	"Chapter XLII."
De cauterizacio de dolor de dos.	"About the cauterization of pain in the back."
Alcunas veguadas dolor es en le dos per tropas causas, cum per cazement o per percucio o per superflua evacuacio, e per causas ad aquelas semblantz, per infusio de materia frega e humida.	"Sometimes pain occurs in the back due to various causes, such as from coughing or from blows or from excessive evacuation, and also for similar reasons, due to the infiltration of moist and warm matter."
E cauteri no catz sino en aquesta sola specia la qual es fayta per efusio de materia frega.	"And cauterization is only used in this single case which occurs from an effusion of hot matter."
Donc cove, aprop evacuacio del malaute am pillulas fitidas e am semblant a lor, que sian faytas sobre·l dos en le qual es la dolor tres linhas segon la latitut de lu, pus que senhas am tentha en quascuna linha v cauteris o mays, segon la quantitat que ve de la tolleransa del malaute e de la vertut de lu.	"Therefore, after evacuating the illness with pills made of fritillaria and similar ones, they should be placed on the back where the pain is felt, three lines apart according to its width. For then cauterization should be done in each line, three or more times, depending on the amount that can be tolerated by the patient and the strength of the medicine."
E sia fayta cauterizacio am cauteri de punt.	"And cauterization should be performed with a cautery tip."
E si vols, cauteriza am tres cauteris o am quatre am cauteri clavilh medial segon aquesta forma:	"And if you wish, cauterize three or four times with a hot iron brand according to this pattern:"
Capitol .xliii.	"Chapter XLIII."
De cauterizacio al comensament de gilbositat.	"About cauterization at the beginning of jaundice."
Motas veguadas endeve aquesta malautia als petitz enfantz; e senhal del comensament de lu en les enfantz es que accideys sobre lor estrectura en le ale eves la elevacio e·l movement.	"Many times this illness occurs in young children, and the sign of its beginning in children is that it happens suddenly on their skin, which becomes elevated and moves."
E atrobas en le derier espondil del dos e dels notz de lu que ja comensa a sobremontar sobre les autres spondils.	"And also you will find in the last dorsal vertebra of the back and its neighboring vertebrae that have already begun to protrude above the others."
E donc quan tu vezes aquo e voles prohibir, lahoras cauterisa aquel am cauteri que sia cercle segon aquesta forma:	"Therefore, when you see this and want to stop it, immediately cauterize there with a hot iron brand that is round according to this pattern:"
que prengua le cauteri sobre tota partida del spondilh engualment.	"That the cautery should be placed across the entire width of the spine."
E si vols, cauteriza en le circuit del spondilh am le cauteri de punt dos linhas o tres.	"And if you wish, cauterize around the spine with a cautery tip two or three lines away."
E sian les puntz propdas entre lor.	"And let the points be close together between them."
E aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat am aquo que havem dit.	"And then cure that place until it is healed with what we have said."
Mays guarda que cauteri no sia administrat en gelbositat que sia fayta per spasme de nervi.	"But be careful not to administer cautery in jaundice caused by spasm of the nerves."
Capitol .xliv.	"Chapter XLIV."
De cauterizacio de podagra e de dolor de juncturas.	"About cauterization for gout and pain in joints."
Quan dolor de juncturas son faytas per humors fregas les quals so enfundutz a quascun membre del cors, lahoras quan veno dolors en los pes, de costuma dels metges es que aquo apelen podragua propriament.	"When pain in joints is caused by hot humors which are enclosed in each member of the body, then when pains occur in the feet, it is customary for physicians to call that gout properly."
E donc cum es curada podagra de causa frega am manieyra de cura e no so remaugudas las dolors, lahoras las remau cauteri.	"And therefore when gout caused by heat is treated with a remedy and the pains are not removed, then remove them with cautery."
E es que tu cauterizas aquel aprop evacuacio en le circuit de la junctura del pe am motz cauteris.	"And if you cauterize there after evacuation, do it in the circumference of the joint of the foot with many cauteries."
E sia cauteri olivar del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	"And let the cautery be an olive-shaped one, of which this is the shape:"
E si es necessitat que puntz sia fayt sobre la fassia del pe, lahoras fay am cauteri de punt.	"And if it is necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a cautery tip."
E si las dolors pujan entro als denolhs o a las autras juncturas, e aquo motas vetz s’endeve, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre quascun donolh am tres cauteris o quatre de tota partida am aquest cauteri olivar.	"And if the pains persist in the toes or other joints, and this happens many times, then cauterize there over each painful spot with three or four olive-shaped cauteries across its entire width."
E si motz cauteris que aquestz cauteris sian a tu necessaris, lahoras cauteriza aquel e no premas trop la tua ma am le cauteri abans, sia tant solament enviro la specitut de la codena.	"And if many cauteries are necessary for you, then cauterize them and do not press the hot iron brand too hard on your hand beforehand, but only just around its surface."
E si las dolors pugan entro al donolh e·l dos, lahoras aministra le cauteri le qual havem dit en le sieu capitol.	"And if the pains persist in the toe and the back, then administer the cautery which we have said in its chapter."
E si las dolors so en las mas tant solament, e es apelada suagra, lahoras puncta en le circuit dels focils ayssi cum se revolvo, puncta en aquels dos linhas.	"And if the pains are only in the hand and it is called sweating, then make points in the circumference of the fingers thus as they turn, making them two lines apart."
E si reman de las dolors en les ditz, lahoras puncta en le cercuit dels focils sobre quascun notz e sobre la pinche de la ma.	"And if the pains remain in these places, then make points in the circumference of the fingers over each joint and over the thumb."
E si las dolors pugan aprop alscus jorns als coydes o als muscles, lahoras cauteriza les quascus de tota part dels ajutoris.	"And if the pains persist near those days to the elbows or the muscles, then cauterize each of them across its entire length."
E no evacuas le malaute de bon regiment e de recepcio de medicinas, quar si es fayt bon regiment e flacma es evacuada am aquest cauteri sira sanat, Dieus ajudan.	"And do not rely on good regimen and reception of medicines, for if there is good regimen and evacuation is done with this cautery and yet it does not heal, God help us."
Capitol .xlv.	"Chapter XLIV."
De cauterizacio de rompeduras.	"About cauterization of fractures."
Quan endeve rompedura en les angonars e diysendo les budels denant l’atela al genetiu, e aquo es comensan de aprop, lahoras cove que tu mandas al malaute layssar la sua comestio en le sieu dia e que use de causas leniens per so que la fenda deyssenda del sieu ventre.	"When a fracture occurs in the thighs and hips, and this is how it begins, then you should order the patient to abstain from food on that day and to use gentle remedies so that the wound may close up from his belly."
E aprop segua le malaute entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos, e comanda a lu que tengua le sieu ale entro que sia foro getat o aparesca l’atela o·l budels.	"And then place the patient between your hands over his back, and order him to hold his breath so that his belly is drawn in or appears to be empty."
E aprop retorna aquel am les tieus ditz e senha am tenta la ruptura sobre le os del pentenilh am senhal la extremitat del qual sia semblant a la maytat de cercle a las subiranas partidas del cors.	"And then return him with your hands and press the fracture onto the bone of the sternum, signaling the end of it which is like half of a circle on both sides of the body."
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	"And then heat the cautery of which this is the shape:"
entro que sia mot rog e gete cintilhas.	"until it becomes very hot and gives off sparks."
E aprop reduzeys le budel o l’atela a la sua conquavitat, e aprop pause la sua ma sobre le loc per so que le budel no yesqua.	"And then reduce the bowel or the belly to its concavity, and place your hand over that place so that it does not escape."
E tu ja has ubert entre las coyssas del malaute e dejos lu as pausat un coyssi, et autre servent sia sus las cambas de lu, e autre sus le pietz de lu, le qual tengua las suas mas.	"And you have now placed yourself between the patient's thighs and left him one thigh uncovered, and another servant holds his arms down, and another holds his feet, which he should hold with his hands."
E aprop pausa le cauteri sobre aquel senhal am la tua ma am cauteri stan dreyt, e te aquel entro que am lu consieguas le os del pentenilh entro al mieg del duiduni; e itera am aquel autra veguada si a tu aquel no has conseguit en la primieyra veguada entro al os.	"And then place the cautery on that signal with your hand, applying it cautiously and directly, until you succeed in reaching the sternum bone midway between the breasts. Repeat this again if you do not succeed on the first attempt."
E observa saviament del ysiment del budel en la hora de la tua cauterizacio, que no comburas aquel budel per so que sobre le malaute no vengua in mort o autre gran malicia.	"And observe carefully the movement of the bowel at the time of your cauterization, lest you burn it and bring harm or great mischief upon the patient."
E sapias que quan tu am le cauteri no atenhas le os, no confereys la tua operacio.	"And know that if you do not reach the bone with the cautery, your operation is worthless."
E cove que·l cauteri dels enfants sia subtil segon le gran e la mesura de lor.	"And it is necessary that the cautery for children be thin according to their size and measure."
E aprop cura le loc del cauteri per tres dias am boder entro que sia remauguda la scara del foc.	"And then dress the place of the cautery for three days with lint, until the scar from the fire has healed."
E aprop cura aquel am les autres enguentz entro que sia sanat.	"And then dress it with other ointments until it is healed."
E le malaute sia jasent sobre le sieu dos per xl dias entro que sia sigillat le loc e la plagua.	"And the patient should lie on his back for forty days until the place and the wound are sealed."
E cove que pauses le nutriment de lu segon la longitut del temps de la curacio de lu le qual le linesca le ventre de lu, e que le budel no yesca fora deves le esforsament de guerir.	"And it is necessary that you withhold nourishment from him according to the length of time for his healing, which makes the belly loose, and that the bowel does not come out through effort in recovering."
E aprop quan se vol levar aprop xl dias, lahoras aministra liament decentment fayt, e tengua aquel per autres xl jorns.	"And then when he wants to get up after forty days, gradually administer food to him, and keep him for another forty days."
E sia mermat de trebalh e de replecio de vianda e de beure, e de votz vehementz, quar quan usa de aquest regiment de sanacio entiera sira sanat.	"And he should be spared from work and from abundant food and drink, and from violent coughing, for if he uses this regimen of healing completely, he will surely be healed."
E yeu diyre la curacio de las rupturas en las autras partidas del ventre, e so al comensament, e vols que no treguan, lahoras cauterisa la ruptura d’aquel am cauteri redon segon la quantitat de lu, e sia aquo que es exhurit de la codena ayssi cum la tersa partida de lu; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit, e no es ajustat.	"I speak of the treatment for ruptures in other parts of the belly, and at the beginning, if it is not too severe, cauterize the rupture with a round cautery according to its size, and this should extend as far as the third part of the rupture; then cure it with what we have said."
E ja diyssero alcus primiers que ruptura sia cauterizada am cauteri triangular segon aquesta forma, pus que es senhada am tenta:	"Some earlier authors said that a rupture should be cauterized with a triangular cautery in this shape, which is indicated by the diagram:"
e es pausada linha que eys per la latitut en le latz pus sobira de la ruptura, e autra linha al desus; e depausa la tua ma am un cauteri clavilh, mays le primier cauteri es pus leugier e milhor.	"And the line that they drew across for its width on either side of the rupture is continued upwards; another line is drawn above it. Then place your hand on it with a cautery shaped like this, but use the first cautery more lightly and better."
Capitol .xlvi.	"Chapter 46."
De cauterizacio de torcio.	"On cauterizing a hernia."
Quan endeve en alscus membres per cazement o per percussio dolor e persevera aquela dolor per lonc temps e no comfereys al u curacio am medicinas, lahoras cove que cauterizes am cauteri de punt.	"If there is pain in any of the limbs due to compression or percussion and that pain persists for a long time without being relieved by medical treatment, then it is necessary to cauterize with a pointed cautery."
E sia le cauteri de tot membre segon la magnitut e la parvitat de lu, e vertut e develitat de lu, e locacio de torcio e dolor de lu.	"And let the cautery be made according to the size and smallness of the limb, its strength and weakness, its location and the severity of the pain."
Donc si·s sanat per le primier cauteri, bo es; e sino, lahoras itera sobre lu le cauteri; quar de costuma de aquelas dolors es que sian punctatz de membre ad aquel membre le qual apropinque al u, per que cove que consieguas aquels am cauteri entro que·l malaute sia sanat.	"If it is healed by the first cautery, that's good. But if not, then apply the cautery again over it; because those kinds of pains are often punctured in the limb closest to the one being treated, so you should continue with the cautery until that pain is healed."
Capitol .xlvii.	"Chapter 47."
De cauterizacio de lepra.	"On cauterizing leprosy."
Les lebros alcunas veguadas am cauteri per mot gran juvament, e magerment si la specia de lepra que es fayta per putrefaccio de flacma e de melencolia.	"Some lepers have been seen to benefit little from cautery, and it is even harmful if the type of leprosy is caused by putrefaction of phlegm and melancholy."
E donc cum tu vols cauterizar aquel, considera si la lepra es comussan e as aquela curada am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no deysen, ni esta, e temes sobre le malaute que la corrupcio comprehenda tot le cors de lu e tota la compleccio de lu, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre le cap am v cauteris: am un en le mieg loc del cap, e am le segon pus dejos de lu, eves le front a la fi dels cabels; e amdos sobre dos corns; e am un detras, sobre la nuca o servitz.	"And so when you wish to cauterize someone with leprosy, consider if the leprosy is contagious and if it has been cured by what we have said in the division of it. If not, and you fear that the corruption will spread throughout their entire body and complexion, then cauterize them on the head with five cauteries: one in the middle of the head, another further out from it, even unto the end of the hair; and two on each horn; and one behind, on the nape or servant's neck."
E ultima la tua ma am le cauteri un pauc entro que emprema en le os una petita empressio, e de lu sian deslocadas las scorsas, per so que la expiracio de grossas vapors sia alleujada de lu; e cauteriza sobre la melsa segon que es precesit.	"And finish your work with the cautery by pressing it a little bit in to leave a small impression on the bone, and let the scabs be removed from there so that the expiration of thick vapors may be alleviated. And cauterize on the chest as is necessary."
E si la lepra es ja expanduda sobre le malaute e apar manifestament, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas aquel am aquels cauteris les quals havem ditz en le cap; e am cauteri sobre la extremitat del nas, e am dos cauteris sobre las doas maysselas, e am dos cauteris sobre dos spondils del col, e am vi cauteris sobre les spondils del dos, e am un gran sobre les spondils prop de la coeta, e un sobre la cotea , e am dos sobre las anquas, e am un sobre quascuna anqua, e am dos sobre les donols e un sobre quascun donolh, e am dos sobre les coydes, e am dos sobre les muscles, e am dos las teneretutz del sieu pietz; e cauteriza aquel sobre totas las juncturas dels ditz de las mas e dels pes, e sobre quascun talon dels sieus pes, e sobre les foscils de las suas mas.	"And if the leprosy has already spread over the person and appears manifestly, then you must cauterize them with those cauteries which we have mentioned for the head; and also cauterize on the tip of the nose, and with two cauteries on each cheekbone, and two cauteries on two spine bones of the neck, and six cauteries on the spine bones of the back, and one large one on the spine bones near the buttocks, and one on the buttocks themselves, and two on each ankle bone, and one on each ankle bone itself, and two on each knee joint, and two on each muscle of the thigh; and cauterize them on all the joints of those limbs and also on each heel of their feet, and on the balls of their feet."
E guarda te dels nervis les quals so sobre le talo que no comburas aquels.	"And be careful not to burn the nerves that are located on the heel."
E alcunas veguadas es cauterizat am un cauteri sobre le os del pentenilh e am autre sobre la boca del stomac, e autre sobre le fietge.	"And sometimes one is cauterized with one cautery on the bone of the breastbone, and another on the mouth of the stomach, and yet another on the liver."
E sapias que quant mays ajustas cauteris, tant es mays juvatiu e mays conferent; e sapias que le malaute no ha en le cauteri dolor, ayssi cum han les sas, per so quar le cors de lu ja es stupefayt.	"And know that the more closely you apply cauteries, the greater the benefit and help. And know that the person does not feel pain from the cautery, as they do from their sores, because their body is already numbed."
E cove que les cauteris sian grans o paucs segon les membres e las juncturas segon que es precedit de las specias dels ferramentz.	"And it is necessary that the cauteries be large or small according to the members and joints as is prescribed by the specifics of the instruments."
E aprop cura le cauteri am farina de errs coyta am mel e am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	"Then apply the cautery with barley flour cooked with honey, and with other remedies within to promote healing."
Capitol .xlviii.	Chapter XLVIII
De cauterizacio de stupor.	Of cauterization for numbness.
Quan alcun membre es stabozit o adormit e es curat am medicinas, olis e emplastres, e no es sanat, lahoras tu cauteriza aquel membre stabozit am cauteris segon que merita la grandesa del membre o la parvitat de lu.	When any limb is numb or paralyzed and is treated with medications, oils, and plasters, but does not heal, then cauterize that numb limb with cauteries according to its size or smallness.
E sia lo tieu cauteri intrant la ispicitut de la codena un pauc.	And let your cautery enter a little bit into the thickness of the flesh.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia sanat.	Then treat that with an ointment so that it may heal.
E alscunas veguadas es cauterizada alcuna stupor le qual endeve a las mas e als pes, e als spondils del dos e ves le eysiment dels nervis les quals mavon aquel membre, e es remauguda la stupor.	And sometimes some numbness which is in the arms and legs, and in the spine of the back, is cauterized where the nerves that cause that limb to be paralyzed come out, and the paralysis is removed.
Mays no prusuma sobre aquo sino aquel que es savi en la anotomia dels membre e de la egressio dels nervis tot le cors moventz.	But let no one presume to do this unless he is knowledgeable in the anatomy of the limbs and the exit of the nerves that move all the body.
Capitol .xlix.	De cauterizacion d'uncas e de cicatrices.
De cauterizacio de albaras que es morfea.	"Burning of the whites of the eyes that is disfigured."
Quan albaras es antiqua e no comfereys a lu alcu dels enguentz de medicina, lahoras tu cauteriza sobre aquela am cauteri preon un pauc segon la quantitat de la specitut de la codena entro que sia remauguda la blancor e la color de lu, e la color de lu sia mudada.	"If the whites of the eye are ancient and don't benefit from treatment by any means of medicine, then cauterize over that area with a hot cautery iron a little according to the quantity of the inflammation that has taken away the whiteness and color of it, until its color is changed."
E aprop cura aquel am farina de errs e de lentilhas am oli rozat e am folhas de arnagrosa, e am sanc de colomba o am sanc de yronda, da cascuna sia una partida e totas sian mescladas, e aprop sia linit un drap e sus le loc sia pausat entro que sia sanat.	"And appropriate treatment for it is with flour of barley and lentils mixed with olive oil and leaves of rose geranium, and with dove's blood or hen's blood, giving each one a part and mixing them all together, and then applying it to a cloth and placing it on the location until it is healed."
Capitol .l.	"Chapter 1."
De cauterizacio de cranc.	"Cauterization of the crab."
Quan canser es comensan e vols aquel ostar, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteri de cercle en le circuit de lu ayssi cum es revolgut.	"If cancer begins and you want to cauterize it, then cauterize around its circumference using a circular cautery iron in the same way that it is revolved."
E diysero les savis que sia cauterizat am lo derier cauteri en le mieg loc; mays a mi no es vist aquo, quar temi que sia ulcerat, e yeu ja e vist aquo alcunas veguadas.	"And some experts say that it should be cauterized with the last cautery iron in the middle of it; but I have not seen this, because I fear that it may become ulcerated, and I have seen this happen sometimes."
E es pus dreyturier que sia cauterizat en le circuit de lu am cercle ayssi cum avem dit, o am motz cauteris.	"And then it is advisable to cauterize around its circumference with circular cautery irons as we have said before, or with many small cautery irons."
Capitol .li.	"Chapter 12."
De cauterizacio de adubilati.	Cauterization of varicose veins.
Quan alcun adubilati es tardat en maturacio, e aysso es per la superfluitat fazen aquela, o per etat del malaute, quar es vielh en decrepitat, de pauc sanc, o per le temps, e tu vols festinar en la maturacio de adubilati; lahoras cauteriza en le circuit de lu am motz cauteris petitz punctan; e aprop leyssa aquela quar ela fastinara en maturacio.	When varicose veins are delayed in maturation, this is due to the superfluity of that area, or because of the state of the patient's health, as they are old and decrepit with little blood, or because of time, and you want to hasten the maturation of varicose veins; therefore cauterize around it with a small pointed cautery needle; and leave that alone until it has matured.
Mays si tu vols la perforacio de lu am cauteri, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu: e depausa aquel en le mieg loc de adubilati entro que penetre la codena.	But if you want to perform the cauterization with a cautery needle, then heat the cautery needle of which this is the shape: and afterwards place it in the middle of the varicose veins where the cord enters.
E si le cauteri en aquel loc que es pus dejos, per so que le cors del brac sia alleujat; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if you cauterize that location which is lower down, so that the arm's vein may be alleviated; and then dress it until it is healed.
Capitol .lii.	Chapter LII
De cauterizacio de corrodent.	Of cautery for burning.
Corrodent es corrupcio ambulant en le membre, la qual corrodeys aquel ayssi cum a foc comedent lenha secca.	"Corrosion that wanders in limbs, which corrodes as fire consumes dry wood."
Donc si vezes aquel corrodent en loc le qual sufferte cauteri am foc, lahoras tu igneys cauteris clavils motz paucs, e grans segon que es convenent en aquel loc en le qual es corrodent.	Therefore, if you find that corrosion in the place where cautery with fire is suffered, then you should ignite cautery cloves, both few and large ones, according to what is convenient for that place where the corrosion is.
E aprop cauteriza aquel de tota partida entro que erradiques tota la corrosio e no romangua alcuna causa de lu.	And accordingly cauterize the whole affected area so as to eradicate all corrosion and ensure there remains no cause of it.
E aprop leyssa aquel per tres dias, e pausa sobre les locs cauterizats solpre trissat am oli mesclat entro que las scaras sian totas eradicadas e tota la corrupcio.	And let them rest for three days, applying olive oil mixed with honey to the cauterized areas, until all scabs are eradicated and all corruption is gone.
E aprop cura aquel am enguentz carn engendrantz.	And thus cure it with healing flesh-producing herbs.
Mays si aprop tres dias vezes que la carn nasca sana en la qual no es corrupcio, bo es; mays sino, lahoras itera le cauteri sobre aquo que es romas en les locs corrumputz.	But if after three days the flesh grows healthy without corruption, that is good. But if not, then repeat the cautery upon what remains corrupted in those places.
E corrodent es medicat alcunas vetz am medicina aguda, quar aquela es meza en loc de cauteri.	And corrosion should be treated sometimes with sharp medicine, because it acts like cautery in its place.
Mays empero cauteri am foc es de pus leugier juvament.	But nevertheless cautery by fire is the lighter remedy for relief.
E yeu ja e dit la curacio de lu am medicina aguda en la divisio, e donc pren aquela quan de lu auras endegencia.	And I have already mentioned in that section how corrosion can be cured with sharp medicine, so take that when you begin to have an occurrence of it.
Capitol .liii.	Chapter 53
De cauterizacio de claus e dels autres semblants.	Of the cautery of warts and similar affections.
Motas veguadas endeve a las partidas dejos del pe malautia que s’apela clau, e es causa grossa, fentrada, la qual ladeys le pe; e cauteri en aquels es segon dos manieyras, so es cauteri am foc e cauteri am aygua cauda.	Many times it happens that the disease called "claw" appears in the toes of the sick foot, and it is caused by a thick, entrenched humor that adheres to the foot; and cauteries are used for this in two ways: namely, cautery with fire and cautery with cold water.
Mays cauteri am foc es que igniscas le cauteri concau semblant a pena de voltor, le qual sia feyt de ferr segon la quantitat la qual contengua le clau de tota partida, e sia de subtils marguas.	Cautery with fire is done using an iron cautery shaped like a vulture's tail feather, which should be made according to the size that encompasses all the claw of each toe, and it should have fine edges.
E aprop pausa aquel ignit sobre le clau, e aprop revolveys la tua ma am le cauteri en le circuit del clau entro que·l cauteri pervengua a la profunditat del clau.	Then place that heated cautery upon the claw and gently rotate your hand with the cautery around the edge of the claw until it reaches the depth of the claw.
E leyssa aquel per tres dias entro que comense getar brac.	Leave it on for three days until it begins to form scab.
E aprop emplastre aquel am malvas salvatges trissadas am sal, e leyssa le emplastre sobre aquel per una nuoyt, quar aquel sira eradicat de las suas razitz.	Then apply a plaster made from three parts wild mallow leaves mixed with salt, and leave it on overnight, for the inflammation will be eradicated from its roots.
E aprop cura le loc am enguent de carn generatiu entro que sia sanat.	Then dress the wound with a unguent made of regenerative flesh until it is healed.
E si so no-convertitz, e motas veguadas accideysso en la superficia del cors, majorment en las mas e les pes, lahoras cove que tu aministres en aquels cauteri am aygua, e es que prenguas una quannula de eram o de ferr o de pena de voltor, e pausa aquela sobre le clau; e aprop geta en la quanula de aygua cauda pauca cantitat, e rete la tua ma, e tu revolveys aquela am compressio de la tua ma de tot, e sia enpremut le marge de la canula en la razit del clau, e atrobara la aygua cauda via al preon de la razit del cau; e espera le malaute un pauc la mordicacio de l’aygua cauda per una hora, e aprop remau aquela, quar le clau am las suas razitz sira erredicat.	E si so no-convertitz: If it is not converted.
E ayssi fe am aquels la i aprop l’autre entro que venguas sobre totz les quals de lor so en le cors.	And then you should also come over those of their wounds that are on the surface of the body, especially those on the thighs and legs.
E aprop cura aquels pus que las razitz dels claus so erradicadas am aquo dels enguentz les quals la carn ve engenran.	And cure those puss that the roots of nails were eradicated with water from egg whites which makes skin grow again
Capitol .liiii.	Chapter IV.
De cauterizacio de tremor.	On cauterization of tremors.
Quan endeve ad alcu tremor per freg en le nervi o per febre de causa frega, o per autra causa semblant, lahoras cove que tu cauterises aquel am quatre cauteris o am v sobre les spondils del dos, entre quascun spondilh am un cauteri; e am cauteri en le pietz de lu, e sobre l‘estomac de lu, am cauteri olivar.	When you encounter a tremor due to friction in the nerves or fever caused by heat, or other similar causes, then you should cauterize it with four cauteries or five on the shoulders of the back, placing one cautery between each shoulder blade; and also place a cautery on the foot and one on the stomach with an olive-sized cautery.
E la tremor de lu se repausa e festina la sanetat de la malautia frega.	And the tremor will cease and recovery from the heat-related illness will be hastened.
Capitol .lv.	Chapter LV.
De cauterizacio de albati accidentz al cors.	"Regarding cautery treatment of sudden accidents in the body."
Quan en le cors so espellitz albati, e so pustulas fendas las quals so feytas de materias grossas corruptas; donc cove al comensament cum apareyso, que sia cauterizat sobre tot cap de la fistola am cauteri subtil am fustz de mirt, la extremitat del qual es estenduda am foc; o am razitz de erestologia longua; o am cauteri lentecular.	"When the body is suddenly affected by sores and pustules are formed which are made of corrupt matter, it is necessary at the beginning to appear with caution so that the head of the fistula may be cauterized with a thin cautery made from myrtle wood, the end of which has been extended in fire; or with long tweezers made for this purpose; or with lenticular cauteries."
E alscunas veguadas es cauteri ademamil al comensament de la sua expulcio segon aquesta manieyra; e no so cregudas, e es disrumpuda la superfluitat fazens aquels, et sana de aquels.	"And in recurrent sores they are cauterized again at the beginning of their discharge according to this manner; and they are not believed [to be healed], and the superfuities are disrupted making those [sores] and healing them."
Mays empero cove que aquo sia fayt aprop evacuacio am fleubotomia.	"But it is necessary that this be done near evacuation with phlebotomy."
Capitol lvi.	"Chapter LVI"
De cauterizacio de fluex de sanc accident per incisio de arceria.	"Regarding the cautery treatment of accidental flux of blood by incision with an arrow."
Tropas veguadas endeve fluex de arceria que es inciza deves la plagua la qual endeve deforo, o deves la incizio de apostemas o cauteri del membre, e alor semblantz, e es dificil remaura aquel.	"Many times in that place where blood flows by incision with an arrow which is inserted into the flesh which there is a defect, or into the incision of an aposteme or cautery of the member, and it then seems, it is difficult to remain quiet."
Donc cum accideys ad alcu aquo, lahoras tu·t coyta am la tua ma a l’orrifici de la arceria, e pausa sobre aquel le tieu dit endic estrenh aquel motas veguadas entro que sia ostat le fluex del sanc dejos le tieu dit, e que non yesqua.	"Therefore when it happens to someone that place, immediately you cover with your hand the horror of the arrow, and press on that spot until the blood flow ceases from that place, so that it does not escape."
E aprop pausa en le foc les cauteris olivars paucs e grantz, per nombre motz, e exsuffla sobre aquels entro que sian mot ignitz.	"And immediately apply to the fire the olive-shaped cauteries, both small and large, by number many, and blow on them until they are sufficiently heated."
E aprop pren de aquels un petit o un gran segon le loc e la plagua en la qual es rompuda la arteria, sobre aquela vena festinantment pus que auras remaugut le tieu dit, e te le cauteri entro que sia abcindit e restreyt aquel sanc.	"And then take one of those, either small or large according to the place and the size of the flesh in which the artery has been broken, and press it quickly upon that vein until you have stopped the blood flow, and hold the cautery there until it is attached and restrains the blood."
E si le sanc es expellit de l’orrifici de la arteria quan tu remaues le tieu dit e extringeys le cauteri, lahoras pren la un autre cauteri coytadament dels cauteris les quals en le foc son preparatz, e donc no cesses fer aquo un aprop autre entro que le sanc sia restrengit.	"And if blood is expelled from the mouth of the artery when you release your finger and press the cautery, then immediately take another cautery carefully from those which are prepared in the fire, and do not cease doing this until the blood has been restrained."
E guarda te que no comburas le nervi que aqui es, e que vengua sobre le malaute autra malicia.	"And be careful that you do not burn any nerve that is nearby, lest it come upon some other injury or mischief."
E sapias que quan de l’arteria flueys sanc, lahoras no es possible en aquels restrenge la sanc, e majorment quan l’arteria es gran, si no am una de quatre manieyras: o am cauteri ayssi quo dit havem, o am extraccio quan no es extrayta, quar quan es extrayta las extremitatz de lu miels son comburidas e es restreyt le sanc, o que sia liat am fiel o am liament per fort strectura, o que sian pausadas sobre lu medicinas de las quals la vertut es restringir la sanc; e sian strengudas am pulvinar am costriccio decent.	"And know that when blood flows from the artery, it is not possible to restrain it with those means unless by one of four methods: either with cautery as already said, or with extraction when it is not extracted, because when it is extracted the ends of the marrow are burned and the blood is restrained; or else it should be tied with pitch or linen by strong tension, or placed upon medicines whose virtue is to restrain blood, and they should be pressed on with a pulvinar and proper constriction."
Mays aquel que aministra restriccio decent de lu am liament e am strictura am draps o per posicio de causas comburentz e de semblantz, no comfereys sino tart.	"But he who administers restraint properly with linen and tension with bandages or by position of cauteries and similar things, does not heal but harms."
Mays si aquo endeve ad alcu e no sia le metge present ni medicina, lahoras obre am pausament del dit indic sobre le orrifici de aquela vena ayssi cum havem dit, e entenda a la gran costreccio de lu entro que le sanc sia ostat de la sobirana partida de la plagua, e sobre la arceria le dit no sia remaugut; e de sobre la arceria sia aspergit am aygua frega de mot gran fregiditat entro que·l sanc sia congilat e engrossat; e mays cossire en que ha de cauteri o de medicina necessitat.	"But if this happens to someone and there is no doctor present nor medicine, then press your finger on the mouth of that vein as already said, and understand to make a great tension on the inside so that blood may be stopped from the supreme part of the flesh, and let the finger not be removed from the artery; and upon the arrowlet sprinkle with cold water rubbed much until the blood is coagulated and thickened; and more consider if there is need for cautery or medicine."
Comensa la segonda partida.	"Begin the second part."
De incisio e perforacio e ventozas e de fleubotomia e de plaguas e de lor semblants.	Surgical procedures involving cutting, piercing, suctioning, bloodletting, plague treatment, and similar afflictions.
Aquestas son paraulas de Albucazis.	Albucasis' words are:
Ja havem dit en le primier capitol tota malautia en la qual cauteri am foc es convenient e am medicina comburent, e las occasios e las causas de lu, e les instrumentz en aquels necessaris am las formas dels cauteris; e he ordenatz les capitols de la subiranetat del cap entro als pes.	We have said in the first chapter all illness in which burning cautery is beneficial and medicine burns, and the occasions and causes of it, and the instruments necessary for it with the forms of cauteries; and we have arranged the chapters on the superiority of the head down to the feet.
E yeu procesire en aquest capitol per aquela meteysa guisa, per que sia alliujat lo querent aquo, lahoras sobre aquo que aura demandat.	And you shall proceed in this chapter with that same method for which it will be pleasing to him who seeks it, so that he may find what he has asked about.
E denant que yeu comense aquo, cove, fils, que aprenguatz que en aquest capitol es per terror aquo que es en le capitol primier de cauterizacio.	Before you begin this, know, son, that in this chapter is the explanation of what is in the first chapter on cautery.
E per aquo que cove que sia en lu gran cautela, quar en la operacio la qual es en aquest capitol motas veguadas catz evacuacio la qual es am sanc am le qual esta la vida deves la aspersio de la vena o incisio sobre l’apostema o apercio de exsitura o puracio de la plagua o extraccio de sageta o incizio de peyra e a lor semblantz.	And for that reason, it is necessary to be very careful in this operation which is explained in this chapter, for many times there occurs evacuation with blood from which life depends; thus, you should aspire the vein or make an incision over the abscess or opening of fistulas or purification of gangrene or extraction of arrows or incision of stones and similar things.
E de totz aquels so acompanhatz temor e tremor e en le mas de lor catz la mort.	And all these operations are accompanied by fear and trembling, and in many of them death often occurs.
E yeu amonesti vos que sobre vos no caia aquo en le qual es esitacio, quar alcunas veguadas cazo deves vos manieyras de homes am manieyras motas de malautias.	And I advise you not to fall into that in which there is danger, for sometimes you will encounter situations where you must deal with men who have many illnesses.
E de lor es alcu que s’irays am la sua malautia e es leugiera deves lu la mort, e aysso per la vehemensia de aquo que troba de sa malautia, e per longuesa de la malautia de lu, e am la malautia es paor la qual significa mort.	And among them are some who die with their illness, and it is easy for death to come from that, because of the vehemence of their illness and its duration, and because the illness brings fear which signifies death.
E de aquels es le qual dona a tu son aver e ditta, tu esperant am aquel sanetat, e la sieua malautia es perniciosa.	And among them is he who gives you his wealth and says to you, "Wait until I am healthy," but his illness is fatal.
E donc no cove que tu consentas en aquel que ve a vos del qual es aquesta manieyra; e la vostra cautela sia major que covesitat e la vostra rapacitat; e no presumatz alcuna causa sobre aquo sino aprop sciencia certa la qual virifica aquo deves vos, e al qual perve successio lausabla.	Therefore, do not consent to him who comes to you with this manner; and let your caution be greater than greediness, and your rapacity; and do not presume anything about it unless you have certain knowledge which proves it for you, and to which there succeeds a praiseworthy outcome.
E usatz en la curacio de totz vostres malautes de pronosticacio e indicacio de lu al qual es salut convertida, quar en aquel es a vos ajutori sobre adquisicio de fama e de memoria, de lausor e de gloria.	And use in the curing of all your illnesses prognosis and indication of that to which health is converted, for in that you will find help towards acquiring fame and memory, praise and glory.
O, filhs, Dieus en vos spire le sieu entendement e no oste a vos direccio e proteccio, quar aquo es en la sua ma.	Oh, sons, God breathes His understanding into you and does not remove from you direction and protection, for that is in His hand.
E yeu e ordenat aquest capitol distingent per capitols segon que precedit en le capitol de cauteris, de la cura del cap entro als pes, per que sia a vos alleujat aquo que demandatz de aquo e del qual havetz necessitat.	And I have ordered this chapter divided into chapters according to what is said in the chapter on cautery, concerning the treatment of the head down to the feet, so that it may be easy for you to find what you ask for and what you need.
Capitol primier.	Chapter one.
De la curacio de aygua la qual es contenguda en le cap dels enfantz.	Concerning the cure of water which is contained in the head of infants.
Sapias que aquesta malautia motas veguadas endeve als enfantz deves le enfantament e quan la noyrissa estrenh le cap del enfant ses livitat.	Know that this illness often happens to infants during childbirth, when the midwife stretches the infant's head without gentleness.
E alcunas veguadas endeve per causa amaguada la qual no es saubuda.	And sometimes it happens for a hidden cause which is not known.
Mays yeu no vi aquesta malautia sino en les enfantz; e a totz aquels les quals yeu vi se coytec la mort, e per ayssi es a mi vist layssada obra en aquels.	I have only seen this illness in children; and in all those whom I saw affected by it, death soon followed. Therefore it seems to me that this is a neglected matter in these cases.
E yeu e vist que un enfant le cap del qual era d’aygua omplit, e·l cap de lu era totjorn ayssi magnificat entro que ceser no podia sobre si meteys per la grandesa del sieu cap, e mays que la humiditat fe aucmentada entro que foc mort.	And you have seen that a child whose head was filled with water had its head so greatly enlarged that it could not cease growing and eventually died from the excess moisture.
E aquesta humiditat o es agreguada entre la codena e l’os, o es agreguada dejos le os sobre le ciphac.	And this humidity either collects between the spine and the skull or gathers beneath the bone at the back of the neck.
Quar la operacio en aquel si la humiditat es entre la codena e l’os e le apostema es pauc, lahoras cove que tu fendas en le mieg loc del cap am una fissura en la latitut, e sia la longitut de la fissura cays dos notz entro que corra la humiditat, e aquesta es la forma del spatum:	If the humidity is between the spine and the bone and the abscess is small, then you should make an incision in the middle of the head along its width; let the length of the incision be two fingerbreadths so that the moisture can flow out. This is how to perform the operation:
E donc si la humiditat es mays augmentada e l’apostema es major, lahoras son aqui dos fissuras segon aquesta manieyra:	And if the humidity has increased and the abscess is larger, then you should make two incisions in this manner:
E si la humiditat es dejos le os, senhal de lu es que tu vezes la comissuras del cap ubertas de tota partida e l’aygua es spremuda quan tu compremes aquela am la tieua ma a las partidas dedintz e no es aquo a tu amaguat.	If the moisture is left on the bone, it is a sign that you should open the corners of the head widely and squeeze out the water when you press that with your hand inside.
Cove que tu fendas en le mieg loc del cap am tres fissuras segon aquesta manieyra:	That you make three incisions in the middle of the head in this manner:
e aprop la inscizio extratz ne tota la humiditat; e aprop strenh las fissuras am draps e plumassols; e aprop enbroca aquo de sobre am vi e oli entro al quint dia, e aprop deslia le liament e cura la plagua am tentas e enguentz, e strenh le cap am equalitat; e mange le malaute am vianda secca de pauca humiditat entro que·l membre sia confortat e sanat.	And near the incision remove all moisture;
E es autra manieyra de incisio, que consideras hon apar la magnitut del apostema e la colleccio de l’aygua, quar alcunas veguadas es mays en le occipicii, o en la partida denant, o en la destra, o en la sinistra; e donc aten am la incizio on appar le apostema e la replecio de l’aygua, e fen aquo segon que a tu es miels possible.	"It is another method of incision that considers where the boil appears and the collection of water, for sometimes it is more in the occiput or at the front, right, or left; therefore attend to the incision where the boil appears and the gathering of water, and do as best pleases you."
Et observa que no inscindas la arteria e endevengua flueys de sanc e mora le malaute per aquel flux de sanc am evacuacio de humiditat.	"And observe that thou dost not cut the artery and cause a flow of blood, which would make the patient worse by that flow of blood with evacuation of humidity."
Capitol .ii.	Chapter II.
De inscisio de las arterias las quals so aprop las aurelhas, apeladas hilasseysse.	"Regarding the incision of arteries which are close to the ears, called hilar ones."
Capitol segon.	Chapter Two
Quan endeveno ad alcu catars o raumas als huelhs o al pietz, e es antiquat aquo, e no confereys en aquo la curacio de las medicinas, lahoras la deriera curacio en aquest es incizio de aquelas dos arterias.	"When some catsar or wound appears in the eye or foot, and this becomes old, and the cure with medicines does not help, then the last cure for this is incision of those two arteries."
E donc cove quan tu vols inscidir aquelas que le malaute raza lo sieu cap, e aprop fregua le loc am drap aspre per so que aparan las arcerias, e aprop sia strengut le col del malaute am alcu drap; e aprop considera on polsa la vena; e les locs de quascuna sobre les locs les quals so aprop las aurelhas depremutz, e tant se occultan sino en alcus homes.	"And thus when you wish to incise those [arteries] that the disease has its seat in the head, and close the place with rough cloth so that the arteries appear, and also bind the patient's neck with some cloth; and also consider where the vein pulsates; for the places of each are above the places which are near the lower ears, and they may be hidden unless in certain men."
E aprop senha sobre la arceria am tenta, e aprop inscideys quascuna am le spatum de quascuna partida agut am inscizio pervenient entro al os, e sia aquo per la latitut del cap.	"And thus sign over the artery with ink, and then incise each one with a scalpel of each sharp point made for entering into the bone, and this should be done through the thickness of the head."
E si vols, entromet le spatum dejos la arteria e trenqua aquala a las inciden a las partidas desus.	"And if you wish, insert the scalpel between the artery and cut it where the incisions have been made above."
E sia la longitut de la inscizio cays dos ditz ajustatz, quar quan alcuna vena es inscizida le sanc es eyssit am egressio pulsatil, le qual saut deforo per saut frequent.	"And let the length of the incision be as those two points set [apart], for when any vein is incised blood immediately issues with pulsatile exit, which often flows forth with frequent flow."
Mays si la arceria no apareys al cintiment, lahoras cove que tu mesures de la aurelha la quantitat del spazi de tres ditz, e aprop senha am tenta, e fen entro al os.	"But if the artery does not appear at the beginning, then you should measure from the ear the amount of space between three fingers, and thus sign with ink, and then enter into the bone."
E aquo que cove getar del sanc es quantitat de vi unc., e fort leu ne geta de lu mays o mens, e tot aquo es segon la quantitat la qual appareys de la vertut del malaute e de la replecio de la arceria de lu.	"And know that the amount of blood to be let is about one quarter [of a pint], for less or more can be let depending on the quantity which appears of the strength of the disease and the fullness of the artery."
E aprop considera la plagua, e donc si reman sobre le os alcuna causa del ciphac, lahoras inscindys aquo per so que no endevengua apostema caut.	"And thus consider the plague, and if anything remains on the bone which could cause aphthae, then incise that in order to prevent any ulceration."
E aprop strenh la plagua am plumassols e am liamentz de drap de li, e aprop cura aquela am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	"And thus strengthen the wound with cotton and bandages of linen cloth, and then cure it with ointment until it is healed."
Capitol .iii.	Chapter III
De extraccio de las arcerias las quals so en las templas.	On the extraction of arteries that are in the temples.
Quan ad alcu accideys emigranea antiqua o catertz agutz, per humiditatz agrimonials e per qualiditat en les lacertz des templas, o sodo antiqua vehement e semblantz ad aquels, e es medicat am las manieyras de curacio de medicina e aquo no comfereys, lahoras nos hem sproatz en aquestas malautias extraccio de las arcerias en les templas, o cauterizacio de aquelas ayssi cum havem mostrat.	When ancient migraine or catarrh occurs due to moist humors and poor quality in the temples' nerves, if it is ancient and violent like those, and it is treated with medical remedies but does not improve, then we resort to these ailments by extracting from the arteries of the temples, or cauterizing them as we have shown.
E la manieyra de la operacio e extracio de aquelas es que·l malaute raza les pels les quals son en les templas; e entenda a la arceria apparent en le templar quar ela es a tu mostrada per le sieu pols, e·s occultada sino en paucs homes per vehemencia de freg.	The manner of operation and extraction is as follows: the patient lies down on their back with their head supported by a pillow. Locate the temporal artery visible at the temple as shown by its pulse, which is usually palpable but may be hidden in some individuals due to excessive hair growth.
E si a tu es occultada, lahoras le col del malaute sia strengut am alcun drap; e aprop fregua le loc am un drap aspre o evapora le loc am aygua cauda entro que aparesca a tu la arceria manifestament.	If the artery is not palpable, then place a strap around the patient's neck to compress it. Then rub the area with a rough cloth or apply hot water compress until the artery becomes clearly visible.
E lahoras tu pren le spatum del qual aquesta es la forma:	Then take the following instruments which are shaped as follows:
E aprop tu scorja la codena am aquel am facilitat entro que pervenguas a la arceria; e aprop geta en lu onti e extratz aquela a las partidas sobiranas entro que extraguas aquela de la codena e descobras aquela de las tunicas las quals so dejos aquela, de tota partida.	"Then carefully remove the skin with ease until you reach the bone; then throw it away and extract that which is above it within the flesh, so as to remove that from the bone and uncover those coverings which are left there, of every part."
Mays si la arteria es subtil, lahoras envolveys aquela am la extremitat del oncii, e aprop inscindeys de aquela una partida segon la quantitat per la qual sian alonguadas las extremitatz de lu e sian contraytas, e no endevindra flux de sanc, quar si no so inscididas no pujara le sanc de tot.	"If the artery is small, then envelop it with the tip of your finger; and carefully cut into it one part according to the length by which its ends are stretched out and contracted, and blood will not flow out, because if they are not cut, blood will not pass through."
E aprop evacua del sanc de vi unc. entro a tres.	"And now evacuate three drops of fresh blood."
E si la arceria es gran, lahoras cove que tu lies aquela en dos locs am fiel dopble fort de ceda o am cordas a lonc, e no coyte a lu putrefaccio denant la consolidacio de la plagua e endevengua flux de sanc.	"And if the artery is large, then you should tie it in two places with strong thread or cord, so that it does not decay before the wound is healed, and blood will not flow out."
E aprop incideys la superfluitat la qual es entre dos liamentz; e fay aquo en aquela hora o aprop autra ora.	"And then cut off the superfluity which lies between two ligaments; and do this at that time or another appropriate time."
E si vols, cauteriza aquela am cauteri entro al os am cauteri cutellar entro que sian incididas las extramitatz de lu, e stara en loc de aquela meteyssa obra.	"And if you wish, cauterize it with a hot iron between the incisions of its extremities, and this will take the place of that operation."
E es milhor obra sino que·l malaute aia febre o es de escalfada compleccio; quar cauteri es de aquelas causas que ajudan a las humiditatz finidoras, e donc es milhor en juvament.	"And it is better if the patient has fever or is of hot complexion; for cauterization is among those causes which help the final humidities, and therefore it is better in healing."
E cove aprop la extraccio de las arcerias que huomplas le loc de coto antic, e sian pausatz sobre lu polvils decentement fayt, e aprop sia curat am medicinas seccas fazen naysser la carn e am calguas entro que sia sanat.	"And also regarding the extraction of arteries which are prominent at the site of the cut, they should be covered with powders made appropriately and carefully, and then dressed with dry medicines that make flesh grow and with ointments so that it may be healed."
E si mentre obres autra veguada endeventa flux de sanc de la arceria, lahora tu te coyta a restrenger aquel sanc, o am cauteri, o que omplas le loc de coto, e strenh la tua ma entro que sia restreyt le sanc.	"And if while performing these operations there occurs bleeding from the artery again, then you should stop that blood flow with a ligature or cautery, or press your hand on the site of the wound until the bleeding has stopped."
E si deguna causa de aquelas no es a tu present, lahoras pausa le tieu dit sobre le loc entro que·l sanc sia congilat, e enbroca le loc am aygua de vehement fregiditat entro que la acuitat repausa, e sia strengut segon que cove.	"And if none of these causes is present, then press your finger on the place until the bleeding stops, and apply cold water to the place until the pain subsides, and then bandage it according to what is necessary."
E aquo que es pus leugier en extraccio de arceria es que tu cauterizes la vena am aquest cauteri haventz dos cotels, pus que tu has senhat les dos locs am tenta, e depausa quascus, mot ignitz, entro que pervenguan al os e inscindan la vena en dos locs, per so que sia elonguat aquo que es entre las extremitatz de lu, quar no son consolidadas de tot am aquest cauteri.	"And what is easiest in the extraction of an artery is that you cauterize the vein with this cautery having two points, because you have pierced both places with a probe, and then each one separately, lighted, until they reach the bone and cut through the vein in two places, so that it may be elongated between its extremities, for they are not completely solidified by this cautery."
E aquesta es la forma del cauteri:	"And this is the form of the cautery:"
E sia la acuitat dels dos cotels esemps.	"The sharpness of both knives should be tested."
Mays empero si so mendres acuitat que dos cotels es milhor, quar si so agudas cum dos cotels propera a quascuna freg, e no enscideysso la carn am velocitat.	"But if the edges are not sharp enough, one knife is better than two, because if they are very sharp like knives, it will cut the flesh quickly."
Donc cum en aquels es alcuna grossitut, es tenguda la calor del foc en aquels e la carn es abscindida leugierament.	"Therefore, with some thickness in them (the intestines), heat from the fire is held in them and the flesh is cut gently."
E aquesta obra es milhor en tota obra e pus leugiera.	"And this task is better than any other and easier."
E sia le spazi le qual es entre dos cotels la quantitat de la grossesa del dit.	"And let the space between two knives be equal to the thickness of a finger."
Capitol quart.	"Chapter Four."
De la cura de cors de lagremas agudas e aciduas dels huels.	"Of the care of eyes with acute and chronic tears."
Quan so lagremas aciduas, e es le cors de aquelas venas las quals so sobre le test del cap deforo, e no comfereys en aquo alcuna causa de la curacio de medicina, e vezes la cara del malaute ja enrogesir e sent en le sieu front deambulacio ayssi cum si era deambulacio de formiguas, e·ls huels de aquel so extenuatz, humitz enayssi que ja les pels de lor son conodutz, e las parpelas so scalfadas per la acuitat de las lacrimas, les antics agro mesties en la curacio de aquelas de aquesta operacio, e nompnero aquela curacio am spassa.	"When tears are chronic and there is no cure for the medicine of that cause, sometimes the face of the sick person becomes reddened and they feel ants crawling on their forehead like ants, and their eyes become weak and wet, so much so that even the eyelashes stick together, and the skin around them is cracked due to the sharpness of the tears. For this operation, a hot poultice is prepared for its treatment, without using any other cure."
E es que tu comandas al malaute rayre les pels les quals son en le sieu front, e aprop inscideys en le front tres fissuras engualment distans segon la longitut del front.	"And you will command the sick person to raise their eyebrows and then incise three equally spaced cuts into the forehead according to its length."
E si’ la longitut de la fissura cays dos ditz: la una fissura sia engualment distant a la longitut del nas en le mieg loc del front, e la segonda segon la longitut un petit del movement dels lacertz les quals so en le lacrimal, e la tersa del autre part.	"And if the length of the incision is two fingers: one cut should be made equidistant from the length of the nose in the middle of the forehead, and the second according to the length slightly below the movement of the eyelids which are at the tear gland, and the third on the other side."
E guarda te de la incizio de las arcerias las quals so en dos latz, e elongua la tua ma de la continuacio de amdos las mandibulas.	"And be careful not to cut the arteries located on both sides, and extend your hand along the continuation of both jawbones."
E si’ l’espazi de quascuna inscizio la quantitat de tres ditz ajustatz.	"And if the space between each incision is equal to three fingers' width adjusted."
E si’ a tu una pessa d’espongua apparelhada o draps seccatz motz am les quals exsiccas le sanc.	"And if you have a piece of sponge or dry cloth cut into many parts with which you can dry the blood."
E aprop entremet le spatum de dos agudas extremitatz, del qual aquesta es la forma de la inscisio de lu:	"And then insert spatula of two sharp ends, of which this is the shape of its incision:"
que es de la partida des templas entro a la segonda inscizio.	"This is from the departure of the temples into the second incision."
Exxcorja am aquel tota la codena la qual es entre dos incizios am le ciphac le qual es sobre le os, e aprop fay aquo de la inscizio migera entro a la segonda inscisio.	"Excise all the skin along this line that is between two incisions with the knife that is on the bone, and then do the same for the second incision."
E aprop stratz ne aquest spatum e entromet en la primieyra inscizio autra vetz un autre instrument le qual es apelat cutellar, agut de una part e del autre no agut.	"And then immediately in this space enter again into the first incision with another instrument called a cutellar, sharp on one side and not on the other."
E pausa le latz de aquel agut deves la carn annexa deves la codena, e le latz de lu leon dintz le os, e empelley aquel entro que pervengua a la fissura migera, e abscindeys am aquel totz les vaysels que descendo del cap als huels.	"And then pause the cut on that sharp side close to the attached flesh along the skin, and enter with it into the bone, and employ this way until you reach the second furrow, and cut away with it all the vessels that descend from the head to the ears."
Mays que sia continuada la inscizio ad aquo appar de la codena, e aprop fay aquo en la fissura migana entro al autra fissura.	"Make sure the incision continues until you meet the skin, and then do this in the second furrow into another furrow."
E pus que corr del sanc quantitat engual, exprem les locs de las pessas del sanc congilat.	"And because a considerable amount of blood will flow out, compress the places where the vessels of the blood are connected."
E aprop pausa en quascuna fissura calgua de coto vielh, e pausa sobre aquels polvils enbegutz en vi e oli e vi agre, e vegas que no endevengua apostema caut.	"And then pause in each furrow carefully with hot iron, and pause on those powdered spices wrapped in wine and oil and vinegar, and make sure it does not become gangrenous."
E en le tertz dia deslia le liament e aministra gran enfusio de aygua cauda o tebeza, e aprop cura aquo am enguent bazilicon am oli rozat e autres entro que las plaguas sian sanadas.	"And on the third day untie the ligature and administer a large infusion of cold water or decoction, and then dress it with basilicon ointment mixed with rose oil and other appropriate medicines until the wounds are healed."
Capitol .v.	Chapter 5
De la cura de lagramas per catartz e als huels descendentz de las partidas dedintz del cap.	"On the treatment of wounds by cauterization and on the ears descending from the divisions inside the head."
Quan ad alcu veno catartz agutz e continuantz, e vezes les huels del malaute extenuatz petitz, e ja le reguardament de lor es debelitat, e las palpebras ulceradas e de lor cazo les pels, e en le preon del cap es dolor aguda ledent e extrenutacio consequent, lahoras sapias per aquestz accidentz que las materias e catartz no veno sino de motas venas de las partidas dedintz procedent.	"When there are wounds cauterized and continuous, and the ears of the sick are thin and small, and their condition is debilitated, and the eyelids are ulcerated and their hairs fall out, and there is acute pain in the forehead with subsequent swelling, you should know that these materials and cauteries come only from certain veins that originate from inside."
E la milhor curacio en aquels es aquesta: que comandes al malaute que raza lo sieu front, e aprop inscideys en aquel una fissura al mieg loc del front, un petit per la latitut (e comensa am la fissura del templar senestre entro al dextre templar; e sia inscisio entro al os; e eslongua la tua ma dels lacertz del templas lesquals son maugutz deves la mastigacio), entro que sia le os descubert.	"And the best treatment for these cases is: order the patient to shave his forehead, and then make an incision in that middle part of the forehead, about half an inch wide (beginning at the left temple entering into the right temple; and let the incision be within the bone until it reaches the bone), removing your hand from the cartilage of the temples which are attached by mastication, until the bone is exposed."
Exsicca tot le sanc am espongua o am drap secc e aprop repleys entre las doas labias de la fissura am coto vielh o am draps de li.	"Absorb all the blood with sponge or dry cloth and then fill the furrow between the two lips of the incision with hot iron or cloth."
E aprop estrenh desus am polvils enbegutz en vi e oli per so que no endevengua apostema caut.	"And then sprinkle above it powder wrapped in wine and oil to prevent gangrene cautery."
E quan deslias aquo e veses que l’apostema ja es diminuit, lahoras cove que fregua le os entro que comensa en lu nayser carn, e aprop cura aquel am regiment exsiccatiu le qual fassa neysser la carn, ayssi cum si tu prenes de farina de froment dos partidas e de colofania quatre partidas e mescla o, e de lor sia fayt emplastre e sia aministrat en aquestas plaguas a de la carn nativitat.	"And when you remove it and see that the gangrene has diminished, then you must scrape the bone where flesh grows, and dress it with an astringent remedy which makes the flesh dry out, as if you take two parts of flour from wheat and four parts of colophony, mix them together, make a plaster, and apply it to these wounds until new flesh is generated."
Capitol .vi.	Chapter 6
De la cura de aquo que catz en las aurelhas.	"The treatment for what falls into the ears."
Tota causa que catz en las aurelhas es una de quatre specias, quar o es peyra mineral o causa semblant a peyra, ayssi cum ferr e veyre, o es de planta ayssi cum ceze o fava, o es causa fluxtibla ayssi cum aygua e vi agre e a lor semblantz, o alcuna bestia.	"Every cause that falls into the ears is of four kinds: it may be mineral as stone or similar to it like iron and bronze; or it may be from plants like chickpeas or beans; or it may be fluid like water and vinegar and their relatives; or some creature."
E donc quan peyra catz en l’aurelha o autra causa semblant de aquelas causas que no ajustan ne creysso en l’aurelha, e pausa la aurelha al solelh, e si vezes la peyra, lahoras distilla en aquela alcuna causa de oli violat o sizami, e aprop aministra la extraccio de lu, e fay le stornudar am condizi, e oppila las nars deve le aveniment de stornutacio.	"And therefore when a stone falls into the ear or other cause similar to those causes that do not adjust nor adhere in the ear, and blocks the ear canal, it distills some oil or rosewater at certain times, and appropriately administers its extraction; and makes them sneeze with certain conditions, and then covers their nose during the onset of sneezing."
E aprop pausa en le circuit de la aurelha alscunas pessas de drap o lana, e dextendas la aurelha a las partidas desus, quar motas veguadas es foro-getada am aquestas causas.	"And appropriately blocks the ear canal with some pieces of cloth or wool, and stretches the ear outward on its parts above, because many times it has been forgotten with these causes."
E si no n’es getada, lahoras aministra extraccio de lu am le instrument apelat gesti epicicarios subtil del qual aquesta es la forma:	"And if it is not removed, then appropriately administers extraction from it using the instrument called 'epiciclos gesture of subtle', whose form is as follows:"
E si es foro-getada am gesti, bo es; e sino, lahoras aministra la extraccio de lu am onci subtil de pauca duplicacio.	"And if it is forgotten with the gesture, that's fine; but otherwise, then appropriately administers extraction from it using a subtle hook of little duplication."
E donc si no es foro-getada per aquo, lahoras fay una canula de aram e entromet la extremitat de la canula en le trauc de la aurelha e claus a l’enviro de la canula am cera e am oli mollificada per so que no sia ubert sino la canula.	"And therefore if it is not removed by this method, then make a cannula of iron and insert the extremity of the cannula into the tract of the ear and seal around the cannula with wax and softened oil so that only the cannula may be inserted."
E aprop extratz am le tieu vent am fort atraccio, quar tropas veguadas cum aquo que havem recontat.	"And therefore extract with a gentle wind with strong attraction, because many times it has been counted with this method that we have recounted."
Mays si no es foro-getada en aquesta manieyra, lahoras pren de halka alumbat o de vecz aparelhat am le qual son preses les ausels una patita quantitat, e pausa aquel en la extremitat de ray, e aprop envolopa sobre aquel coto decentment pausat.	"But if it is not removed in this manner, then take some burning sulphur or sometimes prepared with which the eggs are taken in small quantity, and place that on the extremity of the wick, and appropriately wrap it carefully around that area."
E aprop entromet aquel en le trauc de la aurelha am facilitat, e aprop excicca la aurelha de la humiditat.	"And therefore insert that into the tract of the ear with ease, and appropriately remove the ear from humidity."
E donc si no es foro-getada am totas las causas las quals havem recontadas, lahoras tu coyta a talhar aquela denant que endevengua apostema caut o espasme.	"And therefore if it is not removed with all the causes that we have recounted, then you should attempt to cut that before it becomes an abscess or spasm."
E la manieyra de talhar aquela es que tu al comensament sancnes le malaute de la vena sephasica e extratz del sanc segon la mannieyra de la vertut de lu, e aprop fay aquel cezer entre las tuas mas e converteys l’aurelha a las partidas desus, e fen am petita fissura en la razit de la aurelha deves lo greys de lu en le loc be premegut de lu.	"And the manner of cutting that is as follows: first sanctify the disease of the vein sepsis and extract blood according to its virtue, and then make that incision between your thumbs and turn the ear outward on its parts above, and finally make a small fissure in the root of the ear where you feel its grease."
E sia la fissura de figura lunar entro que pervengua a la peyra, e, la peyra atrobada, osta aquela si podes am instrumentz apropriatz; e aprop cos la fissura en aquela hora am velocitat, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	"And let the incision be in the shape of a crescent moon and extend it to the ear bone, and once the bone is exposed, remove that if possible with appropriate instruments; and then quickly close the incision at that time, and care for it until it is healed."
E si la causa cazent en la aurelha es un dels gras que creysso e so inflatz, lahoras aministra la curacio e la extraccio de lu; mays si no obezeys a tu ad eyssiment, lahoras tu pren spatum teune subtil segon aquesta forma:	"And if the cause is in the ear is one of those grease that rises and swells, then administer care and extraction from it. But if it does not obey your treatment, then take a thin subtle spatula according to this form:"
e aministra am aquel la abscizio de aquel gra lo qual es cazut en l’aurelha.	"And therefore use that spatula to perform the abscess of that grease which has fallen into the ear."
E no fassas aquo quan cogitas que aquel ja es humectat per la vapor del aurelha, e pausa aquel en motas pessas, e prop extratz ne aquelas am les oncis o am gesti subtil, o ab inscizio ayssi co dit havem, quar es alleujada la extraccio de lu.	"And do not perform this when you think that it has already been moistened by the vapor of the ear. Instead, place it in several pieces and gently extract from those with tweezers or subtle gesture, or use an incision as mentioned earlier, for this facilitates extraction."
Mays en l’aygua la qual es intrada en l’aurelha cove que·l malaute use de sternutacio am condizi al comensament, e omple la sieua aurelha am alcu coto vielh, e jagua sobre aquela aurelha en la qual es l’aygua, e si per aquo es foro-getada, bo es; e sino, lahoras pren tropas peyras teunas e leons segon la longitut del dit, e calfa aquelas en le foc un pauc, e le pacient entrometa una de aquelas en le trauc de la sua aurelha e saute sobre la un pe sieu de aquela partida e percussia am una autra peyra sobre la peyra la qual es dintz la aurelha.	"But when water enters the ear, it is necessary for the disease to sneeze at the beginning with condition, and fill its ear with some cotton wool, and press on that ear in which there is water. And if by doing this it is not removed, then take thin flints and pebbles according to the length of your finger, heat them a little in the fire, and the patient inserts one of those into the tract of their ear and presses one side of that part with that stone, and strikes with another stone on the stone which is inside the ear."
Donc no cesse aquo am peyra entro que tota l’aygua sia foro-getada.	"So do not cease doing this until all the water has been removed."
E ja l’aygua sira foro-getada enayssi que tu prenguas de papier o de gonc i, e met la una extremetat de lu en l’aurelha e estendas l’autre extremitat am foc entro que sia comburit le may de lu.	"And if the water is not removed in this way, then take some paper or gauze, and put one end of it into the ear and extend the other end with fire until most of it burns."
E prop met i autre gonc e fay aquo tantas veguadas entro que tota l’aygua sia foro-getada, e stratz aquel am canula ayssi co desus es dit de la peyra extrasadora.	"And then put in another gauze and do this several times until all the water has been removed. Then remove it with a cannula as mentioned earlier of the stone extractor."
Mays en la extraccio de bestia intrant en aquela aurelha, si es a petit cos, ayssi piussa e a lu semblant, cura aquel ayssi cum havem dit en la divisio; mays si es de gran cos la qual causa apar al sen del vezement, lahoras aministra la extraccio de lu am gesti e oncis, e la causa de lu es pus leugiera de totas las autras causas que cazo en l’aurelha.	"But in the extraction of a beast entering that ear, if it is a small creature, then press it and do it similarly. Care for it as mentioned earlier in this section. But if it is a large creature which causes pain at the sensation, then administer its extraction with gestures and tweezers. And the cause of this is pus, lighter than all other causes that occur in the ear."
Mays en la extraccio de verm engendrat en la aurelha, quan tu curas aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e en le tractat de distillacios e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu reguardes la aurelha al solelh.	"But in the extraction of a worm generated in the ear, when you care for it with what has been said earlier in this section and in the treatise on distillations, but your treatment does not improve, then you must examine the ear by the light."
E donc si apar aqui alcuna causa dels verms, lahoras extratz aquel am gesti o am onci subtils, mays si no apar deguna causa, lahoras pren una canula dejos streyta e desus ampla de la qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	"And then if you see any cause of worms here, then extract them with gestures or subtle tweezers. But if you do not see any cause, then take a cannula narrow at its base and wide at its mouth, of which this is the shape:"
E entromet la extremitat subtil en la aurelha segon la quantitat la qual suffertar puesca le malaute; e aprop sucgeys am aquela per succio fort, e fay aquo motas veguadas, entro que totz les verms sian foro-gitatz.	"And insert the narrow end of the cannula into the ear according to how much it can tolerate. And then suck with that using strong suction, and do this several times until all the worms have been removed."
Mays si no obezeysso a tu al ayssiment, lahoras tu opila e claus en le circuit de la canula am cera ayssi cum havem dit; lahoras aministre distillacios las quals han ja esproadas les antics en la curacio dels verms, e atrobaras aquo en le tractat de distillacios.	"But if it does not obey your treatment, then plug and close the circuit of the cannula with wax as mentioned earlier. Then administer distillations which have already been proven in the treatment of worms, and you will find this in the treatise on distillations."
E sia la tua efusio am la qual efundas les olis medicinas en la aurelha am aquest strument del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	"And let your effusion be with which you pour medicinal oils into the ear with this instrument, of which this is its shape:"
E fay aquela de argent o de eram, dejos streyt, en le qual sia un petit trauc, e am pla desus.	"And make it of silver or bronze, narrow at its base, with a small tract in it and flat on top."
E donc sia cum empellent a que es en la conquavitat de la canula de continent aqui on sira necessari.	"And therefore let it be made such that it pushes into what is inside the cavity of the cannula when necessary."
E si vols, pren le ray e envolveys en la extremitat de lu decentment coto, e aprop gieta oli en la concavitat del auziment, o suc de alcuna herba, o aquo que vols de aquestas medicinas en la canula — e aquela es en la aurelha —, e aprop entromet le ray am coto desus e exprem am la tua ma aquel am compressio temprada de lu entro que l’oli sia expellit en la concavitat del auziment e le malaute senta le oli dedintz.	"And if you wish, take the reed and wrap its end decently with cotton wool, then pour oil into the cavity of the instrument or juice of some herb, or whatever medicinal liquid you want into the cannula — which is in the ear — and then insert the reed with cotton wool on top and gently squeeze it with your hand so that the oil is expelled into the cavity of the instrument and the patient feels the oil inside."
E aquo que sia enfundut en la aurelha sia ja scalfat am foc un petit.	"And whatever is poured into the ear should already be heated a little by fire."
E guarda te que la causa la qual distillaras en l’aurelha no sia trop frega, quar las medicinas de aurelha no suffertan aquo.	"And take care that the cause which you distill in the ear is not too hot, for medicinals for the ear do not tolerate that."
Capitol .vii.	"Chapter VII"
De curacio de opilacio de aurelhas.	"On the treatment of impacted ears."
Alcunas veguadas alcus enfantz yeysso dels ventres de lors mayres no-perforatz, e aquo ja accideys en alcus homes, opilacio en le meat de la aurelha per plagua o per carn nada en aquela; e aquesta opilacio alcunas veguadas es fayta en le preon del trau de la aurelha la qual no consiec le vezement, e alcunas veguadas es en las partidas defora.	Sometimes, some children are born from their mothers' wombs imperfectly, and this has happened to certain men, obstruction in the ear's meatus due to mucus or hardened flesh there; and this obstruction sometimes occurs in the front of the ear canal which does not permit seeing through it, and sometimes it is in the outer parts thereof.
E aquela que accideys en le preon de lu, la qual no comprehen le vezement, es en las majors disposicios de dificil sanacio.	And that which occurs at the front of it, which does not allow seeing through it, is among the most difficult conditions to treat.
E en aquela en qual consegueys le vezement, cove que tu pauses la aurelha del malaute al solelh e reguarda en aquela.	And in that case where you can see through it, you should hold the sick person's ear towards the sunlight and look into it.
E donc si vezes oppulacio apparent, obre aquela am espatum subtil del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And thus if there appears to be obstruction, open that with a subtle spatula, which is its shape:
Si’ la extremitat de lu en la qual sia petita la latitut, del qual la una partida sia aguda e l’autra no; e le spatum sia de dos latz leon per so que no fassa lizio al aurelha.	If the tip of it where you should make the incision is small in width, with one end sharp and the other blunt; and the spatula should be double-sided to prevent injury to the ear.
E donc si la opilacio es per carn nascuda en la aurelha o en le meat de lu, lahoras te aquela am oncis subtils e incidiys aquela vehement facilitat entro que sia ostada tota la carn.	And if the obstruction is due to hardened flesh in the ear or its meatus, then use fine forceps and cut that with great ease until all the flesh is removed.
E si opilacio es en le preon de la aurelha, lahoras pren ray subtil leon e escalfa aquel am foc un pauc, e aprop met aquel en le meat de l’aurelha.	And if obstruction occurs at the front of the ear canal, then take a thin reed and heat it gently over fire, and carefully insert it into the meatus of the ear.
E donc si as scentit oppulacio am aquo que le malaute atroba am facilitat, per gravetat de ausir, esforsa la oppressio de lu am facilitat; e guarda te que no plagues les nervis del aurelha.	And thus if there is a sensation of obstruction with what the patient finds easy to pass through, due to heaviness or deafness, remove that obstruction gently without injuring the nerves of the ear.
E aprop pausa en l’aurelha drap de li segon la quantitat del ample del trauc lo qual tu as envolvutz en l’enguent egipciac; e fay aquo per alcus jorns entro que sias segur de la consolidacio de la plagua; o que prenguas qualgua e enfon aquela en ayguaros e pulveriza sobre lu segi trissat e usa de lu; e si vezes la aurelha ja esser apostemada, lahoras cove que tu estraguas la qualgua e permutes aquela am autra qualgua la qual tu envoloparas en cerot que sia fayt am oli rozat, entro que sia le apostema caut cedat; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And then place the ear dropper on the ear according to the quantity of the width of the tube that you have inserted into the Egyptian ointment; and do this for several days until you are sure of the consolidation of the dressing. Or take some wax, crush it, moisten it with warm water, powder it finely, and use it; and if the ear becomes inflamed, then grind the wax and replace it with new wax mixed with rose oil, so that the inflammation may be cauterized; and dress it until healed.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc, lahoras submergeys esponga o drap en aygua frega e pausa sobre la aurelha, e usa del autra curacio la qual restrengeys le flux del sanc, la qual es dita en le tractat de distillacio.	But if there is bleeding from the ear, then soak a sponge or cloth in warm water and place it on the ear, and use other treatment that will stop the flow of blood, which is described in the treatise on distillation.
Capitol .viii.	Chapter VIII
De cura de athezil le qual endeveno a las palpebras.	Of the treatment of swelling that occurs on the eyelids.
Athezil les quals endeveno a las paupebras dels huels alcuna veguada so humitz, alscunas veguadas son secs.	"Dry the excess moisture that occasionally collects on the eyelids of the eyes; sometimes they are dry."
Donc cove que tu tenguas aquels am tenhalhas o am onci, e inscindas aquels am espatum de las suas razitz, e aprop pausa sobre les locs segi trissat.	"It is necessary that you have those towels ready or at hand, and unfold them from their folds, and place them over the locations as indicated."
Mays si dolor am flux de sanc veno, lahoras tu cauteriza aquels am cauteri lanticular subtil.	"Moreover, if pain comes with a flow of blood, then you should cauterize it with a small anticlinal cautery."
E la milhor cauterizacio es aprop las inscizios e tropas veguadas retornam quan reman alcuna causa de sas razitz; e quan so cauterizadas am foc, aquelas razitz son comburidas e no retornan.	"And the best cauterization is when the incisions and wounds are made repeatedly until there is no longer any cause for them to reopen; and when they are cauterized with fire, those causes are burned and do not return."
Capitol .ix.	Chapter IX
Cura de grandeyssa que veno a las palpebras dels huels.	Treatment of swelling that comes to the eyelids.
Motas veguadas endeve en las palpebras dels huels alcuna causa la qual es asemblada a grandissa en sa fortalicia e duricia, e per so grandissia es apelada.	Often, some cause arises in the eyelids that resembles hardness and toughness, which is why it is called swelling.
E es agreguacio de humiditat grossa en la palpebra dejos e desus.	And it is an accumulation of thick humidity in the left eyelid upwards.
Donc la opperacio en lor es que consideras lahoras si la grandissia es procedent en lu en aquo que apar de la palpebra e es mauguda a tota partida; e la causa de lu es leugiera.	Therefore, the operation for them is to consider if the swelling comes from there because it appears above the eyelid and is spread all over; and its cause is light.
Donc fen sobre aquela am fissura per la latitut, e aprop escorga aquela de tota partida am facilitat entro que evasesca, e aprop suspen aquela am onci e abscindeys aquela.	Therefore, cut above that with a latitudinal incision, and then carefully spread open from there until it evacuates easily. Then suspend it with a bandage and cauterize it.
Mays si a tu no es apparelhada la incizio de lu si no pus que penetras la palpebra am inscizio pauc a pauc, lahoras aquo no notz en deguna causa.	But if you cannot make the incision unless you open the eyelid little by little with forceps, then it has no cause.
E si la figura es gran, lahoras tu l’ajusta am sutura; e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	And if the swelling is large, then adjust it with sutures; and care for it until it heals.
E si es pauca, a tu no sobrevindra mal per aquela quar l’anguent de lu restaura aquela e encarna.	And if it is small, then do not worry because that ointment will restore it and make it grow back together again.
E si la grandissia es declinant a las partidas dedintz de la palpebra deves la superficia dedintz, lahoras evesa la palpebra e suspen la grandissia am onci, otra que tu indigescas de incizio, e prem aquela de tota part, e si la palpebra per inscizio es alonguada, aquo no notz en deguna causa.	And if the swelling descends to the inner parts of the eyelid underneath its surface, then lift up the eyelid and suspend the swelling with a bandage without making any incision. Press it all over and if the eyelid becomes elongated because of an incision, then there is no cause for that either.
E aprop la incizio, lava le huel am aygua salada; e cura le loc am aquo que encarna entro que sia sanat.	And after the incision, wash the eye with salt water and dress the wound with something that encourages healing until it is healed.
Capitol .x.	Chapter X.
De la cura axcirnah en la palpebra desus del huel.	Of the treatment of swelling above the eyelid.
Axcirnath es grays le qual es engendrat en las tunicas de la palpebra desus, e majorment endeve als enfantz, agrava les huels de aquels et accideyso a lor catartz le mayti; e no podon reguardar la claror del solelh per aquo quar lagremas se coytan ad aquels.	"Eyesore is caused by the growth of tissue on the eyelid, occurring more often in children, it aggravates their eyes and hinders their sight, causing tears to flow."
E per so tu vezes aquels jaser sobre les lors caras tot temps, e sobre les lors caras dormen; e so a las palpebras de lor dejos les sobrecils humidas, las quals ja ha cuberta imflacio, e iminencia de accernac apparent es en l’uelh; e que quant tu premes le loc am les tieus ditz, tu centes accernac entro aquels.	"And therefore they often wipe their faces, and even sleep with their faces covered. And because of this the eyelids become swollen and inflamed, showing signs of infection in the eye."
E alcuna manieyra de opperacio es en aquel que le malaute pausa le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop pausa drap de li e de lu fay calgua, e fay de lu cercle segon la quantitat la qual contena arthernach de tota partida, e aprop pausa aquel sobre aquela e prem am les tieus ditz de tota per que sia agreguat arcernac en le mieg del cercle, e aprop fen en le mieg de aquela humiditat am spatum inscident am fissura per la latitut, e la fissura no sia major que la fissura que es fayta en flaubotomia.	"And some method of operation is in that one who stops the disease by placing his head in a certain position, and covers him with cloth and hot water, makes a circle according to the amount of moisture in the eye, and places it over that eye and presses it with the tips of his fingers so that the arcernac may be drawn towards the center of the circle, and then finishes in the middle of that humidity with a probe inserted with an incision along the width, and the incision should not be larger than the one made in trepanation."
Mays en le preon cove que tu fendas la codena tota entro que pervenguas ad arcernach, quar en las mays desposicios proceseys arcernach per fissura segon la forma de grayseza blanca.	"But in the front it is necessary to cut through the entire chain until you reach the arcernac, for in most cases procedures process arcernac through an incision according to the shape of a white mass."
Donc extratz aquela am draps los quals tu as envolopatz entre les tieus ditz a las partidas deforo e revolv entre la ma dextra e sinistre entro que sia dispargut.	"Therefore remove it with cloths which you have wrapped between your fingers, and roll it back and forth between the right and left hands until it has disappeared."
E guarda te que no ajustes en la fissura per so que am le spatum no pervenguas al huel e ladescas aquel.	"And be careful not to insert the probe into the incision, lest with the probe you reach the eye and damage it."
Mays si no apar a tu arternach en le comensament de la fissura, mays que tu ajustes en la fissura un petit am fecilitat entro que procesisca arternach; e aprop extratz aquela ayssi quo havem dit; e aprop submargeys draps de li en aygua e vi agre e pausa les sobre le loc e estrenh aquels am polvils.	"But if your arcernac does not appear at the beginning of the incision, then insert a small probe gently until it processes arcernac; and then remove it as we have said; and then wipe cloths on him with water and vinegar and place them over the location and strain them with powders."
E so alcus que trissan sal e pausan aquel en la conquavitat de la fissura per so que aquo que es remas de aquela humiditat.	"And some also grind salt and place it in the concavity of the incision, lest anything remain of that moisture."
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	"And then take care of him until he is healed."
Mays si accideys en le loc apostema caut, lahoras cura aquel am emplastres cedatils entro que sia sanat.	"But if it happens in the location of an aposteme, then cure it with cedar plasters until it is healed."
Capitol .xi.	"Chapter XI"
De manieyras de tactimi del huel.	"Of methods for touching the eye."
Quan en las palpebras dels huels so natz pels ajustatz dejos les pels naturals e so antiquatz, lahoras aquels noso al huel e fan endevenir manieras de malautias ayssi cum lacrimas assiduas e mollificacio de palpebras e tela entro que aquo sia causa de destruccio del huel que s’apela tactinir del huel, e cura se en quatre manieyras: o per cauteri am foc; o am medicina acuta segon que denant es dit en le capitol de cauteri; o es fayt atactini per inscizio e sutura; o per cannas segon que yeu diyre.	When the eyelids are born from improperly attached hairs, then those are called blepharitis and they cause conditions such as constant tears and swelling of the eyelids, which if not treated, can lead to destruction of the eye, a condition known as trachoma. It is cured in four ways: either by cauterization with fire; or by acute medicine, as mentioned earlier in the chapter on cautery; or by incision and stitching; or by cupping.
E donc cove que tu pauses le cap del malaute en le tieu se; aprop converteys la palpebra del uelh am la tua ma sinistra, e si es convertida, bo es; e sino, entromet agulha en aquela en la qual sia fiel de la partida pus dejos de la palpebra, e fay penetrar la agulha am fiel desus, e aquo sia — prop del marge de la palpebra en le qual naysso les pels — prop dels pels, e tira le fiel a las partidas desus am la palpebra, e converteys aquela am le ray.	Then you should grasp the head of the patient with your left hand; next, carefully turn back the eyelid of the eye with your right hand. If it is already turned back, good. Otherwise, insert a needle into that part where the hairs begin to grow out from under the eyelid, and make the needle pierce through above the hairs, close to the edge of the eyelid where the hairs grow out, and pull the thread upwards with the eyelid turned back, and turn it over again with your thumb.
E aprop fen en la partida dedintz de la palpebra dejos les pels ajustatz am spatum inscidentz del lacrimal major entro al lacrimal mendre; e aprop extratz le fiel e pausa dejos la palpebra polvilhs petitz de coto o de drap, e aprop senha sobre la palpebra am tenta, e sia ayssi cum figura de fuelha de mirt.	Next, insert scissors into the parted eyelid beneath the hairs and cut the lacrimal caruncle entering the lacrimal sac; then extract the thread and put it aside the eyelid using small forceps made of cotton or cloth. Then press upon the eyelid with your thumb, so that it is like a leaf of myrtle.
Mays empero cove que sia la figura segon la quantitat de helevacio de la palpebra, quar aquo ja es diversificat en les homes, quar de aquels es le quals indigeys que sia inscidit de la palpebra gran quantitat segon la quantitat per la qual la palpebra es mollificada.	However, the pressure applied to the eyelid should vary according to the amount of swelling present. For men, this is already diversified as some may require a greater incision on the eyelid depending on how much it has swollen up.
E aprop fen am le spatum sobre las doas linhas las quals has senhadas, e comensa del lacrimal major entro al lacrimal menor.	Then take the forceps and place it on both lines you have marked earlier, starting from the lacrimal caruncle going into the lacrimal sac.
E si’ la tua fissura prop dels pels naturals ayssi cum es la grossetut del rey.	And if your incision is close to the natural hairs, make it as thick as a barleycorn.
E aprop met le onci en un dels dos angles de la codena, e aprop excoria aquela tota, e aprop ajusta am la scitura las doas labias am gula o fiel de lana subtil, e abstergeys le sanc, e fay adherir aquo que superflueys dels fiels sobre dos sobrecils am alcunas causas enviscans, si voles far aquo, e sino, non cures.	Then place a needle on one of the two angles of the wound, and carefully cut it all out. Next, adjust both lips with thread or fine wool, and wipe away any blood. If you wish to do so, make some adhesive with viscous substances and attach what is superfluous from the threads onto both eyebrows; otherwise, don't bother with this step.
E aprop leyssa la sutura dels fiels entro a tres dias o quatre, e aprop cura aquo.	Then leave the stitches in place for three or four days before removing them and caring for the wound.
E si vols, layssa la plagua ses sutura, e cura aquela am aquo que exsicca e constrenh, quar la palpebra es alevada deves la sigillacio de la plagua e la agreguacio de lu; mays sutura es milor E donc aysso diysso les antics de taxanir.	If desired, you can leave the plaster without stitching and care for it using something drying and constricting since the eyelid swells due to the sealing of the plaster and the application of grease. However, stitching is better. This is what the ancient authorities on taxanir say.
Mays empero en lu sia sollicitut sobre le malaute, e es de bona operacio, e no es en lu temor.	However, if there is urgency regarding the illness, it is good to operate and there should be no fear in doing so.
E es autra manieyra en taxmir, e es que senhes sobre la palpebra figura ayssi cum fuelha de mirt, e aprop eleva la palpebra am tres uncis segreguatz e congreguatz segon aquesta forma:	And there is another method of taxanir: press upon the eyelid so that it resembles a myrtle leaf, and then lift up the eyelid with three fingers placed separately and joined together in this manner:
Mays si no es possible aquo, tener les uncis, e aquo no es engualhat, lahoras pren una agula en la qual haia fil e met aquela en le mieg de la figura, e entromet le autre fiel prop le lacrimal major, e·l fiel segon prop le lacrimal mendre, e ajusta entre les tieus ditz les fiels am equalitat, e aprop am aquels eleva la tua ma am elevacio engual, eleva tota la codena sobre la qual es senhat ayssi cum havem recomtat.	If this is not possible, hold the eyelids, and if it is not enough, then take a needle with thread and place it in the middle of the figure, and insert another thread near the larger lacrimal, and the second thread near the smaller lacrimal, adjust the threads evenly between your fingers, and raise your hand with equal elevation, raising the entire chain upon which this is indicated as we have recommended.
E aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	Then close the two lips of the wound with suture, and care for the area that has been healed.
Mays si accideys apostema deves la tua inscizio o la tua fissura, seda aquel apostema am cerot e a lu semblantz, e am enguentz.	But if an abscess forms after your incision or wound, lance it with cautery and similar treatment, and dress it.
E alcunas veguadas endeve a la palpebra que·ls sieus pels sian convertitz, adonc cove que tu uses en aquela de aquo que havem dit de inscizio; mays sutura en quascus es mays artificial.	And sometimes the eyelashes turn inward, causing discomfort. In such cases, you should use what we have mentioned about incision; however, closing them with stitches is more artificial.
Ataxinir am cannas es segon aquesta forma:	To treat a cataract according to this method:
e es que tu convertas la palpebra e scindas la figura qu’es dedintz segon que he recontat; e aprop per art fay doas cannas o doas astelas subtils de las quals longitut sia segon la longitut de la palpebra e la latitut de lor sia mendra de la latitut del spatum.	"It is necessary that you invert the eyelid and cut the figure that is inside according to what has been described; then, using artifice, make two small cannulae or needles whose length matches the length of the eyelid and whose width is less than the width of a needle."
E tu ja has inscidit en las extremitatz de quascunas partidas, la on tenes les fils.	"And you have already inserted into the ends of each parted extremity where you hold the threads."
Aprop agregua quascuna am subtilitat subre aquo que superflueys de la palpebra del huel, e constres las cannas de quascunas partidas am fort strictura, e layssa aquela per alcus jorns, quar la codena per la strictura morira e sira denegada e se poyrira entro que per si meteyssa cayra.	"Next, carefully apply each [thread] underneath what is superfluous of the eyelid skin, and press the cannulae into each parted extremity with great force; leave them like that for several days so that the thread may die and be ejected naturally, and the wound will heal."
Mays si es tardat, lahoras trenca la am las toroyras, e aprop cura la plagua entro que sia sanat.	"But if it is delayed, then break it with tweezers and carefully remove the plug until it is healed."
Donc cum es solidada, la palpebra es elevada e les pels no pungo.	"So once it has healed, the eyelid will be lifted up and the hairs will not touch [the eye]."
E aquesta es la forma de doas cannas las quals faras segon aquesta forma:	"And this is how you make two cannulae according to this shape:"
e haia la quantitat de la longitut e de la latitut ni mays ni mens.	"and let the quantity of its length and width be neither more nor less."
Capitol .xii.	"Chapter Twelve."
De elevacio de pels pungentz en le huel am agula quan le pel es dur.	"On lifting hairs that touch the eye when the hair is hard."
Quan son pels no-naturals, durs e aspres e pungentz les huels, lahoras la operacio en lu es que tu prenguas agula subtil e pauses en aquela fiel de ceda subtil e leon, e aprop que tu ajustes las extremitatz de lu e nozes quascu en manieyra mot subtil.	When it is caused by unnatural, harsh and rough humors that pierce the holes, then the operation for him is that you take a subtle needle and place it in that vein of cedar wood and lion, and then carefully adjust the extremities of it.
E sia la longitut dels fiels de quantitat de una palma.	And let the length of the needles be as long as half a palm.
E aprop tu compon2 autre fiel subtil dejos lu en breu, e nuza las extremitatz de aquel si tu·t vols.	Next, take another subtle needle and place it beside him shortly, and then if you wish, adjust the extremities of that one.
E aprop pause le malaute le sieu cap en le tieu se, e sia prop del solelh per que la tua obra sia declarada, quar es operacio subtil e menuda.	Next, hold the patient's head firmly on the pillow, and let it be near the sun so that your work may be clear, for it is a subtle and delicate operation.
E aprop intromet la agulha en la razit del pel ajustat la qual ha necessitat de engen, e fay aquela penetrar en la palpebra festinantment entro que extraguas aquela desus le pel natural.	And quickly insert the needle into the shaved skin where necessary and make it penetrate into the eyelid swiftly before pulling it back out above the natural skin.
E aprop tire le pel entro desus e intromet aquel en alixati, e sian les pels un o dos o tres e no mays.	And then pull back the skin while inserting the needle underneath, and let there be one or two or three hairs at most.
E aprop tira la tua ma am aquel entro que·l pel sia fora-gitat am alixolati en la palpebra am le pel natural.	Then carefully remove your hand while pulling out that hair along with it beneath the eyelid and bring it back up through the natural skin.
Mays si es atirat alixalati e non es gitat le pel, atiraras alixati a las partidas dejos am le fiel le qual tu has compost am aquela, entro qu’en sia gitat alixalati del trau sobira.	But if the eyelid is pulled too much and the skin does not come out, then pull the eyelid outward with the needle that you have placed there, until the eyelid of the wound opens beneath.
E vegas aquela am la visio del huel, quar lahoras tu gitaras alixati e lo fiel, e grotan quascu e clautz le huel, e laysse le claus per dos dias o tres, entro que·l pel adheresca al sieu loc e nasque sobre aquel bona carn.	And then close it with the sight of the wound, for later when you remove the eyelid and needle, carefully wash each eye with warm water and keep them closed for two or three days until the skin adheres to its place and grows good flesh over it.
E si es mays breu le pel, lahoras tu ajusta un pel lonc dels pels naturals, e es elevat am aquel, o que·l leysses entro que sia alonguat aprop alcu spazi, e lehoras tu eleva aquel.	And if the skin is too short, then take a long hair from the natural hairs and sew it with that one, or leave it until it grows longer some distance away, and then raise it.
Capitol .xiii.	Chapter XIII
De la cura de ehacratir la qual ve en la palpebra desus.	Of the treatment of the inflammation that occurs on the eyelid above.
Quan ve en le huel ehacratir, e es contraccio de la palpebra quan es contrayta en sus, o a dextra o a sinistra partida, per mala consolidacio de plagua o de seccio o de cauteri, e es apelada leporina, e aquesta ahercrati o es natural o accidental, e es fayta per consolidacio de plagua o de seccios o de cauteri, o per semblantz a lor malcuratz.	When inflammation occurs in the eye, and there is contraction of the eyelid when it contracts above on either side due to poor healing of wound or cut or burn, it is called blepharitis. This inflammation may be natural or accidental, caused by poor healing of wounds or cuts or burns, or resembling those that are badly treated.
May la manieyra de la operacio en lu es que tu fendas aquela consolidacio e que separes las labias de lu, e pauses en lu en aquo que es entre aquelas una meca de drap de li, e ligues aquelas entro que sian sanadas.	"The manner of the operation on him is that you should cleave that consolidation and separate the lips of it, then place in it between those a wick of cloth dipped in pitch, and bind them together until they are healed."
E no cove que tu uses de curacio de lu de las causas las quals exsiccan, constrenho; quar si tu fas aquo retorna alixacratir pus mal que nulh temps no foc habantz.	"And it is not necessary that you use any cure for him from the causes which dry out and constrain, because if you do this, he will return to his former condition even worse than before."
Usa en aquela de causas que mollifico ayssi cum es fenugrec, e embroca am la aygua en la qual son coytz altea e semensa de li, o enguent dyaquilon, le qual sia liquefayt am alcu dels olis, e submergeys en aquel la meca, e cura am aquel.	"Use in that one of the causes which soften, such as fenugreek, and crush with hot water in which almonds have been cooked and strained from it, or diacylglycerol, which should be liquefied with some oil, and immerse the wick in that, and treat him with it."
E lo tesaur de la tua curacio es que tu perforsses am tot engen que no sia consolidat segon la forma que foc al comensament.	"And the treasure of your cure is that you persevere with all energy until nothing is consolidated according to the form that was at the beginning."
E aquesta operacio la qual havem dita, no es sino alcuna rectificacio de ehalixacrati que no retorna la forma del loc segon que foc denant.	"And this operation which we have spoken of is only some rectification of ichthyosis which does not return to its former form."
Capitol .xiiii.	"Chapter XIV"
De la cura de ehacrati le qual es fayt en la palpebra dejos.	"Of the treatment of ichthyosis which occurs on the left eyelid."
Aquesta alxacrati la qual es fayta en la palpebra dejos, la qual es nompnada vertadierament alxacrati; e es de lu alcuna natural, autra accidental.	This operation called "alxacrati" is performed on the eyelid, properly known as "alxacrati"; it is of two kinds, natural or accidental.
Mays accidental es fayta per plagua o per scissura o per cauteri o per autres semblantz.	Accidental alxacrati is done by plague or cut or burn or other similar causes.
E la via de la operacio de lu es que tu prenguas una agula en la qual haga fil doble, e fiques aquela en la carn, e que la fassas passar del lacrimal de senestre entro al lacrimal dextre, entro que·l fil pervengua en las doas extremitatz de la carn.	The procedure for this operation is to take a needle with doubled thread and insert it into the flesh, passing it from the left tear duct to the right, until the thread reaches both ends of the flesh.
E aprop exten la carn a las partidas desus am la agula e cus aquela am la agula, e inscideys am spatum ample.	Then stretch the skin at its edges with the needle and cut it with the needle, then open it wide with a broad spatula.
E donc si retorne la figura de la palpebre segon que cove, bo es; e sino, pren le ray e pausa aquel en la figura fenduda, e am aquel converteys la palpebra, e fen las doas fissuras en le latz de la palpebra dejos.	And then return the eyelid to its proper shape. If it doesn't return properly, take thread and sew up the split, turning the eyelid back into shape, and close both incisions on the inner side of the left eyelid.
E sian las extremitatz de las doas fissuras de dos angles de la inscizio, la qual has fayta entro que concurren, e sia de lor fayt angle entro que quan se congreguan sia fayta figura de lor.	And if both ends of the incisions meet at two corners of the cut, then make sure that when they come together, they form a closed figure with both ends.
E aquesta figura es letra greca: la landa.	And this figure is called the Greek letter "lambda".
E aprop osta la carn aquela per la quantitat que es le latz de lu agut dejos de lu, aquo que siec la palpebra.	Then remove the excess skin along the side of the incision on the inner side of the eyelid, so that it secures the eyelid.
E aprop ajusta las partz seperadas e cos aquelas am le fil de lana; e aprop cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit de las medicinas mollificativas e de las calguas entro que sia sanat.	Then adjust the separated parts and sew them together with wool thread. And then dress it with the moistening medicines and bandages that we mentioned, until it heals.
E si alxacrati endeve per fissura o sutura o cauteri, lahoras cove que tu fendas am fissura plana sobre les pels de la palpebra segon que es precedit.	And if there is any inflammation afterwards due to a split, stitching or burning, it is necessary to make an incision with a flat blade over the skin of the eyelid as was previously mentioned.
E aprop separa am la calgua entre doas labias segon que havem dit.	Then separate with a bandage between the two lips according to what we have said.
En la suma del sermo de la cura de alxacrati quan es desus o dejos, que corra en lu operacio, segon que es preparat de la forma de alxacrati, e aquela es en forma de motas diversitatz.	In the final words of the speech on the treatment of algebra when it is high or absent, let water run in its operation according to what has been prepared in the form of algebra, and that is in the form of many diversities.
E le artifexs savi totz temps prepara engen en quascuna manieyra la qual es possibla a lu entro que fassa retornar la figura a la forma natural, o prop de aquela, e aquel malaute segon que a lu conveneys de la operacio e dels strumentz en las majors disposicios.	And the skilled artisan always prepares various tools in every way possible so that he can bring the figure back to its natural form or close to it, and this patient according to what is suitable for them from the operation and the instruments in the greatest positions.
Capitol .xv.	Chapter XV
De la adherencia de la palpebra am la conjunctiva o am la cornea.	On the adhesion of the eyelid to the conjunctiva or the cornea.
Quan accideys aquesta consolidacio a motz homes enayssi que sia solidada la palpebra pus desus am le album del huel, e sia prohibida de la facilitat del movement e de las suas obras naturals, donc cove que tu entrometas la extramitat del ray dejos la palpebra, e eleva en sus aquela, o exten aquela am le unci.	When this adhesion occurs in many people, so that the eyelid is firmly stuck upwards with the albumen of wool and prohibited from its natural movements and works, then you should insert the tip of a needle between the eyelid and lift it up or extend it with forceps.
E aprop tu inscideys la adherencia am spatum subtil, le qual no sia am acuitat de las inscisios, habantz obtus un petit per so que·l malaute no sia inquietat deves la operacio, e remau le spatum que no ledesca le huel am la sua acuitat.	And then you should cut the adhesion with a fine spatula that is not sharp for incisions, having an obtuse tip to avoid injuring the patient during the operation. Be careful not to let the spatula slip and scratch the eye with its sharp edge.
E sia la tua inscizio quays excorjan aquela adherencia am facilitat entro que sia retornada la palpebra segon la sua forma natural e que sia sanada tota la adherencia.	And your incision should be such that it easily removes that adhesion, so that the eyelid returns to its natural shape and all the adhesion is healed.
E aprop tu met en le huel aygua salada am la qual tu laves; o distilla en lu de zunia dissolvut en l’aygua.	And then you should apply saltwater to the eye, with which you rinse it; or distill in its place juice of rue dissolved in water.
E aprop separa entre la palpebra e l’huel am calgua de li, e pausa sobre le huel lana infuza en album de huou, e aprop le tertz jorn usa de causas consolidativas entro que sia sanat.	And then separate the eyelid from the eye with a finger, and press on the eye a compress of wool soaked in egg white. On the third day apply consolidating remedies so that it may heal.
Capitol .xvi.	Chapter XVI
De inscizio de ungla e de eminencia de carn dels lacrimals.	On Incision of Nail and Excrescence of Flesh from the Lacrimal Apparatus
Sapias que ungla es segon dos manieyras, quar o es nervosa, e es semblant a ciphac dur subtil; o es no-nervosa, semblant a humiditat blanca congilada, la qual quan ferr la toca, o es forsat aquela prendre am onci, es abscindida e le onci no es ficat en lu.	Know that nail can be of two kinds: either nervous, resembling hard and fine skin; or non-nervous, resembling congealed white moisture. When you touch it with forceps, if the latter kind is present, you may take hold of it with forceps, cut it off, but the forceps should not penetrate into it.
E amdos las specias no comensan sino del lacrimal major entro que va petit a petit que cobre la vista e prohibeys le lum e·l movement de huel.	And in both kinds, they begin only from the outer canthus of the eye, gradually increasing until they cover the pupil and prohibit light and movement of the eyelid.
Mays la manieyra del obrar en la inscizio de lu es que·l malaute pause le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop obre les huels de lu, e eleva la palpebra am la tua ma, e aprop colligeys la ungla am onci de pauca duplicacio e exten aquela a las partidas desus.	But the manner of operating in its incision is that the patient should place his head in a suitable position and open the eyes wide. Then elevate the eyelid with your hand and grasp the nail with forceps with little duplication, and extend it upwards at its sides.
E aprop pren una agula e entromet en aquela un pel de cavalh o de buou o de vaqua, o de semblantz, o de fiel fort, o duplica la extremitat de la agulha petit a petit e fica aquela en le mieg de la ungla, e penetra aquela am la agulha, e lia am fiel la ungla; e exten aquela a las partidas desus, e excorja am le pel le latz de la ungla lo qual siec la pupilla.	Then take a needle and insert it into the nail about a horsehair or bull's hair thickness, or use similar thread of strong gut. Duplicate the tip of the needle little by little and place it in the middle of the nail, penetrate it with the needle, tie the nail with thread; extend it upwards at its sides, and remove the excess nail that covers the pupil using the thread.
E ayssi tu sieguas aquela am le pel entro al derier de lu.	"And thus you shall proceed by applying the hair cloth at the back of him."
E aprop tu inscideys le romanent en la razitz del lacrimal am spatum subtil o am petitas forfexs, e leysa la carn del lacrimal natural per so que per inscizio de aquela no endevengua fluxs de lagremas continuabla.	"And then you shall incise the caruncle at the corner of the eyelid with a fine spatula or small forceps, and lift up the skin of the lacrimal sac so that there may be no continuous flow of tears through the incision."
E alscunas vetz la ungla am le sol onci estenduda o am fiel, ayssi co havem dit, e aprop sia excurjat am spatum leon del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	"And sometimes the nail extends beyond the skin or is curved upwards, as we have said, and therefore it should be cut away with this lion-shaped spatula of which here is a drawing:"
E guarda te que am le spatum no toques la tunica cornea e que avengua en lu ruptura, e que la pupilla sia perforada.	"And take care that with the spatula you do not touch the tunica cornea and cause its rupture, and that the pupil is perforated."
Aprop la inscizio geta en le huel un pauc de sal trissa o di cief fayt de siniar, e leyssa aquel entro al autre dia; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove entro que sia sanat.	"Then sprinkle a little salt or powder of sinapis into the wound and leave it alone for another day; but take care to wash that wound with water until it is healed."
E si la ungla no es nervoza e no podes metre la agulha, ni es ficada en aquela le onci, lahoras motas veguadas aquesta specia de ungla es curada am medicinas, e es sanada ayssi cum yeu e recomtat en la divisio.	"And if the nail is not nerve-rich and you cannot insert the needle into it, or the needle is not fixed in that nail, then sometimes this type of nail is cured with medications, and healed as described in the division [section]."
E si tu vols inscindir aquela, lahoras tu obre le huel del malaute e pren spatum subtil leon de freul acuitat segon aquesta forma:	"And if you wish to incise it, then open the wound of the disease and take a thin pointed spatula made of iron according to this form:"
am subtilitat.	"with subtlety."
E si vezes que aquela es rarificada e es confugida e empren en aquela razit, lahoras distilla de la tua ora en le huel de cief fayt de siniar o am cief rog o am sal trissat, e opila le huel entro a l’autre dia.	"And if it happens that it is rarified and becomes congested and pressed in that region, then distill some of your spit into the wound with a little powder of sinapis or rue or salt, and cover the wound until the next day."
E aprop itera sobre aquela la operacio entro que sia remaugut tot aquo que es de lu, sino que·l contrari apostema caut sia en le huel, quar lahoras tu leyssa aquela, e cura al comensament la apostema entro que sia sanat.	"And again perform the operation on it until all of that has been removed, but instead a counter-abscess forms in the wound, for then you will leave it alone and treat the abscess at the beginning so that it may heal."
E aprop itera la tua operacio sobre aquela am razo entro que sia sanat.	"And again perform your operation on it with reason until it is healed."
La emenencia de la carn lacrimal, si notz en le huel per gran nocument, sia suspendut am onci; e inscideys aquela de aquela una partida, e no ultimes la inscizio per so que no inscidesqua fluxs de lagremas.	"The prominence of the lacrimal caruncle, if it appears in the wound causing great harm, should be suspended with a thread; and incise that from there with one cut, but do not extend the incision too far so as not to cause excessive tearing."
E aprop distilla en le lacrimal cief rog e fayt de siniar entro que sia sanat.	"And again distill into the lacrimal sac a little powder of rue and sinapis until it is healed."
Capitol .xvii.	"Chapter XVII."
De inscizio de alguazardenic e de aquo que es nascut de carn ajustada en le huel.	"Of incision of an aposteme and of that which is born of flesh adhered in the wound."
Alcunas veguadas en les huels de alcus es nascuda carn roga, e es sobre-pausada entro que cobre la pupilla, o apropinqua o estrenh sobre las palpebras e fort leu comprem las palpebras a las partidas deforo e es assemblada a roza de balaustra.	"Sometimes in the wounds of some people flesh is born, rough and overgrown so that it covers the pupil, or it approaches and adheres to the eyelids, pressing them tightly together at the edges, and it becomes assembled like a coral branch."
Mays la operacio en lu es que·l malaute pausa le sieu cap en le tieu se; e aprop obre les huels de aquel e colligeys tota aquela carn am oncis convenientz ad aquo, e te aquo am una forcep o am cesti; e aprop inscindiys la carn el comensament entro que tot sia finit am le encisori, e guarda te del huel que no ledescas aquel deves la tua operacio.	"The operation in this case is to pause the head of that patient on a cloth, and then open the wounds of it, collect all of that flesh with convenient forceps or pincers, take it away with tweezers or pliers; and again incise the flesh at the beginning until everything is finished with the scissors, taking care of the wound so as not to leave anything behind due to your operation."
E sia la tua inscizio am la qual inscides aquelas o am espatum le qual nos havem recomtat en la inscizio de la ungla, o am petitas forfexs am las quals es colligit ascebel segon que vindra la forma de lu aprop aquest capitol.	"And let your incision be with that which you use to incise those or with the spatula which we have recommended in the section on nail incision, or with little forceps according to what is appropriate for this case, as will come later in this chapter."
Donc cum es complida la tua inscizio e es remauguda tota aquela carn, lahoras omple le huel de sal trissa, o destilla en lu polvera roga e semblantz a lu de las medicinas corrossivas, e pausa sobre le huel deforo coto am album de huou entro que sia asegurat de apostema caut.	"Therefore, when your incision is complete and all of that flesh has been removed, then fill the wound with finely ground salt or distill into it powdered medicines like corrosives, and apply a poultice of egg-white over it until a dry abscess forms."
E si roman alcuna causa de alguardenici e es senhoragat sanc caut, e temes apostema caut, lahoras leyssa le huel e cura aquela apostema am aquo que ceda aquela apostema, e aprop itera sobre aquel am operacio entro que sia sanat, e semblantment fay en la carn ajustada la qual accideys en le huel de aquesta especia.	"And if any cause of aposteme remains and is secretly present, but you fear a dry abscess, then leave the wound alone and treat that abscess with whatever cures it, and again perform an operation on it until it is healed; similarly act for the flesh adhered in wounds of this kind."
Mays empero tu cove que alienes tota curacio del huel freul per via natural o per via accidental, obran am ferr, e no metas la tua ma en alcuna de aquestas operacios entro que veges que aquel membre sia suffertant aquela operacio.	"But nonetheless you must be careful not to omit all treatment of the wound freely through natural or accidental means, operating with iron, and do not put your hand in any of these operations until you see that that limb can withstand this operation."
Capitol .xviii.	"Chapter XVIII."
De colleccio de sabel en le huel.	"Of collection of pus in the wound."
Sabel so venas rogas las quals son testudas sobre le huel e prohibeysso al vesement la sua operacio, e develican le huel am longitut de dias.	"Know that veins are often enlarged upon the bone, hindering its movement, and this should be uncovered gradually over many days."
Donc necessari es al comensament que tu consideres si le huel en le qual es sabel es fort e en lu no es autra malautia que sabel, lahoras tu colligeys aquel sabel.	"Therefore, it is necessary at the beginning that you examine whether the bone in which swelling has occurred is strong and whether there is not another illness causing the swelling; then you should gather that swelling."
E es que tu comandes al malaute que pause le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop suspen aquelas venas am un onci o am dos segon la tua prudencia; e sia aquel onci de subtil duplicacio segon aquesta forma:	"And you should order the patient to place their head back in a straight position and suspend those veins with an ounce or two of your choosing, using this type of delicate bandage:"
o so dos oncis gradantment en un cos segon aquesta forma:	"or gradually increase it up to two ounces."
E aprop sian colligidas aquelas venas am forses subtils, am subtilitat, e abstergeys le sanc hora aprop hora, entro que vegas aquelas venas esser remaugudas del huel e sian revolgudas.	"And then bind those veins with delicate forceps, delicately, and wipe away the blood hour by hour until you see that those veins are detached from the bone and turned back."
E guarda te que tu no ledes le huel am las extremitatz del spatum; e si’ la tua operacio en le miegjorn denant le solelh, e sias mot ferm en la tua operacio que no inscidas sino aquelas venas.	"And be sure that you do not compress the bone with the ends of the forceps. And if your operation takes place in the middle of the day before the sun, then be very careful in your operation so that you grasp only those veins."
E quan tu auras complitz, lahoras tu distilla en le huel cief vert o rog per que am sa acuitat corrodesca aquo que es remaugut del sabel.	"And once you have completed this, then apply vinegar or rue to the bone chief so that with its sharpness it may corrode what has been detached from the bone."
Mays si aquo no es a tu possible colligeys tot en aquela hora, e lahoras tu emplastra tot am aquo que cede la dolor de lu, e leyssa lu per alcus dias entro que sia sedada la dolor de lu e que sia asegurat de apostema caut.	"But if you cannot complete this in one hour, then plaster all of it with whatever relieves pain from it, and leave it alone for a few days until the pain has subsided and it is assured that there will be no abscess."
E aprop itera sobre lu segon que la mateyssa manieyra entro que sia sanat.	"And afterwards apply ointment over it according to the most medicinal way until it is healed."
E aquesta es la forma de las forfexs:	"And this is the form of forceps:"
Capitol .xix.	"Chapter XIX"
De reduccio de arizati al nas.	"Of the reduction of fractures of the nose."
Quan tu curas arisati am cauteri o am medicina aguda comburent segon que es precedida la narracio de lu e no es sanat, lahoras no es engen en lu sino que fendas sobre le apostema deves la maturitat de lu, e que extraguas tota la humiditat la qual es en lu e·l poyre entro que sia descubert le os.	When a wound burns with cautery or sharp medicine as described but does not heal, then do not incise into it, but wait until the abscess reaches maturity. Then remove all moisture from within it and ensure that the bone is exposed.
E donc cum es descubert le os e vezes en lu corrupcio o negror, lahoras tu ratz lu am un sturment del qual aquesta es la forma:	Then when the bone is exposed and you see corruption or blackness in it, then remove it with an instrument of which this is the shape
E es nompnat de aspre cap, e sia feyt de fer indi, e sia le cap redon ayssi cum asir le qual sia fayt punctat per punctacio de lima o aliskalfati per punctacio subtil (ayssi cum es en la forma seguent).	And it is called the "sharp head," made of iron. Its head should be round, like this, pierced with holes made by a chisel or awl through subtle punching (as shown in the following figure).
E pausa aquel sobre le loc corrumput del os, e aprop revolveys aquel entre les tieus ditz, e prem la tua ma petit a petit entro que sapias que aquela corropcio es rasa.	And press that onto the corrupted part of the bone. Then rotate it between your fingers and gently push it in until you know that all corruption is scraped away
E aquo sia fayt alcunas veguadas, e aprop restaura le loc am causas exsiccativas e stipticas.	Then do this several times, and next restore the area with drying and astringent causes
Donc si·l loc es consolidat e es en lu nascuda bona carn e es abscindit le cors de la sania e roman per xl dias, e no es renovat e no es apostemat e no accideys en lu accident, lahoras tu sapias que es sanat.	Therefore, if the area is consolidated and there is new healthy skin in its place, and the flesh has been severed from the sound parts and remains for forty days, without renewing or suppurating or recurring again, then you know that it is healed.
E sino, lahoras no es en lu engen sino reduzir la fissura a la forma del nas, e segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu descuebras de segon os am ferr o am medicina acuta, e cum sira descubert le os, lahoras tu pren tribo segon aquesta forma:	But if not, then it is necessary to reduce the opening into a nasal shape and in this manner:
Sia la extramitat de lu ferr triangulada, e·l fust de lu sia prim extenuat entro a la extremitat ayssi cum vezes assi.	"The iron's tip should be triangular, and its shaft carefully tapered at the end like this."
E aprop pausa aquel sobre le os, e sia aquel prop del lacrimal; e alongua la tua ma un pauc del huel, e aprop revol la tua ma am le tribo entro que penetre tot le os, e aquel sente le malaute per asso que atroba vent yssir per so quan te la sua ma.	"Then pause the hammer on the bone near the lacrimal, and stretch your hand a little further down the hole. Then rotate your hand around the trial until it penetrates the entire bone, and the patient feels pain as you withdraw your hand."
Donc lahoras restaura le loc am medicinas stipticas exsiccantz ayssi cum t’e eyssenhat.	"Then you should restore the area with medicines that are astringent and drying, such as you have here."
Donc cum nays la carn e·l loc es endurazit, lahoras la materia la qual effundia a las partidas deforo retorna al nas, donc aquo es pus leugier sobre le malaute.	"Then when the flesh is cut and the area is closed, the matter that flowed out returns to its place. Therefore, it is easier to bear the pain."
Capitol .xx.	"Chapter 20."
De reduccio de la eminencia del huel.	"On the reduction of nasal humps."
Quan le huel emineys am la sua totalitat e no accideys en le vezement nocument ni diminuacio, lahoras cove que laxas le malaute, e aprop que·l segues, e aprop que pausas ventozas en le cervitz ses scarificacio e succa per bona succaccio; e aprop pausa sobre le huel liniment le qual sia fayt de acatra e aloe e enses e sarcocolla, e aprop strenh le emplaustre sobre le huel am motz polvils.	"If the hump is prominent along its entire length and does not show signs of inflammation or decrease in size, then you should relieve the pain, follow up carefully, and pause your ventouses on the nape without scarification, suc
E la manieyra dels polvils es que prenguas draps de li leons motz, e quascun drap sia duplicat en quatre plecs; e fay de aquels motz.	"For the manner of powders: take linen cloths and fold each one into four layers. Make them from those mastic grains."
E aprop pausa aquels la un sobre le autre segon la quantitat de la qual ha le huel necessitat.	"And pause those ones on top of another according to the quantity that the hump requires."
E aprop strenh sobre aquels am drap dur am fort strictura; e itera las ventosas am succio ses scarificacio; e aprop osta las ventosas e leyssa le huel streyt le dia e la nueyt.	"And strengthen them with a hard cloth with strong compression. Repeat the cupping with suction without scarification. Then remove the cups and leave the hump uncovered day and night."
Mays si entretant le liguament es mollificat, lahoras cove que sia mot streyt.	"But if in the meantime the bandage becomes softened, then it should be made tighter."
E aprop osta le liament aprop le dia e la nueyt ayssi cum havem dit.	"And remove the bandage day and night as we have said."
E si vezes le huel ja esser redusit, bo es, e sino, lahoras itera le emplastre am les polvils e la strictura e las ventosas entro que sia sanat.	"And if sometimes the hump has already been reduced, that is good. But if not, then repeat the application of the plaster with powders and compression and cupping until it is healed."
Capitol .xxi.	"Chapter 21."
De la inscizio de la eminencia de la tunica uvea.	"On the incision of the nasal hump."
Quan endeve disrupcio en la tunica uvea, e aprop es eminent e procezeys fora las palpebras ayssi cum un gra de rasim, e es orrazada la forma de home per aquo, e vols aquo inscidir, lahoras la operacio en lu es ayssi cum havem recomtat, que tu entrometas la agula en la razitz de la uvea de la partida dejos en la partida desus, e aprop met la agula autra en la qual sia fil doble de la part del lacrimal, e fay aquela penetrar e leyssa la primieyra agula segon la sua disposicio; e aprop inscideys le loc del fiel doble e leva am aquel la partida de la uvea en le circuit de la agula, e strenh aquela mot.	"When there is disruption in the tunic of the eye, and if it protrudes beyond the eyelids like a grain of barley, and appears like a human form because of that, and you wish to incise it, then the operation in that case is as follows: insert the needle into the ridge of the eye from below upwards, and insert another needle on the side where the lacrimal is located. Make the latter needle penetrate and let the first needle follow its course. Then incise the location of the double thread and remove the piece of the tunic with that, pulling it tightly."
E aprop extratz la agula e pausa sobre le huel lana infusa en album de huou e leyssa entro que cayha le fil am la uva.	"And then extract the needle and apply lanolin infused in egg white onto the wound. Leave it on until the thread adheres with the blood."
E aprop cura le huel am aquo que conforte aquel entro que la plagua sia sanada.	"Then dress the wound with something that will promote healing until the wound is healed."
E alcunas veguadas aduna de tota partida am cercle de drap entro le huel ajuste eminencia gran, e aprop sia perforat am le spatum subtil que vengua al preon del huel, e corra la humiditat albuginea, e descen le huel e intra tantost.	"And sometimes, all the excess skin with a band of cloth around it is gathered together into one large prominence. Then pierce it with a fine spatula that comes to the front of the hump, so that the whitish fluid runs out, and the hump descends immediately."
E aprop strenh entro que sia sanat.	"And then compress until it is healed."
Capitol .xxii.	"Chapter 22."
De curacio de alconati.	Of treating eye diseases
Aquesta malautia que es apelada alconati no es sino sania la qual es ajustada en le huel semblant a aygua dessendent e no es aquela.	This disease called alconati is none other than watery humor descending into the eye, not that one.
Mays la manieyra del obrar en ela es que fasses le malaute sezer sobre la sela aparelada e dreyta, e aprop pren le cap sieu en las tuas mas de doas partz e mau aquel entro que veias la sania pervenir a las partidas dejos, e aprop sia siccada e no descenda, e sia ostat le lum, e·l malaute veia las causas ayssi cum vezia.	To treat this condition, place the patient's head on the prepared seat and hold it in both hands. When you see that watery fluid is about to flow into the eye, quickly dry it up with lint and cover the eye with a bandage. Then observe the causes of the condition as follows:
E si no descendra en jos, sapias que es aygua.	And if it does not flow downwards, know that it is water.
Mays si no es preparat le descendement a la sania am aquo que havem dit, lahoras fay le malaute sezer entre las tuas mas e aprop pren spatum subtil e fen am aquel sobre le pannicol cernent un petit deves la continuacio de la conjunctiva am la tunica cornea en la corona (entro al loc vuet), entro que sia fora-getada la sania.	But if the descent of the watery humor is not prepared as said above, then make the patient sit between your hands and take a thin spatula. Then gently press it onto the panicle surrounding a small part of the conjunctiva near the junction with the cornea (at that location), so that the watery humor flows outwards.
Donc cum es fora-getada, lahoras tu distilla en le huel aygua cauda en la qual has mesclat mel o aygua en la qual ja has bulit fenugrec e mel.	Then, when the fluid has flowed outwards, collect it in a vessel containing water mixed with honey or water in which you have boiled fenugreek and honey.
E aprop sia curat am las autras causas entro que sia sanat.	And then treat it with other causes as appropriate until it is healed.
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter XXII
De la curacio de la aygua descendent del huel.	Of the treatment of watery humor descending downwards.
Ja havem dit las specias de la aygua en la divisio e qual conveneys a perforar am sermo declarant, lahoras aquel segon la sanetat.	"We have previously discussed the types of water in the division, and which is suitable for boring with clear speech, now according to health."
Lahoras cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute entre las tuas mas sobre un cayrat e lia le sieu huel sa, lu mot stringent.	"You must make the patient lie between your thighs on a pillow and tie their hands and feet together tightly."
E aprop pausa prop de la palpebra del sieu huel la tua ma senestra, si le huel en le qual es l’aygua es le huel senestra; o am la tua ma dreyta, si le huel es le dextre.	"And then place your left hand near the eyelid of their left eye if it is the left eye where the water is inserted; or with your right hand if it is the right eye."
E aprop am la tua ma dextra pren almagda, si le huel es senestre; o am la tua ma senestra, si le huel es de dreyt.	"And then take a probe with your right hand if the eye is left; or with your left hand if it is right."
E aprop pausa la extremitat de almagda prop de la corona per la grossesa del ray en le album del huel de part del mendre lacrimal, e aprop enpelleys almagda am vertut e revol la tua ma am aquel.	"And then place the tip of the probe near the edge of the eye's cornea, about the thickness of a needle from the corner of the tear duct, and gently rotate it with your finger."
E aprop penetre en le album del huel e sentas que almagda ja es pervenguda a causa vueda.	"And then penetrate into the eye's cornea and feel that the probe has reached the bottom of the tear duct."
E cove que sia la masura del cami de almagda al preon la mesura del spazi le qual es de la pupilla entro a la fi de la negror, e es la corona del huel; quar tu veyras am aquel pupilla am la visio de l’huel per la clartat de la tunica cornea.	"And you should measure the distance of the probe at the front to be the same as the space from the pupil to the end of the black hole, which is the edge of the eye; because through that pupil you will see with the vision of the eye through the clarity of the corneal tissue."
E aprop pausa almagda entro al loc en le qual es l’aygua, e aprop tu la atira en jos una veguada aprop autra, e donc si la aygua descen tantost, lahoras vetz le malaute aquo sobre le qual huebre la sua vista tantost, e almagda en le sieu huel.	"And then place the probe into the location where the water is inserted, and then pull it down once or twice, and if the water descends immediately, at that moment you will see the disease on which the eye's vision depends, and the probe in its place."
E aprop repausa se un pauc; donc si la aygua es descenduda, lahoras tu depausa aquela autre veguada abantz que almagda ne sia getada.	"And then pause for a moment; if the water has descended, then pull it back down again, making sure that the probe is not dislodged."
E donc quan es sicada e no descen, lahoras tu extrat almagda am facilitat, e revol am aquel la tua ma pauc a pauc, e aprop dissolveys en l’aygua un petit de sal clara de gemma e am aquela lava le huel dedintz; e aprop pausa fora le huel coto o stopa o lana infusa en oli rozat e album de huou e ligua am aquo le huel sa.	"And then when it is full and does not descend, you should gently remove the probe, rotate it gently with your hand, dissolve a little bit of ground crystal salt in water and wash the inside of the eye with it; and then close the eye gently or apply cotton soaked in rose oil and eye ointment and wipe around the edge of the eye."
Mays nos e aquels que so de nostre temps pause sobre aquel comi trissat am album de huou.	"But those who are not of our time pause over that treatment with eye ointment."
E si no obezeys a tu almagda al intrament de l’huel per la sua duricia — quar es alcu dels homes del qual le huel es dur mot —, lahoras cove que prenguas le spatum le qual es nompnat alberid del qual aquesta es la forma:	"And if the probe does not obey you when entering the eye due to its hardness - because it is one of those people whose eyes are very hard - then you should take the spatula, which is called an 'alberid' and has this shape:"
E donc perfora am aquel aquela conjunctura, e no ultimes la tua ma en le trauc, e no es si no que fassas via ad almagda loc subtil.	"And then pierce with that the conjunctiva, and do not move your hand from the track, and if you cannot find the probe's location, make a small incision there."
E aprop entromet almagda segon que havem dit.	"And then insert the probe as we have said."
E deves le compliment de la tua obra, sia preparat al malaute dormitori descentment fayt en le qual dorma sobre le sieu dos en mayson tenebrosa, e sia prohibit de totz movementz .	"And you should prepare for your work by ensuring that the patient is asleep, lying down in a room where they can sleep on their back in darkness, and prohibiting all movements."
E pausa en la natura de lu aquo per que sia linida la sua natura, e no maugua le sieu cap a la partida dreyta ni senestra de tot.	"And pause for a moment to examine the nature of the water you are using to ensure it is clear, and do not move the patient's head to the right or left at all."
E sia le liament segon la sua disposicio entro al tertz dia.	"And place the ligature according to its position on the third day."
E aprop deslia aquel en aquela maysso tenebrosa e exproha la freol vista, e fay li vezer alcunas causas, e aprop retorna le liament entro al dia .vii.	"And then untie it in that dark room and expose the eye to light, show them some objects, and then put the ligature back on again on the seventh day."
E no cove que fassas aquo en la hora de las curacios o tantost aprop la infusio.	"And this should not be done during the time of treatment or immediately after the infusion."
Habantz cove que tu alienes aquo per so quar la aygua puega leugierament per gran e vehement de reguardament.	"Therefore, you should be careful with this because water can flow gently but also strongly and forcefully due to excessive pressure."
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras cove que deslias le huel denant le vii dia, e rectifica aquel am aquo que ceda apostema.	"But if an abscess forms, you should untie the eye on the seventh day and then treat it with something that will cause the abscess to burst."
Lahoras tu absol la vista de lu e pausa sobre la cara de lu oral per le qual sia regit le vezement de lu dejos lu per alcus dias, lu existent en la mayszo tenebrosa.	"Then uncover the eye and pause for a moment on the face of the patient while they are facing the direction of the light, allowing them to see dimly through it for a few days while remaining in the dark room."
E aprop sia gitat de aquela mayzo gradantment e conversa8 en las suas causas.	"And then gradually lead them out of that dark room and converse with them about their condition."
E sapias que in alchatea no es excusat le discipol de visio alcunas veguadas, e lahoras tu sias ardit sobre la operacio.	"And know that the student of optics is not exempt from some observations, and therefore you should be bold about the operation."
E ja es pervengut a nos de alcu de aquels les quals so al Artach , e alcu disse que fayt foc en al Ayrac magdaam perforat am le qual es succada la aygua.	"And it has come to our knowledge that some of those who are skilled in this art have said that fire should be made in the Eye, using a probe made for that purpose which sucks up water."
Mays empero yeu non e vist degu en la nostra terra le qual haia perfeyt aquo, ni e aquo legit en alcu dels libres dels antics; e es possible que aquo sia novel.	"But however we have not seen anyone in our land who has perfected this method, nor is it mentioned in any of the books of the ancients; and therefore it may be considered to be a new method."
E aquestas so las formas de las specias de magdaan per que sia sobre aquelas aquel le qual ignora aquelas:	"And these are the forms of the probes used for this purpose, so that those who do not know them can understand them:"
E sian faytas de eram o de ferr propriament, e sian las extramitatz de lor am aquesta subtilitat triangulada, la extremitat aguda ayssi cum aquela es la forma.	"And they should be made of iron or steel specifically, and their tips should be triangular and sharp-pointed like this, as shown in the diagram."
Capitol .xxiv.	"Chapter XXIV."
De la curacio de carn nada en le nas.	"Of the treatment of flesh-colored growths in the nose."
Quan en le nas so nascudas carns diversas ajustadas de las quals es alcuna causa la qual es assemblada a scorpio de motz pes, o a polip peys; e aquesta malautia es apelada polipus quar es a semblansa de aquel peys representat.	"When flesh of diverse kinds is born in the nose, some cause of which is assembled like a scorpion with heavy breath, or a polyp; and this illness is called polyps when it resembles that fish."
E de lu es carn cancrosa, lapadea, de fusca color; e de lu es que es carn leon no de color fusca.	"And its flesh is cancerous, gangrenous, dark-colored; and it is said to be the flesh of a lion but not dark-colored."
Donc en aquela que es en aquestas carns leon no fraudulenta ni cancroza, cove que fassas le malaute sezer entre las tuas mas e posat al solelh, e huebre las nars de lu, e picoys le tieu onci en aquelas carns.	"Therefore in that which is in these lion-like flesh not fraudulent nor cancerous, you should cut the disease between your hands and place it in the sun, and open its nostrils and pierce its head where those flesh are."
E aprop extrat aquela a las partidas deforo, e aprop inscindeys aquo que has comprehendut de aquelas am spatum agut subtil de la una partida entro que sapias que tota la carn ja es ostada; que si roman de lu deguna causa de la qual la abscisio es possibla, lahoras tu ratz aquo am la un dels estrumentz subtils am facilitat entro que de lu romangua denguna causa.	"And then extract that from its boundaries, and also cut through what you have grasped of those with a sharp, subtle spatula, from one part where you knew all the flesh was removed; but if any cause remains for which amputation is possible, at that hour remove it with one of these instruments easily and skillfully where no cause remained."
Mays si senhoreja am sanc o accida apostema caut, lahoras tu pausa a lu aquo que cove; o es dels apostemas malignes, lahoras tu coyta e cauteriza aquel entro que sia abscindit sanc e sian ostadas las cavas totas.	"But if it is accompanied by sanctification or occurs an aposteme cautery, then you should apply to it what is necessary; but if they are malignant apostemes, then cut and cauterize it until it is amputated, the blood is stopped, and all the cavities are opened."
E aprop sia getatz en le nas aprop la inscizio vi agre e aygua o vi.	"And also let it be steeped in the nose with an incision of wine and water or vinegar."
Mays si le nas es ubert e de lu procezeys humiditat entro al palat, lahoras sapias que ja es sanat.	"But if the nose is open and there flows moisture into the palate from it, then you know that it is healed."
Mays si la humiditat no penetra segon que cove, lahoras tu sapias que dedintz lu es carn nada en los pus sobiras osses de las nars als quals non es pervengut abscizio.	"If moisture does not penetrate as it should, then you would know that the flesh within is corrupt beneath the elevated bones of the nose where no cauterization has been performed."
Donc lahoras cove que entromitas fiel de li al qual sia alcuna grosseza, e nuza en lu motz nuzes, e pausa entre quascun nutz la quantitat del dit o mens, e engene le malaute e entromet una extremitat del fiel en le nars am lo ray o am autra causa la qual es a lu possibla.	"Therefore, you should insert thick threads into the wound and tie each knot with the quantity of a finger or less. Then stretch the patient and insert one end of the thread into the nose along with wax or another suitable substance."
E pus que aquo aura fayt, que atire le sieu odorament entro que pervengua a las canals de las nars, e sia eyssit sobre le sieu golayro, quar tropas veguadas le semblant ad aquesta accio fan les enfantz a las scolas, e es leugiera causa ad aquel que ho vol far.	"And after that is done, cause the patient to sneeze so that the thread reaches the nostrils' canals. Then have them lie on their back, just as children do in schools when they practice this action. It will be easy for one who wants to do it."
E aprop pausa las dos extramitatz del fiel, una extremitat que iesca sobre le nas et l’autra que romangua en le nas, e aprop aministra serratura de carn am les nuzes que so en le fiel, e fay aquo entro que sapias que las carn ja so am les nuzes del fiel.	"And then tie the two ends of the thread, one that comes out of the nose and the other that remains inside. And also apply sutures of flesh to the knots on the thread, making sure that the flesh is already attached to the knots before you do this."
E aprop extratz le fiel, e pausa en le nas aprop la abstraccio del sanc una calgua , e fay aquo per tres dias o mays entro que l’enguent corrodo tot aquo que es romas de las carns.	"And then extract the thread, and pause its removal until after the extraction of blood from the nose once. Then do this for three days or more until the medicine has corrupted all that is rotting in the flesh."
E aprop en la fi de la causa, pausa en le nas una canula de plom per alscus jorns entro que sia sanat.	"And finally, at the end of the treatment, insert a lead cannula into the nose for several days until it is healed."
Mays si endigeys de curacio que exsique, usa de aquela.	"But if you find a dryness in the cure, use that one instead."
E aquesta es la forma del instrument a capipurge fazedor am le qual son distillatz olis e medicinas en le nars:	"And this is how to make the purge-causer instrument with which oils and medicines are distilled into the nostrils:"
E fay aquo de argent o de eram, la qual sia semblant a una petita lampesa uberta, ayssi cum petita conqua, e le meat semblantment.	"And make it of silver or brass, resembling a small open lantern, like a small jug, and the mouth similarly."
E si vols, fay una canula clausa ayssi cum cana, e la cancula del estrument a capipurge fazedor e sia plana, descuberta; a la qual sia manubre en lo derier de lu, am le qual tenguas aquela quan escaufas en lu oli o aquo que tu vols dels sucs e de las causas suctiblas.	"And if you wish, make it with a closed cannula like this (illustration), and the opening of the purge-causer instrument is flat and open. Then attach a handle at the end to hold it when you pour in oil or water or any other substance you want from the juices."
E aquestz capipurgi es precios: recipe de enforbi de castor, de balayra blanc, de giengiebre, e piletre de safra, de pebre lonc, de escafragia, de epetum de spic ana unc. vi cumfizeys am suc de bleda e de caul, e sian faytas pillulas, e sia destemprada una pillula am aygua tebeza, e sia gitat en las nars del malaute jasent envers.	"And this purge-causer is priced: take equal parts of castor oil, white balm, ginger, saffron, long pepper, asafetida, and spice nutmeg. Mix with the juice of beetroot and celery, and make pills from it. And administer one pill dissolved in hot water to the patient lying down."
Capitol .xxv.	"Chapter XXV."
De theyls natz en las extramitatz del nas.	"Of swellings born in the external parts of the nose."
Motas veguadas es nat theyl en las extramitatz del nas, e es magnificat e omentat en alscus dias entro en que mot es leg le reguardament de lu.	"It is very rarely seen that a swelling appears in the external parts of the nose. It can be treated and cured in a few days if it is seen early."
E per aquo cove que tu inscidas aquel en le comensament de la apparissio de lu, e erediques tot aquel.	"And for this reason, you should apply that (remedy) at the beginning of its appearance, and remove all of it."
E aprop pausa sobre le loc o cauteri o medicina comburent la qual estia en loc de lu.	"And then place cautery or medicine that burns where it is."
Mays si es tardada la sua inscizio entro que sia magnificat, lahoras considera si es lapificat, dur, de fusca color e de pauc sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel am ferr quar es apostema crancos; quar motas veguadas ad aquel que inscideys aquesta apostema endeve per lu granda malicia sobre aquel le qual aquel havia.	"But if the incision has been delayed until it is suppurated, then consider whether it is livid, hard, of dark color and insensitive. Then do not touch that with iron for it is a cancerous ulcer; for many times those who cut into this ulcer do great harm to him whom they had intended to heal."
E si le apostema es de leon tocament e no es de fosca color, e vezes que inscizio es possibla en tot aquel, lahoras evacua le malaute e inscideys aquel senes temor, e cura le loc am aquo que exsique e costrenh entro que sia sanat.	"And if the ulcer is caused by a lion's bite and not of dark color, and sometimes an incision can be made anywhere on it, then evacuate the illness and cut into that without fear, and dress the wound with something that dries and contracts until it is healed."
Capitol .xxvi.	"Chapter xxvi."
De sutura del nas e de las labias e de la aurelha quan la continuitat es dissolvuda per plagua o per semblantz.	"On the suture of the nose, lips, and ear when continuity has been destroyed by plague or injury."
Sapias que quan accideys solucio de continuitat en una de aquestas cartillages, pauc confereys en aquela operacio sino en alcus homes.	"You should know that when a solution of continuity occurs in one of these cartilages, little is gained from that operation except in some cases."
Donc cove, quan endeve ad alcu alcuna causa de aquelas, que consideres si es plagua fresca am le sieu sanc, e lahoras tu ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	"So if you encounter one of these cases, first examine whether it is a fresh plague with its usual sanguineous appearance. Then approximate the two lips of the wound by suture and apply dressings until healed."
E si las labias de solucio de continuitat so ja separadas, e quascuna es fayta sana, lahoras cove que tu excorjes quascuna partida de la sua codena apparent entro que n’iesca sanc.	"And if the lips of a solution of continuity are already separated and each is healthy, then you should excise each part of its apparent margin until no more blood flows."
E aprop ajusta las doas labias am sutura e strenh aquelas, e sobre aquelas pulveriza sanc de drago e enses trissat, e pausa sobre la polvera una pessa de emplaustra diafinicon, o de alcu autre dels emplastres consolidatius, e leyssa aquel liat per dos jorns o per tres, e aprop deslia aquel e permuta aquel emplaustre e leyssa aquel entro que·ls fiels per si sian abscinditz, e aprop cura am enguent entro que sia sanat.	"And then approximate the two lips by suture and strengthen them with a compress, dusting over it powder of dragon's blood and mastic. Then place on top of the powder a piece of plasters of diachylon or some other consolidative plaster, and leave it for two or three days. Then remove it and change the plaster, allowing the flesh to heal by itself. Finally dress with ointment until healed."
Mays la manieyra de la sutura es que tu agregues la solucio de continuitat o am agulhas ayssi cum havem recomtat en la sutura del ventre, o agregua la solucio de continuitat am fiel ayssi cum a tu e fayt saber.	"But the manner of suture is that you approximate the solution of continuity with needles as we have recommended in the suture of the belly, or use filiform sutures as you are accustomed to do."
Capitol .xxvii.	"Chapter xxvii."
De extraccio de aquela causas que veno en las doas labias en las partidas dedintz.	"On the extraction of those causes that appear between the two lips in wounds."
Motas veguadas endeve a motz homes en las partidas dedintz de las suas labias alcus apostemas durs semblantz a gras de errs, e alscunas de lors son mendres e alcunas son majors.	"Often seen in many men in wounds between the lips are hard abscesses resembling fatty tumors, some of which are small and others large."
Donc cove que tu convertas las labias e fendas quascuna de aquelas duricias de tota part, e aprop la abscizio umpliscas le loc de sagi trissat entro que·l sanc sia restrengut, e aprop sia lavat am vi agre e sia curat le loc am aquo que es stipticitat, entro que sia sanat.	"So you should incise the lips and open each of those hard swellings on all sides, then perform an abscess incision with bistoury until no more blood flows. Then wash the area with vinegar and dress it with astringent water until healed."
Capitol .xxviii.	"Chapter xxviii."
De inscizio de la carn ajustada en las gengivas.	"On incision of adherent skin in the gums."
Granre de veguadas nays sobre la gengiva carn ajustada la qual les antics apelero albulus, adonc cove que tu suspendas aquela am onci o que tenguas aquela am las forfecs e inscidas aquela deves la sua razit, e leyssas la sania correr o le sanc.	"Often happens that adherent skin covers the gum which anciently was called albus. Therefore you should elevate it with a hook or hold it with forceps and incise it along its length, allowing the healthy tissue to heal or the blood to flow."
E aprop pausa sobre le loc sagi trissat o autra polveras stipticas o excicativas.	"And then apply powdered bistoury or other styptic or caustic powders."
E si aquela carn retorna, lahoras inscideys aquela segundariament, e cauterisa aquela, quar aprop le cauteri no retornara.	"And if that skin returns, then incise it again and cauterize it so that it does not return."
Capitol .xxix.	"Chapter xxix."
De razo de dentz am ferr.	"On the causes of toothache with iron."
Quan en la superficia de las dentz de las partidas dedintz e de las de foro e entre las gingivas so ajustadas escorsas aspras, legas, e alcunas veguadas son de nigradas e son faytas citrinas o vertz entro que a la gingiva ve per aquo corrupcio e son faytas las dentz legas.	"When on the surface of teeth in wounds or furrows and between adherent gums there are rough, dry, dark spots, sometimes yellowish-green or greenish-yellow in color, which indicate corruption in the gum and the teeth are loose."
E donc cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute entre las tuas mas e pausar le cap de lu en le tieu se, e ratz las dents en las quals apareysso aquelas escorsas e causas semblantz arena entro que de lor no romangua deguna causa, e aquo fay de la negror e de la citrinitat e de las autras entro que sian mondificadas.	"And therefore you should press the pain between your hands and place the head of it in the nape of the neck, then scrape the teeth in which those rough spots appear until no cause remains. And this is done for the blackness and yellowness and other discolorations until they are cleaned."
Donc si es ostat aquo que es en aquelas del comensament de la razio, bo es; e sino, lahoras tu itera la razio sobre aquelas al autra dia e al segon e al tertz entro que vengua al derier stament en aquo que tu vols.	"Then if the cause of those conditions at the beginning of this chapter is removed, well and good. Otherwise, repeat the treatment on those teeth over another day and a second and third until you achieve your desired result."
E sapias que las dentz han necessitat de motz rezoris de diversas formas e de motas figuras segon que es preparat a la tua operacio.	"And know that teeth require many kinds of files with diverse shapes and figures, according to how they are prepared for your operation."
E per so quar le razori am le qual la dent es raza de la partida dedintz es autre del razori am le qual es ras entre las dentz segon autras formas, e aquestas formas de razoris sian deves tu preparadas las quals veyras tantost:	"And therefore the file with which you scrape a tooth from a wound is different from that used to rasp between teeth according to other forms. And these forms of files should be prepared by you as follows:"
Capitol .xxx.	"Chapter xxx."
D’eradicacio de dentz.	"On the removal of teeth."
Cove que tu cures la dent de la sua dolor am tot engen e tardes en tota eradicacio de lu, quar no es denguna causa que suplisqua la veguada de lu quan es eradicada, quar es sustancia sublima entro que es excusacio en la eradicacio de lu.	"You should care for the tooth with all diligence and patience in every extraction, because there is no cause that can excuse the pain when it is extracted, because it is a sublime substance whose removal causes suffering."
Mays cove quan le malaute es forsat aquela dent eradicar, que fermament deves tu sia certificat quala es la dent dolent, quar motas veguadas la dolor descep le malaute e cuga que sia en dent sana, e tu eradicas aquela e aprop la dolor no cessa entro que la dent malauta e dolent sia eradicada, quar nos ja havem vist aquo per operacio dels barbies.	"But when the pain forces the extraction of that tooth, you should be firmly certain which is the painful tooth, because often the pain seems to come from a healthy tooth and you extract it, but the pain does not cease until the diseased and painful tooth is extracted, as we have seen happen in operations by barbers."
Donc cum deves tu es sertificat qual es la dent dolent, e que o sabes be, lahoras cove que tu scarifiques en le circuit de la dent am spatum en le qual sia alcuna vertut, entro que sia dissolvut de la dent de la gingiva de tota partida, e aprop mau aquel am les tieus ditz, o am forfexs subtils al comensament petit a petit entro que aquela concucesquas.	"Therefore when you are certain which is the painful tooth and know it well, then scrape around the tooth with a spatula having some virtue in it until the gum surrounding the tooth is dissolved. Then grasp that tooth with your fingers or with subtle forceps little by little until it loosens."
E aprop alogua en lu fortz tenalhas grans per bona loquacio o estuptura fort, e pausa le cap del malaute entre les tieus denolhs que be le tengues que no·s maugua, e aprop tratz la dent segon rectitut en manieyra que no trenques aquela, ni al malaute major dolor no dones.	"And then take strong tenacula for good traction or sturdy leverage and place the head of the pain between your thumbs so that you hold it firmly without hurting it. Then pull the tooth straightly in such a way that you do not break it nor cause greater pain."
E donc si no es foro-getat, lahoras pren un de aquels instrumentz, e met aquel dejos lu de tota part am facilitat e esforsa la remocio de lu ayssi que es feyt al comensament.	"And if the tooth is not forgotten, then take one of those instruments and place it on both sides of it with ease and effort to remove it as was done at the beginning."
Mays si la dent es trauquada o corrosa, lahoras cove que tu comples de drap aquel trauc e estrenguas aquel am la extremitat de ray subtil per so que no sia trinquada en la hora de la tua constriccio sobre aquela am tenalas.	"But if the tooth is broken or decayed, then you should fill that breach with cloth and strengthen it with the end of a thin needle so that it does not break during your compression with forceps."
E cove que tu obres exquesitament am scarificacio en le circuit de tota part de la gingiva e guarda mot la tua fortaleza que no trenques aquela e romangua partida de lu, e retorne sobre le malaute per la malicia que sia majo que la primieyra dolor de lu.	"And you should work carefully with the scraping around the entire gum and guard your strength so that you do not break it nor cause greater pain than the original pain."
E guarda te que no fassas aquo que fan alscus ignorantz barbiers en lor fistinacio e audacia sobre la eradicacio de lor, ses que no aministran aquo que nos havem recomtat; quar motas veguadas fan venir sobre les homes malautias grans las quals son pus dificils que sian trinquadas, e las razitz de lor remaugudas totas, o alcunas de aquelas, o que extrayguas aquela am alcus osses de la mandigula ayssi cum motas veguadas havem testificat.	"And beware that you do not do what many ignorant and daring barbers do in their haste and audacity regarding extraction, without administering what we have recommended. For often they cause great illnesses in people which are harder to treat than the teeth themselves were to extract, and some leave behind entire roots or some of them, or remove a tooth with part of the jawbone as we have witnessed many times."
E aprop la eradicacio de lu sia lavada la boca am vi caut o vi agre am sal.	"And after the extraction has been washed, rinse the mouth with warm or vinegar water mixed with salt."
E si endeve fluxs de sanc per aysso, ayssi cum motas veguadas endeve, lahoras trissa alcuna quantitat de zegi e aspergeys sobre la plagua, e si no confereys aquel zegi, cauteriza.	"And if there is bleeding afterwards, as often happens, then sprinkle some quantity of powdered sage on the wound and apply it. And if the bleeding does not stop, cauterize."
La forma de las forceps e tenalas subtils am las quals es mauguda la dent al comensament sia de longua extramitat, de breu manubre e gros, per so que no sian doblatz quan am aquels deves obrar.	"The form of the forceps and subtle tenacula with which you grasp the tooth at the beginning should have a long extremity, short handle, and be thick so that they do not bend when you work with them."
E sian ayssi cum vezes de gros manubre entro que quan estrenhas am aquelas no sian dobladas, sian breus extramitatz.	"And they should be shaped like this: thick in the middle, tapering at both ends, so that when you grasp something with them, they do not bend and are short at the tips."
E sian faytas de ferr de India descentment faytas de dreytas extramitatz, e en las extramitatz de aquelas sian dentz de las quals las unas intron en las autras e estrenhan per constriccio descent fort, e alscunas veguadas las extramitatz de aquelas sian la forma del bec d’un auzel le qual ha nom ciconia, so es guanta, e son de fort constriccio.	"And they should be made of India iron, straight-edged, and have teeth on their extremities which interlock with each other to grasp tightly. Sometimes the extremities are shaped like a bird's beak called 'ciconia', that is, hooked, and provide strong grasping."
Capitol .xxxi.	Capital Thirty-One
De erradicacio de dentz e d‘estraccio dels osses de las mandibulas trincadas.	To remove wisdom teeth and extract trapped jaw bones.
Quan deves la eradicacio de dent le qual es trinquat roman alcuna causa, lahoras cove que tu pauses sobre le loc coto am boder per un jorn o per dos entro que·l loc sia mollificat; e aprop entromet algesti o tenalhas las extramitatz de las quals so asembladas al bec de un auzel apelat ciconia o guanta, la forma de las forceps:	When removing a tooth that is tightly clenched there may remain some cause for concern,
Las extramitatz de lor sian faytas dedintz ayssi cum lima o alfagi.	The limbs of the patient are affected as if by file or scourge.
E si no obediys a tu a eyssiment am aquestas forceps o tenalas, lahoras cove que tu caves sobre la razit e descrobas tota la carn e entrometas le instrument le qual ha nom atali, so es palanca petita del qual la forma es aquesta:	And if you do not obey the previous instructions with these forceps or tongs, then you should press on the razis and remove all flesh and insert this instrument called "tongs," whose shape is as follows:
E sia de breu extremitat grossa un petit, e no sia enbegut per so que no sia trinquat.	And it should be of short length and thick at the end, so that it is not inserted too deep to avoid injury.
Donc si per aquo la razit es foro-getada, bo es; e sino, ajuda te am aquestz autres instrument dels quals aquestas son las formas: la forma del primier instrument es de triangulada extramitat en la qual sia alcuna grossesa:	Therefore if the razis is torn away, it's good; and otherwise, help yourself with these other instruments whose shapes are as follows: the shape of the first instrument is triangular at the end, and has some thickness.
La forma del segon instrument es que sia de triangulada e de pus subtil extremitat.	The second instrument should have a triangular form and a very fine tip.
E ja so ajudatz am aquest instrument havent dos ramps del qual aquesta es la forma aprop la seguent:	And then, helped by this instrument having two branches whose shape is approximately as follows:
e am autres instrumentz les quals precidero en rasura de dentz; quar juvament es fayt am aquest instrument le qual es asemblat a onci gran, e aquesta es la forma:	and with other instruments which will be described later in the form of tooth-cutting blades; for they are useful in this procedure and have this shape:
de la triangulada extremitat torta o curta, la qual sia alcuna grossesa, e no sia enbegut per so que no sia trinquat.	of a triangular tip curved or short, which is somewhat thick, and should not be inserted too deep to avoid injury.
E otra sapias que·ls instrumentz de las dentz motz so e semblantment les autres instruments.	Also know that the instruments for removing teeth are similar in form to the other instruments.
Mays le artifexs savi e subtil en l’art, atroba per si mateys segon aquo que a lu significa la operacio e las malautias diversas; quar son de las malautias a las quals les antics no diysero ni pausero propri instrument, per las formas de diversas specias.	But the skilled and subtle artisan in this art will find for himself mates suitable to his purpose according to what he understands about the operation and various diseases; because there are diseases for which the ancients neither gave nor reserved any proper instruments due to the variety of their forms.
Mays si es trinquat l’os de la mandibula o dels autres osses de la boca, o si poyreys, lahoras sia pes curat sobre aquel en son loc am aquo que es a lu convenient dels instrumentz e de las forceps las quals havem dit en la extraccio de las razitz de las dentz, e ajuda te am gesti del qual aquesta es la forma:	But if the bone of the jaw or other bones of the mouth is injured or torn away, then it should be treated immediately with whatever is convenient of the instruments and forceps which we have mentioned for the extraction of dental roots. And help yourself with this gesture whose form is as follows:
E sia en lu alcuna grosseza petit a petit, e sia instringida o tenguda am la boca per que no evasesca o fuga entro que l’os de tot sia foro-getat; e aprop restaura le loc am medicinas convenientz ad aquo.	And gradually increase the pressure, holding it tightly with your mouth to prevent it from escaping or fleeing until the bone is completely healed. Then apply appropriate medicines to restore the area.
Mays si en l’os es petita poyredura, lahoras ratz aquel de aquela poyredura e de la sua negror, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	But if there is a small puncture in the bone, then remove that part of the bone with the puncture and its darkness, and treat it until it is healed.
Capitol .xxxii.	Chapter XXXII
De la cura de las dentz eminentz sobre las autras.	Of the care of prominent teeth above the others.
Quan las dentz so eminentz no segon lor cors natural per aquelas la forma es laga, e majorment quan endeve a las femnas, e majorment a las piuselas venerablas; donc cove que tu consideras: si dent es nada aprop autra dent, e no es possibla sarradura ni linament de lu, lahoras radica aquela; mays que no sia annexa am autra dent, lahoras tu inscideys aquela am aquest instrument del qual aquesta es la forma; e es semblant a morr de porc, e sia feyt de ferr de India de extramitat mot aguda.	When teeth protrude unnaturally from their natural course, especially in women, and more so in venerable elderly ones; therefore you should consider: if the tooth is not close to another, and it cannot be straightened or aligned, then its root must be removed. But if it is attached to another tooth, then cut that one with this instrument, which resembles a pig's bristle, made of Indian steel with an extremely sharp point.
E sia la tua inscizio am la qual inscideyses aquela en trops dias per la duricia de la dent, e que no sia comauguda autra de las dentz.	And your incision should be made in such a way that you cut through that tooth in three days due to its hardness, without damaging any other teeth.
E si es dent eminent expausat a limadura, lahoras lima aquel am lima de ferr de India del qual aquesta es la forma:	And if it's an erupted tooth to be filed down, then file it with this Indian steel file whose shape is like this:
E sia tot de ferr de India e·l margua eysament; e sia de motz menutz puntz ayssi cum lima am la qual son faytas agulhas, am la qual la dent sia limada pauc a pauc en motz dias am fecilitat, per so que no sia autra dent comauguda e caga.	And let it be made entirely of Indian steel with very sharp edges; and let its points be thus made like the teeth of a file, with which the tooth should be filed little by little over many days with ease, so that no other tooth is damaged or injured.
E aprop lineys aquela en la fi, e ratz aquela am alscus razoris.	And afterwards polish it off at the end and scrape it smooth with small rasps
E si es dent del qual una partida es trinquada e lideys la lengua, lahoras cove que tu limescas aquel entro que l’aspretat de aquela fraccio sia ostada e engualhada, e sia aplenada per so que la lengua no ledesca ni la paraula no corrumpa.	And if it's a tooth whose sharp edge is cutting the tongue and causing difficulty in speaking, then you should grind down that part until its sharpness is blunted and smoothed out, so that the tongue does not get hurt and speech is not impaired.
Capitol .xxxiii.	Chapter XXXIII
De restauracio de dentz maugudas am fiel de aur o de argent.	Of restoring broken teeth with gold or silver foil
Quan accideys a las dentz devant concussio e remossio per percussio o per cazament, e le malaute no pot strenher sobre aquo que manga, e tu has curat aquel am medicinas stipticas, e no ha valgut la tua curacio, lahoras per so que no cagan es engen en aquelas que sian strengudas am fiel de aur e no de argent, quar argent se fa vert e aprop se poyreys aprop alscus dias, mays aur nul temps no es mudat.	When teeth are broken off due to concussion and removal by percussion or falling, and the patient cannot chew properly despite your treatment with astringent medications, then you should restore those that can be strengthened with gold foil (and not silver), for silver will tarnish and darken over time, whereas gold never changes.
E sia le fiel en tal subtilitat e grocesa segon la quantitat que puesca entrar entre las dentz; e la forma de la reccio es que prenguas le fiel e pren lo doble de lu entre doas dentz sanas, e aprop que cresques am doas tortuositatz del fiel entre doas maugudas, o si’ una o motas, entro que pervengua la tela a la dent sana del autra partida.	And let the foil be made so thin and fine according to the amount that can fit between the teeth. And the method of applying it is as follows: take the foil and fold it double lengthwise between two healthy teeth, and then twist it in two places between the broken teeth or one if there are fewer, until the foil reaches the healthy part of the other tooth.
E aprop itera le teyssiment entro a la partida de la qual comenciest, e strenh la tua ma am facilitat e savieza entro que no sia mauguda.	And then repeat the twisting movement within the broken portion where you began, using your hand with gentleness and skill so that nothing is broken further.
E sia la tua striccio am la qual strenhas le fiel deves las razitz de las dentz que no evasesca.	And let your pressure be such that you hold the foil tightly against the roots of the teeth, but do not squeeze it out between them
E aprop inscindeys las extramitatz del fiel superfluens am las forceps o tosoyras, e agregua aquelas en quascun loc am gesti, e converteys aquelas e las occulta entre la dent sana e la dent mauguda, per so que no fassa lesio a la lengua.	And then cut off the excess ends of the foil with forceps or scissors, and push those pieces back into their places with your fingers, and tuck them in between the healthy tooth and the broken one, so that they do not cause injury to the tongue.
E aprop leyssa aquela ayssi streyta cum roman.	And then let it remain thus tightly as if glued together
Mays si es desliada o rumpuda, strenh aquela o aquelas am autra fiel en tal manieyra en tot son temps.	But if it becomes loose or breaks off, reinforce it or them with more foil in the same manner at all times.
E aquesta es la forma de las dentz e la figura de la rectacio de doas dentz sanas e de doas maugudas, ayssi cum vezes aquestas liadas:	And this is how you repair two healthy teeth and two broken ones, as shown in this diagram:
E quan se fa que retorno una dent o doas aprop le cazement de quascuna en lors locs, e sian recrescutz ayssi cum havem recomtat, e que remauguan.	And when a tooth or two return to their proper places after falling out and have been rebuilt as described earlier, but still remain loose
E no fa aquo sino bo artifexs e savi.	Then only an experienced and skillful artisan can accomplish this
E alcunas veguadas es aptat alcuna causa dels osses de vaca, e es fayt de lor ayssi cum forma de dent, e es pausada en loc en le qual defayl la dent, e es strengit ayssi cum havem dit, e reman e serveys am aquel per lonc temps.	Sometimes it happens that bones from cattle are suitable for this purpose, and they can be shaped like teeth and placed in the location where the tooth is missing. They are then secured in place with gold foil as previously described, and remain there serving well for a long time
Capitol .xxxiv.	Chapter XXXIV
De inscizio del liament le qual ve en la lengua e prohibeys loquela.	On incision of the frenulum that causes difficulty in speech.
Aquest liguament le qual ve dejos la lengua alcunas veguadas o es natural am le qual hom nays, o accidental e accideys per plagua la qual ja es consolidada.	This frenulum that hangs below the tongue sometimes may be present naturally or may occur accidentally due to scar tissue that has already healed.
E la operacio en lu es que huobres la boca del malaute, le sieu cap existent en le tieu se; e eleva la sieua lengua, e aprop inscideys aquel liament nervos segon la latitut entro que sia solvuda la lengua de la sua recencio.	The procedure is as follows: open the patient's mouth with your hand under his chin, raise his tongue gently, and then incise the frenulum transversely until the tongue is freed from its attachment.
Mays si en aquela es alcuna duricia o denodacio, e aquo es stat per consolidacio de plagua, lahoras tu gieta unci e scindeys aquel per la latitut entro que aias inscindit le liament e sia dissolvuda la nodacio.	But if there is hardness or toughness in that area due to scar tissue from previous injury, then take an awl and cut through it transversely until you have completely incised the frenulum and released the toughened tissue.
E guarda te que no sia fayta fissura en le preon de la carn e que scindas aqui arceria e vengua flux de sanc.	Take care not to make a deep incision in the front of the flesh, for this could cause bleeding.
E aprop sia lavat le vestigi de la inscisio am ayguaros o am vi agre o am aygua frega; e aprop pausa dejos la lengua licini; so es meca la qual tengua le malaute dejos la lengua en quascuna nuoyt per so que no sia consolidat autra veguada.	Then rinse the site of the incision with warm water or vinegar and water, or with salted water to prevent infection. Afterwards, apply a dressing of linen over the tongue to protect it from becoming adherent again in the future.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc, pausa sobre le loc vetriol trissat; mays si le sanc ventz, lahoras cauteriza le loc am cauteri lantiginos le qual conveneys ad aquo.	But if bleeding occurs, apply a dressing of lint soaked in vinegar to the area. If the bleeding continues, then cauterize the location with a silver caustic pencil that is suitable for this purpose.
E aprop aquel cura am las autras causas entro que sia sanat.	And then treat it with other remedies as appropriate until it is healed.
Capitol .xxxv.	Chapter XXXV
De extraccio de ranula dejos la lengua.	On the removal of a ranula from beneath the tongue
Alcunas veguadas accideys dejos la lengua apostema asemblant a nomla petita prohibent la lengua de la sua operacio natural; e fort leu es magnificada entro que huempla la boca.	Sometimes, an abscess resembling a small tumor appears under the tongue and interferes with its natural movement. When this happens, it is difficult to open one's mouth wide.
E la operacio en lu es que huebras la boca del malaute sesent devant le solel e considera le apostema.	The procedure is as follows: have the patient sit facing the sun and examine the tumor carefully.
E si tu le vezes de fusca color o de negra, dur, al qual le malaute no atroba sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel quar es cranc.	If it appears dark in color or black, hard, and if the patient feels no pain, then do not touch it because it is a cancer.
E si es declinat a blancor, en le qual es humiditat, lahoras tu met le onci en lu, e inscideys aquel am spatum subtil, e inscindeys le de tota partida; e si sanc te ventz en la hora de la tua operacio, lahoras tu pausa desus zegi trissat, so es vetriol, entro que sia restreyt le sanc.	But if it appears white and feels moist, then insert an awl into it, incise it with a sharp instrument, and cut it completely away. If bleeding occurs during the procedure, apply a dressing soaked in vinegar to stop the flow of blood.
E aprop retorna a la obra tua entro que lo haias trayt am compliment de lu, entro que sia lavat am vi agre e sal; e cura aquel am l’autra curacio ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	Then return to your work and remove it completely with the help of others, taking care to wash the area with vinegar and salt afterwards. Then treat it with other appropriate remedies until it is healed.
Capitol .xxxvi.	Chapter XXXVI
De extraccio de apostema de doas aurelhas e de aquel que es nada en le golayro e de las autras apostemas.	"The extraction of an abscess from both ears and that which is found in the groin, as well as other abscesses."
Quan endeveno en le golayro godat, so son glandulas las quals son asembladas algodat, las quals accideysso deforas e son nompnadas doas aurelhas, las quals quan tu las curas am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no es sanat, lahoras tu considera si le apostema es dur, de fusca color, de pauc sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel am ferr.	"When an abscess forms in the groin, it is called a gland that has accumulated some time ago. These often occur outside and are named 'two ears.' If you treat them with what we have mentioned in the division but they do not heal, then consider if the abscess is hard, dark-colored, and insensitive. Then do not touch it with an iron."
E si es de roga color e la razic es grossa, lahoras no toques aquela am ferr per le flux del sanc; abantz layssa aquel entro sia madurat, e lahoras o tu trauqueras aquel, o sira romput per si.	"And if it is red in color and the root is large, then do not touch it with an iron due to the flow of blood. Let it be left alone until it ripens, and then you will remove it, or else it will break open on its own."
E si es de blanqua color, radon, e la razit de lu es subtil, lahoras aquel es que cove esser inscidit.	"And if it is white in color, round, and its root is thin, then that one should be incised."
E la operacio en lu es que consideras, denant la tua operacio, si ja ha repausat le apostema de lu caut am repaus complit o si es deminuit am alcuna deminucio; e lahoras fay sezer le malaute denant le soleyl, e·l cap de lu sia en le tieu se, e huebre la boca de lu, e le servidor prenent entre las suas mas prema la lengua de lu dejos am instrument mot noble del qual aquesta es la forma:	"And the operation on it is to consider, before the operation, if the abscess has already been allowed to rest with complete rest or if it has decreased somewhat. Then make the incision facing the sun, and have its head tilted downwards. Open its mouth widely, and the assistant takes a cloth between his fingers and presses the tongue of the patient gently with a noble instrument whose shape is as follows:"
E sia fayt de argent o de aram, e sia subtil cum cotel.	"And it should be made of silver or copper, thin like a razor."
Donc cum tu premes am aquel la lengua e es mostrat a tu la apostema, e catz sobre aquel le tieu vezement, lahoras pren onci e fica aquel en l’amenla, e tira aquel a las partidas defora tant quant podes.	"Therefore, when you press with that the tongue and reveal the abscess, and kneel over it gently, then press down on it and insert your finger into it. Then pull it outwards in all directions as much as possible."
Otra aquo que tiras alcuna causa de las tunicas, e aprop incideys aquela am instrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	"Then, if you remove some of the tunics, and wish to incise with that instrument whose shape is this:"
e es asemblat a forceps, empero las extramitatz de lu son corvadas, ayssi que l’orrifici de quascuna de aquelas es en le endreyt del autra, mot agudas, le qual sia de ferr indi enbegut.	"And is shaped like forceps, but its extremities are curved so that the sharp edge of each one is directed towards the other, very sharp, and it should be made of forged iron."
Mays si aquest instrument no es a tu present, lahoras inscideys aquel am spatum del qual aquesta es la forma de lu: E sia agut de la una part, no agut del autra part.	"But if that instrument is not available to you, then incise with this spatula whose shape is as follows: it should be sharp on one side and not sharp on the other."
E pus que has inscidit una mella, inscideys l’autra segon aquesta meteyssa manieyra de inscizio, e aprop la inscizio le malaute guarguarise de aygua frega	"And after you have made one incision, make another according to this same method of incising. Then clean the wound with water that has been boiled."
Mays si endeve flux de sanc, guarguarise aygua de decoccio de scorsa de milgrana o de fuelha de mirtra e semblantz ad aquel de las causas stiptiquas entro que·l flux del sanc sia restreyt, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	"But if there is a flow of blood, cleanse it with water from a decoction of wormwood or myrtle leaves, similar to those substances that have astringent properties so that the flow of blood may be restricted. Then treat it until it heals."
E alcunas veguadas naysso en le guolayro autras apostemas otra aquelas doas aurelhas, e inscideys aquelas segon que yeu e dit en la inscizio de doas mellas engualment.	"And sometimes in the groin appear other abscesses besides those of the ears, and incise them according to what has been said about the incision of two equal swellings."
E yeu ja fu medicat una femna de apostema le qual era nat en le golayro de lu, le qual apostema tendia a color fusca, de pauc sentiment, le qual ja havia claus le golayro de lu, e la femna respirava am meat streyt, e ja havia prohibit a lu comestio e beure de aygua, e ja era pervenguda a la mort si mays agues stat per un dia o per dos.	"And there was once treated a woman with an abscess that had appeared in her groin. This abscess was dark-colored and little sensitive, and the groin had already been closed up. The woman breathed with difficulty, nourishment and water had been prohibited to her, and she was close to death if not for one or two days more."
E l’apostema ja tant havia pugat que havia mezes dos ramps entro que eyssiro per dos traucs.	"And the abscess had already grown so much that it had extended through two months, having broken out through two openings."
Donc yeu me cuytegui fisturalment e fiquegui en un de lor onci, e tiregui aquel, e atirada es de lu gran porcio, e aprop yeu incidigui aquela de on comprendegui del autre trau, e aprop yeu obrigui la boca de lu, e compremegui la sua lengua, e aprop yeu fiquegui le onci en aquela apostema.	"Therefore, I extracted it surgically and remained in one of their orifices, and pulled out that which was drawn from a large part, and immediately I inserted this into the other track where it understood, and then I opened its mouth, compressed its tongue, and finally placed the orifice in that abscess."
E aprop yeu abscizi gran partida de lu, e no corria de lu sino un pauc de sanc.	"And you also cut off a large part of him, from which hardly any blood flowed."
Donc absolut es le guolayro de aquela femna, e comensec tantost beure aygua, e aprop presec vianda, donc yeu no cessegui inscidir de aquela apostema motas vetz per lonc temps, e succesia apostema en loc de aquel, le qual inscizia entro que es prolonguat aquel.	"Soon enough the woman recovered from that illness and began drinking water again, and also ate food. And I continued to examine that abscess many times over a long period of time, and it eventually healed in its place, although it left behind a scar."
Donc yeu engen agui e cauterizegui le guolayro de lu, donc astec de addicio; e aprop yeu perambulegui e no saubi que fec Dieus de aquela aprop mi.	"So I applied heat and cauterized the wound on him, and then added a dressing; but later, as I walked about, I did not know what God had done to that man."
Capitol .xxxvii.	"Chapter XXXVII."
De inscizio de huvela quan es apostemada.	"Of the examination of a swollen gland when it is abscessed."
Quan catarr deysen a la huvula, e es apostemada e es longa, lahoras ela es nompnada perpendicular; e si es en la partida dejos grossa e redonda, e lahoras ela es apelada buba.	"When pus flows from the gland, and it is abscessed and elongated, then it is called a carbuncle. But if it is located in the thick fatty tissue and is rounded, then it is called a boil."
Mays quan es curada am aquo que havem dit en la divisio, e no comfereys la tua curacio, e eyssament ja vezes que apostema caut ja es ostat de lu e es subtil, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquela que es agreguadas redonda; e si es ad aquela longitut, e es sanguina, de fusca color o de negre, e no es a lu centiment, lahoras cove que tu temtes la inscizio de lu, quar en aquela es temor sobre le malaute.	"But when it is cured with the treatment we have mentioned and does not heal as expected, especially if an abscess that has been cauterized still remains and is deep-seated and subtle, then you should incise the one that is attached roundly. And if it is of that length and it oozes blood, which is dark-colored or blackish, and it does not improve at all, then you should be cautious about examining it, for there is fear of severe illness in that."
E quan tu vezes aquela segon la manieyra que yeu he dita de la sua blancor e longuesa, que tu fassas sezer le malaute e premas la lengua de lu am instrument del qual procesic la sua forma e aprop fica le onci en la nuva, e tira aquela en jos e inscideys aquela am un de dos instrumentz les quals e ditz en la inscizio de dos mellas.	"And when you find it according to the manner I have described as being white and elongated, then make sure that you alleviate the illness by pressing its tongue with an instrument of such shape that you can place your finger on it at once, and pull it downwards and incise it with one of those instruments used for the incision of boils."
E cove que no inscidas aquela sino aquo que es ajustat sobre le terme natural ses addicio, quar si tu inscides de lu mays, lediyras le sieu parlar.	"And you should not incise more than what is appropriate to its natural extent without adding anything, for if you incise too much, you will destroy it."
E aprop la inscizio, usa de aquo le qual havem recomtat en la inscizio de dos mellas, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	"And during the incision, use what we have recommended in the incision of boils, and treat it until it is healed."
Mays si era le malaute espaventat per la inscizio de lu, cove que use de engen en la cauterizacio de lu ses temor, e la manieyra del cauteri en lu no es sino am aygua aguda, e es que tu pauses le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop prem la lengua de lu am le instrument le qual havem dit, e aprop pren de l’aygua la qual havem dita en le capitol de cauterizacio, e comfeys am aquela caus viva, e pausa aquela no spessa ni subtil, e de aquela omple la concavitat de l’estrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	"But if the illness is frightened by the incision of it, then you should use a cautery on it without fear, and the manner of cauterizing it is not other than with sharp water. And thus: take hold of the head of the illness in its thick part, and press its tongue with the instrument we have mentioned, and take some of the hot water that we have spoken of in the chapter on cautery, and apply it with that live coal, pouring it onto the thickness or subtlety of it, and fill up the concavity of the instrument, which has this shape:"
Sia la extramitat de lu conquavitat en la qual sia pausada la medicina ayssi cum la conquavitat de culher de ray, e pausa le strument am la medicina sobre la vula, e·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu latz per so que corro saliva o musellage de la boca de aquel per la intrinscequa medicina, per so que no deyssenda de aquela deguna causa sobre le golayro de lu e que ledesca aquel.	"The extremity of the concavity in which the medicine is placed should be as round as that of a spoon, and place the instrument with the medicine onto the wound. And let the illness lie on its side so that saliva or mucus from its mouth does not enter through the opening of it for some reason, lest it cause harm to it."
E aprop te la tua ma am la medicina, e exprem aquela sobre la uvula per l’espazi de miega hora entro que vegas aquela esser denegrada e sedada per la mordicacio de la medicina.	"And then place your hand on the medicine and press it onto the uvula for half an hour until you see that it has become blackened and satisfied by the biting of the medicine."
E si vols, prengues coto e envolopes aquel sobre la extremitat del ray, e submergeys le coto en la medicina, e entrometas le ray am le coto en una canula de sobre entro que·l coto adheresca en aquela canula, e fay aquo tantas vetz entro que consiegues aquo que vols de la cauterizacio de la uva, e aprop leyssa aquela quar ela se seccara e cayra aprop tres dias o quatre.	"And if you wish, take cotton and wrap it around the extremity of the ray, and immerse the cotton in the medicine. Then insert the ray with the cotton into a tube that is thin enough so that the cotton adheres to it. Do this several times until you achieve what you want from the cautery of the wound, and then leave it alone because it will dry up and fall off after about three or four days."
E si indigeysses que iteras la medicina, itera aquela, e aprop la cauterizacio abstergeys en le circuit de la uva am coto enbegut en boder, e mondifica am aquel aquo que es en le circuit de lu de la medicina, e sia lavat am aygua frega, e sia curat deforo am embrocacio, e dedintz am guarguarismes entro que sia sanat.	"And if you need to repeat the medicine, repeat it. And during the cautery, cleanse around the wound with cotton dipped in border. Then wipe away what remains of the medicine from the area around it with that same cotton, rinse it with warm water, and afterwards treat it with embrocation, and then bandage it until it is healed."
E aquesta especia de curacio es pus salva que inscizio e pus long de temor.	"And this kind of cure has been preserved for us that incision and pus are fearful."
Alcunas veguadas es curada la uvuola am aquo que es pus subtil que cauteri e inscizio, quar es curat am subfumigacio en aquesta manieyra: recipe calament, ysop, origua, ruda, scicados arabic, camamilla, broyda e semblant ad aquels de las erbas, e ajusta totas aquelas causas, o alcunas de lor, en una ola, e sian submergidas am vi agre, e bulhan; e la ola sia be lutada am lut decentment, e sia en le mieg loc de la ola un trauc, sobre le qual sia pausat un instrument conquau de aram segon aquesta manieyra; sia fayt de argent o de aram.	"Sometimes the uvula is cured with something so subtle that cautery and incision are fearful. For it is treated by inhalation in this manner: take calamint, hyssop, origanum, rue, saffron, chamomile, and similar herbs of those kinds, and adjust all or some of them in an earthenware pot, and submerge them with sour wine, and boil them. And the pot should be well luted on the outside with good clay, and there should be a tube in the middle of it, over which is placed a concave instrument made of silver or brass."
E sia entromesa la extremitat en la boca del malaute entro que la vapor poge a la uvula sobre la quanula, entro que la uvula sia mot ofuscada.	"And insert the extremity into the mouth of the sick one so that the vapor can reach the uvula above it until the uvula becomes moistened."
E aprop itera sobre aquela motas veguadas entro qu’es secca, e guarda te que no fassas aquesta curacio al comesament de l’aveniment de apostemas, quar trop ajustaria en le apostema, e no cove que tu fassas aquo, sino deves la declaracio de apostema de lu caut.	"And then repeat this several times until it becomes dry again. And be sure that you do not perform this cure at the beginning of an occurrence of apostumes, for it would too tightly fit onto the apostume and therefore you should not do this, but rather declare the cautery of the apostume."
Mays si no es a tu present aquest instrument, lahoras pren una cana e compon en la extramitat de lu un clos de huou, per so que la boca del malaute sia comborida, quar le closc del huou prohibeys la vapor comburir la boca.	"But if you do not have this instrument present, then take a reed and put a wad of cotton at its extremity, so that the mouth of the sick one is covered because the wad of cotton prevents the steam from burning the mouth."
E aquesta curacio es bona am salut.	"And this cure is good for health."
Capitol .xxxviii.	"Chapter XXXVI."
De extraccio d’espinas e de aquo que adhereys en le golayro e de las autras causas.	Of the extraction of splinters and of that which adheres in the wound and of other causes.
Motas veguadas adhereys en le guolayro o spina de peys o alcuna autra causa.	Many times there adhere in the wound a fishbone or a thorn or some other cause.
Adonc cove que tu extraguas aquo que de aquels es apparent, sobre le qual catz la vista, pus que tu premes la lengua am instrument denant solelh, per so que a tu sia declarat aquo que es en la guola.	Therefore you must extract that which is apparent of them, on which the sight falls, because you press the tongue with an instrument towards the sun so that what is in the wound may be declared to you.
E aquo que no apar e es a tu occultat en le guolayro, cove que tu fassas vomir le malaute denant que la vianda sia degerida en l’estomac, quar fort leu la causa annexsa le golayro sira foro-getada per vomit; o que deglusia le malaute una pessa de nap o de razit de laytuga o un boci de pa sec; o prengua una pessa de sponga marina sequa leon, e lia aquela fortment am fiel, e aprop le malaute transglussia aquela, quar cum perve al loc en le qual so spinas e es extrahuda, lahoras so foro-getatz.	And that which is not apparent and is hidden in the wound, it behooves you to make the sick one vomit before the food has been digested in the stomach because the cause annexed to the wound will be expelled by vomiting. Or let the sick one swallow a piece of walnut or radish leaf or a mouthful of dry bread; or take a piece of dried sea sponge, and tie it strongly with pitch, and then have the sick one swallow that because when it reaches the place where its spines are located, they will be extracted, and therefore they will be forgotten.
E mays pren una anguila e be am fiel liada, e sia dedintz mesa e soptament sia extrayta; o pren un porr e soptament le metas e soptament l’en tratz.	And more you can take an eel and tie it with pitch, and afterwards place it in the wound and gently extract it. Or take a syringe and gently insert it and then gently withdraw it.
Mays si no so foro-getatz am aquelas causas las quals havem ditas, lahoras husa de un instrument de plom segon aquesta forma:	But if they are not forgotten with those causes which we have mentioned, then you must use an instrument of lead made in this form:
E sia pus gros que ray un petit, e en la extramitat de lu sia conquavitat la qual tu entrometas en la sua guola am facilitat.	And let it be a little thicker than a small finger, and at its extremity there should be concavity which you insert into the wound gently.
E el aga le sieu cap elevat en sus, e guarda te que·l tocament del sieu os de la gola, per so que endevengua a lu cos e am aquela que enpellesca le os o la spina, o que aquel le metge am la sua ma.	And let him raise his head up high, and see to it that the touch of its bone does not affect the flesh or that which envelops the bone or the splinter itself because that doctor touches it with his hand.
Mays empero que·l malaute aquel entrometa es miels, per la sua sciencia del loc de la causa annexa e enpellisca en jos, e tira la sua ma am le instrument en sus, tot aquo segon la quantitat la qual es a lu preparada entro que sia foro-getada.	But nevertheless let the sick one insert it himself better, because of his knowledge of the place where the cause adheres and envelops itself in him, and pull his hand with the instrument upwards until everything is forgotten which was prepared there.
Capitol .xxxix.	"Chapter 39."
De extraccio de sancguisugua annexsa al golayro.	"On the removal of sanguinary tumors attached to the gallbladder."
Quan es medicada sanguisugua am aquo que havem dit en la divisio de la curacio am medicinas e no comfereys, considera lahoras en le guolayro del malaute al solelh, pus que tu aias compremuda la lengua de lu am instrument le qual a tu havem recomtat.	"When the sanguinary tumor is treated with medicines as previously mentioned in this division on treatment and does not improve, consider the time of day when it occurs in relation to the sun, because you have understood the tongue of the patient using the instrument that we have recommended."
Donc si tu vezes la sancguisugua, extratz aquela am onci petit o am gesti subtils decentment.	"Therefore, if you wish to remove the sanguinary tumor, do so with gentle force or subtle gestures appropriately."
E si no es a tu possible estrayre am aquel, lahoras pren una canula concava e entromet aquela en lo guolayro del malaute, e aprop pausa en la concavitat de la canula un ferr ignit, e fay aquo tantas vetz (entro que la sancguisugua sia morta e se osta del guolayro) e abstengua se le malaute tot lo jorn de aygua.	"And if it is not possible for you to remove it in that way, then take a concave cannula and insert it into the gallbladder of the patient, and properly place inside the concavity of the cannula an ignited iron instrument, doing this many times (until the sanguinary tumor is dead and removed from the gallbladder), and afterwards abstain from giving the patient any water all day."
E aprop prengua una veyria plena de aygua frega, e obra la boca de lu en aquela, e lava la boca am aquela; e no trasglucia de aquela alcuna causa e maugua l’aygua una hora aprop autra am la sua ma, quar la sancguisugua tantost cum sent l’aygua catz.	"And then take a vessel full of water and apply the mouth of it to that (the cannula), and wash out the mouth with it; do not spill any of that water, but keep it in its vessel for an hour or so more, because the sanguinary tumor is immediately attracted by water."
Mays si no es foro-getada am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras subfumigua le malaute am cimetz o am assafetida per le instrument le qual havem recomtat en la sufumiguacio de uvula.	"But if it is forgotten in this procedure that we have recommended, then fumigate the patient with incense or asafetida using the instrument that we have recommended for the fumigation of the uvula."
Fay aquo, so en quar cayra.	"Do this, and thus you will be cured."
E es un’autra manieyra de operacio en sufumiguacio de aquela, es que tu prenguas una ola en la qual sian carbos ignitz e la ola sia cuberta am una cobertora en le mieg de la qual sia un trauc, e sia compausat en aquel trauc la extremitat del instrument; e aprop dega desus la subfumigacio; e pause le malaute la sua boca en la extremitat de la canula, e claugua la sua boca per que la subfumiguacio no sia foro-getada entro que sapias que la subfumigacio es pervenguda a la sancguisugua, quar la sancguisugua tantost cayra.	"And another method of operation in the suffumigation of that (the patient), is to take an earthenware vessel in which there are burning coals, and the vessel be covered with a cover having a hole in its middle, through which the extremity of the instrument should be placed; and immediately raise the suffumigation; and place the patient's mouth at the end of the canula, and close their mouth so that the suffumigation is not forgotten until you know that it has reached the sanguisugua (the bloodstream)."
E si no catz, lahoras tu itera la subfumiguacio motas vetz, e abstengua le malaute de beure, e mange causas saladas e alhs, e no begua aygua, e ayssi necessari es que am aquest regiment sia fora-getada.	"And if not so, then repeat the suffumigation many times, and withhold water from the patient, let them eat salted foods and almonds, and do not give them water; and thus it is necessary that this regimen be forgotten."
E aquesta es la forma del instrument am le qual es trayta sancguisugua del guolayro quan es vista; e es semblant a forceps ayssi cum vezes, sino quar es en lu alcuna curvitat:	"And this is the form of the instrument with which blood is drawn from the vein when it appears; and it resembles forceps thus much, except that it has some curvature:"
le qual sia mesa al guolayro, e la extremitat de lu es semblant a bec de ciconia, que es guanta, en la qual es aspretat de lima, per so quar, quan comprem alcuna causa, aquela no leyssa.	The joint pain is placed on the trigger, and its end resembles a stork's beak, which is called a glove, in which sandpaper is sharpened.
Capitol .xl.	Here comes the next sentence to translate:
En le qual es la suma del sermo en apercio de apostemas e en seccio de lor.	In which the sum of speech in regard to apostemes (abscesses) and their incision is contained.
Les apostemas so motas specias, de motas manieyras, segon que ve rememoracio de lor, de quascuna en aquest libre.	Abscesses are many species, with many different treatments according to the remembrance of them, each one mentioned in this book.
E so diversas en perforacio e seccio de lor per doas manieyras, de las quals la una es per la specia de apostemas en si meteys; e per aquo que comprem de las humiditatz.	And so diverse are they in perforation and incision of them by two methods, one of which is for the species of internal abscesses; and the other, what we receive from humidity.
E la segonda manieyra es prop les locs en les quals accideys del cos, quar le apostema accident en le cap es autra de la apostema accident en le cul; e le apostema en le loc carnos accident es autra del apostema accident en junctura; e a quascun de lor es son juguament per operacio.	And the second method is appropriate for the places where accidents of the body occur, because the abscess that happens in the head is different from the one that happens in the buttocks; and the one that happens in the fleshy location is different from the one that happens at a joint; and each one has its own treatment through operation.
E mays de apostemas so alcunas las quals cove que no sian perforadas sino aprop maturacio de la sania en aquels o compliment de lor.	And more about abscesses: some of them should not be perforated, but rather waited for their ripening or completion on their own.
So autras apostemas les quals cove que sian traucatz quan son cruzes, e no son maturatz segon lor compliment, ayssi cum apostemas que son propdas a las juncturas, quar apostema quan ve prop junctura, lo esser de lu es prolonguat entro que·s poyreys aquo que es en le circuit de lu, e fort leu son corromputz les liamentz o les nervis de aquela junctura, per que es fayta causa de contraccio de aquel membre; o es apostema prop de membre principal, e si tu tardas la perforacio de lu entro sia madurat nosira al membre principal; o es prop le cul, donc perfora aque no-madurat; e no cove que·l perforas cru, de no-complida degestio, sino aquel que es prop del cul, per so que no poyresca le preon de lu e sia elonguat a las partidas dedintz del cul, e sia fayta fistula, o que sia fayt en le terme de lu que no sia sanat.	There are other abscesses that should be removed when they are hard and not yet ripe according to their completion, like those close to joints. For when an abscess is near a joint, its essence extends into what is around it, and often the ligaments or nerves of that joint are corrupted by it, causing contraction of that member; or if it is near a principal member, delaying the perforation until it is ripe causes harm to the principal member; or if it is near the buttocks, then perforate it without waiting for it to be fully digested. You should not perforate it raw and incompletely digested, except when it is near the buttocks, so that you do not damage its front and prolong it into the inner parts of the buttocks, causing a fistula or making it unsanitary in its term.
Mays cove que tu sapias la hora de la perforacio de la apostema, e aysso es quan es maturat.	You should know that the time for perforating an abscess is when it has ripened.
E sapias que es madurat quan es la cedacio de la dolor e la cessacio de la febre, e aprop la diminucio de la rogor e de la pulsacio, e la acuitat del cap del apostema, e les autres senhals.	You should know that an abscess has ripened when there is a decrease in pain and fever, as well as a reduction of heat and swelling around it, and when the head of the abscess becomes pointed, and other signs appear.
E quar cove que sapias la perforacio cazer en le loc pus dejos del apostema e de pus venient de curacio de la eminencia.	You should know that the incision to drain an abscess should be made where there is less skin over the abscess and away from its head, avoiding the emission of pus during healing.
E perforacio tostemps sia per le lonc de la carn o del cors, si las apostemas son en las partidas de las mas o dels pes, e en loc dels lacertz, de las cordas dels nervis, de las arcerias; e, al derier, en totz locs enguals en les quals no es reflecio; quar en aquels que so reflectitz, usa de perforacio segon aquel membre.	Always perform an incision along the length of the skin or body if the abscess is located on the thigh or leg, and avoid places where there are nerves, arteries, or joints. In all other locations, make the incision accordingly to that member.
Mays quan le apostema es en loc carnos, lahoras miels es que leysses la perforacio de lu entro que sia confermada la digestio de lu segon compliment, ayssi quo havem dit; quar si tu perforas aquel denant aquo, es prolonguat le cors del poyre de lu e de mota sordicia, e fort leu las labias de lu so enduradas e la profunditat de lu.	When the abscess is in a fleshy location, it's better to leave its perforation until digestion is confirmed after completion, as we have said; for if you perforate that before, the pus from it will spread out much filthily, and strongly its lips are hardened and its depth increased.
Mays alcus apostemas so perforatz segon la latitut de la carn o del cos deves la necessitat, o segon aquo del qual lo membre indigeys.	Moreover, abscesses that have been pierced according to the extent of the flesh or body's need, or according to what the member requires.
E cove que administres petita perforacio , e·n les apostemas grans gran perforacio e ampla o motas seccios segon la diversitat de la grandesa dels apostemas.	You should make small perforations for small abscesses, large ones for large abscesses with wide openings or multiple incisions according to the diversity of their size.
E autras so dels apostemas en les quals cove que la codena sia conquavada e sia encidida, quan es fayta ayssi quo pan e fayta es en terme que ja stigua, ayssi cum aquel que accideys en trops de dubelec e de bubos.	And there are those abscesses in which the skin must be drawn together and incised when they are about to burst, like those that occur suddenly as in cases of impetigo or boils.
E de aquels so que so insciditz am seccio havent tres angles; e de aquels es en le qual es inscidit ayssi cum figura de fuelha de mirtra, ayssi cum las apostemas dels angonars.	And there are those that are incised with three-angle sections; and there are those in which it is incised like a figure of a spearhead, as in the cases of inguinal hernias.
E de lor so en les quals es administrada seccio redonda e seccio lunar, e semblantz ad aquels.	And there are those in which a round incision or crescent-shaped incision is made, resembling these.
Mays aquel al qual no es cap ayssi cum son apostemas leons superficials, cove que tu perforas aquel am perforacio superficial, o plana tant solament.	"Yet for that one to whom it is not so easy as superficial abscesses, you should perform this operation with careful depth, not just on the surface."
E cove quant le apostema es gros e ya ha colligit mota sania, que perfores aquel e no te coytes que extraguas tot le poyre en aquela hora; habantz extratz de aquel una partida, e aprop opila le apostema entro al autre dia, e aprop extratz una partida major, e aprop fa aquo motas veguadas segon graduacio entro que sia foro-getat.	"And when the abscess is large and has already collected much pus, you should not hesitate to extract all of it at once; however, after extracting some, apply a dressing and return on the following day to extract more, gradually increasing the amount extracted until the abscess is entirely drained."
E majorment si·l malaute es de freol vertut, o femna prens, o enfant petit, o viel en decrepitut, quar l’esperit animal motas vetz es resolvut am la egressio de la sania, e fort leu mor le malaute, e tu operte les.	"And especially if the patient is of delicate constitution, a pregnant woman, an infant, or an elderly person in decline, because the animal spirit is often weakened during the discharge of pus, and such patients are easily harmed; therefore operate cautiously."
Don guarda aquest capitol am gran cautela, e aprop la tua perforacio en la qual perforas aquestz apostemas, cove que abstergescas las plagues e consideras donc si la plagua del apostema es pauca, o es una seccio plana, lahoras tu aministra las qualguas de li o de coto antic; e si le apostema es gran, e las fissuras de la perforacio son motas, lahoras cove que tu pauses meca en quascun trauc entro que pervenguan ensemps.	"And guard this chapter with great care, and also the operation through which you perform these abscesses; for you must wipe away the pus and consider well if the opening of the abscess is small or wide. If it is small, then administer a narrow probe or an old one. But if the abscess is large and the incisions are deep, then pause carefully in each stroke until they unite together."
E si en le apostema es abscindit una partida de la codena o has concavada aquela en le circuit, lahoras cove que tu la complescas de coto viel o de fil fayt de drap de li, ayssi cum quan has traytz pans o razizos, ses humiditat; e strenh aquel entro al tertz dia; e aprop proceseys aquel e cura le am aquo que cove dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	"And if in the course of an abscess a portion of the skin is cut off or concave around its circumference, then you should fill it with old cotton or lint, like when tying up bandages without moisture; and tighten it on the third day; and then treat it with what is appropriate for wounds until it is healed."
Mays si accideys flux de sanc en la hora de la operacio tua, lahoras tu aministra aygua frega e vi agre en les quals mules un drap de li, e pausa aquel sobre le loc del fluxs del sanc motas veguadas.	"But if bleeding occurs during your operation, then apply water mixed with vinegar and a little wine on lint, and place it over the bleeding area several times."
Mays si persevera le fluxs del sanc, lahoras cove que tu aministres regiment e curacio e polveras las quals he recomtadas en motz locs de aquest nostre libre e de divisio.	"But if the bleeding persists, then you must apply ligature and dressing, and powders which are recommended in many places throughout this book and division."
Mays si es en temps de hivern, e·l loc de la apostema es loc de motz nervis, lahoras cove que tu enfundas pulvils en vi e oli caut, e pauses aquels sobre les locs.	"But if it is wintertime and the location of the abscess has many nerves, then you should apply powders made from hot wine and oil, and place them on those locations."
E si es en estiu, e les locs son carnoses, lahoras cove que tu pauses pulvils enbeguts am aygua e oli o am vi e oli, e tot aquo sia freg entro que sia le ters dia, ayssi cum havem dit, e lahoras cove que tu deslies le apostema e abstergescas aquel e aministres en la curacio de lu aquo que a lu conveneys entro que sia sanat.	"And if it is summertime and the locations are fleshy, then you should apply powders mixed with water and oil or with wine and oil, all of which must be rubbed until the third day as we have said; then open the abscess, wipe it clean, and administer treatment appropriate for it until it heals."
E aysso es aquo que es necessari de la cognicio de la curacio de apostemas universalment, mays segon la via de distinccio ja he dit de tot apostema en qual manieyra es via de la cura de lu per capitols singularment.	"And this is what is necessary to know about the treatment of abscesses in general, but according to the way of distinction I have already said how each type of abscess should be treated particularly by chapters."
Capitol .xli.	Chapter XLII
De seccio de apostemas les quals veno en la codena del cap.	"Of the incision of abscesses which occur in the neck of the head."
En la codena del cap petitz apostemas, e so de specias de nodes les quals conteno tunicas que so a lor factz ; e las specias de lor so motas.	In the neck of the head, small abscesses appear, and they are of species of knots containing tunics which are formed from them; and their species are many."
E de lor son pingas, e de aquelas so que conteno humiditat semblant a lima.	"And among them are pimples, and those contain humidity resembling milk."
E de aquelas so las quals conteno humiditat semblant a pols, et asemblantz a lor; e de aquelas so que son lapideas, durs.	"And those are the ones containing moisture resembling dust, and resembling them; and those that are stony, hard."
E en la seccio de totz, e en la extraccio de aquels no es temor, cum deves la exteccio de aquels no fa contrariat arceria.	"And in the section of all [organs], and in the extraction of those, there is no fear, since their extraction does not cause harsh difficulty."
E la operacio en seccio de aquels es que tu esproes aquels am instrument la forma del qual ve aprop aysso, le qual es apelat entromes, entro que sapias que contengua.	"And the operation in section of those is that you expose them with an instrument whose shape appears approximately like this [drawing], which is called 'entromes', until you knew that it contained."
Quar si aquo que conte es humiditat, lahoras scindeys aquel am seccio segon la longitut per seccio superficial segon aquesta forma:	"For if what it contains is moisture, then cut it with a section along its length through a superficial section according to this shape:"
E comensa en la seccio de la linha de .B. entro a la linha de .G. Donc cum la humiditat es evacuada, lahoras tu excoria aquela pel que conte aquela humiditat, e no leysses de aquela alcuna causa de tot, quar tropas veguadas retorna, si roman de aquela alcuna causa.	"And begin in the section of line .B. to line .G. Therefore, when the moisture is evacuated, then you strip that from which that moisture came, and do not leave it with any cause for concern, because viewed wounds return, if something remains."
E aprop submergeys coto en enguent egipciach, si es present, e sino, en aygua e sal; e umpleys am aquel la plagua e layssa aquel entro ad autra dia, quar am aquo corrodeys tot so que es romas de aquela pellicula.	"And approximately immerse it in Egyptian pitch, if available, and otherwise in water and salt; fill it with that and leave it there for another day, because with this you corrode all that remains of that skin."
E aprop itera sobre aquel coto am enguent egipciach segondament e tersament si indigeyses de lu, entro que·t comfides que no y haia romas alcuna causa de aquela pellicula; lahoras cura la plagua am enguent entro que sia sanada.	"And approximately iterate over that coto with Egyptian pitch secondly and thirdly if you need it, until you are confident that there remains no cause of that skin; then cure the wound with oil until it is healed."
E si apostema conte nodi gras, lahoras tu inscideys aquel segon aquesta forma:	"And if an aposteme contains fatty knots, then cut it according to this shape:"
am seccio havent forma de crotz, e geta oncis entre doas labias de la seccio e scorsa aquel de tota partida, e esforsa la tua vertut en extraccio de la tunica la qual conte aquel.	"with a section having the form of a cross, and make incisions between both lips of the section and scrape that from all parts, and exert your strength in extracting the tunic which contains it."
Mays si a tu arceria fa contrarieta, lahoras fay aquo que yeu t’e recontat primieyrament.	"But if your arrow causes difficulty, then do what I told you first."
E semblantment fay en le apostema lapificat de seccio e de curacio segon que a tu havem dit; e seccio sobre apostema lapificat es pus leugiera, quar es de pauc sanc e de pauca humiditat.	"And similarly do with the lapidated aposteme in section and cure according to what we have told you; and a section on an apostemate is easier, because it has little blood and little moisture."
E alcunas vetz so alcus de aquestz apostemas les quals so en le cap en alcus homes am los quals de tot no es humiditat; la qual causa es quar yeu inscindigui sobre un apostema en le cap de una femna vielha e atrobegui le apostema ayssi cum peyra sorda, aspra, blanqua, la qual no podia esser trinquada, e si a alcu fos am aquela percussit, plaguera aquel.	"And sometimes some of these apostemes are in the head of certain men who have little moisture; and this cause is that someone incised on an aposteme in the head of an old woman and scraped it like deaf stone, rough and white, which could not be crushed, and if anyone had been struck with it, he would be wounded."
Mays en les autres apostemas accidentz en le cap otra aquest no es aquest capitol, ayssi cum les apostemas que veno als caps dels enfantz e deves las razitz de las aurelhas, mays la seccio de aquestz totz sia seccio superficial.	"But in other accidental apostemes on the head that are not of this kind, like those that come to children's heads and around the roots of the ears, the section of these all is a superficial section."
E pausa la perforacio de aquels de la partida pus bassa de lor per so que sia alleujat le cos de la sania a las partidas pus bassas.	"And pause the perforation of those that are lower down because their root is to alleviate the body from the pain in the lower parts."
E aprop cura aquelas am aquo que conveneys ad aquel de curacio.	"And approximately cure these with whatever you deem suitable for that cure."
Capitol .xlii.	Chapter XLII
De seccio de scrophulas las quals accideyso en le col.	Of the section of scrofulas which occur in the neck.
Motas veguadas endeveno aquestas apostemas en le colh e en las aysselhas e en les angonars; e alcunas veguadas accideyso en las autras partidas del cos.	Many times these apostemes appear in the neck, armpits, and groins; and sometimes they occur in other parts of the body.
E so aquelas que accideysso en le colh, e so motas que so engendradas entre lor, e tota scrofula de aquelas es dintz la sua tunica propria, e ayssi cum en les nodis e apostema del cap, ayssi cum havem recomtat.	"And those that occur in the neck are many and are often generated between them, and all scrofula of these is within its own tunic, like the knots and apostemes of the head, as we have mentioned."
E las specias de aquestas scrophulas son motas, quar de aquelas so alcunas lapideas, e de aquelas so que conteno humiditatz, e de aquelas so malignas las quals no obeseysso a curacio.	"And the species of these scrofulas are many, because among them there are some that are lapidated, and others contain moisture, and still others are malignant which do not yield to cure."
Donc en aquela la qual tu vezes de bona disposicio en le Tocament, de la qual la color de aquo que es manifest es propda a la color de la codena, e es mauguda a tota partida, e no es annexsa am le nervi del colh, ni am las venas, ni am la arceria, e no es preonda, cove que tu inscidiscas aquela am siccio superficial de la partida desus a la partida dejos del cos de la linha de .G. entro la linha de .B., e scorja aquela de tota partida, e exten dos labias de la codena am onci, o am motz oncis si has necessitat de aquels, ayssi cum havem dit en las apostemas del cap, e extratz aquela petit a petit.	Therefore in that one which you find to have good disposition in the Touching, of which the color of what is manifested is reddish like the skin, and is swollen all over, and is not annexed with the nerves of the neck, nor with the veins, nor with the artery, and is not tender, it is necessary to incise it with a superficial section from above to below on the body line from G. between the line B., and scrape it from all parts, and extend the lips of the skin with an incision or with many incisions if you have need of them, as we said in the apostemes of the head, and extract it little by little."
E es mays cautela que no sia inscidida la vena o nervi.	"And more caution that the vein or nerve is not incised."
E sia le spatum no mot agut, que no ajuste a tu la tua ma am inscizio, o que enquiete le malaute, e que inscidas aquo que no es necessari inscidir; quar si inscideysses vena o arceria e prohibeys tu de la tua operacio, lahoras pausa en la plagua vetriol trissat o autras polveras las quals ostan fluxs de sanc, e estrenh la plagua, e layssa aquel entro que·s repausa la acuitat de la apostema e sia mollificada la plagua e comense esser poyrida.	"And let the spatula not be too sharp, so that it does not hurt your hand when incising or cause injury to the patient, and do not incise what is not necessary to incise; because if you incised a vein or artery and hindered yourself from your operation, then pause in the wet vitriol plaster or other powders which stop the flow of blood, and stretch the plaster and leave it inside until the sharpness of the aposteme has paused and the plaster becomes softened and begins to be moistened."
Quan le sanc es abscindit.	When the blood is absorbed.
Donc retorna a la tua operacio entro que l’aias complida.	Therefore return to your operation until it is completed.
E aprop inquireys am le tieu dit indic si es romas alcuna causa de las autras petitas scrophulas, donc inscideys aquelas e munda aquelas.	"And approximately ask with the little finger if there are any causes of other small scrofulas, then incise those and clean them."
E si es en la razit de la scrophula gran vena, cove lahoras que no inscidas aquela scrophula de la sua razitz.	"And if it is in the root of a large scrofula vein, then do not incise that scrofula from its root."
Abantz cove que lies aquela am fiel doblat fort e que leysses aquela entro que caia per si ses nocument.	"Then tie it with doubled thread strongly and leave it inside until it falls by itself without harm."
E aprop omple la plagua de coto vielh le qual tu has ja submirgit en enguent egipciac, e aprop cura aquel.	"And approximately fill the plaster with wax old which you have already melted in Egyptian ointment, and approximately cure it."
E si inscides aquela scrophula tota, lahoras cove que tu ajustes las doas labias de la plagua e cuzas2 tantost pus que no y ha romasa deguna superfluitat.	"And if you incise that scrofula entirely, then it is necessary that you join the two lips of the plaster and cure immediately afterwards so that there remains no superfluity."
Mays si tu vezes que haia romasa superfluitat per la grandeza de la scrofula, cove que tu entendas a inscidir la razit de aquela, e astrayra aquela e aministra sutura e aquo que es dit.	"But if you see that there remains superfluity due to the size of the scrofula, then it is necessary that you intend to incise its root, and draw it out and administer suture and what is said."
E aquela de las scrophulas que conteno humiditatz, perfora aquela am perforacio superficial aqui la on appar a tu le loc de maturacio de lu, e pausa perforacio de aquo que siec le pus bas del cos, ayssi cum havem dit.	"And those of the scrofulas that contain moisture, pierce them with a superficial perforation where it appears to you the place of maturation of it, and pause the perforation from what is below the body, as we said."
E aprop aministra perforacio, calguas am enguent e semblantz ad aquels, per so que corroda aquo que es romas de la corropcio.	"And approximately administer perforation, cauterize with ointment and similar things, for that which is left of the corruption."
E aprop quan tu vezes la plagua ja esser mundada, lahoras tu cura aquela am enguent de carn generatiu entro que sia sanada.	"And approximately when you see the plaster already cleaned, then cure it with ointment of generation flesh until it is healed."
Capitol .xliii.	Chapter XLIII.
De seccio del pilhot del apostema accident dintz le guolayro.	Of the section of the aposteme accidentally within the wallet
Diyssero les antics aquesta seccio en le epilhot, e no vist alcu hom en nostra terra que aquela aia fayta.	It was said by the ancients this section in the epilote, and we have not seen anyone in our land that it has been done.
E aquesta es la inscriptura del sermo de aquels.	And this is the inscription of the discourse of those.
Mays en les homes haventz esquinencia, cove que sia esquivada la extraccio del epilhot, cum per aquo no sia fayt juvament per so quar totas las venas e las majors del malaute so aqui.	But in men there is squintness, therefore it is necessary to avoid the extraction of the epiglottis, because through this there would be no advantage for that all the veins and the largest of the patient are here.
Mays en aquels que han apostemas cautz en la boca o guolayro o dos aurelhas, quan la malautia no es en la cana, cove husar de la seccio de epilhot a fugir la perdicio la qual es fayta per perfocacio.	But in those who have apostemes cauterized in the mouth or throat or both ears when the disease is not in the canal it is necessary to perform section of the epiglottis to avoid the harm which occurs by perforation.
Donc cove quan volem aquo, que inscidam le epilhot dejos tres cercles dels cercles del epilhot, o quatre am petita seccio per la latitut en aquel que es entre dos cercles per quantitat, que la seccio sia en ciphac, no en la cartillage, e aquest loc es convenent a seccio, quar es privat de carn e les vayselhs de sanc de lu son luhen.	Therefore when we want to do this, it is necessary to incise the epiglottis three circles away from the circles of the epiglottis or four with a small section for width in that which is between two circles by quantity, so that the section is in cartilage and not in flesh and the vessels of blood of it are distant. This place is convenient for section because it is deprived of flesh and the vessels of blood of it are distant.
E si le metge es pauruc, cove lahoras que extenda la codena del golayro am onci, e aprop fenda la codena entro que pervengua a la canal, mays evite les vaysels de sanc si vetz de aquelas alcuna causa.	And if the doctor is fearful then let him extend the chain of the throat with a hook and approximately cut the chain until it reaches the canal but avoid the vessels of blood if he sees any cause.
E aprop inscida li ciplach segon que havem recomtat; e es significat sobre la seccio de la canal per le flacma le qual es de aquela eyssit am aquo que es de lu disromput e per la abscizio de la votz.	Approximately, "Then carefully insert the catheter as previously instructed. This signifies entry into the urethra via the opening from which the fluid has escaped due to rupture and by suction of the voice."
E layssa la plagua uberta per alcun temps.	"Leave the wound uncovered for some time."
Donc cum la hora es remauguda en la qual perforacio es temuda, agregua doas labias de la codena de la plagua, e cus aquela sola ses la cartillage.	Therefore, once the hour has passed in which perforation is feared, add two lips of the skin of the wound, and cut away only the cartilage.
E aprop administra medicinas que fan naysser la carn entro que sia sanat.	Then administer medications that cause flesh to grow within until it is healed.
E diyssec Albucasis que la summa del sermo le qual havem recomtat, exposicio no es sino que veias que alcus de aquetz apostemas ja han opilat lo guolayro del malaute, e le malaute es vengut entro a mort, e le ale de lu es entresecat, e alcus van a inscidir le epiglos per so que respire le malaute sobre le loc de la plagua per alcuna respiracio, e sia salvat de mort.	Albucasis states that the essence of this discussion is that some of these apostemes have already filled up the throat of the patient, and the disease has entered into death. The lung of the one affected has become obstructed, and some proceed to incise the epiglottis so that the patient may breathe over the site of the wound for a short breath, thereby saving him from death.
E per aquo comandero layssar la plagua uberta entro que sia consumida la malicia de la malautia; e es la malicia de lu per tres dias; e donc lahoras comandero cosi la plagua, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	And thus it is commanded to leave the wound uncovered until the mischief of the disease is consumed. The mischief remains for three days. Afterwards the wound should be closed and cared for until healed.
E aquo que yeu he vist per mi meteys, es que una sirventa pres un cotel e mesec le en le sieu golayro e inscidic am aquel una partida de la cana del pulmo, e yeu fu apelat a la curacio de lu, e atrobegui la mugen ayssi cum es mugit del moridos, e descubrigui la plagua e atrobegui le sanc le qual era yssit de la plagua petit.	And this I have seen with my own eyes, that a servant took a knife and thrust it into his throat and made an incision there with one stroke of the knife, cutting off a portion of the lung. When I was called to attend him, he groaned like one in agony, and I uncovered the wound and found that much blood had issued from it.
Donc yeu fo confessat que aquela no havia inscidit vena ni guidegi, e le vent yssia de la plagua, e curegui aquela entro que foc sanada.	Therefore I concluded that he had not cut any vein or artery, and the wind was issuing from the wound. I treated him until he was healed.
E no accidic a la sirventa si no rauquiera en la votz, e aprop alcus dias retornec ad miloracio de las suas dispozicios.	And the servant did not die if he had anything in his voice-box, and after some days he returned to his usual state of health.
E ara dic yeu que en la seccio del epilhot no ha temor.	And now you say that there is no fear in the section of the epiglottis.
Capitol .xliv.	Chapter XLIV
De seccio sobre apostema le qual accideys en le golayro defora, e es apelat hernia del golayro.	Of incision over an aposteme which occurs in the throat externally, and is called a hernia of the throat.
Aquest apostema nompnat hernia del golayro es apostema gran segon la color del cors, e es mot en las femnas.	This aposteme called "hernia of the throat" is large according to the size of the body, and it is common in women.
E es segon dos manieyras, quar o es natural o accidental.	And it occurs in two ways: either naturally or accidentally.
E en le natural no es engen de curar.	And in the natural [case], it is not necessary to cure it.
E l’accidental es segon dos manieyras del qual la un es semblant a nodes grasses, e l’autra manieyra es semblant apostema le qual es fayt per nodacio de arteria, e en aquel es temor.	And the accidental [case] occurs in two ways: one is similar to fatty swellings, and the other way is similar to an aposteme that occurs due to a blockage of an artery, and in this case there is danger.
E no cove que·s fassa presumpcio a lu cum ferr sino en aquel que es petit.	And it is not necessary to perform an incision with iron except when it is required.
E tu proha aquel e investigua aquel am le dit, e si atrobas lu semblant a nodi gras, e no es suspendut am alcuna de las venas, lahoras tu inscideys aquel ayssi cum les nodes, e extratz aquel am aquo que conte lu de la pel e bursiclam; e sino, lahoras es perscrutat tot le sieu esser, e aprop cura le loc am aquo que cove de curacio entro que sia sanat.	And you should approach that [aposteme] and examine it closely with your finger, and if you find it similar to fatty swellings and not suspended by any veins, then incise it like a node, extract what is inside it from the skin and bursicle; but if not, then carefully examine its entire nature, and afterwards treat that place with whatever remedy is necessary until it is healed.
Capitol .xlv.	Chapter XLIV
De seccio de las specias de nodes.	Of incision of different kinds of nodes
Dels nodes so motas specias e yeu ja he dit totas las specias de lor en la divisio.	There are many species of nodes, and I have already mentioned all their kinds in the division.
E cove que yeu recomte assi la diferencia entre node e exitura cum fassa dubitacio.	And it is necessary that you explain clearly the difference between a node and an excrescence when there is doubt.
Donc yeu dic que am exitura es caliditat e febre e dolors vehementz entro que es sedada la ebullicio de la superfluitat; e es complida putrefaccio que lahora cessa la febre, la dolor e la calor.	Therefore I say that with an excrescence there is heat and fever and intense pain until the boiling off of the superfluity is finished; but it is completed putrefaction when the fever, pain, and heat cease.
Mays am node no es caliditat ni febre ni dolor, e conte aquel ciphac leon le qual es al u sac propri.	But with a node there is no heat nor fever nor pain, and it contains either fluid or solid matter in its own sac.
E es segon la color del cors, e le comensament de lu es cum un ceze e es fayt ayssi cum vace, sia major o minor, e son segon dos specias, quar o so grassas e conteno humiditat, e las colors de la humiditat son motas, segon que yeu diyssi en la divisio.	And it is according to the size of the body, and its beginning is like a small pimple, and it becomes like a bag, whether large or small, and there are two kinds: either fatty ones containing fluid, with many colors of fluid as I have mentioned in the division.
Donc cove, quan pervenas a la curacio de node, que exprohes aquel e inquiras aquel al comensament am sturment le qual es apelat intromes, segon que vindra la sua forma en le capitol le qual es aprop aquest.	Therefore, when you arrive at the cure of nodes, it is necessary to examine that [node] and inquire into its beginning with an instrument called "intromissum," according to what will be discussed in the chapter which follows this one.
E es manieyra de inquisicio de apostemas e de totz nodes, e es que tu prenguas aquest sturment e entromet aquel en le loc pus humit le qual atrobas en le apostema, e tu revolveras les tieus ditz am aquel petit a petit entro que sapias que·l sturment ja ha penetrat la codena.	And this is the method of examining apostemes and all nodes: you should take this instrument and insert it into the moistest place that you find in the aposteme, and slowly rotate your fingers with it until you know that the instrument has penetrated the node.
E aprop ultima la tua ma segon la mesura de la grandeza del apostema, e aprop extratz le entromes e considera aquo que es yssit en le vestigi de lu.	And then stretch out your hand according to the size of the aposteme, and extract the intromissum and observe what comes out in its track.
E si es fora-getada la humiditat corrent, de qualque color sia, lahoras tu le inscideys am seccio superficial segon que he dit en les autres apostemas.	And if running fluid of whatever color is discharged, then incise it with a superficial incision as I have said concerning other apostemas.
E si del vestigi de l’intromes no hieys humiditat, lahoras sapias que es gras.	But if you do not find any humidity in the track of the intromissum, then know that it is fatty.
E secca sobre lu am seccio havent forma de crotz segon aquesta forma:	And dry it with an incision having the shape of a cross according to this form:
ayssi cum t’e ensenhat, e suspen aquel am oncis, e excorja la codena de tota part am facilitat, e guarda la pel o sac, si podes, sobre aquel e extraguas aquela sania am le node.	Thus as I have shown you, and suspend it with forceps, and carefully excise the node from all sides, keeping the skin or sac if possible, and extract that node.
Mays si es romput en la operacio, no es possible extrayre aquela sana, e motas veguadas endeve aquo, e lahoras tu la extratz a pessas entro que de lu no romangua denguna causa.	But if it is broken during the operation, then it is not possible to extract that node intact; nevertheless, often you will find something there, and therefore extract it piece by piece until nothing remains of it.
Quar si de lu roman denguna causa, pauc o trop, le node retorne segon le mays.	For if any cause remains from it, little or much, the node returns according to the manner which is greatest.
E si tu vezes que de lu roman alcuna part petita, lahoras comple la plagua de alcunas polveras corrosivas agudas e strenh la plagua, e pausa sobre aquela que sede apostema caut, e cura aquel del autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And if you find that some small part remains, then complete the wound with a poultice of sharp corrosive powders and strengthen the poultice, and apply it to the cauterized wound, and cure that [wound] with other remedies until it is healed.
E si es node gran, lahoras tu cus las doas labias de lu e cura aquel am aquo que encarna.	And if it is a large node, then cut both lips of it and cure it with what is appropriate.
Mays si vena pulsatil es a lu contraria, o no-pulsatil, lahoras tu coyta e huemple le loc de zegi trissat que es vetriol e leyssa aquel streyt per dos dias o per tres entro que·s poyresca la plagua e que repause la ebullicio del sanc; e aprop retorna a inscindir aquo que es romas del node.	But if a pulsating vein is found on the opposite side, or non-pulsating, then tie and bind the place with triple bandages made of linen soaked in vinegar, leaving that strait for two or three days until the wound closes up and bleeding stops; and then return to excising what remains of the node.
Capitol .xlvi.	Chapter XLVI
De las formas del sturmentz necessaris en seccio e perforacio.	Of the shapes of instruments necessary in incision and perforation.
De aquels so las formas dels intromesas, e so de tres specias, que de aquels es alcu gran, e de lor es migier, e de lor es petit.	There are three kinds of shapes of intromissum: some large, others medium-sized, and others small.
La forma de intromes gran es aquesta:	The shape of the large intromissum is as follows:
La forma de intromes migier es aquesta:	"The method for treating gout is as follows:"
La forma de intromes petit es aquesta:	"The method for treating smallpox is as follows"
Sian faytz de ferr, de alfulud, de extremitatz cayradas decentment, per so que festino le intrament en les apostemas.	"They should be made of iron, wool, or soft skin, so that they can be inserted into the blisters without delay."
E aquestas so las formas dels experientz, e son nompnatz albered, e un de aquels es apelat berid.	"And these are some examples of remedies, and among them is one called balsam"
E so de tres especias, quar de lor es gran, migier e pauc.	"And it is made from three spices, because they are abundant: cinnamon and little pepper."
La forma de experient gran, forma de lu:	"The remedy for the great disease is as follows:"
La forma de experient migier, forma de lu:	"Here's how you make the gout remedy:"
La forma de experient pauc, forma de lu:	"Here is the recipe for the remedy for little (illness):"
Conveneysso que sian per aquels apostemas e exituras e fistulas e bubos per so que entre aquelas so dels osses e de autras causas.	"It helps with those blisters, discharges, fistulas, and boils that are caused by bone issues and other causes."
E so faytz redontz, grosses, leons, ayssi cum grans agulhas am las quals son cosidas las selhas, e son faytas de eram citri, o de eram o de ferr, o de argent, E las milhors so quan so faytas de eram citri.	"And red-hot needles, large ones like big sewing needles with which the blisters are pierced and drawn out, made of iron, bronze, or silver. The best ones are those made of bronze."
E son faytz les experient de plum negre, les quals se acordan que per aquels sian ubertas las fistulas en la conquavitat de las quals so reflexios, que sian reflectidas am la sua levitat am aquelas refleccios.	"And remedies made of black pitch are prepared to open up those fistulas in whose concavity reflections are made, that they may be reflected by their own weight with those reflections."
E so de tres specias, quar alcus de lor so loncs, e dels autres migiers, e dels autres breus, segon la quantitat del ample de la fistula e de la strictura de lu.	"And it is made from three spices: some are long, others medium-length, and others short, according to the quantity of the width of the fistula and the tightness of its opening."
Forma del experient gran de plom:	"Formula for the great lead remedy:"
Forma del experient migier de plom:	"Formula for the medium-sized lead remedy:"
Forma del experient petit de plom:	"This is the shape of the experiment performed using lead:"
Las formas dels oncis so de motas specias, quar de aquels so alcus simples, als quals es una curvitat solament, e so de tres specias: grans, paucs e migiers.	"The shapes of onions are of many species, for some are simple ones that have only one curvature, and they are of three species: large, few, and medium."
E de lor so uncis orps, e so de tres specias.	"And among them there are onion eyes, and they are of three species."
E de aquels so uncis haventz doas curvaturas, e so de tres specias.	"Among those there are onions with two curvature, which are also of three species."
E de lor so haventz tres curvaturas, e so de tres specias.	"And among them there are ones with three curvature, and they are also of three species."
E totz aquetz so necessaris en lor loc.	"And all of these are necessary in their place."
Forma de unci simple gran, forma de lu:	"Form of large simple onion, shape of wolf:"
Forma de unci simple migier:	"Form of anointing the right hand:"
Forma de unci simple pauc, forma de lu:	"How to anoint the left hand: its form:"
Forma de unci orp gran:	"Form of large ear ointment:"
Forma de unci orp migier, forma de lu:	"Form of right ear ointment: its form"
Forma de unci orp pauc, forma de lu:	"How to anoint the left ear: its form"
Forma de unci gran havent dos curvaturas:	"Form of large ear ointment with two curves:"
Forma de unci migier havent dos curvatas:	"Form of right ear ointment having two curves:"
Forma de unci pauc havent dos curvaturas:	"How to anoint the left ear having two curves:"
Forma de unci gran havent tres curvaturas:	"Form for large ear ointment with three curves:"
Forma de unci migier havent tres curvaturas:	"Form of right ear ointment with three curves:"
Forma de unci pauc havent tres curvaturas:	"How to anoint the left ear having three curves:"
E aquestas so las formas dels scalpels am les quals son seccatz e scorjatz les nodes e le apostemas, e so de tres specias, quar de aquels es gran, migier, e pauc.	"And these are the forms of the scalpels with which nodules and boils are cut and scraped, and they are of three kinds: large, middle-sized, and small."
Forma de scapel gran:	"How to use a large scalpel:"
Forma del scapel migier:	"Form of medium scalpel:"
Forma de scapel pauc:	"Form of small scalpel:"
Las extramitatz de aquels am les quals es fayta seccio so agudas e las autres extramitatz so no-agudas, e no so pausadas en tal manieyra, sino per que sia fayt juvament en la excorjacio dels nodes la temor de inscizio de vena o de nervi, e per aquels sia sanat le malaute e atrobe tranquilitat un petit per la adustio la qual atroba deves la excoriacio del apostema.	"The extreme points of those with which section is made are sharp and the other extreme points are not sharp, nor are they paused in this manner, but so that the incision may be done judiciously in the scraping of nodules without fear of cutting a vein or nerve, and so that the illness may be healed and tranquility obtained by a little through the cautery which follows after the scraping of the boil."
E aquestas son las formas de almagidas, e so de tres specias: gran, migier e pauc, ayssi cum veyras.	"And these are the forms of tweezers, and they are of three kinds: large, medium-sized, and small, as you see."
La forma de magda gran:	"The form of large tweezers:"
Forma de magda migier:	"Form of medium tweezers:"
Forma de magda pauc:	"Form of small tweezers:"
Sian faytas de eram e so semblantz de ray am le qual e fayt alcofol.	"The forms of ear candles are like rods with which brandy is made."
E es en la extramitat lada punctada am spatum occultada e en aquela corr a las partidas dedintz e defora, quan tu vols, ayssi cum veses.	"And it has at its end a hole pierced with a spatula hidden inside, and in that part there are openings both inside and outside, whenever you wish, as you see."
Las formas de spatimis, les quals so amaguatz entre los ditz deves la perforacio dels apostemas e no les percebo les malautes, e so de tres specias: gran, migier e pauc.	"The forms of spatulas, which are hidden among the said devices for the perforation of boils and are not perceived by the sick, and they are of three kinds: large, medium-sized, and small."
E aquestas so las formas de aquels:	"And these are the forms of those:"
Las formas de ventozas am las quals es abscindit le flux del sanc, e so de tres specias; gran, migiera e pauca; las formas de lu:	"The forms of bloodletting cups with which the flow of blood is extracted, and they are of three kinds: large, medium-sized, and small. The forms of them are like this:"
Sian faytas de eram citri, redondas am alcuna longitut , e sian subtils.	"They are made of citrus peel, round with some length, and they are thin."
E cove que sian aquestas specias de ventosas deves tu grans, migieras e paucas, per so que per aquelas abscindas flux de sanc am velocitat en necessitat, e lahoras quan a tu primieyrament no es medicina.	"And it is necessary that these kinds of bloodletting cups be large, medium-sized, and small, so that by means of them the flow of blood may be extracted quickly in necessity, and also when you first begin to practice medicine."
Enpero no uses de aquelas ad abscidir sanc en tot loc del cors, e non uses sino en locs carnoses, ayssi cum en les lacertis de las cambas e de las coyssas, e en les lacertz dels brasses, e de las mamillas e del ventre e dels engonars, e semblantz a lor dels lacertz carnoses humitz.	"However, do not use them to extract blood in any part of the body, and only use them on fleshy areas, such as those near the armpits and groin, the arms, breasts, abdomen, buttocks, and similar moist flesh."
E alcunas veguadas son faytz de aquels strumentz autres petitz semblantz scorsas de fisacs segon aquesta forma; per les quals lo sanc es abscindit quan es fayt per fleubotomia, o deves inscizio de vena o de arceria.	"And sometimes these instruments are made of small pieces resembling little scissors according to this form; with which blood is extracted when it is done by flebotomy, or by incision of a vein or artery."
E alcunas veguadas son faytas redondas segon aquesta forma:	"And sometimes they are made round according to this form:"
Capitol .xlvii.	"Chapter XLVI."
De la cura de las mamillas dels homes las quals so asembladas de femnas.	"Of the care of men's breasts, which resemble those of women."
Alcunas veguadas so infladas las mamillas de alcus homes deves le compliment del dormir cum comensan esser pellutz, e aprop so infladas las mamillas, e so asembladas las mamillas de las femnas, e romano apostemosas, lejas.	"Sometimes the breasts of some men become swollen during sleep with the beginning of becoming hairy, and then they are also swollen like those of women, and we call them 'apostemous'."
E ad aquel que avoreys aquo, cove que inscidisca aquelas am seccio lunar segon aquesta forma, de la linha de .B. entro a la linha de .G., e aprop excorja la groceza tota, e aprop uempla la plagua de medicament encarnatiu, e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am cosidura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	"And he who suffers from that should incise it with a crescent-shaped incision according to this form, along the line from B to G, and then remove all of the thickness, and then fill the wound with an embrocation containing medicine for healing, and then join the two lips of the wound with stitching, and care for it until it is healed."
Mays si la mamilla declina a las partidas dejos e es mollificada per la sua magnitut ayssi cum endeve a las femnas, lahoras sia fendut en dos latz sieus pus sobiras, am dos seccios semblantz a figura lunar, de las quals quascuna sia contenguda en l’autra deves la fi de quascuna, entro que sia que la linha major contengua la menor segon aquesta forma de la linha de .B. e la linha de .G. E aprop excorja la codena la qual es entre dos labias de la plagua, e osta la pingueza, e aministra aquo que havem dit de la sutura e de las polveras aquo que es necessari en la curacio entro que sia sanat.	"But if the breast declines toward the sides and is softened by its size as happens in women, then it should be split into two of its own parts with two crescent-shaped incisions, each contained within the other at the end of each, so that the larger line contains the smaller according to this form from B to G. And then remove the chain which is between the two lips of the wound, drain the pus, and apply what has been said about stitching and powders as necessary in its care until it is healed."
E si tu non conpleysses la inscizio de aquo que cove inscidir per la inquietut del malaute, e per flux de sanc, lahoras cove que huemplas la plagua de coto submergit en enguent corrosiu e layssa aquel entro que aquo corroda que es romas de la grayssa, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	"And if you do not complete the incision of that which should be incised for the relief of the disease and the flow of blood, then it is necessary to fill the wound with cotton soaked in corrosive ointment and let that corrodes that which is swollen until it rots away, and then care for it until it is healed."
Capitol .xlviii.	"Chapter XLVIII."
De perforacio de apostemas que veno dejos le titillic.	"Of the perforation of boils that come from beneath the armpits."
Aquetz apostemas que veno dejos le titillic so de las specias de scrophulas, durs, las quals conte una pel que es sac.	"Those boils that come from beneath the armpits are of the species of scrofulous, hard ones, which contain a core that is discharged."
E de aquelas so alcunas que conteno humiditatz; e aquelas que conteno humiditatz cove que sian inscididas am seccio lunar segon aquesta figura: de la linha de .G. a la linha de .B. E cum es tot evacuat aquo que es en le apostema de la sania, lahoras tu le comple de coto viel e leysa le entro al autra dia.	"And among those there are some that contain moisture; and those that contain moisture should be incised with a crescent-shaped incision according to this figure: from G to B. And when all that is inside the boil has been evacuated, then fill it with cotton wool and leave it alone for another day."
E aprop le coto sia ostat e sia curat am enguent convenient ad aquo, entro que sia sanat.	"And then remove the cotton wool and care for it with an appropriate ointment until it is healed."
E si le apostema de las specias dels nodes es, e de las scrophulas, lahoras tu scindeys sobre aquel ayssi cum havem dit en la seccio sobre las scrophulas engualment.	"And if the boil is of the kind that is nodular or scrofulous, then incise it as we have said in the section on swollenness."
May si la plagua es extenduda en aysso que yesca poyredura, lahoras administra en lu cauteri segon que en aquo havem denant dit.	"But if the wound is extended to such an extent that it leaves a scar, then apply cautery as we have said before."
Capitol .xlix.	"Chapter XLIX."
De seccio de apostemas que accideysso per arceria o per vena.	"Of the incision of boils that occur through an artery or vein."
Quan arceria es rompuda, e la codena es consolidada la qual es sobre aquela, lahoras motas veguadas accideys apostema E les senhals per les quals es conoguda que imflamacio e apostema sian per la arteria o per vena: quar quan apostema es per arceria es lonc agreguat en le preon del cors; e que quan inpelleysses le apostema am les tieus ditz, sentes en lu quays sia stridor.	"When an artery is broken and the cord above it becomes swollen, then many times a boil occurs. And the signs by which it is known that inflammation and boil are due to an artery or vein: for when a boil is due to an artery it is elongated in front of the body; and when you press on the boil with your fingers, you feel a rustling noise."
E aquel que es per vena es redon al manifest del cors.	"And that which is due to a vein appears on the surface of the body."
E seccio sobre aquest apostema es error, e majorment en aquel que es dejos las aysselhas, e en les angonars, e en le col, e en motz locs del cors; e es mot gran, donc cove que la sua curacio am ferr sia esquivada, e aquel que es en las extramitatz, o al cap, cove que sia evitat.	"And incision on this boil is an error, and especially so in those that are near the armpits, in the angles of the chest, in the neck, and in many other parts of the body. And it is very large, therefore its cure with iron should be avoided; but if it is on the extremities or on the head, then it should be avoided."
Mays sobre aquel que es de lor per imflacio de l’orrifici de la arceria, scindeys en la codena seccio en le lonc; e aprop huebre la seccio am uncis e aprop la arceria, e deliura de las tunicas entro que sia descuberta.	"But concerning that which is due to inflammation of the sheath of the artery, incise along the cord in a long line; and then widen the incision with forceps and expose the artery, and free it from its tunics until it is exposed."
E aprop met sobre aquel agulha e fay aquela penetrar entro al autre latz, e estrenh la arceria am fiel doble en dos locs, — la qual causa yeu a tu eyssenhegui en extraccio de doas arcerias les quals so en les templars.	"And then place that needle and make it penetrate to the other side, and tie the artery with double thread in two places, — which is what you do when extracting two arteries which are on the temples."
E aprop punh le loc le qual es entre dos liamentz am spatum entro que yesca le sanc tot que es en lu, e sia dissolvut le apostema.	"And then pierce the place that is between the two threads with a spatula until all the blood in it is discharged and the boil is resolved."
E aprop administra curacio en la qual es engendrat poyre entro que caian les liamentz; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz convenientz ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	"And then apply treatment where putrefaction has occurred until the threads fall off; and then care for it with an appropriate ointment until it is healed."
E si es apostema per seccio de vena, lahoras cove que tu tenguas am la tua ma aquo que es a tu possible del apostema am la codena, e aprop intromet la agulha dejos le loc le qual tu has tengut dejos la tua ma, e fay aquela penetrar; e sia en aquela fil doble entro que tu extraguas aquel del autre latz, e aprop ligua le apostema am bo liament segon que yeu he dit a tu en le liament de uva4 de doas partz am doas extremitatz del fil.	"And if it is a boil due to the section of a vein, then you should hold as much of the boil with your hand as possible near the cord, and then insert the needle beyond the place where you have held it with your hand, and make it penetrate; and thread that double thread through which you extract it from the other side, and then tie the boil with two threads according to what I told you in the section on the grapevine of two parts with two ends of the thread."
Mays si temes que extraguam le fil, lahoras entromet le fiel am aquela agula dejos tot le apostema deves la inscizio de la agulha primieyra, e strenh les tieus fiels en quatre locs.	"If you fear the thread may slip out, then insert the needle with that hook and remove all the abscess through the first incision, and strengthen your thread in four places."
Aprop secca le apostema en le mieg loc de lu entro que quan es yssit aquo que es en lu, lahoras tu inscideys la superfluitat de la codena, e layssa aquo que de lu es liat.	"After you have dried the abscess in its middle part within which it was exited, then incise the surplus of the cord, and leave that which is tied."
E aprop pausa sobre lu pulvil le qual has submergit en vi e oli, e aprop administra la curacio la qual es fayta am calguas e enguentz entro que sia sanat.	"And furthermore, place on the wound the powder which you have submerged in wine and oil, and then apply the treatment made with bandages and compresses until it is healed."
Capitol l del apostema le qual accideys per torcio de nervis.	Chapter 1: On Abscess caused by twisting of nerves
Ayssi cum accideys apostema en arceria e en vena, e semblantment accideys apostema en les nervis quan accideys en lor percussio o accideys per trebal superfluable, e per semblantz.	"So too does abscess occur in arteries and veins, and similarly it occurs in nerves when they are struck or subjected to excessive labor."
E es fayt le mays de lu en les locs dels adjutoris o del talo, o en tot loc en le qual so maugudas las juncturas.	"And this happens more often in the locations of the elbows or heels, or in any place where the joints are more movable."
E es apostema greu, e es asemblat a la color del autre cors, e es en las majors de lu disposicios ses de lor e quan es streyt am vehementia, sent en lu le malaute semblant stupor.	"And it is a severe abscess, similar in color to the rest of the body, and is in its greatest dispositions without release when pressed with violence; then it feels like a stupor."
E no es apostema agreguat en le preon del cors, e per so es dejos la codena, e el es maugut a tota partida e no va a las partidas denant ni detras.	"And it is not aggregated abscess in the front of the body; therefore it leaves the cord behind and moves to all parts but does not go before nor after them."
Donc aquo de aquels que es en las juncturas no cove que sia envasit am ferr, quar fort leu endevenguera contracio.	"Therefore those that are in the joints need not be treated with iron, for it would cause great contraction."
Mays aquel que es en le cap o en le front fen la codena am spatum.	"But that which is in the head or forehead should cut the cord with a scalpel."
Mays si es apostema pauc, lahoras te aquel am les forfecs e abscindeys aquel de razitz.	If it's a small abscess, then apply leeches to it and cut it out in pieces.
E si es gran, lahoras tu le suspen am unci, e excorja aquel, e aprop osta aquel; e ajusta la plagua am sutura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if it's large, then suspend a sling under it, cut it open, and remove its contents. Then adjust the wound with stitches, and treat it until it heals.
Capitol .li.	Chapter 52.
De seccio de apostema le qual accideys de cheil que accideys al ventre.	Of the incision of an abscess which occurs in the thigh that occurs on the abdomen.
Endeveno ad alcus homes motas veguadas en les ventres de aquels e en las autras partidas del cors de aquels theils les quals son apelatz funguals per similitut de aquels am funges, dels quals la razitz es subtil e·l cap de aquel es gros; e ja las labias de aquels so conversas, e es de aquels que es petit, e es de aquels que es mot magnificat.	And therefore it is necessary to observe how often this disease occurs in the bellies of those people and in other parts of their body which are called fungous because of their similarity with fungi; whose root is subtle but whose head is thick; and sometimes its lips become inverted, and there are some that are small, and others that are very large.
E yeu ja e vist un, e en le ventre de lu eran dos theils les quals eran mays a funges semblantz, e no era diferencia entre aquels blancs, de menuda razitz.	And I have seen one which had two parts in its belly that resembled fungi more; and there was no difference between them, both were white with thin roots.
E ja las labias de aquels eran enversadas e se fendian, e humiditat corria de aquel tot temps.	And the lips of those were inverted and opened, and moisture flowed from it all the time.
Donc yeu inscidegui aquels e atrobegui en la un en pes quays xviii unc. e l’autre quays vi unc.	Therefore I incised them and removed one weighing eighteen ounces and the other six ounces.
E la operacio en la inscizio de lor es que consideres lahoras si·l malaute es humit, e la color de atheil es blanca, humit, de subtil razitz; lahoras tu le inscideys am spatum lat, e sian en la presencia tua cauteris en le foc, quar motas veguadas deves la seccio de lu es expellit mot sanc; e si te ventz le sanc, cauteriza aquel.	"And the operation for this condition is to consider first if the patient is humid, and if the color of their skin is pale, humid, and subtle. Then you should incise with a broad knife, and have cauteries in the fire present, because many times much blood will be expelled from the section; and if blood comes out, cauterize that."
E si vezes le malaute pauruc e temeros, guarda te de inscizio am ferr; mays lahoras pren fiel de plom recent fayt, e strenh am aquel atheil, la manieyra del qual es aquela que havem dita; e leyssa aquel per dos dias.	"And if the patient is pale and afraid, guard yourself from incising with iron; but rather take fresh lead, and apply it to that skin, in the manner which we have said above; and leave it for two days."
E aprop ajusta en la strictura del fil de plom; donc, no cesses strenher le plom granre devetz en theil, entro que sia abscindit e cayha per se ses trebalh.	"And appropriate to the narrowing of the lead thread; therefore, do not cease applying the lead until it is absorbed and falls away by itself without your effort."
Mays si theil es de grossa razitz, lahoras en la inscizio de lu es alcuna causa de temor e de paor, e majorment en aquel que es en le ventre.	"But if the patient has thick skin, then in incising it there is cause for fear and trembling, especially one who is in the belly."
Mays possibla es que tu inscindas la maytat de lu , e aprop cauteriza aquel per que no retorne.	"But it is possible that you may cut the membrane of it, and appropriately cauterize it so that it does not return."
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanada la plagua.	"And then treat what has been healed from the plague."
E guarda te que tu no presumas inscidir theil le qual es de fusca color, de pauc sentiment, de leg reguardament, quar aquel es absi cancros.	"And be careful not to presume to incise a member that is dark in color, insensitive, or poorly regarded, for such is highly malignant."
E yeu vindre am rememoracio de cranc aprop aysso.	"And then bring me some remembrance of crane fat herewith."
Capitol .lii.	"The capital [letter] .lii."
De curacio de eminencia del umbilic.	"On the treatment of prominence of the navel."
Eminencia del umbilic es fayta per motas causas; o per fissuras del ciphac le qual es sobre le ventre, e yeys de lu la tela o budel segon que endeve en las autras rupturas; o per sanc le qual flueys de vena o de arceria segon que es denant dit, o per ventositat coarctada en lu.	"Prominence of the navel may occur due to many causes: from fissures of the cicatrix which is on the abdomen, and sometimes from a hernia arising from it; or from blood that flows from veins or arteries, as mentioned earlier; or from constriction of wind in it."
Mays si es per fissura del ciphac e per yssiment de la tela, lahoras la color del apostema es semblant a la color del cors; e es leon ses dolor, e aprop appar de divers situament.	"But if it is due to a fissure of the cicatrix and protrusion of tissue, then the color of the tumor resembles that of the skin; and there is no pain, and it appears suddenly in various locations."
E si es per egressio del budel, lahoras le situament de aquel am lu de aquo que havem recontat, de mays vehement diversitat, e cum tu premes aquel am les tieus ditz es occultat, e aprop retorna; e fort leu es am lu so, e es magnificat mot deves le introt de banh e vehement trebalh.	"And if it is due to protrusion of the hernia, then its situation is more variable than what has been mentioned earlier. When you press on it with your fingers, it disappears and returns suddenly; it is hard and loud when sound is produced, and there is much difficulty in passing baths and severe distress."
Mays si per humiditat, lahoras es leon e no es occultat quan premes am la tua ma, ni es constrengut, ni es cregut.	"But if it is due to moisture, then there is no pain, nor does it disappear when you press on it with your hand; nor is it constricted or swollen."
E si es per sanc, lahoras am aquestz senhals apareys le apostema a negror declinant.	"And if it is due to blood, then the tumor appears dark in color."
Mays si es per carn nada, lahoras es apostema greu, gros e dur, e es ficat segon una quantitat.	"But if it is due to raw flesh, then the tumor is large, thick and hard; it is filled according to its quantity."
Mays si es per ventositat, lahoras le tocament de lu es leon.	"But if it is due to wind, then touching it causes no pain."
E la operacio en lu es que consideras lahoras si la eminencia de l’umbilic es per sanc de arceria, o de vena, o per ventositat; lahoras cove que sias prohibit de la curacio de lu, quar en aquela es temor e paor ayssi cum t’e ensenhat en le capitol en le qual he dit les apostemas per arceria e per vena.	"And the operation for it is that you should consider whether the prominence of the navel is due to blood from an artery or vein, or to wind; then if so, you should refrain from treating it, because in such cases there is fear and dread, as has been taught in the chapter where I have spoken about tumors resulting from arteries and veins."
E si la eminencia del umbilic es per le budel o per la tela, lahoras cove que comandes al malaute que tengua le ale sieu, e sia stant extendut; e aprop senha am tenta en le circuit de tot le umbilic, e aprop comanda a lu que stia envers entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos, e aprop circunda am spatum lat en le circuit del umbilic sobre le loc le qual has senhat am la tenta; e aprop exten la maytat del apostema a las partidas desus am unci gran; e aprop lia en le circuit am fiel fort o am ceda e la manieyra del liar decent.	"And if the prominence of the navel is due to hernia or tissue, then you should order the patient to lie on his back with his legs extended. Then sign all around the navel with a tent, and immediately order him to lie face down between your hands over the two hips, and immediately encircle it with a broad spatula in the circuit of the navel where you have signed with the tent; then extend the mouth of the tumor upwards with a large hook, and ligate around it tightly with strong flax or thread using a proper tying method."
E aprop huebre le mieg del apostema extendut sobre le liament e intromet le dit tieu en aquel indic e quereys le budel; e si tu l’as atrobat ni guardat per le liament, lahoras tu extratz alxorati e impelleys le budel a las partidas dedintz del ventre.	"And immediately grasp the middle of the extended tumor with your left hand and introduce your finger into its mouth seeking for the hernia; if you find it caught by the membrane, then release it carefully and push the hernia back into its place inside the abdomen."
E si has atrobada la tela, lahoras pren aquel am unci; e inscideys las superfluitatz de lu.	"And if you have found tissue, then grasp it with a hook; cut away its excess."
Mays si es contraria a tu arceria o vena, lahoras circunda aquel mot, e aprop retorna a la tua operacio; e pren dos agulhas e met en aquelas dos fiels fortz e entromet dos agulhas en le circuit le qual has feyt entorn le apostema en manieyra de crotz, las quals fassas penetrar; e aprop strenh le apostema en quatre partidas sobre las agulhas.	"But if it is opposed to your artery or vein, then encircle that area and immediately return to your operation. Then take two needles and thread them with strong flax, and introduce the needles into the circuit which you have made around the tumor in such a way as to cross each other; pierce these through; then tighten the tumor in four places over the needles."
E si tu vols, osta las agulhas e leyssa le loc entro que poyresca la carn extenduda e caia per si; o inscideys aquel quan es subtiliat e se poyreys, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	"And if you wish to do so, remove the needles and let the wound heal by itself with the flesh extended. Or else cut it when it is ripe and ready to burst, and then treat it with a suitable ointment for wounds until it heals."
E si la eminencia del ombilic es de carn nada en lu o per humiditat, lahoras cove que tu conquaves le apostema ayssi cum havem dit e estraguas le sanc o la humiditat, la qual atrobas en lu, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove e que consolide le loc.	"And if the prominence of the navel is made of raw flesh or due to moisture, then you should evacuate the tumor as has been said and remove the blood or moisture which you find in it. Then treat it with a suitable ointment and dressing that will consolidate the area."
Capitol .liii.	Chapter LIII
De curacio de cranc.	About the treatment of cancer.
Ja havem dit, en la divisio, de specia de cranc e en qual manieyra es via a la curacio de lu am medicinas, e que es squivador en lu la curacio am ferr per so que no sia ulcerat; e havem dit cranc engendrat en la mayra e cautela de la curacio de lu.	We have already spoken in the division of cancer and how it is treated with medicines, and that surgery should be avoided for fear of causing an ulcer. We have also said that cancer can be generated from a mole orwart.
E diyssero les antics que alcunas veguadas cranc es en loc on es possibla la eradicacio de lu, ayssi cum de cran le qual es en las mamillas o en la coyssa e a lor semblantz dels membres allocat a estrayre tot aquel, e majorment quan es comensant petit.	And the ancients said that sometimes cancer can be removed from a place where it is possible to eradicate it, as in the case of cancer found in the breasts or scrotum, which they deemed appropriate to excise entirely, especially when it is still small.
Mays quan es antiquat e es gra, no cove que te propries a lu, quar yeu non pogui sanar de aquel alcu ni no he vist autre, ni que sia pervengut ad aquo.	But when it is advanced and large, it is not appropriate to approach it, for I have never seen anyone healed from such an ulcer nor have I heard of any other way.
E la operacio en lu es quan es allocat ayssi cum havem dit, es que tu precedescas e laysses le malaute e purgues de colera negra alcunas veguadas, e aprop sagna aquel, si es atrobada replecio manifesta.	And the operation in such cases is as follows: first prepare and let the patient lie down. Then purge him with black colic medicine several times, and if there is a manifest tumor, mark it off with a tent.
E aprop prepara le malaute am preparacio en le qual sia locat am operacio, e aprop prohiceys en le trauc uncis les quals cove ad aquel; e aprop concava de tota part am la codena sego bona perexcrutacio entro que no romangua alcuna causa de las razitz de lu.	Then prepare the patient for surgery at the site of the tumor. Then place cloths appropriate to that area on the traction table. And then circumcise it with a good, careful incision without leaving any cause for bleeding.
E layssa correr le sanc, e no abscidas aquel leugierament, e exprem les locs, e abstergeys le sanc gros tot am la tua ma o am instrument am le qual es a tu possible dels instruments.	Then let the blood flow out freely, do not remove it lightly. Then press on the area and wipe away all the thick blood with your hand or an appropriate instrument.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat de sanc gros inscizio de vena o de arceria, lahoras cauterisa aquela entro que·l flux del sanc sia cessat, e aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	But if you encounter difficulty with thick blood from vein or artery, then cauterize that area until the flow of blood stops. Then treat it with other appropriate treatment until it heals.
Capitol .liv.	Chapter LIV.
De curacio de ydropici.	Of the treatment of dropsy
Nos ja havem recomtat, en la divisio, de las specias de ydropici de l’aygua, e les senhals de quascuna especia, de la curacio de lu am medicinas.	We have already mentioned, in the division, the types of dropsy of water and their symptoms for each type, as well as its treatment with medicines.
E aquela la qual es curada am ferr no es sino la specia de althitas sola, e no es aproximat am ferr a la specia de timpanistres ni a la especia de yposarcha, quar aquo es mortal.	And the one that is cured with iron is only the species of dropsy alone, and it is not close to the species of tympanites nor to the species of hypocharesis, for this one is fatal.
E quan tu ja has medicat aquesta especia de ydropici timpanistre am medicinas e no comfereys la tua medicacio, lahoras considera, quar si al malaute ja es conseguida debelitat, o es am aquel autra malautia otra ydropici, ayssi cum si es en lu tos o cos de ventre e semblant ad aquels, lahoras guarda te que no le mediques am ferr, quar temor es sobre aquo.	And when you have treated this tympanitic dropsy with medicines and do not see any improvement in the patient's condition, then consider whether the patient has already achieved debility from another disease or if there is another kind of dropsy present, such as in cases of cough or stomach problems. Be careful then that you do not treat them with iron, for there is danger in this.
Mays si tu vezes le malaute de vertut exuberant, e am lu no es autra malautia sino ydropici tant solament, e no enfant ni vielh, lahoras la manieyra de la operacio de lu es que tu eleves le malaute entre las tuas mas, e le ministre aprop lu exprema le ventre de lu am la sua ma, enpellen la aygua a la partida dejos del pentenilh, e aprop pren spatum spinos segon aquesta forma:	But if you find the patient to be strong and healthy, and there is no other disease present besides dropsy alone (not infancy or old age), then the method of operation for this case is as follows: elevate the patient between your hands, and have an assistant press the patient's abdomen with their hand, squeezing out the water from both sides towards the groin area. Then take a sharp needle (spatula) according to this form:
sia de dos partz agudas lonc, de aguda extremitat ayssi cum spatum; mays empero sia en lu alcuna brevitat petit a petit, per so que en la operacio am aquel no passes entro al budel, e que ledas aquel.	"It should be two parts long and sharp-pointed like a sword; however, it should be slightly shorter gradually, so that during the operation it does not go inside the intestine, and it may lash out."
E aprop considera si la generacio de ydropici es de part dels budels, quar lahoras cove que tu am la seccio te alonhes del ombelic per la quantitat de tres ditz a las partidas dejos, en le dreyt de lu sobre le pentenilh.	"And consider whether the generation of hydrocele is from the intestines, because when cutting you should stay away from the navel by about three fingers' width to the right on the side."
Mays si la generacio de hydropici es per malautia del fietge, lahoras la tua seccio sia sinistra del ombilic per tres ditz.	"But if the generation of hydrocele is due to a disease of the liver, then your cut should be three fingers' width left of the navel."
E si la generacio de lu es per la melsa, lahoras la tua seccio sia en le las dreyt.	"And if its cause is the spleen, then your cut should be on the left side."
E no cove que la tua seccio sia sobre le costat sobre le qual vol jaser le malaute per que no corron las superfluitatz ad aquel loc freul.	"And it is necessary that your cut be on the side opposite to where you want to treat the illness, so that excess fluid does not accumulate at that location."
E aprop perfora am le instrument tota la codena, e aprop entromet en aquela seccio, e eleva la tua ma am le spatum entre la codena e·l siphac, e tu excorja aquel; e si’ la quantitat de una ungla o enviro.	"And therefore pierce with the instrument all along the canal, and approximately enter that section, and lift your hand with the spatula between the canal and the spermatic cord, and you should strip away that; if it amounts to about a fingernail or less."
E aprop perforo le ciphac entro que pervengua le spatum al loc vuoyt, e es loc de l’aygua.	"And therefore pierce the spermatic cord until the spatula reaches its desired location, and that is the location of the water."
E aprop extratz aquel e entromet un instrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	"And then extract it, and insert an instrument which has this shape:"
e es semblant a canula de argent subtil; es fayt de argent o de eram o de lato leon, al qual en la partida pus bassa de lu es un petit trauc, e en les costatz de lu so tres traucs: dos de una partida e un del autra partida; e fayta es la extremitat de lu insciza segon la manieyra de pluma, ayssi cum vezes:	"... and it resembles a thin silver cannula. It is made of silver or iron or lion's hair, at the lower end of which there is a small hole, and on its sides there are three holes: two on one side and one on the other. And its tip is shaped like an inkwell feather, thus:
E en la extramitat de lu pus sobirana es armilla, quar quan le instrument perve al aygua, lahoras aquela tantost deysen sobre le instrument, donc evacua de l’aygua en la ora miega quantitat, quar si tu evacuas de aquela mes que no cove en la hora, fort leu mor le malaute per resolucio del sieu spirit animal, o accideys a lu cincopi que es appropinquada la mort.	"At the outer end of him they placed an armillary sphere, for when the instrument reaches the water, then that immediately descends upon the instrument, thus evacuating water in about half quantity. For if you evacuate more than necessary at that hour, it could cause death due to excessive resolution of his animal spirits, or even bring him close to death."
Mays evacua de aquela segon la quantitat de la vertut de lu e segon que significan a tu las disposicios del malaute de la vertut del pols de lu e de la bontat de lu.	"Evacuate that according to the quantity of his virtue and according to what you understand about the dispositions of his illness, the virtue of his pulse, and his temperament."
E aprop extrats le instrument, e rete l’aygua la qual causa es quar tantost es retenguda per la codena la qual rete le trauc que es sobre le ciphac del qual e recomtat a tu que perfores aquel segon aquela manieyra.	"And when you remove the instrument, retain the water that is, for it will soon be retained by the chain that retains the tube which is over the cistern. And I advise you to pierce him in this manner."
E aprop itera le instrument al autra dia si vezes le malaute tollerant aquo, e extratz de la aygua petita quantitat, e fay aquo per alcus jorns sobre temor, e guarda te de error entro que no romangua de l’aygua sino pauc.	"And if you repeat the procedure on another day if the illness is tolerating it, then remove a small quantity of water, and do this for some days, but be careful not to leave too much water."
Mays si tu temes sobre le malaute, e leyssas de l’aygua gran quantitat, lahoras cura aquel am sepultura en arena cauda, e mota suzor en banh, e al solelh espere per lonc temps; e cura aquel am medicinas dessicativas entro que sia sanat.	"But if you are afraid about the illness and remove a large quantity of water, then bury him in dry sand up to his chest, apply much sweat in bathing, and expose him to the sun for a long time. And treat him with drying medicines until he is healed."
E cauteriza sobre le stomac, e la melsa e·l fitge aprop la extraccio de l’aygua, segon que yeu he recontat en aquo que es precedit.	"And cauterize the stomach and the liver near the extraction of water, as I have described above in what has been said before."
Capitol .lv.	"Chapter L.V."
De la curacio dels enfants les quals so natz les locs de la urina no-perforatz.	"Concerning the treatment of children born with unopened urinary passages."
Alcunas veguadas alcun dels enfantz es eyssi del ventre de la sua mayre e·l cap de la sua mixtio no es perforat (o es trauc streyt o no es en son loc).	"Sometimes, in some children who are born from their mother's womb, the opening of the head is not perforated (or it is very narrow or it does not have its opening)."
Donc cove coytar am perforacio de lu tantost que es nascut am spatum mot subtil segon aquesta forma:	"It is therefore necessary to perform a circumcision with perforation as soon as possible after birth, according to this method:"
E aprop pausa en le trauc un clavil subtil de plom e ligua aquel, e te per tres jorns o per .iiii.tre.	"Then pause for three days or four."
E quant vol urinar sia remaugut e hurine; e aprop retorne aquel.	"And when it is time to urinate, remove the splint and let him urinate; then return it."
E si tu no pauses le plom, ja es possible que la urina la qual va sobre le loc, no leysa aquest claure.	"But if you do not pause the lead, it is likely that the urine which falls on the opening will not close it."
Mays aquel del qual le trauc es streyt sia medicat am clavil de Plom, ayssi cum havem dit, per trops dias entro que sia amplificat.	"However, if the passage is too narrow, treat it with a lead splint as described above for several days until it is widened."
Mays aquels en les quals es le trauc no en son loc, so leditz, la qual causa es quar de aquels, aquel que es nat e·l trau es deves la fi del cap de la vergua per que no pot urinar a las partidas dedintz, entro que eleva la vergua am la sua ma a las partidas desus; e no es a lu generacio, per so quar le sperma no pot pervenir a la mayre segon rectitut, e es malautia mot laga.	"However, in those cases where the passage is not at its opening, it should be led downwards. This happens because some children are born with the head of the penis at the end of the glans so that they cannot urinate downwards but must raise the penis with their hand upwards. This is not due to their nature and it causes great harm since the semen cannot reach the mother rectally, which is a serious illness."
E la manieyra de la operacio en lu es que·l malaute sia envessat sobre le sieu dos, e aprop exten le cap de la vergua de lu am la tua ma sinistra am vehement extraccio, e inscideys le cap del cap de la vergua del loc del perpucii am spatum agut, ayssi cum es inscizio de pluma, o que tu ne razas alcuna partida, per so que·l mieg de lu vengua semblant al cap de la vergua e que le trauc caia en le mieg loc segon que cove.	"And the manner of performing this operation is as follows: have the patient lie on his back and then extend the head of the penis from him with your left hand using vigorous traction. Then incise the opening at the tip of the glans with a sharp blade, like cutting a feather, taking care not to cut any part of the skin deeply so that only the midpoint of the penis is opened and the passage falls into its proper location."
E guarda te que en la tua operacio de flux de sanc, quar motas vetz accideys aquo; e pausa te a lu am aquo que abscindeys le sanc, e cura la plagua entro que si’ sanada.	"And be careful when performing an operation for the flow of blood, as this happens often. Pause the bleeding with whatever you have at hand and treat the wound until it heals."
Capitol .lvi.	"Chapter LV."
De albater le qual accideys en le prepucii en le cap de la vergua e de corropcio e negror e adherencia del prepucii del cap de la vergua.	"Iron deposit that occurs on the foreskin of the penis, characterized by hardness, blackness and adhesion of the foreskin to the head of the penis."
Motas veguadas accideys aquest albater en la vergua e es eminencia de carn laga.	"Many times this iron deposit occurs on the penis, accompanied by a swelling of flesh."
E de aquela una es maligna e autra es no-maligna.	"And among these, one is malignant and another is benign."
No-maligna, cove que suspendas am unci subtil e abscindas aquela entro que aquela mondes tota; e aprop pausa sobre aquela coto submirgit en enguent egipciac; e aprop aquel, cura le am enguent diafinicon entro que sia sanat.	"Benign: provided you grasp it with a fine hook and cut it off where it can be completely removed; then press gently on it with Egyptian cupping glass; afterwards apply the defattening ointment until healed."
E si albater es maligna, de lega color, lahoras cove que tu aministres cauteri aprop la inscizio de lu e la razio de lu.	"And if the deposit is malignant and dark in color, then you should apply cautery around its incision and its root."
Mays si albater es en le prepuci del cap de la vergua no-circumcis, e la una partida de albater es dedintz le prepucii e l’autra partida es defora, lahoras cove que tu ostes albater le qual es dedintz al comensament entro que es consolidat; e lahora tu cura aquel deforo, quar quan tu curas aquel ensemps le prepuci, no es asegurat que no sia trinquat.	"But if the deposit is on the foreskin of an uncircumcised penis, and part of it is inside the foreskin and another part is outside, then you should remove the inner portion once it has solidified; afterwards treat the outer portion separately, because when you treat them together with the foreskin, it may become trapped."
E ja eysamen accideys en les genetius e en le prepuci negror e corruccio, adonc cove que tu conquavas tot aquo que ja es denigrat e que ja se vol corrompre o que ja es corrumput; e aprop lineys sobre aquel aprop aquo am mel, le qual es contusit am farina de scorsa de milgrana e de errs trissatz e crivellatz.	"And if these conditions occur in the genitals or the foreskin and are accompanied by darkness and corruption, then you should cut away everything that is already darkened and about to decay or has already decayed; afterwards apply a poultice of honey mixed with ground almonds, barley grains, and three kinds of herbs sieved."
E aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sana.	"And then treat it with the other cure until it is healed."
Mays si endeve flux de sanc, lahoras aministra cauteri lunar segon aquesta forma:	"But if there is a flow of blood, then cauterize according to this method:"
quar cauteri juvatiu es a dos disposicios ensemps, so es a flux de sanc e a la plagua quan es corrumpuda.	"Because cautery has two purposes: to stop bleeding and to treat gangrene when it is corrupted."
E si le cap de la vergua es corrodut e es destruit tot en la hora, lahoras cove que tu intrometas en lo meat del prepucii una canula de plom per so que le malaute urina per aquela.	"And if the glans penis is completely destroyed in one moment, then you should insert a lead cannula into the meatus of the foreskin so that urine may flow through it."
En la adherencia del prepucii am le cap de la vergua (et aquesta adherencia no accideys sino en aquel del qual le prepucii es sa, e sobre lu no es exhigida circumcizio; e quan accideys adherencia per plagua o per apostema) cove que excorjas am spatum obtus entro que sia dissolvut le liament e sia deliurat le cap de la vergua de tota partida.	"In the adhesion of the foreskin to the glans penis (and this condition occurs only in those whose foreskin is intact, and circumcision is not required; but it can also occur due to inflammation or swelling) you should use a blunt spatula to gently separate them until the adhesion is dissolved and the glans penis is completely freed from all parts."
E si es dificil desirnir aquelas exquisidament, lahoras cove que tu excorjes am spatum alcuna causa del cap de la vergua e del prepucii, e aysso es quar le prepucii, quan es subtil, fort leu es perforat per la sua subtilitat leugierament.	"And if it is difficult to separate them carefully, then you should use a scalpel to cut through the adhesion at the glans penis and foreskin, because sometimes the foreskin, being thin and delicate, may be perforated accidentally."
E aprop separa entre·l prepucii e·l cap de la vergua am dra7 de li subtil, le qual ja es mulhat en l’aygua frega per que no adherescan autra veguada.	"And then separate the foreskin and glans penis with a fine, soft piece of cloth that has been moistened in warm water to prevent them from sticking together again."
E aprop sia curat am vi stiptic entro que sia consolidat.	"And then treat it with styptic wine until it is consolidated."
Capitol .lvii.	"Chapter Fifty-Seven."
De mundificacio dels enfants e de la curacio de aquo que accideys ad aquels de circumcisio.	"The purification of children and the treatment of what happens to them during circumcision."
Circumcisio no es solucio de continuitat ayssi cum las autras plaguas: mays empero cum sia de la nostra operacio e de nostra voluntat, e lus de aquela sia propriament en les enfants, es necessari que asignem en aquela milhor operacio e via pus leugiera perdusent a salut.	Circumcision is not a cure for continuity like other diseases. However, since it is an operation and within our willpower, particularly in children, we should assign the best method and path that is least painful to achieve health.
Donc dic que les antics no diyssero circumcisio en alcu dels lors libres, quar no n’usan en las suas leys, e no es sino quar havem aquisit per speriment, la qual causa es que yeu he atrobat la major partida dels artifexs e dels barbies usar circumcisir e mundificacio am novacula e am torores; e usan de liament am fiel e de inscizio am la ungla.	It is said that the ancients did not mention circumcision in any of their books because they did not use it in their laws. However, we have acquired this knowledge through experience, which is why most skilled surgeons and barbers practice circumcision using clamps and torches; they also use lime plaster and scrape with a nail.
E yeu ja he prohadas totas aquestas manieras e no atrobegui milhor mondificacio am forfexs, am liament am fiel que en mondificacio cum la ungla, quar motas vetz efugeys la codena pus desus, quar la codena del prepucii a dos tunicas, e roman la tonica pus dejos, e fort leu es forsat ad autra inscizio e dolor sicura.	"I have already tried all these methods and found no better modification with forceps, using linen soaked in pitch for modification as with the nail, for many times it escapes the skin above because the foreskin has two tunics, one remains below, and it is very difficult to avoid another incision and certain pain."
E am mundificacio le qual es fayta per alphecati, e es digital, del qual usan les sabatiers, no es segurada la inscizio de la extremitat del membre viril, quar fort leu intra en le trau de lu.	"The modification which is done by apothecaries and is called 'digital', used by barbers, does not ensure the incision of the extreme end of the male member because it often goes too far into the skin."
Mays en la operacio am ungla, fort leu obazeys ferr e corromp la tua operacio.	"However, in the operation using a nail, you may accidentally cut with iron and ruin your operation."
E la codena del enfant es breu per natura, e motas veguadas nays en tal manieyra que no ha necessitat de mondificacio, e yeu he vist aquel.	"Moreover, the foreskin of a child is short by nature, many times it appears in such a manner that it does not require modification, and I have seen that."
Mays de la mondificacio que·s fa am forfexs e liamentz am fiel, la bontat, experiment descrobic a mi, quar las forfexs so de proporcional inscizio, per aquo quar la acuitat que es desus es ayssi cum la acuitat que es dejos; e donc cum tu premes la tua ma so proporcionadas dos acuitatz, e inscideysso segon una comperacio en un temps; e es fayta compressio del fiel am figura contenent la codena de la vergua de tota partida, am le qual no catz error de tot.	"However, concerning the modification done with forceps and linen soaked in pitch, I have found experimentally that forceps provide a proportional incision because their sharpness above is equal to the sharpness below. Therefore, when you press your hand so proportionally on both sharp parts, you cut evenly according to one comparison at once; and there is compression of the pitch with a shape containing the foreskin completely without any error."
E la manieyra de la operacio primeyra es que tu fassas estar le enfant majorment si es de aquels que entendo un petit, que no fassas sino que tu lies le fiel en la sua vergua tant solament, e que leysses aquel entro al autra dia.	"And the first way of performing this operation is that you should keep the child awake as much as possible if he understands a little, and that you should only apply the pitch to his foreskin at once, and leave him like that for another day."
E aprop fay aquel alegrar en tota aquela manieyra que es a tu possibla de aquo que recep la sua intelligencia.	"And accordingly, make the child happy in every possible way according to your ability so that he may receive his intelligence."
E aprop fa aquel estar entre las tuas mas estatuir preparadament, e no sia ges cezent; e occulta las forfexs en la tua ma o dejos le tieu pe, que l’enfant no veia aquelas ni degun autre dels instruments.	"And accordingly, keep the child between your arms prepared, and do not let him be frightened or see the forceps in your hand or below your chin so that he does not see those nor any other of the instruments."
E aprop entremet la tua ma a la vergua de lu e suffla en la codena, e tira aquela entro que sia eyssit le cap de la vergua, e aprop mondifica aquel de aquo que es agregat en ela de sordicia.	"And accordingly, insert your hand between the child's thighs and blow on the foreskin, pulling it outward until its head appears, and promptly remove anything that has adhered to it due to dirt."
E aprop lia le loc signat am fiel dobla, e aprop ligua pus bas de aquel un petit le segon liament, e aprop te am le dit pous e endic tieu le loc del liament dejos am bona retencio, e inscideys entre dos liaments.	"And accordingly, apply the pre-signaled place with doubled pitch, and promptly bind it a little lower with the second linen, and then press your finger there while pushing down on the foreskin below with good retention, and cut between the two linens."
E aprop eleva la codena sus leugierament e estratz le cap de la vergua; e aprop leyssa le sanc corre petit e petit, quar es milhor ; e pausa polvera desus e sobre la polvera pausa drap en le qual es spandut mugol de huou coyt en ayguaros concosit am oli rozat recent bo; e layssa aquel sobre aquel entro al autra dia; e cura aquel am curacio entro que sia sanat.	"And accordingly, gently lift the foreskin upward and remove its head; then let the blood flow slowly, little by little, for it is better so; then apply powder on top of that and over the powder apply cloth moistened with fresh rose oil mixed with egg yolk cooked in hot water, and leave him like that overnight; and take care of him until he is healed."
La forma de las forfexs a mondificacio, aquesta es la forma:	"This is the form of the forceps used for circumcision:"
Sian las unas extramitatz no-talhantz e las autras sian talhant, que non sia yssit le ram del clau, e sia la longitut de las doas acuitatz ayssi cum la longitut de dos manubres engualment.	"The outer edges of the forceps are not sharpened while the inner ones are sharp, so that the root of the nail is not exposed. The length of both sharp parts should be equal to the length of two fingers placed side by side."
Mays la error en mundificacio es quar fort leu efugeys la codena intrinseca tota, o partida de lu deves la inscizio.	"However, an error in circumcision occurs when you hastily cut off too much or part of the foreskin beyond the incision."
Donc cove que tu extendas aquela de la tua hora am la tua ungla denant la apostemacio del loc e que inscidas aquela segon equalitat.	Therefore, you should extend it with your fingernail in front of the inflammation of that place and cut according to equality.
E si no la podes tenir am la tua ungla, lahoras extratz aquela am unci e inscideys aquela.	"And if you cannot hold it with your fingernail, then extract it with forceps and cut it."
Mays si son passatz tres dias, e roman aquo que es imflat dejos la vergua apostemat, lahoras tu leyssa aquo entro que sia cedat le apostema caut, e excorja aquel am fecilitat, e inscidex aquel segon que a tu es preparat.	"But if three days have passed and there is still inflammation below the foreskin, then let it be until the inflammation has subsided naturally, carefully scrape off the scab, and cut according to what you have prepared."
E guarda te del cap de la vergua, quar no nosera a lu aquo.	"And guard yourself from cutting off the head of the foreskin, for that would be disastrous."
E donc cura aquel am aquo que la plagua consolida de las polveras las quals havem recomtadas en le tractat de las polveras.	"And therefore treat him with what strengthens wounds and with the powders which we have recommended in the treatise on powders."
E si es inscidit de la codena sobre mesura, e obezeys a las partidas desus, aquo no notz a lu.	"If it is cut correctly according to measure and you follow the guidelines above, there will be nothing wrong with him."
E mays cura aquel am aquo que havem dit entro que sia sanat.	"And also treat him with what we have said until he is healed."
Capitol .lviii.	Chapter LVII.
De curacio de urina retenguda en la vesiqua.	On the treatment of retained urine in the bladder.
Retencio de urina en la vesica es fayta per oppulacio fayta per peyra o per sanc congilat, o per poyre o per carnada, e semblantz ad aquels de aquo que havem dit de las manieyras de curacio en la divisio.	Retention of urine in the bladder is caused by obesity or by stone or by blood clots, or by poverty or weakness, and those affected have similar treatments to what we have said about the methods of treatment in the division.
E si no es dissolvuda la urina, e veses retencio de lu esser per peyra le qual ja es en le col de la vesica, lahoras cove que le malaute sia encorbat sobre les sieus denolhs.	"And if urine is not dissolved and retention occurs because of stone that is already in the neck of the bladder, then it is necessary for the patient to be bent over on his knees."
E aprop conponeys les pes de aquel sobre le sieu dos e extendas le sieu ventre de la partida pus desus del sieu dos, e le malaute estrengua le sieu ale tant quant es a lu possible.	"And accordingly place the weights on that one's back and stretch his belly from just below his buttocks upwards, and the patient should strain as much as he is able."
Donc lahoras le col de la vesica es costreyt ha espulsio de la peyra a las partidas detras, per que la urina es absolta.	Therefore, the neck of the bladder will be constricted and expulsion of the stone to its usual passages behind occurs, so that urine is released."
E si no es dissolvuda am aquo que havem dit he vehement es fayta la causa sobre le malaute, lahoras cove que aministres extraccio de lu am instrument le qual es apelat siringua, del qual aquesta es la forma: Sia de argent e sia subtil leon conquau, ayssi cum canula de pena de ausel am subtilitat de ray lonc en similitut d’un palm e mig, al qual sia cana subtil en le cap de lu.	"And if it is not dissolved by what we have said and the cause of this trouble remains severe, then you must perform extraction using an instrument called a "syringe," which has the following shape: It should be made of silver and thinly hollowed like a feather quill with subtlety equal to half a palm's length, and it should have a thin canal in its head."
E la manieyra del eyssiment de la urina per aquel es que prenguas le fiel doblat e lies en la extramitat de lu lana o coto per bona liadura; e entrometas las extramitatz del fiel en la partida dejos de la ciringua, e inscideys am las forfexs si superflueys alcuna causa de la lana, mays intromet la en la canula am vehemencia E aprop enongeys la ciringua am boder e am album de huou.	"The method of extracting urine through that is to take doubled fleece and tie it tightly at the outer edge of the wick or cotton; then insert the outer edges of the fleece into the opening behind the syringe, and cut with forceps any excess that may be there. Then insert the wick into the canal vigorously. Next, fill the syringe with egg whites beaten together with border and albumen."
E fay cezer le malaute sobre la selha, e embroca la vesiqua de lu e la vergua am olis umitz, e oli de oliva e ayguaros.	"And make the patient sit on a chair, then embrocate his bladder and urethra with warm olive oil mixed with water."
E aprop entromet la ciringua am facilitat entro que pervengua a la razit de la vergua; e aprop dobla la vergua desus a la partida del embelic; e aprop empelleys la ciringua dintz aquela; e aprop empelleys aquela entro que pervengua a la vesica, e aquela centa le malaute esser pervenguda a la causa vuoda, e no es fayt asso segon aquest orde, sino le meat en le qual va a tortuositat.	"And then insert the syringe gently until it reaches the root of the urethra; then bend the urethra upwards at the navel area; then push the syringe inside that; then push it further until it reaches the bladder, and if it is not done in this order but meets with tortuosity, then use caution."
E aprop exten le fiel am la lana petit a petit, quar la urina siec la lana.	"And then slowly extend the fleece with the wick little by little because urine clings to the wick."
Aprop extratz aquela e fay per curacio urina, e usa ciringua, no cesses fer aquo e usa ciringua entro que sia evacuada la vesica e le malaute atrobe alleviacio.	"And then remove that and treat it with urine. Use the syringe repeatedly until the bladder is emptied and the patient obtains relief."
Capitol .lix.	Chapter LIX
De qualitat de clisterizacio de la vezica am clampcedra e am semblantz instrumentz les quals sian acordants ad aquo.	On the quality of irrigation of the bladder using chamomile flowers and similar instruments that are suitable for this purpose.
Quan accideys en la vesica ulceracio o apostema, o sanc congilat en aquela, o es coartat poyredura, e vols en aquela destillar ayguas e medicinas, lahoras sia fayt am instrument le qual es apelat clampcedra, e aquesta es la forma de lu:	When ulceration or inflammation or blood clots occur in the bladder, or there is a narrowing of the urethra and you wish to irrigate it with water and medications, then use an instrument called "chamomile flowers," which has this shape:
sino que en la extramitat de lu es sorda, so es clausa.	Its outer edge should be blunt and closed.
Et en aquela so tres traucs: dos de la una partida , ayssi quo vezes.	And it has three openings on one side like this:
En le comensament es loc concau, en le qual es aquo que es enpellit, e sia segon quantitat que oppile aquel, ses addicio, entro que quan alcuna causa es ab aquel tirada de las humiditatz, sia atirada, e quan es expellida, am aquo sia atirada, e quan es expellit lonc, segon que fa clampcedra am la qual es phicat naphta en las batalhas de mar.	"In the beginning is a hollow place where this thing resides, called according to its quantity without addition. When any cause draws out moisture from it, let that be drawn out; and when it is expelled, with it let that be drawn out."
Donc cum tu vols prohicir humiditatz en la vesica, entromet la extremitat de clapcedra en la humiditat, e atira am aquel aquo que es empellit a las partidas desus, quar la humiditat es atirada en la conquavitat de clapcedra.	"Therefore, when you wish to expel moisture from the bladder, insert the tip of the reed into the moisture and draw out with it that which is expelled upward, for the moisture is drawn into the hollow of the reed."
E aprop entromet la extramitat de clapcedra en la vergua segon que havem recomtat en la ciringua; e aprop empelleys la humiditat am aquo que empelleys, quar aquela humiditat perve a la vesica tantost, e le malaute cent aquela.	"And so insert the tip of the reed into the urethra as we have described in the circle. And thus expel moisture with that which you expel, for that moisture quickly reaches the bladder and relieves it from its illness."
Forma del cristeri subtil am le qual la vesica es cristerizada, e es aquela la forma:	"This is the form of the subtle sieve through which the bladder is sieved, and this is its shape:"
E sia fayta de argent o de lato, de la qual le cap pus aut sia semblant a petita pluma, e dejos lu cana dedintz liament.	"And it should be made of silver or lead, from which the top should resemble a small feather, and let the cane be hollow inside."
E aprop pren vesica de moto, e pausa en aquela la humiditat que vols cristirizar en la vesica, e aprop lia aquela entre dos am fort liguatura am fiel doble, e escalfa aquela humiditat sobre le foc.	"And then take urine from the person whose bladder you wish to sieve, and place that moisture in it. Then tie that [the sieve] between two strong bands with doubled thread, and heat that moisture over the fire."
E aprop entromet la extremitat del cristeri en la vergua.	"Then insert the tip of the sieve into the urethra."
E aprop estrenh la tua ma sobre la vesica am la humiditat am strectura descent entro que·l malaute centa que aquela humiditat ja es pervenguda a la vesica.	Approximately grasp your hand over the bladder with warmth descending within that patient, ensuring that that warmth has already reached the bladder.
Mays si a tu no es present vesica, lahoras tu pren una pessa de parguames e fay de aquel cercle; e perfora aquel de tota la sua retonditat; e aprop entromet fiel fort en aquels traucs, ayssi quo so revolgut; e aprop agregua le cercle ayssi quo es agreguat alsofatur, pus que tu pausas en aquel aquo que tu vols de las humiditatz, e olis e ayguas.	If you are not sure about the bladder, then take a piece of sponge and make it into that circle; and pierce that one throughout its entirety; and then firmly press on those tracks until they revolve around; and also attach the circle so that it is attached to the outer skin, because you pause in that water which you wish for moistures, oils, and waters.
E aprop tu lia aquel en le instrument e fay am aquel ayssi cum has fayt am la vesica, e exprescio am la tua ma entro que la humiditat pervengua a la vesica.	And then you attach that to the instrument and do with it as you did with the bladder, expressing from your hand until the warmth reaches the bladder.
Capitol .lx.	Chapter LX
De extraccio de peyra.	Of extracting stone(s).
Nos ja havem dit en la divisio las specias de peyra e curacio de lu am medicinas, e la diferencia entre peyra engendrada en los ronhos e peyra engendrada en la vesica, e les senhals de aquela.	We have already mentioned in the division of the species of stones and their treatment with medicines, and the difference between stones generated in the kidneys and stones generated in the bladder, and their signs.
E havem dit la peyra en la qual catz operacio am ma, e seccio.	And we have said about stone that is operated on by hand, and sectioned.
E la peyra engendrada en la vesica propriament es aquela que es ficada en la vesica.	And the stone properly generated in the bladder is that which remains in the bladder.
E yeu so narrant aquel am exposicio manifesta e abreviacio.	And I thus recount it with clear exposition and brevity.
Donc dic que peyra engendrada en la vesica majorment ve als enfantz; e dels senhals de lu es que la urina que es eyssida de la vesica es semblant a aygua en la sua subtilitat, e apar en aquela arena; e le malaute fregua la sua vergua, e motas veguadas pen, e aprop es dressada; e am aquo yeys foro le cul en motz de aquels.	Therefore it is said that stone generated in the bladder mainly affects children; and among its signs are that urine excreted from the bladder is like water in its subtlety, and appears sandy; and the discomfort feels like a worm's sting, often accompanied by pain, and sometimes it stands up straight; and with this comes forth the anus, especially in those cases.
E es laugiera la sanacio dels enfants de aquela entro que han conseguitz xiiii ans; e es dificil curacio en les viels.	And it would be easier to cure children of that condition if they have reached fourteen years of age; and difficult treatment for the elderly.
Mays en les joves es migiera per aquo quar es entre aquels.	But among young people, it is midway between those two.
E de aquel del qual la peyra es major e la curacio es pus leugiera; E si es pauca, es contraria ad aquela.	And of that person for whom the stone is large and the cure would be easier to perform, but if it is small, it is contrary to that.
Donc cum pervenem a la curacio de aquela, cove al comensament de aquela que mondifiquem le malaute am cristeri le qual extragua tota la fenda la qual es en les sieus budels; quar aquela fenda alcunas veguadas prohibeys la envencio de la peyra deves la inquisicio de lu.	Therefore, when we come to the treatment of that condition, it is necessary at the beginning of it to relieve the discomfort with a cautery which extracts all the opening which is in its passage; for that opening sometimes hinders the expulsion of the stone through investigation of it.
E aprop sia pres le malaute am les sieus pes e sia contosit e maugut enjos per so que la peyra descenda al preon de la vesica, o que saute de loc aut alcunas veguadas.	And likewise let the discomfort be taken with its weight and be suspended and moved up and down so that the stone may descend to the neck of the bladder, or what is left of it sometimes.
E aprop fay aquel cezer entre las tuas mas preparat, e las mas de lu sian dejos las coysas de lu, per so que la vesica tota sia fayta declinant a las partidas dejos.	And also let that cautery be placed between the thighs but well prepared, and its ends be close to the things of it, so that the whole bladder may be inclined downward towards its parts.
E aprop perquier aquela e tota aquela deforo.	And also let that be inquired about and all of that be done foreward.
Donc si sentes la peyra en l’espazi, lahoras tu te coyta tantost am seccio sobre lu.	Therefore if you feel the stone in its space, then immediately cut with sectioning upon it
E si no catz de tot dejos le tieu tocament, lahoras cove que tu untes am oli le tieu dit indic de la ma sinistra, si malaute es enfant, o le dit miga si es jove complit, e entrometas aquel en le sieu cul.	And if you do not reach it with your touch, then it is necessary that you anoint with oil your little finger of the left hand, if the discomfort is a child's, or the middle finger if it is a young person full-grown, and insert that into its anus.
E perquier de la peyra entro que stia dejos le tieu dit.	And inquire within whether the stone lies near your finger.
E converteys aquela petit a petit entro al col de la vesica.	And bring it out little by little towards the neck of the bladder
E aprop prem sobre aquel am lo tieu dit, e expelleys aquel a las partidas defora ves le loc del qual vos la seccio.	And also press upon it with your finger, and expel that outward through the place from which you made the section.
E comanda al ministra que prema la vesica am la sua ma; e comanda a un autra ministra que am la sua ma dextra extenda les genetius a las partidas desus, e am la sua autra ma remaugua la codena la qual es dejos les genetius, en partida del loc en le qual se fa la seccio.	And command the assistant to press upon the bladder with his hand; and command another assistant with his right hand to stretch open the labia majora upwards, and with his other hand move back the cord which is below them, in preparation for the place where the section is made.
E aprop entromet espatum be inscident del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And also introduce spatula like this, of which this is its shape:
e scindeys en lu aquo que es entre·l cul e·ls genetius, no en le mieg loc, abantz al latz de la coyssa sinistra; e sia la seccio sobre aquela peyra e·l tieu dit sia en le cul, e sia fayta seccio transversa, per que la seccio defora sia ampla e dedintz streyta segon la quantitat que egrecio de la peyra sia a lu possibla, e no major, quar fort leu comprem le tieu dit le qual es en le cul la peyra deves la seccio, e es foro-getada ses defacultat.	And cut in it that which is between the anus and the labia majora, not in the middle place, approaching to the left side of the thing; and let the section be made upon that stone, and your finger be in the anus, and let the section be transverse, so that the section outside may be wide and inside narrow according to how much of the stone it is possible to extract, and not more, for if you press too hard with your finger which is in the anus, the stone will be pushed back through the section, and it will be forgotten without difficulty.
E sapias que de la peyra es alcuna a la qual so angle e margers, per que le eyssiment de lu es fayt deficil per aquo.	And know that among stones there are some which have an angle or margin, because the extraction of them is made difficult by this.
E de aquela aquo es leon semblant a glan, e es redonda, e es fayt de lu leugier eyssiment.	And concerning those things it is like this: if they resemble a grain and are round, their extraction is easy.
Donc si es aquela al qual so angles e marger, ajusta en la fissura.	Therefore if that one has angles or margins, adjust in the crevice
E si no es ayssi foro-getada, lahoras cove que tu engenes sobre aquel, o que strenguas sobre aquel am gesti decentment, la extremitat del qual sia ayssi cum lima am le qual strenguas sobre la peyra, e no evasesca de lu; o que entrometas dejos lu instrument subtil de curvada extremitat.	And if it is not thus pushed back, then you must press upon it, or what stretches upon it decently, the extremity of which should be like a chisel with which you stretch upon the stone, and do not escape from it; or what introduces into it that subtle instrument of curved extremity.
Mays si tu no podes sobre aquel, lahoras tu amplifica le trauc un petit, e si tu veus flux de sanc, abscindeys en strenh aquel am vitriol trissat.	But if you cannot press upon it, then widen the track a little; and if you see flow of blood, cut that open with vitriolated scissors.
Mays si la peyra es mays de una, lahoras al comensament tu impelleys la ma a la boca de la vesica, e aprop inscideys sobre lu; e aprop impelleys un petit aprop aquo; e semblantment fay si son motas mays de doas.	But if the stone is more than one, then at the beginning you press your hand upon the mouth of the bladder, and also cut open upon it; and again press a little upon that; and similarly do if there are many more than two.
E si es peyra mot gran, lahoras ignorancia es que tu inscidas aquel am gran seccio, quar accideys al malaute una de doas causas: o que mora o que endevengua a lu destillacio de urina continuabla, per aquo quar le loc no es de tot consolidat.	And if it is a very large stone, then ignorance is that you cut open upon it with a large section, for one of two causes happens to the patient: either he dies or he degenerates into continuous distillation of urine because the place is not entirely consolidated.
Mays aministra expulcio de lu entro que sia fora-getada, o engenia en la fractura de lu am las forfexs entro que extragua aquela en pessas.	But let an assistant pull it out from within that which has been pushed back, or press in the fracture of it with forceps so as to extract it in pieces.
Donc cum tu auras cumplit la tua opperacio, lahoras omple la plagua de enses de aloe e de sanc de drago, e strenh aquel.	Therefore when you have completed your operation, then fill the wound with ointment of aloes and dragon's blood, and stitch it up.
E pausa sobre aquel drap enfus en oli e vi, o en oli rozat e aygua frega, per so que apostema caut sia cedat.	And lay upon that cloth dipped in oil and wine, or in oil of roses and washed water, so that the cauterized wound may be softened.
E aprop resupina le malaute sobre le sieu col, e no deslias le liament entro al tertz dia.	And also make the patient lie upon his back, and do not remove the ligature until the third day.
E cum aquel auras desliat, embroca le loc am aygua e mot oli, e aprop cura aquel am enguent diafinicon e am enguent diabazilicon entro que sia sanat.	And when that has been untied, wash the place with water and much oil, and afterwards cure it with ointment of diachylon and ointment of diacasilicon until it is healed.
Mays si en la plagua accideys apostema caut, adhust e corrosiu, e de aquel semblantz ayssi cum si le sanc es en la vesica congelat, e per lu es la hurina prohibida (e aquo es conogut per la egressio del sanc am urina), a donc entromet lo tieu dit en la plagua e extratz aquel sanc, quar si roman provoca la vesica a corropcio de la vesica e de lu putrefaccio.	But if in the wound there occurs cauterized aposteme and corrosive, and of that kind as if the blood is congealed in the bladder, and because of it urine is forbidden (and this is known by the exit of blood with urine), then therefore introduce your finger into the wound and extract that blood; for if it remains it provokes corruption of the bladder and its putrefaction.
E aprop lava la plagua am vi agre, aygua e sal, e am opposicio a tota specia, am aquo que conveneys a lu de la curacio entro que sia sanat.	And also wash the wound with vinegar, water and salt, and with opposition to all kinds of corruption, with that which is convenient for its cure until it is healed.
E cove en las horas de tota la curacio que tu lies amdos las coyssas e ajustes las medicinas las quals so pausadas sobre le loc.	And it is necessary during all the time of the cure that you keep both things warm and adjust the medicines which are applied upon the place.
E si la peyra es petita e es en le meat de la vergua, e es ficat en lu, e eyssement de urina es prohibit, lahoras cura aquel am aquo que yeu recomti denant que pervenguas a seccio, quar tropas veguadas per aquesta curacio yest acusat de seccio; e ja yeu e esproat aquo, e es que tu prenguas un perforador de ferr alfelut, del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And if the stone is small and is in the middle of the urethra and is stuck there, and urine is forbidden to pass out, then cure it with that which I recommended before you came to this section; for many have been cured by this method without needing a section; and now I will tell you what to do: take an awl of iron thus made:
de triangulada extramitat, agut, ficat en fust.	Triangle-shaped piece of wood inserted.
E aprop pren fiel, e lia am aquel la vergua dejos la peyra per so que no retorne a la vesica.	Then carefully remove the catheter and tie it to the stone with a thread so that it does not return to the bladder.
E aprop entromet le ferr en la vergua, perforant am fecilitat entro que·l perforador vengua ad aquela peyra.	Then insert the iron into the catheter, carefully pushing it until the tip of the probe reaches that stone.
E revolveys le perforador am la tua ma en aquela peyra petit a petit, e tu perforsa la perforacio de lu entro que fassas aquel del autra part penetrar; quar la urina tantost es absolta.	Rotate the probe gently with your hand in that stone bit by bit, and continue the perforation until it pierces through to the other side so that urine can flow freely.
E aprop prem la tua ma sobre aquo que es romas de la peyra de la partida deforo de la vergua, quar aquela es trinquada, e es foro-getada am la urina, e le malaute es sanat.	Then press your hand on what remains of the stone at its exit point outside the catheter, since it is fractured and has been flushed away with urine. The illness is healed.
Mays si aquesta curacio no es a tu aparelhada per alcuna causa la qual prohibeys de aquela, lahoras lia un fiel dejos la peyra, e autra fiel desus la peyra.	But if this treatment does not suit you for any reason that prevents it from being done, then remove the catheter and apply another one above the stone.
E aprop encideys sobre la peyra en aquela vergua entre doas liaduras.	Then cut through the stone in that catheter between two ligatures.
E aprop extratz aquela.	Then extract it.
E aprop deslia le liament e mondifica le sanc congilat, le qual es fayt en la plagua.	"And then untie the ligature and cleanse the congealed blood, which occurs in the wound."
E no es necessari liament de fiel dejos la peyra, sino per que no retorne a la vesica, e l’autre liament desus sino, quar quan es desliat le fiel aprop la egrecio de la peyra, la codena retorna a son loc e cobra la plagua.	"And there is no need for ligature of the stone from the bladder, unless to prevent it from returning to the vessel. And another ligature above this one is necessary because when the stone near the entrance of the bladder is untied, the cord returns to its place and closes the wound."
E per aquo es a tu necessari quan lias le fiel desus, que tu eleves la codena a las partidas desus, o que retorne deves le tieu compliment, e cobra la plagua ayssi co havem dit.	"And for that reason it is necessary when you tie the stone above that you elevate the cord to the parts above or it will return and close the wound as we have said."
Capitol .lxi.	Chapter 61
De extraccio de peyra de las femnas.	"On the extraction of stones from women."
Peyra en las femnas pauc es engendrada.	Stone in women's wombs is rarely produced.
Mays si ve peyra ad alcuna de aquelas, lahoras dificil es la curacio de lu, e es prohibida per tropas manieyras.	However, if there is a stone found in any of them, its treatment is difficult and prohibited by many methods.
La una de lor es quar la femna fort leu es verges.	One of these is that the woman must be very careful while giving birth.
E la segonda es quar tu no trobas femna be scient que descroba si meteyssa al metge quan es casta, o es de las femnas haventz maritz.	And the second is that you should not find a woman who is pregnant and then send her to the doctor when she is menstruating or has never been married.
La tersa es quar tu no hatrobas femna be sabent aquesta art, majorment la operacio am ma.	The third one is that you should not operate on a woman who does not know this art, especially the operation with a stone (am ma).
E la quarta es que·l loc de la seccio sobre peyra en las femnas es longinc del loc de la peyra, per que indigeys de seccio preonda, e en aquela es temor.	And the fourth one is that the location of the incision for removing a stone from women's wombs is far away from the stone itself, so it requires careful cutting, and there is fear involved.
Mays si necessitat provoca a tu ad aquo, lahoras cove que tu prenguas una femna metga be scient, e pauc es atrobada.	However, if necessity compels you to do this, then it is necessary for you to take a midwife who is very skilled and has little experience.
Mays si tu es privat de aquela, lahoras cerca metga quast e subtil, o presenta una femna matrona be esenhada en le feyt de las femnas, o femna que en aquesta art ennueys partida del art.	But if you are deprived of that, then seek out a wise and subtle physician, or present a skilled midwife experienced in the nature of women, or a woman who has learned this art from another.
Donc fay aquela present, e comanda a lu que fassa tot aquo que tu li mandaras, de la enquisicio sobre la peyra al comensament; la qual causa es que reguarde si la femna es verges, lahoras cove que meta lo sieu dit en le cul de lu e quiera la peyra.	Therefore, present that woman and command her to do everything you order regarding the examination at the beginning. This is so she can determine if the woman is a virgin, and if she is, she should insert her finger into the woman's vagina and feel for the stone.
Donc si atroba aquela, coarte aquela dejos le sieu dit, e lahoras comanda a lu que inscida sobre aquela.	Then, if she finds it, let her withdraw her finger, and then command her to make an incision over that area.
Mays si no es verge, lahoras comanda a la matrona que entrometa lo sieu dit en le conh de la malauta e enquiera sobre la peyra, pus que pausa la sua ma sinistra sobre la vesica, e comprem aquela am bona comprecio.	But if she is not a virgin, then command the midwife to insert her finger into the woman's vulva and feel for the stone, as she places her left hand on the bladder, and compresses that area with good compression.
Donc si atroba aquela, lahoras cove que gradantment maugua aquela de l’orrifici de la vesica a las partidas dejos am somman de la sua vertut entro que pervengua am aquel a la razit de la coyssa.	Then, if she finds it, gradually move her away from the opening of the bladder towards its sides with the strength of her virtue until the thing is accomplished according to reason.
E aprop inscida sobre aquela apposicio de la maytat del conh deves la razit de la coyssa de qualque part sia a lu parada e cent la peyra en aquela partida, e·l dit de lu no sia remaugut de la peyra coartan dejos lu.	And appropriately make the incision over that position of the opening of the vulva according to reason, whichever side it is on where the stone is located, and do not remove your finger from the stone until you have taken it out.
E la seccio sia pauca al comensament; e aprop entrometa lo ray sobre aquela seccio, e si sent la peyra, lahoras ajuste en seccio segon la quantitat la qual sap que la peyra sira getada de aquela.	And let the incision be small at first; and then insert your knife into that section and if you feel the stone, then adjust the incision according to the size of the stone which she knows will be removed from there.
E sapias que las specias de peyra son motas: quar de aquelas es pauca e gran, e leon e aspra, e longua e redonda, e havent ramps.	And know that stones are of many kinds: some are small and large, some are round and sharp, some are long and round, and some have ramifications.
Donc tu sapias quantas specias so de lu per aquo que tu signifiques sobre aquo que vols.	So you know how many species there are according to what you indicate about what you want.
E si tu veus flux de sanc, ajusta en le loc vetriol trissat e te aquela per una hora entro que sia abscindit le sanc, e aprop retorna a la tua operacio entro que la peyra sia fora-getada.	And if you see blood flowing, adjust the area with vinegar dissolved in three parts water and let it sit for an hour until the bleeding stops, and then return to your operation until the stone is removed.
E fay que prepares am tu dels instrumentz les quals e ditz en la extraccio de peyra en les homes, per so que sias ajudat per aquels en la tua operacio.	And have ready with you the instruments which are mentioned in the extraction of stones in men, so that you may be assisted by them in your operation.
E si tu veus flux de sanc, e sabes que la expulcio del sanc es de la arceria que es insciza, lahoras tu pausa polvera sobre le loc e estrenh aquel am pulvils e strictura descent, e no iteras aquo; e layssa la peyra e no extraguas aquela, quar fort leu morira la malauta.	And if you see bleeding and know that the expulsion of blood is from the area that has been incised, then pause and sprinkle powder over that area and press it with a dry cloth and strict compression, do not repeat this; leave the stone and do not extract it, for otherwise the woman will die.
E aprop cura la plagua.	And then dress the wound.
Donc cum es cedada la acuitat del sanc aprop alcus jorns, e·l loc se poyreys, lahoras tu retorna a la tua operacio entro que la peyra sia fora-getada.	Then when the sharpness of the bleeding has ceased some days later and the area is healed, then return to your operation until the stone is removed.
Capitol lxii.	Chapter LXII.
De seccio sobre ernia acoza.	Of incision on incarcerated hernia.
Hernia ayguoza no es sino agregacio de humiditat en le ciphac blanc lo qual es dejos la codena dels genetius contenent le huou, e es nompnat ciphac.	Hernia occurs when there's an accumulation of moisture in the white tissue, which is located along the groin of the genitals containing the bowel.
E alcunas veguadas es en le propri pannicol le qual a lu preparec natura en la partida del huou, entro que sia cuyat que ja es autre huou; e es la codena del genetiu entre le ciphac blanc le qual havem dit, e no es aquo sino tart.	Sometimes it occurs within the abdominal wall itself, which is naturally prepared for this purpose in the region of the bowel opening. This is the inguinal canal between the white tissue we mentioned earlier, and it's nothing but a hernia.
E la generacio de aquest hernia es per debelitat la qual accideys als genetius, per que ad aquels es efundunda aquesta materia, e alcunas vetz accideys per percuscio fayta sobre les genetius.	"The occurrence of this hernia is due to weakness that affects the groin area, causing the accumulation of matter there, and sometimes it occurs due to blows received on the groin."
E aquesta humiditat es havent motas colors, quar la color de lu o es declinant a citrina o a sanguinent, o rog, o es negra feculenta, o es ayguosa blanqua, e es aquo que es mays.	"And this humidity has many colors, for its color is declining towards citrus or sanguineous red, or purple, or it is blackish-white, or it is watery and pale, and this is the most common."
E les senhals per les quals es saubut on es aquesta agreguacio de aygua so aquestz: quar si es en le ciphac blanc le qual havem dit, lahoras le apostema es redon declinant un pauc a longitut ayssi cum figura de huou, e appar le genetiu, quar la humiditat conte aquel de tota part.	"And the signs by which it is known where this accumulation of water is located are these: for if it is in the white cyphac, then the aposteme is somewhat elongated in length like an egg shape, and the groin appears, because the humidity contains that of all parts."
E si la humiditat es en le propri pannicol, lahoras le apostema es redon am partida del huou e per aysso hom estima que es autre huou.	"And if the humidity is in its own connective tissue, then the aposteme is round like an egg and it appears as another egg."
E si la humiditat es entre la codena dels genetius e·l ciphac blanc, lahoras catz dejos le centiment.	"And if the humidity is between the cord of the groin and the white cyphac, then there is no swelling."
E cum tu vols la cognicio de la color de la humiditat, lahoras tu esproa la color de la humiditat en le apostema am entromes cayrat del qual la forma es precedida; e segon aquo que es eyssit en le vestigi del entromes, jutga de aquo que es dedintz lu.	"And when you desire knowledge of the color of the humor, then observe the color of the humor in the aposteme with careful attention, of which the form is preceded; and according to what appears in the tracks of the entrails, judge what lies beneath."
Donc quan nos vinem a la curacio de lu am ferr, lahoras cove que comandem al malaute que sia fleubotomat si aquo es a tu possibla, e vezes le cos de lu ple.	"Therefore, when we come to the treatment of this with iron, then it is necessary to order the patient to be bled if possible, and let him lie on his back."
E aprop sia resupinat sobre le sieu dos sobre alcuna causa un pauc auta, e pausa dejos lu motz draps.	"And let him be supported on his back upon some cause a little above, and pause until the drugs have taken effect."
E aprop setz tu sobre la part sinistra de lu, e comanda al ministra que segua a la dextra de lu, le qual extenda la sua vergua a hun de dos latz a la codena dels genetius e a la partida del mirac del ventre.	"And let you sit on the left side of him, and command the minister to stand at his right side; who shall extend his rod to one of two fingers' breadth from the joint of the knees and the division of the buttocks."
E aprop pren spatum lat e scindeys la codena dels genetius del mieg loc per la longitut entro prop le pentenilh.	"And let him take a broad spathula and divide the knee-joint in its length, near to the patella."
E sia fayta la seccio segon rectetut engualment distant de la linha que deveseys la pel dels genetius, entro que pervengua al ciphac blanc comprehendent.	"And let the section be made according to the direction of the joint equally distant from the line that ought to divide the skin of the knees until it reach the white tendon comprehending."
E excorja aquel, e observa, e guarda te per aysso que tu no inscidas aquel; e la tua excoriacio am la qual aquel excorjas per partida jassia que sia suspenduda am le huou mays e subtilment escruta am la excoriacio segon la quantitat a tu possibla.	"And cut it, and observe, and take care that thou dost not cut him; and thy cutting shall be done with a party so gently suspended that it is the most subtle and careful cutting possible according to the quantity that thou art able."
E aprop perfora le ciphac ple de aygua am perforacio ampla, e extratz tota l’aygua.	"And let him pierce the tendon full of water with a broad perforation, and draw out all the water."
E aprop separa entre doas labias de la seccio am uncis, e exten le ciphac a las partidas desus; e no toques la codena les genetius comprehendent, e inscideys le ciphac en aquela manieyra que es a tu possible.	"And let him separate the two lips of the section with forceps and extend the tendon at its upper ends without touching the joint of the knees comprehending; and cut the tendon in that manner which is to thy ability."
E inscideys aquel am la sua totalitat o en pessas, e majorment le sieu latz subtil, quar si tu no perscrutas exquisidament la inscizio de lu, no es fayta segurtat que la aygua no retorne.	"And cut it with its totality or in pieces, and especially the thinner side thereof; for if thou dost not carefully scrutinize the incision of him, it is not certain that the water will not return."
Mays si le huou procezeys de aquela defora de la sua codena en la ora de la tua operacio, lahoras quan tu auras complida la seccio del ciphac, retorna dedintz aquel, e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la codena dels genetius am sutura, e aprop cura aquel ayssi cum las autras plagua, entro que sia sanat.	"But if the water proceeds from that part outside of his joint at the time of thy operation; then when thou hast completed the section of the tendon, return into him again and properly join together the two lips of the joint of the knees with suture, and let him be dressed as usual until he is healed."
E si atrobas le huou corromput per autra malautia, lahoras cove que tu lies les vayssels les quals so sore le suspensori, e extrat le huou, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit.	"And if thou findest the water corrupted by some other disease; then it behoveth thee to ligature the vessels which are near the suspensory ligament and draw out the water, and let him be dressed with that which we have said."
Mays si l’aygua es agreguada en doas partidas esemps, lahoras sapias que doas son las ernias; donc inscideys aquela partida segon que has feyt en l’autra engualment; e si es a tu vist que sia una opera, lahoras tu la fay.	"But if the water be gathered into two parts thereof, then know thou that there are two hernias. Therefore cut that part even as thou hast done in the other; and if it seem to thee to be one operation, then do it."
E aprop tu abstergiys le sanc, e entramet en las seccios lana submersa en oli o en oli rozat; e pausa deforo autra lana la qual tu as submersa en vi e oli, e expandeys aquela sobre dos genetius e·l mirac del ventre; e pausa desobre draps doblatz e pulvils, e lia aquels desobre am liament le qual es segon aquesta forma:	"And then thou shall wipe away the blood and enter into the sections with wool dipped in oil or rose oil; and afterwards put on other wool which thou hast dipped in wine and oil and spread it over both knees and the navel of the belly; and put upon that doubled cloths and powders, and let them be bound together with a bandage according to this manner:"
e aprop sian preses dos draps e sian humplitz de lana carmenada segon aquesta semblansa; e sian faytas las extremitatz am les quals es premut de coto o de lana humida, e sian agreguatz am strectura en le braguier de las braguas, e la una de las extremitatz prengua del cul entro al dos, e la segonda prengua a la partida del pantenilh, e dos extramitatz sobre dos coyssas dejos e dos extramitatz autras sobre dos angonars, e tota extrictura sia ajustada en le braguier de las braguas.	"And let there be taken two cloths and filled with carded wool in this manner; and let the extremities thereof be closed with cotton or wet wool, and let them be bound together by a bandage about the breeches of the breeches, and one extremity take hold of the buttocks within the two and the other extremity take hold of the part of the perineum, and two extremities on both sides of the thighs and two others upon the ancles, and all straitness shall be adjusted in the breeches of the breeches."
E alcunas veguadas aquesta hernia es medicada artificialment am cauteri en loc de seccio am ferr; e es que tu prenguas cauteri cutellar subtil e que inscidas am aquel la codena dels ginitius, e es ignit segon que havem recomtat entro que sia descubert le ciphac blanc contenent la aygua, e lahoras tu pren cauteri segon aquesta forma:	"And sometimes this hernia is healed artificially by cautery instead of section with iron; and if thou take a cautery knife and cut the suspensory ligament of the knees therewith, then it shall be ignited according to that which we have recommended until the white tendon containing the water appear; and then thou shalt take cautery after this manner:"
e es asemblat a letra greca.	"And it is like the letter gamma."
E aprop perfora am aquel ciphac, e es ignit entro que tota la humiditat sia fora-gitada.	"And then burn through that tendon with it until all the moisture is driven out."
E aprop exten le ciphac am uncis, e excorja am uncis, e excorja am cauteri subtil ignit; e inscideys aquel segon que es a tu possible entro que eradiques tot lu; e guarda te del huou que·l foc no·l toque.	"And then stretch the tendon with forceps and scrape it with forceps and scrape it with a subtle cautery that is burning; and cut through it as much as thou canst until thou hast removed all of it; and beware lest the water touch the fire."
E sapias que aquesta operacio es pus salva e pus longinqua de flux de sanc, e milhor que operacio am seccio.	"And know that this operation is safer and farther from flux of blood, and better than an operation with section."
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat apostema caut en la hora de seccio o en hora de cauteri, o flux de sanc, lahoras cove que tu cures qual contrarietat fa a tu per aquo, am curacio la qual conveneys a lu segon que es dit.	"But if it happen to thee that after section or in time of cautery there be any aposteme or flux of blood, then thou shalt cure whatsoever may have happened unto him with such care as is fitting according to what hath been said."
Mays si le malaute es pauruc, e no spera la segonda operacio per la sua horribilitat, lahoras administra perforacio segon que yeu recomti aquo; e es quan es certificat deves tu, per aquo que havem dit de las significacios, que aquela hernia es ayguosa.	"But if the disease be painful and he doth not hope for a second operation because of its horror, then thou shalt perform cautery as I have recommended it; and that is when thou art certain, by those things which we have said concerning signs, that this hernia containeth water."
Lahoras cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute sobre alcuna cezelha elevada, aprop perfora le apostema en la partida pus bassa de lu am spatum lat, e pausa la perforacio segon la longitut del cos.	"Then thou shalt make the patient lie upon some elevated cushion; and then thou shalt prick the apostume in that part thereof which is lowest with a broad lance, and continue the pricking according to the length of the body."
E sia la apercio ampla entro que corro tota l‘aygua.	"And let the opening be wide enough to allow all the water to escape."
E aprop pausa sobre le loc coto e lia aquel e layssa aquel, per so que corro le romanent de l’aygua.	"And then put cotton thereupon and bind it up and leave it alone, that the remnant of the water may run off."
E aprop cura aquel entro que la plagua sia sanada.	"And then dress him until the wound be healed."
Mays si contrarietat es a la egrecio de l’aygua en aquela hora tu perforas aquela: e aquo no es fayt sino per aquo quar le pannicol blanc en le orrifici de la plagua fa contrarietat e prohibeys le eyssiment de l’aygua, lahoras cove que tu metas en la plagua pena o instrument am la qual es extrayta l’aygua dels ydropitz, la forma del qual es precedida; o ajusta en la opprecio de la plagua un petit.	"But if there be any obstruction to the escape of the water at that time thou shalt cut through it: and this is done only when the white skin in the opening of the wound maketh opposition and hindereth the issuing forth of the water, then thou shalt put into the wound a trocar or instrument wherewith the water may be drawn out of hydrocele, the form of which is described above; or thou shalt adjust to the opening of the wound a little plug."
E sapias que l’aygua retorna, e es agueguada aprop vi meses o enaviro aquels; e cum es agreguada, lahoras sia perforat segon aquela meteyssa manieyra, quar le malaute ayssi passara les sieus dias.	"And know that the water will return again, and it is gathered together in about six months or thereabouts; and when it is so gathered together, then let it be opened again after the same manner, for the patient shall thereby pass his days."
Capitol .lxiii.	**Chapter LXIII.**
De seccio sobre hernia carnosa e la curacio de lu.	Of section upon a fatty hernia and the cure thereof.
Sapias que en la seccio sobre aquesta hernia es temor perdusent a pernicia en las majors disposicios; per que a mi es vista la dimissio de lu e esser salvat per aquela milhor.	Know that in the section upon this hernia there is danger of losing it altogether or doing harm to the patient; therefore it seemeth better unto me to dismiss it and let him be saved by that means.
E yeu so rememorant la operacio en aquela e las specias dels apostemas.	And I remember the operation in this case and the kinds of apostemes."
Donc, dic que l‘apostemas natz en les cos dels quals les genetius so conponutz e es fayt aquo per motas causas: o per superfluitat aguda agra, la qual es efundida als genetius, o per percuscio.	Therefore I say that apostemes are natural to those whose spermatic cords are compounded and this is done by many causes: either by acute sharp pain, which is poured forth unto the testicles, or by contusion."
E es la color de la apostema segon la color del cos, e no es atrobat en lu dolor, e es apostema greu.	"And the colour of the aposteme shall be according to the colour of the body and it is not accompanied with pain; and this is a grievous aposteme."
E fort leu es apostema lapificada, del qual la color es fosca, e no es centiment a lu.	And a very light apostema is that which is lapidated, its colour being dark, and it is not felt by the patient."
E alcunas veguadas es fayt per nodacio de las arcerias, e per imflacio de aquelas ayssi quo ja es perceubut la rememoracio de lu, o per imflacio de venas.	And sometimes this happeneth through the stopping up of the arteries and the inflammation thereof so that it is presently perceived; or through inflammation of the veins."
Mays aquo que es per imflacio de arcerias es conogut per la dispercio de la apostema quan compremas aquela am les tieus ditz; e no cove que aquel toques.	But that which happeneth by inflammation of the arteries is known by the dispersion of the aposteme when thou takest hold thereof with thy fingers; and it needeth not to be touched."
Mays aquel que es fayt per imflacio de vena no es dispergut de lu alcuna causa deves la compressio am les ditz.	But that which happeneth by inflammation of the vein is not dispersed thereby, however thou mayest press it with thy fingers.
E ja es possible que sobre aquesta specia sia fayta seccio e sobre les autres carns; e es que tu inscida la codena dels genetius, e aprop esten le huou a las partidas desus, e extratz aquel del ciphac blanc, e deliura le suspensori dels vaysels, e ligua les, e inscideys le suspensori pus que tu deliuras aquel de tota partida de las partidas del huou.	And it is possible that upon this kind there may be made section and upon other flesh; and it is thus: thou shalt incise the spermatic cord and about the anus thou shalt stretch up the skin thereof and draw forth the white ciphac and deliver the suspensory ligament of the vessels, and bind them up, and having done so thou shalt cut off the suspensory ligament itself, that thou mayest entirely deliver it from all parts of the anus.
Donc si l’huou ja es am aquelas carnadas consolida, lahoras cove que tu extraguas le huou e inscidas aquel.	Therefore if the egg is already solidified in those flesh wounds, then you should extract the egg and replace it with that.
E si es adherencia entro alcuna causa del ciphac, o entre aquo que es entre les bayssels, lahoras cove que tu deliures tota aquela adherencia e inscidas aquela per inscizio redonda.	And if there is adhesion within some cause of the hip joint, or between that which is between the thighs, then you should remove all that adhesion and replace it with a rounded incision.
Mays si es nativitat de carn en le loc de la adherencia la qual es detras, lahoras cove que tu inscidas tot aquo que es de lu, e extraguas le huou ayssi cum havem dit.	But if there is flesh born in the place of the adhesion which is behind, then you should insert all that which is of it, and extract the egg as we have said.
Donc cum es complida la tua operacio, lahoras omple la plagua de lana imfuza en oli rozat e vi; e aprop cura aquela am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	Therefore when your operation is complete, then fill the wound with wool infused in rose oil and wine, and take care of it with another dressing until it heals.
Capitol .lxiv.	Chapter LXIV
De la curacio de hernia que es de vitz.	Of the treatment of a hernia that is of wind.
Vit es apostema envolut per alcuna envolucio semblant a broto am mollificacio dels testiculs, e es fayt dificil movement exercitiu e deambulacio sobre le malaute.	Wind (vit) is an aposteme enclosed by some wrapping similar to a bud with softening of the testicles, and it makes difficult exercise and walking over the sick part.
E en la curacio de aquesta malautia es per temor per aquo del qual es precedida rememoracio.	And in the treatment of this condition, fear is what preceded its recollection.
Empero cove que diguam opperacio en aquela segon que fero les primiers.	"But how shall we call this operation according to what was done first?"
E dic que cove que fassas sezer le malaute sobre una cezelha elevada; e aprop enpelleys le suspensori dels testiculs a las partidas dejos; e aprop te la codena dels genetius am les tieus ditz am les baysels que so probdas a la vergua; e tengua aquels autre ministre que tu, e extenda aquels am extencio vehement.	And I say that you should make the patient lie on an elevated chair; and immediately grab the spermatic cord at the scrotum; and then tie the ligament of the crus of the penis with your fingers using needles dipped in boiling water; and have another assistant help you, extending it with great force.
E aprop inscideys am spatum lat agut per seccio traversa en le dreyt dels vaysels entro que sian les vayssels descubertz.	And then incise with a sharp scalpel for a transverse section on the right side of the vessels where they are exposed.
E aprop excorja de tota partida ayssi quo a tu havem dit en extraccio de arceria las quals so en las templas.	And then strip off all fat from each party as we told you earlier in the extraction of the achilles tendon, which is located on the temples.
E aprop fica en aquelas un’agulha en la qual sia fiel doble, e lia aquel en le primier del locs en les quals accideys vit, e lia aquel autra veguada en le derier de lor.	And then insert into those a needle with double thread and tie it at the first of the places where blood was seen, and tie it again at the last one.
E aprop inscideys aquels en le mieg loc per seccio dreyta segon la longuesa del cos, e extratz aquo que es agreguat de las humiditatz fetulentas e corruptas.	And then incise that in the middle place for a right section along the length of the body, and extract what has accumulated from the fetid and corrupted humors.
E aprop cura la plagua am curacio de las autras plaguas en las quals vols sania esser engendrada per so que caian les vaysels les quals noyreysso un de dos genetius, quar no es mal per aquo.	And then heal the wound with the cure for other wounds where you want healthy flesh to be generated, because if the vessels that nourish one or two testicles are not cauterized, it would be harmful.
Mays si accideys vit a totz les bayssels, lahoras cove que·ls testicols sian extragutz o que les testicols per aquo se cequo am les vayssels, per que sia privat de tot nutriment per la inscizio dels vayssels, e que sian estaborits, o que cequo per so que no sia juvament am aquels.	But if blood flows through all the vessels, then it is necessary to extract the testicles or to tie them with the vessels, because by this section of the vessels, they are deprived of all nutrition, and they should be cauterized, or else they would not benefit from that.
Capitol .lxv.	Chapter 65
De la cura de hernia entestinal.	Of the cure of intestinal hernia
Le adveniment de aquesta hernia es per seccio que endeve en le ciphac extendut sobre le ventre de part dels angunars del mirac del ventre, per que deysendo les budels de aquela ruptura ad alcu dels budels.	The occurrence of this hernia is due to a breach that happens in the abdominal wall stretched over the abdomen by the rings of the navel, through which some intestines may protrude.
E aquesta ruptura es o del ciphac o de excencio de lu, e accideysso aquestas doas specias per motas causas: o percussio, o per sautz, o per clamor, o per elevacio de alcuna causa greu, o per semblantz.	And this breach occurs either in the abdominal wall itself or due to an exit of its contents, and these two types occur for many causes: either by percussion, or by falls, or by labor pains, or by lifting something heavy, or by sneezing.
E·l senhal de aquo, quan es per extencio del ciphac, es que accideys pauc a pauc en lonc temps, e no accideys soptament, e es apostema engual entro ves le preon per so quar le ciphac comprem le budel.	And the sign of that is when it happens little by little over time, not suddenly, and it appears as an aposteme enclosed within the prenum because the abdominal wall compresses the intestine.
E le senhal de lu es quan es per seccio del ciphac, quar al comensament fa accidir dolor vehement sobtament; e es apostema divers aparent dejos la codena propdana aparent, e aquo es per eyssiment del budel, e·l cos de lu a las partidas deforo del ciphac.	And the sign of it is when it happens by a section of the abdominal wall, because at the beginning there occurs sudden violent pain; and it appears as a diverse aposteme apparent from the navel area apparent, and this is due to protrusion of the intestine, whose body remains outside of the abdominal cavity.
E alcunas veguadas es fora-getat am le budel la tela, e es apelada aquesta hernia entestinal zirbal.	And sometimes the intestine remains adhered with the tissue, and this type of intestinal hernia is called "zirbal."
E alcunas veguadas es fayta am ventositat, e alcunas veguadas corr en le budel fenda, e aqui es retenguda, e es am aquo gran pernitia3 del malaute, e alcunas veguadas fa endevenir dolor malvada e majorment quan es premut.	And sometimes it occurs with windiness, and sometimes the intestine is torn, and in this case it becomes retained, causing great danger to the illness. And sometimes it causes bad pain, especially when it is pressed.
E en la curacio de las especias de aquesta malautia am ferr es temor, per que cove que sia esquivat le cazament en aquela.	And in the treatment of these types of this disease with iron, there is fear because one must avoid cauterization at that point.
E la manieyra de la operacio de aquela es que comandes al malaute que redugua le budel am la sua ma a las partidas dedintz de la sua conquavitat si obezeys al sieu retornament, e aprop sia envessat sobre le sieu col entre las tuas mas, e eleva las cambas de lu.	And the manner of operating on this is to command the patient to reduce the intestine with their own hand into the concave part if they obey its return, and then it should be covered with a cloth between your hands, elevating its contents.
E aprop sten la codena la qual siec la codena dels testicols a las partidas desus, e inscideys la codena dels testicols tota per le lonc; e aprop fiqua en doas labias de la seccio uncis segon que indigeysses a hubrir la seccio am aquels.	And then tie the navel string which surrounds the navel of the testicles on top, and cut all the navel string longwise. And then put two hooks into both lips of the section according to what you need to open the section with them.
E si’ la seccio segon la quantitat que a tu sia possible que de aquela le huou sia foro-getat.	And if, according to your ability, it is possible that some part of it has adhered there.
E aprop excorja aquela ciphaqueth les quals so dejos la codena dels testicols, entro que sia descubert le ciphac blanc dur de quascuna partida.	And then remove that skin which is near the navel string, until the white tough abdominal wall from each side is discovered.
Lahoras tu entromet le tieu dit en aquo que siec le testicol, en aquo que es entre ciphac blanc, le qual es dejos la codena del huou, e entre le ciphac segon, e absolve am aquel’adherencia que es en la partida detras del huou.	Then insert your finger into that which surrounds the testicle, between the white abdominal wall which is near the navel string and behind the intestine, and remove any adhesion that may be there.
E aprop mau am la ma la codena dels testicols a las partidas deforo, e am aysso exten le ciphac blanc en sus am la ma sinestra, e eleva le huou am le ciphac a la partida de la seccio; e comanda al ministre que extenda le huou ensus e tu dissolveys la adherencia que es detras am solucio complida.	And then pull the navel string with your hand towards outside, and extend the white abdominal wall upwards with your left hand, elevate the intestine with the abdominal wall at the section; and command the assistant to extend the intestine upwards, and you dissolve the adhesion behind with complete solvent.
E cerqua am les tieus ditz que lay no sia alcuna causa del budel envelopat en le ciphac blanc dur.	And carefully check with your fingers that there is no cause of the intestine being wrapped around the white tough abdominal wall.
Mays si tu atrobas de lu alcuna causa, lahoras tu enpelleys aquel al ventre dejos.	But if you find any cause, then reduce it back into the abdomen immediately.
E aprop tu pren una agulha en la qual sia fiel gros fayt de x fiels, e entromet aquel deves le derier del ciphac, le qual es jos la codena dels testicols, la qual siec seccio; e aprop inscideys las extremitatz las quals emineysso del fiel entro que sian quatre fiels, e aprop compausa alcus de lor sobre alcuna figura en manieyra de crotz; e lia am aquel le ciphac del qual havem dit que es dejos la codena dels testicols am fort liament de dos partz.	And then take a needle with a thick thread of six threads, and insert it through the last part of the abdominal wall which is below the navel string that surrounds the section. And then cut the ends of the threads that protrude from the needle until there are four threads left, and then tie some of them together in the shape of a cross; and tie them with the abdominal wall which we have said is near the navel string with strong knot of two parts.
E aprop envolveys las extremitatz dels fiels e lia aquelas am liament vehement entro que alcu dels vayssels que noyrrisso aquels no puscan trametre alcuna causa per so que de aqui no accida apostema caut.	And then wrap the ends of the threads and tie them with strong knot, ensuring that none of the vessels that are nearby can cause any inflammation through this area.
E pausa autra veguada liament segon foro le primier liament, lonh de lu mens tres ditz; e aprop aquestz dos liaments layssa del ciphac le qual es dejos la codena dels testicols la quantitat de la grandeza del dit, e inscideys tot le romanent segon redondeza, e osta de lu le huou.	And pause another knot according to the first knot, about three fingers away from it. And then cut both knots from the abdominal wall which is near the navel string for about the length of a finger, and cut the remaining part roundly, leaving the intestine alone.
E aprop inscideys en la partida dejos de la codena dels testicols per seccio de la qual corra sanc e sania ayssi cum havem recomtat en aquo que havem dit.	And then make an incision in the area near the navel string, through which blood and pus can flow out, as we have recommended earlier.
E aprop aministra lana submersa en oli, e pausa en la plagua; e aministra le liament le qual havem recomtat (e alcunas veguadas le ciphac blanc es cauterizat, le qual havem dit aprop la inscizio de lu temen de flux de sanc, quar motas veguadas accideys aquels) e leyssa le liament entro que per si caia.	And then apply wool soaked in oil to the wound and put a dressing on it. And apply the suture that we have recommended (and sometimes cauterize the white abdominal wall near the incision, because many times this occurs), leaving the knot hanging loose so that it can fall off by itself
Mays si le cazement de lu es tardat, lahoras de aygua cauda sia embrocat, e pausa sobre aquel entro que caia segon que havem dit.	But if the cauterization is delayed, then hot water should be poured over it, and a dressing put on it so that it falls off as we have said.
E aprop cura la plagua am l’autra curacio de las plaguas entro que sia sanat.	And then treat the wound with the other treatments for wounds until it is healed.
Capitol .lxvi.	Chapter LXVI
De hernia ventosa.	About Hernia Ventosa
En aquesta hernia no e vist alcu que sia estat ardit sus la curacio de lu am ferr.	In this type of hernia, none have been seen that have been cured with iron.
E les primiers diyssero que es fayta ayssi cum havem recomtat en la hernia que es am vi; la qual es que tu lies les vayssels aprop la seccio sobre aquela am fecilitat de lu; e aprop secca en le mieg loc en enviro le apostema am aquo que obro aquel, entro que caian les vayssels.	And the first ones said that it is done in the same way as we have recommended for hernia with wind, which is to tie the vessels near the section on top of it with gentleness; and then dry the middle part around the inflammation with what can absorb it, until the vessels fall off.
E cura la plagua segon que havem dit entro que sia sanada.	And treat the wound according to what we have said until it is healed.
Capitol .lxvii.	Chapter LXVII
De la disropcio que es fayta en les anguonars.	About Dislocation in Joints
Alcunas veguadas endeve ruptura en les angonars ayssi cum havem dit, e emineys le loc.	Sometimes there is rupture in the joints as we have said, and the location becomes prominent.
E no deyssen als genetius alcuna causa dels budels al genetius; e si deyssen, aquo es pauc; e retorna s’en en totas horas.	And do not give any cause of the intestines to the horse doctor; and if you do, it is little; and the return will be in all hours.
Mays si es prolonguat le temps am aquo, es ajustada fissura en le ciphac entro que deysenda le budel en le ciphac; e accideys aquo per la extencio del ciphac le qual es en le angonars ayssi cum havem dit, la qual causa es quar le ciphac es estendut, e aprop es mollificat e·l loc es apostemat e emineys.	But if the time is prolonged with this, there will be an adjustable fissure in the abdominal wall through which the intestine can prolapse into the abdomen; and this occurs due to the extension of the abdominal wall in the joints as we have said, which causes the abdominal wall to become soft and the location becomes inflamed and prominent.
E la cura de lu es am cauteri ayssi quo es precedida la narracio de lu.	And the cure for it is with cauterization, as has been preceded by its description.
E alcunas veguadas es curada am ferr segon aquesta manieyra: e es que·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu dos entre las tuas mas, e aprop secca le loc de la ruptura dels apostemas emineys am seccio per la latitut segon la quantitat de tres ditz.	"Sometimes it is cured with iron in this manner: when the patient lies on their back between your hands, then dry the area of the ruptured abscesses with heat along its width according to the amount said."
E aprop strenh le ciphac blanc que es jos la codena entro que sia descubert.	"And then press the white cilice that is under the neck so that it is uncovered."
E aprop pren le ray e pausa aquel sobre le loc eminent del ciphac, e prem aquel al preon del ventre.	"And then take the rod and place it on the prominent part of the cilice, and press it against the front of the abdomen."
E aprop cus le dos locs eminentz sobre la extremitat del ray del ciphac, e ajusta am la sutura un de aquels am l’autre.	"And then cut both prominent points above the end of the rod on the cilice, and join them together with stitching."
E aprop extratz la extremitat del ray, e no inscidas del ciphac de tot, ni no extenda le huou, ni autra causa ayssi cum yeu te fi saber en la curacio de hernia entestinal.	"And then remove the end of the rod, and do not insert it into the cilice entirely, nor extend the wound, nor cause any other such damage as you know about in the treatment of intestinal hernia."
E aprop cura aquela am la curacio de las plaguas, e cum inscideyses les fiels, mundifica aquela e restaura la plagua entro que sia consolidada; quar le ciphac es contrayt e no es ajustada la eminencia de ruptura.	"And then cure it with the treatment of ulcers, and when you cut the veins, cleanse that area and restore the ulcer so that it is consolidated; because the cilice contracts and the prominence of rupture is not adjusted."
E cauteri es milhor en aquest loc, quar es pus propda a salut.	"And cauterization is better at this location, because it is closer to health."
Capitol .lxviii.	"Chapter LXVIII."
De mollificacio de la codena dels testiculs.	"Of the softening of the cord of the testicles."
Motas veguadas la codena dels testiculs en alcus homes es mollificada per aysso quar las carns que so entre aquela son mollificadas, e es fedat le reguardament de lu.	"Very often the cord of the testicles in some men is softened because the flesh that is between it is softened, and it is obvious to look at."
Adonc necessari es ad aquel que es preguat en la curacio de lu que fassa jazer le malaute segon le sieu dos, e enscida tota la codena la qual es mollificada sobre la codena natural; e aprop que ajuste doas labias am la sutura.	"Therefore, it is necessary for anyone who wants to treat this that he makes the patient lie on his back, and cuts all of the softened cord over the natural cord; and then joins both lips with stitching."
E si vols, cus en le comensament la superfluitat de la codena mollificada am tres cozeduras o quatre e am ferma sutura.	"And if you wish, cut at the beginning the superfluity of the softened cord with three or four stitches and firm stitching."
E aprop inscideys entre las suturas; e aprop cura per curacio de las autras plaguas entro que sia sanat e caian les fiels.	"And then cut between the stitches; and then treat it with the treatment of other ulcers until it is healed and the veins fall."
Capitol .lxix.	"Chapter LXIX."
De castracio.	"Of castration."
Sapias que castratio en nostre ley es excomengada, mays per causa es legut a mi que·m remembre de lu en aquest libre; e no es necessaria la rememoracio de lu sino per doas manieyras, de las quals es la una per so que aquo sia en la sciensa del metge quan es enterroguat de aquela, que sapia la curacio de lu al qual accideys; e l’autra manieyra es que nos motas vetz havem necessitat de castracio de autras bestias per les juvamentz nostres per aquelas, ayssi cum de motos, e de bocs, e de porcs, e de semblantz a las bestias.	"Know that castration in our law is excommunicated, but out of duty I remember it to you in this book; and it is not necessary to remember it except for two reasons: the first is so that it may be known by someone who is knowledgeable about medicine when he is asked about this, that he knows how to treat him to whom it happens; and the second reason is because we often have need of castration of other beasts for our profits for those, like mules, oxen, goats, pigs, and similar animals."
E donc dic que castracio es fayta en dos manieyras: o per atrissio, o per fissura a seccio.	"And therefore I say that castration is done in two ways: either by tearing or by cutting through sectioning."
Mays en aquela que es fayta per atrissio, la via de la opera es que nos fassam cezer la bestia en aygua cauda entro que·ls genetius de lu sian mollificatz e sian linhitz e que pendan.	"But in that which is done by tearing, the way of the operation is that we make the beast lie down in cold water until its genitals are softened and relaxed and hang."
E aprop pren aquels am la tua ma entro que sian resols e no apparescan dejos le tocament.	"And then take them with your hand before they are dissolved and do not appear from their touch."
Mays en castracio fayta per fissura e seccio, cove que tu tenguas la bestia e premas la codena dels testicols de lu am la ma senestra.	"But in castration done by cutting and sectioning, you should hold the beast and press its cord of testicles with your left hand."
E aprop lia le suspensori, e inscideys sobre quascun huou am una seccio entro que dos huous proceseysso.	"And then tie the suspender, and cut over each one with a section until two testicles come out."
E aprop inscideys aquels pus que auras quascu excorjat.	"And then cut those that you have torn off."
E no leysses sobre aquels del ciphac alcuna causa, sino le ciphac subtil le qual es sobre les vazes.	"And do not leave on those of the scrotum any cause, but only the thin skin which is over the vessels."
E aquesta manieyra de castracio es milhor la qual es fayta per atrissio, quar atrissio fort leu layssa alcuna causa dels testicols per que la bestia desira coyt.	"And this way of castration is better which is done by tearing, for tearing leaves no cause of the testicles so that the beast desires copulation."
E aprop cura la plagua entro que sia sanada.	"And then treat the wound until it is healed."
Capitol .lxx.	"Chapter LXX."
De la cura de hermafrodozia.	"Of the treatment of hermaphrodism."
Hermafrodozia en les homes es segon dos manieyras: la una es quar o appar en aquo que siec l’espazi en la codena de testiculs, en aquel que es entre dos testiculs figura quar cunh de femna en la qual so pels.	"Hermaphrodism in men is of two kinds: one is when there appears between the space in the cord of testicles, in which there is a figure like a vulva in which it pees."
E alcunas veguadas de aquel corr urina le qual es en la codena dels testiculs.	"And sometimes urine comes from that opening which is in the cord of testicles."
Mays en las femnas es una specia: e es que·l conh de la femna sobre le pentenilh es ayssi cum dos testiculs de home un pauc de tot yminiheys a la partida deforo ayssi cum le perpucii de home e dos testicols.	"But in women it is one kind: and it is that the vulva of the woman on the pubis appears like two testicles of a man somewhat diminished at the opening of the foreskin, like the penis of a man and two testicles."
E la curacio es de tres specias: de dos dels homes e de una specia de las femnas.	"And its treatment is of three kinds: two of men and one kind for women."
E es que cove que tu inscidas aquelas carns ajustadas entro que efuga la emprecio de aquela, e aprop que cures aquelas am curacio de las autras plaguas.	"And it is necessary that you cut those joined flesh until the flow of that stops, and then treat them with the treatment of other wounds."
E en la segonda specia dels homes de la qual yeys urina la qual es en la codena dels testiculs, no es curacio ni opperacio en lu.	"And in the second kind of men from which urine comes that is in the cord of testicles, there is neither treatment nor operation for it."
Capitol .xxi.	"Chapter LXXI."
De lentinge e de carn eminent per causas de las femnas.	"Of lentigo and flesh prominent caused by women."
Lentige fort leu es ajustada sobre causas naturals entro que es etressat e es fayt leg le reguardament; e alcunas veguadas es magnificada en alcunas femnas en tant entro que es spandit ayssi cum en les homes e perve entro al coito.	"Lentigo is fortunately attached to natural causes, and it is stretched out and made with carelessness; and sometimes in some women it becomes enlarged as in men and spreads to copulation."
Adonc cove que tu tenguas la superfluitat de lentinge am la tua ma o am unci e inscidas.	"Therefore you should hold the surplus of lentigo with your hand or with an ointment and cut it."
E no ultimes en inscizio, majorment en le preon de la razit, per so que no endevengua flux de sanc.	"And do not end in cutting, especially on the head of the razor, for fear that bleeding may occur."
E aprop cura aquela am curacio de las plaguas entro que sia sanada.	"And then treat it with treatment of wounds until it is healed."
Mays carn nascuda es carn que nays en le horrifici de la mayre entro que umple aquel, e fort leu es eyssit a las partidas deforo segon semblansa de coa (e per aquo alscus primiers appelero aquo “malautia caudada”); donc cove que nos inscidam ayssi cum inscidem lentinge, e curem aquela entro que sia sanada.	"But flesh born is flesh that grows in the horror of the mother until it fills that place, and fortunately it exits at the openings of the foreskin according to its appearance like coal (and for this reason some people first called it “tail sickness”); therefore we should cut it as we cut lentigo, and treat it until it is healed."
Capitol .lxxii.	"Chapter LXXII."
De curacio de alratica.	Of the treatment of arthritis
Alratica es que le conh de la femna no sia perforat, o sia le trauc petit.	Arthritis is when the joint of the female is not perforated or the fracture is small.
E es o natural o accidental.	And it is either natural or accidental.
Accidental es per malautia la qual ha precedit, e aquela es fayta o per carn nada ajustada o per ciphac subtil o espes.	Accidental happens due to a previous illness, and the latter is caused by flesh not fitting properly or by thin or thick skin.
E es fayt o en le preon de la mayre, o en les costatz de lu, o en le pus sobira de lu, o en le pus bas de lu, e prohibeys de cuoyt e de enprenguacio e de enfantament, e fort leu prohibeys las mestruas.	And it occurs either in the front of the womb or on the ribs, or on the upper part of the uterus, or on the lower part, and it hinders coitus, pregnancy, and childbirth, and it especially hinders menstruation.
E la cognicio de aquela es fayta per reguardament de la metrona, si la oppilacio es apparent, propdana; mays si no es apparent, lahoras tu cerqua aquela am les tieus ditz o am le ray.	And the diagnosis of this is made by examining the vulva, if the contraction is visible, then it is diagnosed; but if not visible, then examine that area with your hands or a mirror.
Mays si oppilacio es per ciphac subtil, e es propda a las doas labias, lahoras tu coyta e disromp aquela.	But if the contraction is due to thin skin and is diagnosed in both labia minora, then you should avoid coitus and disrupt that.
E es que pauses sobre las doas labias pulvils, e aprop pausa les tieus ditz indicz de amdoas las mas encemps.	And it also appears on the outer lips of the vulva, so pause your fingers at both ends to indicate where they meet.
E la femna sia sobre le sieu dos, las sieuas coyssas extendudas, e aprop exten las doas labias am forsa entro que aquel ciphac subtil sia romput e la oppilacio sia uberta.	"The woman should be placed on her back, with her thighs extended, and then forcibly open both labia so that the hymen may be broken and the virginity opened."
E aprop pren lana e enbeu le4 en oli e pausa aquela sobre·l loc, e jagua am home le dia per so que·l loc inscis no sia consolidat.	"And then take wool soaked in oil and place it on that location, and keep pressing it there for a day so that the wound does not harden."
Mays si le ciphac es gros e espes, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquel am spatum lat o am fuelha de mirta.	"But if the hymen is thick and tough, then you should cut it with a sharp instrument or a myrtle leaf tip."
Mays si la oppilacio es per carnada, lahoras suspen aquela am unci, e inscideys aquela.	"But if the virginity is torn by force, then suspend her by one ankle and cut it open."
E sian am tu las medicinas que fan cessar flux de sanc ses mordicacio, ayssi cum ahacatia, e sanc de drago, e enses, ajustat am album de huou.	"And among the remedies that stop bleeding without biting are aloe, dragon's blood, and nettle juice mixed with albumen of an egg."
E aprop aministra una canulha de plom ampla per so que la plagua no sia consolidada leugierament.	"And then insert a wide lead tube in order to prevent the wound from closing lightly."
E tengua aquela per alcus jorns e aministra calgua de li sec.	"And keep her there for a few days and apply warm water compresses."
E aprop sia curada am l’autra curacio de consolidacio entro que sia sanada.	"And then treat it with the other remedy for consolidation until it is healed."
E alcunas vetz accideys en la mayre nativitat de autres carns, e lahoras cove que inscidas segon aquesta manieyra.	"And sometimes it happens that others' private parts are too tight, and then you should cut according to this manner."
Mays si aysso es per apostema crancos, a l’apostema crancos le qual es en la mayre no sia fayta contrarietat am ferr en deguna manieyra.	"But if it is for a hard swelling, then do not cause any injury with iron in any manner."
Capitol .lxxiii.	"Chapter 73."
De la cura de emorroydas e de tayl e de botor roja que accideysso en le conh de las femnas.	"On the treatment of hemorrhoids, anal prolapse, and red swelling that occurs in women's genitals."
Emorroydas so apprecio dels orificis de motas venas entro que de aquelas corro mot sanc continuadament; e cum so antiquadas emorroydas e son fayts theyls.	"Hemorrhoids are caused by many veins in that area, from which blood continually flows; and when these hemorrhoids are old and hardened..."
E ja yeu he dit en la divisio las specias de aquelas e les senhals de aquelas, e diyre ayssi aquelas que recebo curacio e aquelas que no recebo curacio.	"And as you have said in the division, the types of those [hemorrhoids] and their signs, say also which ones receive treatment and which ones do not."
Donc dic que emorroydas e theyls quan so en le preon de la mayre e no apparo al sentiment, lahoras en aquelas no sia fayta curacio am ferr.	"Therefore it is said that hemorrhoids and piles, when they are in the front of the anus and do not appear to the touch, at that time there should be no treatment with iron."
Mays aquelas las quals so en le orrifici de la mayre sobre las quals catz sentiment, so aquelas que so curadas.	"But those which are in the opening of the anus and can be felt, those are the ones that are treated."
E cove que tu metas la femna en mayso frega e aprop exten atheyl am les forfexs, o am drap aspre, e inscideys aquelas am las razitz.	"And it is necessary that you put the woman in a warm bath and extend her anus with hot water or with rough cloths, and incise those with the razor."
E aprop pulveriza sobre aquelas deves le fluxs del sanc de una de las polveras insciscivas ses mordicacio, ayssi cum acassia e semblant ad aquels.	"And also powder it on them with the blood flows of one of the incisive powders without biting it, such as cassia and similar to those."
E aprop enpellesca les sieus pes per una hora, e aprop pausa aquela en aygua freja.	"And also make her hold her breath for an hour, and then give her a hot water enema."
E si persevera le fluxs del sanc, lahoras fay aquela sezer en decoccio de sumat e de scorsas de milgranas e de gualas e de semblantz.	"And if the bleeding persists, then let her be seared in a decoction of sumac and of gallnuts of milestones and of oak-galls and of similar ones."
E aprop pren farina de ordi e comfiys aquela am miel e vi agre e fay emplastre am aquo sobre le dos de lu.	"And also take barley flour and mix it with honey and vinegar, and make a plaster with that over the back of her."
E si le sanc es abscindit, bo es; e sino, fay adherir am dos ventozas, e a las mamilhas ses escarificatio.	"And if the blood is cut off, it is good; but if not, let it adhere with two cupping glasses, and to the breasts without scarification."
E aprop pren lana e submergeys aquela am suc de coliandre o am suc de arnagloza o am suc de guarravier am vi pentit e fay adherir al loc; e aprop cura le loc am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	"And also take wool and immerse it in the juice of coriander or in the juice of argol or in the juice of walnut with red wine, and let it adhere to the place; and also dress the place with ointment until it is healed."
Mays athyl rog le qual es de aspre reguardament, cove que tu inscidas aquo que a tu appar de aquel segon que he dit en theyl engualment.	"But if that which appears is of rough regardment, then incise that which appears according to what I have said in the aforementioned engagement."
E cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	"And dress it until it is healed."
Capitol .lxxiv.	"Chapter 74."
De perforacio de eyssedura accident en la mayre.	Of the Perforation of Accidental Hernia in the Groin
Motas specias de apostemas accideysso en la mayre, ayssi cum cranc e apostema lapident e ulceracios e adhubelat e erpetromens e fistulas emorroyas e raguarrias e thyl e autres apostemas.	Many kinds of accidental apostumes happen in the groin, such as cancer and stone apostume and ulcerated and adherent and serpentine and bloody fistulas and raw places and tumors and other apostumes.
E yeu ja he dit aquestas malautias e las specias de aquelas e les senhals de aquelas, e las curacios de lor en la divisio.	"And I have already said these illnesses and the kinds of them and their signs and the cures for them in the division."
E cove que yeu digua en aquest tractat de apostema caut le qual ve en la mayre quan es dels apostemas que collegeysso sania, e si vols saber en qual manieyra se fa la opperacio de lu am ferr.	"And it is necessary that I say in this treatise about the cauterization of that which comes into the groin when it is of those apostumes that are healthy, and if you want to know in what manner the operation of it is done with iron."
Adonc cove que tu consideres si la dolor de la apostema en le sieu comensament es aguda am percussio e flecma e febre, e vezes aquel enrogezir e si catz sobre aquel le sentiment, lahoras no·t coytes am perforacio de lu, e cura aquel am aquo que ajuda sobre la maturacio entro que cesse la acuitat dels accidentz.	Therefore, you must consider if the pain of the apostume at its beginning is sharp with percussion and inflammation and fever, and if it becomes reddened and if it feels hot upon it, then do not cut it open with perforation, but dress it with that which aids maturation until the sharpness of the accidents ceases.
E lahoras cove que tu fassas cezer la femna sobre una cezelha que aia doas cezelhas; e recline sobre le sieu dos e ajusta les sieus pes a la partida pus dejos del ventre, e las sieus coyssas sian expandudas, e pausa les sieus brasses dejos les sieus denols, e lia quascus am liament ad aquo convenient.	And then you must make the woman lie upon a bolster that has two bolsters; and let her recline upon its back and adjust her feet to the place where it is farther from the belly, and let her thighs be expanded, and pause her arms far from her breasts, and tie each with linen cloth in an appropriate manner.
E aprop la matrona segua del latz dreyt e aministre le instrument am le qual es ubert le orrifici de la mayre, la forma del qual vindra en aquelas causas que·s faran aprop.	And then let the midwife follow from the right side and administer the instrument with which the opening of the groin is opened, the form of which will come in those causes that will be done appropriately.
E cove quan vols ministrar aquest instrument que tu fiques am lo ray le preon de la mayre de la femna, e aquo que del instrument es intrat en la mayre no sia mays que·l preon de la mayre e leda le malaute.	And it is necessary that when you want to administer this instrument, you put it with the right hand on the mons pubis of the woman, and that only the point of the instrument enters into the groin and lets go the illness.
Mays si l’estrument es major que·l preon de la mayre, lahoras cove que tu pauses pulvils sobre la textura del preon de la mayre per sso que sia prohibit l’intrament de tot instrument en le preon de la mayre.	But if the instrument is larger than the mons pubis of the woman, then you must put powders on the surface of the mons pubis so that the entrance of any instrument into the mons pubis is prohibited.
E cove que tu pauses le vertitge que corr en le strument del latz pus desus e que le ministre tengua le strument e revolva le vertitge entro que sia ubert le orrifici de la mayre.	And it is necessary that you put the point that runs in the instrument on the left side farther up, and that the one who ministers holds the instrument and turns the point until the opening of the groin is opened.
E cum appar la excitura, e es tocada am la ma e es leon e molh, lahoras cove que tu secces aquela deves le cap de lu am spatum lat.	And when the evacuation appears and is touched with the hand and is hot and moist, then it is necessary that you cut off its head with a broad-bladed knife.
E cum la sania es evacuada, lahoras cove que tu pauses en la plagua una meca submersa en oli rozat o oli vert en le qual sia alcuna stiptisitat; e pausa la calca7 en la seccio en le preon de la mayre.	And when the apostume is evacuated, then it is necessary that you put a compress soaked in rose oil or green oil with some astringent on the wound and put pressure on it on the section of the mons pubis.
E pause deforo la mayre e sobre le pentenilh lana munda submersa en aygua en la qual sian bulidas malvas.	And then cover the groin with clean wool dipped in water in which mallows have been boiled.
E aprop sia curada aprop dos dias am enguent le qual conveneys ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	"And then it should be cared for properly over two days until it has healed."
E alcunas veguadas es lavada la mayre e la plagua enayssi que es cristerisat am aygua e mel, e aprop am aygua en la qual es bulhida razit de liri o de aristologia longua, e aprop retorna al enguent.	"And sometimes the wound is washed with a mixture of water and honey to cleanse it; and sometimes it is washed with water in which iris root or long-rooted comfrey has been boiled."
E si la plagua es dedintz en la mayre ameguada, lahoras cove que tu sias prohibit de la curacio de lu am ferr, habantz cura aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio.	"If the wound is deep in the flesh, it is prohibited to cure it with iron; they should use water as described earlier."
Capitol .lxxv.	Chapter 75
A ensenhar las matronas en qual manieyre les enbrios bius sian medicatz quan yeysso segon figura no-natural.	"To teach midwives how to handle births that deviate from the normal shape."
Necessaria causa es que la matrona conogua en le comensament la figura del enfantament natural per senhals de lu, e es que quan tu vezas la femna expremar a las partidas dejos e desira odorar le ayre, e sobre aquo es enleujada per aquo que sobre ela es del part, e festina le eyssiment del enbrio, lahoras sapias que aquest part es segon figura natural, e es l’eyssiment de lu sobre le sieu cap, e la segondina am aquel o suspensa o pendent del ombelic.	"A midwife must recognize at the outset the figure of a woman's natural delivery by its signs. Thus when you see her pressing on the parts and desiring to smell the air, and upon this she is relieved by that which is over her from the birth, and hastens the expulsion of the infant, then know that this birth follows a natural figure, and it is the expulsion onto her own head, and the second one hangs suspended or pendant from the navel."
Donc cum tu vezes aquels senhals, lahoras cove que·l ventre de lu sia compremut per so que l’embrio deysenda leugerament quar quan deyssen sobre le sieu cap, deysen a lu la segondina, e es mondada de aquelas superfluitatz am bona mondificacio.	"Therefore, when you see those signs, it is necessary that the woman's belly be pressed so that the infant can easily descend and come out onto its head. When this happens, then the second one will follow and she will be cleansed of all impurities with good cleansing."
Mays aquel que es otra aquest part es no-natural e no-lausable, quar quan le enbrio es eyssit sobre sos pes e·l cos de lu es eyssit devant le cap de lu e·ls pes de lu, e la ma de lu una, o al pe de lu i, o es eyssit le cap de lu e la ma de lu, o al ventre de lu, e fort leu es convertit sobre le sieu col, e semblant de las figuras de lu no-lausablas.	"But if the birth is not natural and blameworthy, it is because when the infant comes out on its feet or buttocks first, and the body comes out before the head of the child and its feet are out, or if the hand or foot comes out first, or if the head comes out sideways with the hand, then this is a figure that is not praise-worthy."
Don necessaria causa es a la matrona que sia savia e subtil en totas aquelas causas, e que·s guarde de error e de decepcio.	"It is necessary for a midwife to be wise and subtle in all those causes and guard against error and deception."
E yeu so mostrant tota figura de aquelas, e qual engen es en aquelas per so que sia significat per aquo e sia stat sobre aquo.	"And I will show you all the figures of birth, and what kind they are and how to interpret them."
Quan le feyt es eyssit sobre le sieu cap per egrecio natural, e aquel es vehement sobre la femna e es fayt a lu part dificil, e vezes la vertut de lu ja debelitada, lahoras fay aquela sezer , o que las femnas tenguan lu, e evapora le conh de lu am fenugrec coyt e am olis humitz.	"When the child comes out feet first due to an unnatural position, and it is stuck over the woman's hips causing her labor to be difficult, then let her sit or have someone hold her up. Let them wrap her in cloths dipped in warm water with fenugreek seeds and olive oil."
E aprop entrometa la metrona entre les sieus ditz espatum petit e fenda am aquel la segondina, o secce aquela am la sua ungla entro que corro aquo que es en ela de humiditat.	"And then the midwife should insert her hand between the woman's thighs and gently tear open that opening with a cloth soaked in olive oil or use her fingernail to scrape away any excess moisture."
E preme le ventre de la femna entro que deyssenda le fet.	"And press on the woman's belly until the child comes out."
Mays si no deyssen, lahoras cove que la femna sia cristirizada de mucellage de ptilli e mucellage de fenugrec am cizami.	"But if it does not come out, then it is necessary to have the woman drink a decoction of mastic and fenugreek with cinnamon."
E aprop comanda a lu, aprop le cristeri, que sia compremuda e fay aquela stornudar am condisi; e te la boca de lu e·l nas de lu per huna hora, quar le fet sira foro-getat tantost.	"And then order her to sit up and have her blow her nose with a cloth over it. Also put some incense in front of her mouth and nose for an hour, because the child will be born shortly."
E si las doas mas del fet so foro-getadas al comensament, lahoras cove que tu redusiscas aquelas am fecilitat petit a petit.	"And if both hands of the fetus are stuck at the beginning, then you should gently pull them out one by one with ease."
Mays si no obezeys al intrament, lahoras pausa la femna sobre una cezelha e leva les pes de lu sus, e aprop concuceys la cezelha sobre la terra; e la femna sia tenguda que no caia deves la concussio.	"But if it does not obey the intervention, then place the woman on a cushion and lift her feet up. Then strike the cushion hard on the ground, but make sure the woman does not fall down from the shock."
E si las mas no son dedintz tornadas e morr le fet, lahoras inscideys aquelas e extratz le romament del fet o lia le cors a la ma de lu am drap e extratz aquel am equalitat, quar aquel sira foro-getat.	"And if the hands are not turned down and the fetus dies, then incise those hands and remove the membrane of the fetus or tie its body with cloth and pull it out gently because it will come out soon."
De eyssiment del embrio sobre les sieus pes.	"Regarding the emergence of the embryo on its feet:"
Quan le fet yeys sobre les sieus pes, lahoras cove que tu impelliscas aquels en sus, e aprop convertas le fet petit, e aprop que engualhes aquel, e aprop que prenguas un pe de lu e extendas aquels petit a petit.	"When the child comes out feet first, then you should push those feet upwards and gently turn the child around. Also grease its body with olive oil and take one foot at a time and stretch it out little by little."
Mays cum son eyssit entro a las coyssas, lahoras tu comanda a lu que se exprema, e fay aquela extornudar am condizi, quar sira foro-getat si Deus lo vol.	"But when it comes out into the hips, then command her to push and make her sneeze with incense because it will come out soon if God wills."
E si no es foro-getat am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras tu retorna le fet petit a petit entro que pauses aquel segon figura natural, quar aquel sira lahoras foro-getat am leugier eyssiment.	"And if it does not come out with what we have advised, then gently return the child and wait until it comes out naturally because it will come out soon with ease."
E si es prohibit am tot aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras pren de musellage de altea e de goma dissolvuda, e percuteys tot en le mortier per bona percussio, e aprop linieys am aquo le conh de la femna, el pus bas del ventre de lu.	"And if it is prohibited with everything that we have advised, then take some gum arabic and dissolved myrrh. Grind them together well in a mortar and apply that mixture on the woman's vulva and the lower part of her belly."
E aprop fay aquela cezer en aygua tebeza, entro que consegua les ypocondias.	"And then make her drink hot water with barley groats to induce contractions."
E cum vezes que las partidas dejos de lu so lenificadas, lahoras fay a lu subfumiguacio de mirta e sub-pausa aquela a lu.	"And sometimes when the openings of her womb are relaxed, then perform fumigation on her with myrtle and apply pressure on her."
E quan te la sub-fumiguacio per una hora, lahoras tu la fay sezer sobre una cezelha, e aprop fay aquela stornudar e extrenh la boca de lu, e levas de aquela, e prem la partida pus bassa del ventre de lu am leugiera compressio, quar le fet sira tantost foro-getat.	"And when you have fumigated her with myrtle for an hour, then make her sit on a cushion. Then make her sneeze and empty her mouth, lift her up, and press gently on the lower part of her belly because the child will come out shortly."
Eyssiment del fet sobre les sieus denols e las suas mas.	"Emergence of the fetus on its backside and hands:"
Quan le fet eyssira segon aquesta forma, lahoras tu engenies en entrometen las suas mas petit a petit; e aprop la femna stia evessada sobre le sieu col, e les pes de lu pengo en jos, e aquelas sia jasent sobre le lieyt, e complegua las suas mas.	"When the fetus comes out in this way, then gently insert your hands between its arms and make the woman lean back on her shoulders, with her feet hanging down and her hips resting on a blanket. Then fold its arms."
E aprop prem sobre le ventre de lu petit a petit, e aprop extratz aquo que es dejos les pes de lu de las aurelhas entro que sia preparada en la partida pus dejos.	"And then press gently on her belly and gradually remove what is below her feet from the anus until it is ready to come out of the lower opening."
E si le fet no es fora-getat, lahoras pren les pes de lu e mau aquels am movement vehement, e aprop prem aquo que es sobre les ypocondres petit a petit entro que le fet puege a las partidas desus.	"And if the child does not come out, then take its feet and shake them vigorously and press what is on the hypochondria gradually until the fetus reaches the openings above."
E aprop entrometa las suas mas e engualhe le fet petit a petit, e comanda a la femna que se exprema entro que le fet sia foro-getat.	"And then insert your hands and grease the child gently. Then command the woman to push until the child comes out."
Eyssiment del fet latutidinalment pendent una de las suas mas.	"Emergence of the fetus laterally, hanging from one of its arms:"
Sia engeniat en reduccio de la ma de lu, mays si no podes aquela reduzir, lahoras eleva la femna e fe aquela anar.	"If it cannot be reduced by its arm, then lift the woman up and make her walk."
E si anar no pot, lahoras fay la jazer sobre le lieyt, e concuteys las coyssas de lu am concussio vehement, e aprop aministra liamentz les quals yeu e recomtatz de mucillages.	"And if she cannot walk, then make her lie on her back. Strike her hips vigorously and administer remedies that we have mentioned made from mucus."
E si es vengut le enfantament, lahoras fay aquela sezer sobre cezelha, e aprop studia sobre la reduccio de la ma, e enguala le fet segon figura natural, e fay stornudar la femna e comanda a lu que comprema a si entro que sia foro-getat.	"And if the childbirth has come, then make her sit on a cushion. Then study the reduction of its arm and grease the child according to nature. Make the woman sneeze and command her to push herself until it comes out."
Eyssiment del fet sobre·l col expandudas las suas mas e la fassia de lu es al dos de la sua mayre.	"Emergence of the fetus on its back with arms spread wide, and its face towards its mother's back:"
Cove que la matrona tengua la ma del fet e aprop revolva aquel petit a petit, e eque aquel am facilitat.	"The midwife should hold the child's hand and gradually turn it around to facilitate emergence."
E cum es e quant so es engualhat, e lahoras pausa sobre le conh de lu aquo que havem recomtat de oli e de mucellages.	"And when it comes out and is greased, then pause on its face what we have recommended of oil and mucus."
E aprop comandas a lu que·s maugua petit a petit, e quan auras feyt aquo, lahoras fay aquela cezer sobre una cezelha e comanda li que sia inclinada sobre le latz dreyt, e aprop comanda a lu que sia compremuda; e fay aquela stornudar am condizi.	"And then command her to wipe it gently. Then make her sit on a cushion and lean towards the right side. Command her to squeeze herself until it comes out completely."
Exitus foetus praeparati super latus.	"Emergence of the fetus prepared for sideways presentation:"
Quan deyssen a horrifici de la mayre segon aquesta manieyra, considera, e lahoras tu inscideys la segondina am la tua ungla entro que sia evacuada de la humiditat.	"If you see horrible things coming out of the mother in this manner, then consider and incise the second one with your nail until it is emptied of moisture."
E si le fet es suspendut sobre la cara e·l col de lu, lahoras tu inscideys aquela del embelic, per so que no sia retengut e mora.	"And if the fetus is suspended on its face and back, then incise the navel cord so that it is not retained and dies."
E aprop empelleys le fet a las partidas dedintz entro que pauses aquel segon que cove, e manda a la femna que comprema a si alcunas veguadas, e el sira fora-getat am eyssiment leugier, si Dieus o vol.	"And then push the fetus inside the openings until it comes out completely. Then make the woman squeeze herself several times and it will come out easily if God wills."
Exitus geminorum aut foetuum multorum.	"Emergence of twins or multiple fetuses:"
Sapias que gemels motas veguadas so natz, e alcunas vetz naysso tres o quatre , mays aquo es estranh e tart s’endeve; mays v so causas foro natura, e no vivo.	"You should know that twins are often born, and sometimes three or four are born. But this is strange and rarely happens naturally."
E conte aquelas, ja sia que sian montiplicatz, una segondina, e son seperatz per ciphac, distingen aquels enter le liguament en l’ombilic de cascun de aquels E alcunas veguadas so foro-getatz ayssi cum es un fet per eyssiment natural leugier, e so eysitz alcunas veguadas per eyssiment no-lausabla ayssi cum havem recomtat.	"And count them one by one even if they are multiplied. Each has its own membrane, distinguished from the other in the navel cord of each. Sometimes they come out just like one fetus through natural emergence easily, but sometimes they come out through difficult emergence as we have recommended."
E si son dificils alcus de lor deves le enfantament e perveno ad aquo que havem dit de las figuras no-naturals, lahoras tu cura aquels ayssi cum havem recontat.	"If the childbirth is difficult or arrives before what we've mentioned about unnatural figures, then care for it as we have described."
E si’ la matrona subtil e fassa aquo que fa am facilitat e subtilitat, e am tarditat, e sia ingeniat segon tota figura segon que es a lu preparat de l’engen amenant a salut.	"And if the midwife acts with skill and subtlety, and with patience, she should follow the figure according to what has been prepared by the engineer aiming for health."
Rememoratio eius quod formatur in matrice ex embrionibus et Abortiuntur.	"Remember that which is formed in the matrix from embryos and those which are aborted."
Alcunas veguadas son formatz en la mayre un, e dos, e tres, e quatre, e v, e vi, e vii, e mays x, e ja es deves mi verificat que una femna abortem ne getet vi, e una autra x totz formatz, la qual causa fo fayta per mensuracio dels glorios savis.	"Sometimes they are formed in the mother's womb one, two, three, four, five, six, seven, and even more than ten. And it has been observed that one woman aborted seven, and another bore all ten of them fully formed, which was caused by measurement according to the glorious sages."
E tot aysso cove que sia en la sciencia de la matrona quar fort leu ad aquela parve semblant de aquo, e donc opause se ad aquo am so que cove.	"And also it is necessary that there be in the science of midwifery knowledge of how to behave according to each small formative semblance. Therefore pause until such a time as it may be necessary."
Capitol .lxxvi.	"Chapter 76."
De extraccio del fet quan es mort.	"Of extracting the fetus when it is dead."
Quan tu curas le fet mort am aquo que havem dit en la divisio de la medicacio e no es defora eyssit, e tu yest forsat usar de opperacio am ma, lahoras cove que consideras si la femna es de sana vertut e no es am alcu dels accidentz per les quals sobre ela es temuda perdicio.	"When you care for a dead fetus as we have said in the division of medicine, and it has not yet been expelled, and you must use an operation with caution, first consider whether the woman is of sound constitution and does not suffer from any of the accidents by which she may be endangered."
Lahoras cove que la femna sia envessada sobre le lieyt sobre le sieu dos, e sia le cap de lu enclinat enjos e las coyssas de lu sian elevadas.	"Then the woman should be placed on her left side with her head lower than her hips and her knees raised."
E·l ministre tengua aquela de doas partz o sia liada en le lieyt per so que·l cos de lu no se extenda deves la extraccio del fet.	"And the attendant should take hold of both parts, or grasp it in his left hand to prevent the body from slipping out during extraction."
E aprop tu humecta la boca de la mayre de lu am olis humitz e am mucellage de altea e de fenugrec e de semensa de li.	"And then you moisten the mouth of the womb with moist oil and a poultice made from mallow, fennel, and linseed."
E aprop unte la matrona la sua ma am aquels olis e mucellages, e aprop entrometa la sua ma am fecilitat en la mayre, e aprop cerque am la ma loc en le qual fique les uncis en le fet.	"And then the midwife anoints her hand with those oils and poultices, and then enters her hand gently into the womb, and then seeks with her fingers in the place where the hooks are to be placed on the fetus."
E locs convenient en aquo: adonc tu considera si le fet es preparat que deysenda sobre le sieu cap, e lahoras tu fique les uncis en les huels de lu, o en le col, o en la boca, o en le palat, o dejos la barba, o en la furcula de lu, o en les locs propdas de las costas, o dejos les ypocondres.	"And the suitable place for this is: then consider if the fetus is prepared to be expelled headfirst. And then you place the hooks in its heels, or neck, or mouth, or palate, or beard, or furcula, or near its ribs, or below its hypochondria."
Mays si le deysendiment es sobre les pes de lu, lahoras en le pentenilh, o en le mieg de las costas.	"But if the fetus is to be expelled feet-first, then place the hooks in its buttocks or between its ribs."
E cove que tengua le unci am la ma dreyta, e pausa la curvitat de lu en aquel loc le qual es entre les ditz de la ma senestra, e entrometa la ma am facilitat e fique le unci en alcu de aquels locs les quals havem ditz, entro que pervengua a la causa boyda.	"And hold the hook with your right hand, and place its curve in that location between the fingers of your left hand. Then enter your hand gently and place the hook in one of those places which we have mentioned, until you reach the cause of the blockage."
E aprop pause e fique en la apposicio de lu un autre unci, o le tertz si es necessitat, per so que sia atraccio engual, e no sia extencio segon la sua rectetut tant solament.	"And then place and fix another hook in the same position as the first one, or a third one if necessary, so that there is equal traction and not just lengthening according to its rectitude."
Ans sia maugut a tota partida, per so que l’eyssiment de lu sia alleujat ayssi cum es fayt en dent deves la eradicacio de lu.	"And thus it should be done in every extraction, so that the fetus is expelled as easily as it happens with the removal of a tooth."
E cove en lu aquo que es entre lor que la extencio sia mollificada; e si alcuna partida de lu es retenguda, lahoras cove que la matrona unte alcus sieus ditz am oli e entrometa aquels espertament e revolva am aquels aquo que es retengut.	"And in this matter, it is necessary that the extraction be softened; and if any part of it is retained, then the midwife should anoint her fingers with oil and gently insert them and revolve around that which is retained."
Donc si la partida del fet es fora-getada, lahoras les uncis sian permudatz entra loc le qual sia pus aut; e fay aysso entro que tot le fet sia fora-getat.	"Therefore if the fetus slips out suddenly, then the hooks should be changed to another place where they can be inserted more deeply. And do this until the entire fetus has slipped out."
Mays si la ma es eyssida denant l’autra, e no es possible reduzir aquela per la coartacio de lu, lahoras cove que drap sia envolopat sobre aquela; e aprop extratz aquela entro que tota sia fora-getada, e inscideys aquela o en la junctura de la ma o en le coyde.	"But if the hand slips out before the other and cannot be brought back by its contraction, then a cloth should be wrapped around it. And then extract that until everything is slipped out, and cut it off either at the junction of the hand or at the elbow."
E ayssi cove que fassas en l’autra ma e en les dos pes.	"And likewise you must do with the other hand and both feet."
Mays si le cap del fet es gran, o accideys a lu coartacio en le eyssiment, o es en le cap de lu aygua ajustada, lahoras cove que entrometa entre les ditz espatum spinos e fenda le cap e extragua la aygua, o que discroba aquel am un instrument le qual es nompnat “alundat”, la forma del qual vindra am las formas dels autres instruments en le capitol le qual es aprop aquest.	"But if the head of the fetus is large, or if contraction occurs during its expulsion, or if it becomes stuck in the pelvic cavity, then you should insert spatula spinosa between those bones and split open the head and extract the water, or use an instrument called "alundat" to remove it. The shape of this instrument will come with the shapes of the other instruments in the chapter which follows."
E semblantment fassa si·l fet es de gran cap per natura: e lahoras cove que inscida aquel am algematu, o que prengua aquel am alunda ayssi cum havem dit; e aprop extra les osses am les forceps.	"And similarly you should do if the fetus has a large head by nature. And then cut it with an embalotum or extract its bones with alundat as we have mentioned, and then extract the bones with forceps."
E si le cap es eyssit e es coartat deves la furcula, lahoras sia fendut entro que la humiditat la qual es en le pietz sia efunduda.	"And if the head is expelled but is contracted at the nape of the neck, then it should be split open until the fluid in the pit is drained."
Mays si no es complicat, ni obezeys a eyssiment, lahoras tu inscideys le cap tantost segon que a tu sira possible.	"But if there are no complications or obstruction to expulsion, then cut off its head as soon as it is possible for you."
E si le dejos del ventre es apostemat o es en lu ydropici, lahoras cove que tu perfores aquel entro que corro la humiditat que es en lu.	"And if the lower part of the belly is inflamed or dropsical, then you should pierce it until the fluid which is in it is drained away."
Mays si le fet es sobre les sieus pes, lahoras la atraccio de lu es leugiera e la direccio de lu a la boca de la mayre es leugiera.	"But if the fetus is lying on its buttocks, then its traction will be easier and its direction towards the mouth of the mother will also be easier."
Mays si es coartat deves le ventre e·l pietz, lahoras cove que tu extraguas aquel am drap le qual auras envolopat sobre la tua ma, e que fendes le ventre e·l pietz entro que corra aquo que es en aquels.	"But if it is contracted at the belly and pit, then you should extract it with a cloth which you will have wrapped around your hand, and split open the belly and pit until that fluid is drained."
Mays si les autres membres so ostatz e torna le cap, lahoras la metrona entrometa la ma senestra; mays si la boca de la mayre es huberta, lahoras intrometa la ma en le preon de layre, e cerque am aquela le cap, e atira aquel am les ditz entro a la boca de la mayre, e aprop entrometa en lu un unci, o dos uncis, e atire lu am aquels.	"But if the other members are obstructed and the head returns, then the midwife should insert her left hand; but if the mother's mouth is covered, she should insert her hand into the thorax of a goat and use that to surround the head, and draw it towards the mouth of the mother with those means, and then insert one hook or two hooks and draw out the fetus with them."
E si la boca de la mayre es coartada per apostema caut le qual accideys a l’u, lahoras cove que no sia trebelhat sobre lu; abantz cove lahoras aministrar efusio de causas humidas grassas.	"And if the mother's mouth is contracted by a hard tumor which has occurred on it, then do not trouble yourself with it. Instead, administer an evacuation of fatty and thick causes."
E aministre emplastres; e segua le pacient en ayguas que mollifican e humectan.	"And apply poultices; and follow the patient in waters that soften and moisten."
E si le fet es sobre le sieu costat, lahoras si possible es, sia agulat: e sia aministrat aquo que havem dit en le fet viu.	"And if the fetus is lying on its side, then if possible, turn it; and administer what has been said for a live fetus."
E si aquo no es possible, lahoras sia inscidit en pessas, e sia extrayt.	"And if that is not possible, then cut it in pieces and extract it."
E cove que non layssas alcuna causa dedintz de la segondina.	"It is necessary that you do not leave any cause inside the secondine."
E cum tu auras complida tota la tua opperacio, lahoras aministra aquo que havem dit de la curacio en les apostemas cautz les quals accideysso de la mayre.	"And when you have completed all your operations, then administer what has been said about the cure for hard tumors which occur in the mother."
E si accideys flux de sanc, lahoras deyssendas en ayguas stipticas e aministra l’autra curacio.	"And if bleeding occurs, then apply yourself to astringent waters and administer the other cure."
E yeu ja e vist una femna en le ventre de la qual era fet mort, e aprop sobre aquel foc autra veguada emprenhada, e aprop foc mort es le fet autre.	"And I have seen a woman whose belly contained a dead fetus, and who afterwards became pregnant again, and again had a dead fetus."
Accidit al u aprop lonc temps apostema en le sieu embelic; e inflat es entro que foc ubert, e comensec a getar brac.	"It happens that over a long period of time an inflammation occurs in the abdomen, which becomes swollen until it bursts open and begins to discharge pus."
E yeu fu appelhat a la cura de lu, e medicat a lu per lonc temps, e la plagua no es consolidada.	"And I was called for its cure, and treated it for a long time, but the inflammation did not consolidate."
Adonc yeu pausegui sobre lu de alscunas causas emplastra de forta atraccio, e eyssic de lu un os, e aprop passero alcus jorns, e eyssic un autre os; e yeu fu trop meravilhat, cum en le ventre no sia os.	"Therefore I placed over it poultices of great attraction, and removed from it one bone, and then after several days removed another bone. And I was greatly amazed that there were bones in the belly, since there are none."
E adonc yeu cogitegui que eran dels osses del fet mort.	"And then I thought that they were the bones of the dead fetus."
Donc yeu enguisigui la plagua, e extrayssi de lu motz osses , la femna existent en las sieuas milhos disposicios, e ja visquec en tal manieyra per lonc temps, correc de lu un petit de brac.	"Therefore I opened the inflammation and extracted from it many bones, the woman remaining in her usual good condition, and she lived in such a manner for a long time, suffering only a little discharge of pus."
E yeu no afermegui asso esser stranh, sino quar en aquo es sciensa e ajutori ad aquo que le metge artifec am la ma per curacio aministra.	"I do not affirm that this is strange, since in this there is knowledge and aid for what the skilled physician administers with his hand for cure."
De las formas dels instrumentz que so necessaris a extrayre le fet.	"Regarding the shapes of instruments that are necessary to extract the fetus."
Forma de vertitge am la qual es uberta la mayre:	"The shape of a vessel into which the mother's womb is opened:"
Aquesta es la forma de strenhedor en le qual so engualhatz les libres, al qual engualhament sian dos virtitges en doas extremitatz de dos futz.	"This is the shape of the forceps in which the tongs are inserted, into which two vessels are inserted at both ends of the two branches."
May empero aquesta virtitge cove que sia pus subtil de strictori, e sia fayt o de eba o de fust de boys.	"And moreover this vessel should be more subtle in its restriction, and it should be made either of ivory or of boxwood."
E sia la latitut de quascun fust quays dos ditz e le marge de quascu amdos quays un dit, e la longitut de quascu es un palm e mig; e en le mieg loc de dos fustz so dos ajustaments de aquel meteys fustz les quals ja son fermatz, dels quals la longitut es la maytat de un palm e un pauc mes, e la latitut de quascu es quay dos ditz, o un pauc mes.	"And let the width of each branch be two digits and a half, and its margin be one digit on both sides, and its length be one and a half palms; and in the middle place of the two branches there are two adjustments of that same piece of wood, which are already fixed, of which the length is about one palm and one digit more, and its width is about two digits or a little more."
E aquestz dos additamentz sian entromeses en la boca de la mayre per que sia uberta am aquels quan tu revolves las doas prescriptas virtigges.	"And these two adjustments are inserted into the mouth of the womb so that it can be opened with them when you turn the two prescribed vessels."
Forma autra semblant de aquela pus subtil e pus leugiera:	"Another form similar to this, but more subtle and lighter:"
Sia fayta de fustz de eba o de boys segon la semblansa de forceps.	"It should be made of ivory or boxwood according to the likeness of forceps."
Mays empero en la extremitat de lu so dos additament ayssi cum vezes, e la longitut de aquels additament es quays un palm, e la latitut de quascu es dos ditz.	"But nevertheless at the end of it there are two additions like this, and the length of these additions is about one palm, and their width is two digits."
E cum tu vols am aquels ubrir la mayre, lahoras tu fay cezer la femna sobre le lieyt les pes pendentz, ubert aquo que es entre las coyssas de lu.	"And when you want to open the womb with them, then you should place the woman on her back and lift up her hips slightly so that it can be opened there."
E aprop obre la tua ma am le instrument ayssi cum fas am forfexs engualment segon la quantitat que vols de la aprecio de la boca de la mayre entro que la metrona fassa so que vols.	"And then open your hand with the instrument like you do with forceps, grasping according to the amount you want of the opening of the womb, so that the fetus can come out as you wish."
La forma de vertitge la qual diysero les antics:	"The form of virtue which they called it in ancient times was: 'Virtus'."
Forma de impellent am le qual es empellit le fet:	"The form for pushing with which the fetus is pushed out:"
Forma de amisidat2 am le qual es conterit le cap gran	"The form of an anvil on which the large head is crushed:"
E es asemblat a forceps al qual so dentz en la extremitat, ayssi cum vezes, e alcunas veguadas es fayt lonc ayssi cum forceps segon aquesta forma, ayssi cum vezes, al qual so dentz ayssi cum dentz de ressegua am le qual es inscidit e conterit.	"And it is similar to forceps which has teeth at the end like this, and sometimes it is made long like forceps according to this form, with teeth like the teeth of a saw with which it cuts and crushes."
Forma de amesidat pauc:	"A small anvil form:"
Forma de unci havent una spina:	"The form of a hook having a spine:"
Forma de unci havent doas spinas:	"The form of a hook having two spines:"
Forma de forceps a la qual so dentz de cerra am le qual le cap del fet sia conterit:	"The form of forceps with teeth like a pincer with which the head of the fetus is crushed:"
Forma de spatum havent dos extremitatz am le qual le cap es abscindit:	"The form of a spatula having two extremities with which the head is severed:"
Forma de dos espatums latz:	"The form of two wide spatulas:"
Totz aquels instrumentz so excersitatz, e quan mes so multiplicadas las specias de aquel e so preparadas deves le artifexs, quant es pus leugier a la sua opperacio e pus aut deves les homes per la sua quantitat.	"However, all those instruments are practiced, and the more numerous and prepared the species of it are by the artisans, the easier is its operation and the better for people due to their quantity."
E no obres de aquels instrumentz ja sia qua sia deves tu aparalhat, quar la necessitat de aquels no es excusabla.	"And do not operate with those instruments, whatever they may be, without preparing them first, because the need for them is inexcusable."
De extraccio de la segondina.	"On the extraction of the secondina (afterbirth):"
Quan la segondina es retenguda deves le enfantament, lahoras cove que tu comandes a la malautae que retengua le sieu ale, e aprop fay aquela stornudar am condizi, e strenh la tua ma sobre la boca de lu e sobre las nars de lu, e si per aysso es defora eyssit, bo es.	When the second stage of labor is retained, then you must command the patient to hold their breath, and also make her sneeze with conditions, strengthen your hand over her mouth and nose, and if by this means it is expelled, well is it.
E sino, lahoras tu pren una ola e perfora en la cuberta un trauc e pausa en aquela erbas ubrent la boca de la mayre, ayssi cum calament e ruda e anet e camamilla e scicados arabic e cassia lignea e santaurea.	And if not, then you should take some water and pierce through the cloth a tube, place it in those herbs burned to make mouth wash for the mother, such as chamomile and rue and fennel and camomile and Arabic cumin and cinnamon bark and wormwood.
Totas aquestas erbas o alcunas de lor sian submersas en aygua en la ola, e pausa aquela sobre le foc.	All these herbs or some of them should be immersed in water in the bowl, and place that on the fire.
E aprop pausa una canula de canaviera en la boca de la mayre, e tengua aquela entro que la evapor vengua a la concavitat de la mayre.	"Then insert a reed cannula into the mother's mouth, holding it in place so that vapor reaches the cavity of the womb."
E aprop fay aquela stornudar ayssi cum havem dit, e la segondina sira fora-getada am velocitat.	"And then make her sneeze as we have said, and the second one will be expelled quickly."
Mays si roman aprop aquesta curacio e no es eyssida, lahoras tu comanda a la matrona que submerge la sua ma sinistra en oli sizami o en micellage de altea, e aprop entrometa aquela en le conh e queresca am aquela la segondina, e cum aquela auras trobada, lahoras pren la e exten aquela pauc a pauc Mays si es annexsa en le preon de la mayre, lahoras entrometa la sua ma segon que havem recomtat, e quan aura trobat la segondina, extragua aquela petit a petit segon rectetut per so que la mayre no caja deves la atraccio vehement.	"If however the second one is not expelled by this treatment, then command the midwife to submerge her left hand in sesame oil or in an emulsion of althea, and then insert it into the womb and search with it for the second one. And when she has found it, then take hold of it little by little, so that the mother does not suffer too much from the violent attraction."
Abantz cove que sia permudada als costatz dreyt e sinestre am facilitat.	"It is necessary that they be changed to the right and left sides with ease."
E aprop sia ajustat en la quantitat de atraccio, quar ela obedira e evasira de adhirencia.	"And also adjust it in terms of attraction, for it will obey and withdraw from adherence."
E si la boca de la mayre es coartada, nos ja havem recomtat la curacio am sturnutacio e am medicacio de la ola am erbas.	"And if the mother's mouth is closed, we have already recommended treatment with sneezing and medication with olive oil with herbs."
Mays si no es fora-getada am totas las causas las quals havem recomtadas, lahoras guarda te que no fetigues sobre aquela en iteracio de abstracio, mays empero cove que aquo que es eyssit de lu a la boca de la mayre lies a la coyssa de la femna, e aprop cristeriza aquela am enguent e tetrafarmacon; quar aquel fara poyrir aquela aprop alcus dias e sira dissolvuda e sira fora-getada.	"But if it is not expelled by all the means that we have recommended, then take care not to tire yourself out with repeated attempts at abstraction, but rather what comes out of her into the mother's mouth should be placed on the thing of the woman, and then crystallize it with gum and treacle; for this will cause it to disappear gradually and it will be dissolved and expelled."
Mays quan se poyreys, es de lu elevada mala audor al cap, e al estomac, e aquo ledeys la malauta; e adonc cove que sian aministradas sub-fumiguacios e convenientz ad aquo.	"But when it disappears, there will be a bad smell in the head and stomach, and this indicates the illness; and then fumigations and appropriate remedies should be administered for that."
Mays alcus dels Antics ja so esproatz sub-fumigacio de nazitort e de figuas seccas.	"But some of the Ancients already used fumigation with narcissus and dried figs."
Forma de instrument am le qual la femna es sub-fumiguada deves la retentio de mestruas e de la segondina:	"A form of instrument with which the woman is fumigated for retention of menstruation and of the secondine:"
Sia fayta de veyre o de eram.	It should be made of vein or of earth.
E sia pausada la extremitat subtil en le conh e la extremitat ampla sobre le foc, e la sub-fumiguacio sia pausada sobre las brazas del foc.	The narrow end should be placed in the cone and the wide end on the fire, and the smoke should be produced by placing burning coals from the fire onto it.
E tengua aquela entro que sia consumida aquela sub-fumiguacio e itera·n autra.	And keep adding more until that incense is consumed
De curacio del cul del enfant no-perforat.	Of treating an imperforate anus
Motz enfantz naysso e les culs de lu no so perforatz, les quals ya ciphac subtil e opilat.	Many children are born without a perforated anus, which is usually discovered during circumcision.
Adonc cove a la matrona que perfore am le sieu dit aquel ciphac; e sino, perfora aquel am spatum agut, e guarda se que no toque le lacert.	Therefore, it is the midwife's responsibility to carefully perforate that anal opening with her finger; if not, she should use a sharp probe, taking care not to injure the rectum
E aprop pause sobre aquel lana enfusa en vi e oli; e aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia senat.	Then place some of that wool soaked in wine and oil on it; and also rub some ointment inside until it is clean
Mays si temes que sia opilat, lahoras pausa en le trauc una canula per motz dias, e osta la quan le enfant voldra degerir.	But if you fear that it may be obstructed, then place a catheter in the anus for several days, and remove it when the child wants to defecate
E ja accideys oppilacio del cul per consolidacio de plagua o de apostema; adonc cove que aquela consolidacio sia inscidida, e aprop sia curada am aquo que avem dit de la curacio e del plom.	And if there is an obstruction of the anus due to a consolidation or abscess; then it is necessary for that consolidation to be incised and also treated with what has been said about treatment using honey and pitch.
De curacio de las fistulas que endeveno dejos.	Of treating fistulas that remain after childbirth
Las fistulas que endeveno en la partida dejos pus bassa so nodacio e grossetut las quals endeveno prop del cul defora o en l’espazi de la una partida.	Fistulas that occur during childbirth are often large and thick, which can happen close to the anus or in the space between two buttocks.
E es una fistula o motas.	And if it is one or more fistulas
E cum aquela nodacio es antiquada e corr de la humiditat aygosa blanca o poyridura subtil, e alcunas veguadas so de aquestas fistulas alcunas penetrantz.	Then, when that swelling is old and full of moist pus or thin pus, sometimes there are also penetrating branches from these fistulas.
E aquelas penetrantz so conogudas per aquo que es eyssit de aquelas per la egressio e per ventosetat; e alcunas vetz use le malaute de egressio, e fort leu es eyssit de aquelas verm.	And these penetrating branches are recognized by what is expressed from them through their opening and also through windiness; sometimes they cause pain upon expression, and very often worms come out of them
E so de aquelas fistulas alcunas veguadas en l’espazi penetrantz entro a la vesica, e entro al meat de la vergua; e so de aquelas penetrantz entro la junctura de la coyssa e entro al notz de la coeta.	And sometimes from those fistulas there are penetrating branches that go into the bladder and into the urethra; and these penetrating branches also go into the junction of the vulva and into the opening of the vagina.
E aquo en que es conoguda fistula penetrant entro al cul e no-penetrant, es que tu metas le tieu dit endic en le cul, e entrometas tenta subtil de eram o de ferr en la fistula quan no y es turtuositat.	And this is how a penetrating fistula into the anus can be recognized as not being penetrant: when you insert your finger into the anus, and subtly introduce a probe made of reed or iron into the fistula where there is no tortuosity.
Mays si en aquela es turtuositat, lahoras entromet en aquela tenta subtil de plom o de pels de caval entro que tu sentas la tenta o le pel en le tieu dit.	But if there is tortuosity in that one, then insert a subtle probe made of lead or horsehair into it until you feel the probe or the hair on your finger.
E si no sentas aquela de tot ni no procezeys del trauc alcuna causa de egestio ni verm ni ventositat, ayssi cum havem dit, lahoras sapias que es no-penetrant, e lahoras coyta te a la curacio.	And if you do not feel that one at all and there is no cause of expression, either worms or windiness as we have said, then you will know that it is not penetrating, and thus you should proceed to the treatment.
E quan la fistula es penetrant entro a la vesica o entro al meat de la vergua, lahoras la significacio de lu es eyssiment de urina de aquela e prohibicio de lu ad aysso que·l loc am medicina sia consolidat.	And when the fistula is penetrating into the bladder or into the urethra, then the sign of this is the emission of urine from that place and the prevention of it until that location has been consolidated in medicine.
Mays si es penetrant entro la junctura de la coyssa o entro al os e envencio de dolor en le circuit, lahoras senhal de lu es que la tenta perve entro aqui si en lu no es turtuositat entro al os, e envencio de dolor en le circuit de la partida; e que de lu yeys poyredura tostemps; e que no val en aquela medicacio, ni es consolidada am enguent.	But if it is penetrating into the junction of the vulva or into the bone and causing pain in the area, then the sign of this is that a probe can be inserted there without tortuosity in the bone, and there is pain around the opening; also, pus is always present there; and that medication is ineffective and not consolidated with any ointment.
E en totas aquelas fistulas penetrant no es curacio de tot, e la curacio de aquelas es trebalh e vanetat dels folyls metges sobre·l qual so fermatz.	And in all those penetrating fistulas there is no cure except that of cutting and cauterizing with the help of skilled surgeons about whom we are confident.
Mays en aquela que no es penetrant e no antiqua, sanacio am ferr es sperada segon que yeu a tu recomtare, e aquo que ja yeu e proat.	But in those that are not penetrating and are not old, healing with iron is expected according to what I will recommend to you, and this has already been proved.
E es que le malaute jagua entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos e eleva las cambas de lu entro sus, las coyssas sian enclinadas al ventre de lu, e aprop entromet tenta de plom, o de eram si es en la fistula turtuositat, entro que sapias le loc on perve la tenta.	And the pain is usually between your thighs, especially on the right side and elevates the cheeks of the buttocks inward, with the vulva inclined toward its belly; and gently introduce a probe made of lead or reed into it until you know where the probe passes.
E si aquela sent le malaute entorn le cuol, lahora cove que tu entrometas le tieu dit endic en le cuol.	And if that pain is felt around the anus, then it is necessary for you to insert your finger into the anus.
E si sentas en le tieu dit la tenta ja per si meteyssa descuberta penetrar, otra aquo que sentas entre le tieu dit e aquela siphac o carn, lahoras sapias certanament que aquela es penetrant; e adonc no trebalhes en aquela, quar no es en aquela sanacio, ayssi cum havem dit.	And if you feel the probe already penetrating as it is inserted, other than what you feel between your finger and that syphon or flesh, then certainly you know that this one is penetrating; and therefore do not operate on it because there is no cure for it, as we have said.
Mays empero diyssero alcus que es sana en alcus homes tart.	But some people say that sometimes they are cured in men.
E de la medicacio per la qual es sperat juvament en lu es que tu ignes cauteri subtil segon le ample de la fistula, ayssi cum es precedit, e intrometas aquel ignit en la fistula entro que pervengua entorn le cuol; e aprop itera aquel doas o tres vetz entro que sapias que ja son adhustas totas aquelas carns ajustadas fistuladas que so semblantz a cana de pluma de ausel.	And the treatment by which improvement is hoped for in this one is that you ignite a subtle cautery according to the width of the fistula, as it has been said before, and introduce that burning into the fistula until it reaches around the anus; and then repeat this twice or three times until you know that all those flesh that were joined together have been burnt like the feathers of a bird.
E aprop cura aquela am calguas envolopadas en boder entro que en yescan totas aquelas carns que so adhustas, e aprop cura aquela am medicinas la carn engendrantz e consolidantz, e si es sanada, bo es; e sino, lahoras no es sana en degun temps per autra curacio.	And then dress that with compresses wrapped in wool until all those flesh have healed; and then treat it with medicines that generate and consolidate the flesh. And if it is healed, well then; but if not, then it will never be healed by any other treatment at any time.
E si la tenta intra, e no penetra entro·l tieu dit le qual es en le cul, e entre aquel e la tenta que es velament spes de carn o de ciphac, e vezes la fistula en aquo que siec la superficia de la codena, lahoras secca la codena del comensament de la fistula, e tu ve seccan am la tenta, e sia en la fistula entro que la seccio pervengua al loc en le qual perve la extremitat de la tenta, e per la tenta es liberat e catz.	And if the probe enters but does not penetrate into the anus which is in the buttocks and between that and the probe which is veiled with skin or syphon, and if it deviates from its course at the surface of the buttock, then cut off the buttock from the beginning of the fistula and you will see how the buttock has been severed by the probe, and let it be opened up until the section reaches the place where the end of the probe arrives; and through that opening you will free and cauterize.
E aprop mundifiqua aquelas carns fistuladas las quals so asembladas a canula de pena de ausel e no romangua de aquelas alcuna causa.	And then clean those flesh that were burnt like the feathers of a bird, without leaving any residue behind.
Mays si flux de sanc vezes que vengua entre tu e la tua opperacio quan ensideysses aquelas carns, lahoras le milh que sia e del pus leugier instrument es cauterizar am foc o am medicina acuta, quar cauteri am foc ajusta bonas doas habitutz: so es adhustio de aquelas carns ajustadas, e abscizio del sanc exseccacio de las humiditatz.	But if there is a flow of blood that comes between you and your operation when you insert those flesh, then the best thing to do is cauterize it with fire or with an acute medicine because cauterizing with fire has two good habits: it joins together those joined flesh and removes the blood by drying out its humidity.
E aprop cura aquela am calguas envolopadas en boder o en caus trissat entro que·l loc geta brac, e aprop lahoras cura la plagua am enguentz carn dura engendran e consolidan.	And then dress it with compresses wrapped in wool or in finely chopped cabbage until that place becomes hard; and then treat the wound with medicines that generate and consolidate firm flesh.
E so medicinas en las quals so stipticitat e exseccio; quan lahoras es restaurada ja es sanada e no temes iteracio.	And these medicines have astringency and drying properties; when they are restored, it is already healed and there is no fear of recurrence.
Mays si la fistula ja perve entro al preon del cul e es elonguada de lu superficia del cos, lahoras entromet le tieu dit en le cul e inquireys am aquel.	But if the fistula has already penetrated into the opening of the anus and is elongated from its surface on the body, then insert your finger into the anus and explore with it.
E donc si centes la tenta e entre tu e ela es velament de ciphac o de carn, e es propda a la penetracio, lahora no es operacio en lu sino segon via di fiducia e de speransa.	And therefore if you feel the probe and between you and it there is skin or flesh that is close to penetration, then it is not advisable to operate on it but rather to follow a path of trust and hope.
La qual causa es aministrar en lu una de tres manieyras: o que cauterize aquela ayssi cum havem dit; o que secces aquela entro que consieguas la conquavitat de lu per que sia a tu possible entrometre las qualcas e la curacio propdana; e no procesiscas mot am seccio per so que no inscidas le lacert contenent le cuol, e que accidisque sobre le malaute eyssiment de la egistio ses voluntat; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit quar fort leu sira sanat; o que elongues aquel velament e mondes aquel pus que seccas aquel entro prop le cul, ayssi cum havem dit, o am tenta o am autre instrument de aguda extremitat, e aprop mondifique aquelas carns fistuladas las quals so en la seccio entro la on podes am percrustacio; e aprop esforsa te a far la restauracio de tota la plagua am seccio, e si le orrifici pus desus no es consolidat, e romangua la fistula uberta en la partida del cul, e sira pus leugier per le malaute.	And therefore administer in this way one of three methods: either cauterize it as we have said; or dry it out until you can succeed in entering the concavity of it so that you may remove its contents and then treat it as I have advised; but do not proceed with cutting because you will wound the lappet containing the rectum, which would cause an injury to the intestines without their consent. And then dress it with water as we have said for a strong person will be healed soon. Or else lengthen that skin and remove its pus by drying it out until near the anus, as we have said, either with a probe or with another instrument with a sharp point, and clean those flesh that are in the section where you can do so by cauterization; and then strive to restore all the wound with cutting, and if the opening above is not consolidated, and the fistula remains open at the partition of the anus, it will cause pain.
E alscunas veguadas la fistula es finida segon aquesta manieyra: es quan tu entrometas la tenta en la fistula, e es en le latz del cul entorn la superficia del cos am la codena e en le marge del cul, lahoras pren tenta de perforada extremitat, que es ayssi cum agulha de preparantz les coers segon aquesta forma:	"Now the fistula is finished in this manner: when you insert the probe into the fistula, it should enter on the side of the buttock near the surface of the body and along the margin of the anus, then take a probe with a perforated end, like a needle for preparing hearts."
e entromet en aquela fiel envolopat de v fiels o entorn aquels; e aprop entromet tenta am fiel en la fistula entro que consiegua la conquavitat de lu.	"And insert it into that field while winding around its four sides or around them, and then insert the probe with the thread into the fistula until you reach its concavity."
Mays si es penetrant en le marge del cul prop dedintz, lahoras tu extratz le fiel de aquel trauc ayssi que tu intrometas le tieu dit en le cul; e extraguas la extremitat del fiel e ajustes las duas extremitatz essemps, e estrenh cascuna, e leyssa aquo per un dia o per dos, e quan mays inscideys le fiel en la carn, estrenh be aquel entro que aquelas carns sian inscididas las quals so entre doas extremitatz del fiel e que cajan.	"But if you are penetrating near the margin of the anus from behind, then pull out the thread from that track in such a way that you insert your little finger into the anus. Then remove the end of the thread and tie both ends together, stretching each one separately, and leave it like this for one or two days. And when you see that the thread has become embedded in the flesh, cut it there where those tissues have been incised which are between the two ends of the thread."
E aprop cura la plagua entro que sia consolidada e sanada.	"And then cure the wound until it is consolidated and healed."
Mays si le orrifici de la fistula no es penetrant, lahoras fay aquel penetrar, en qualque manieyre sia a tu preparat, sino que sia mot en le preon, quar no es a tu que fassas aquo per que no inscidas le lacert; e aprop fay am aquela entro que sia sanada.	"But if the opening of the fistula does not penetrate on its own, then make it penetrate in any way you have prepared, but gently so as not to wound the skin. And then apply that until it is healed."
La forma de spatum spinos am lo qual es fenduda la fistula: la curvitat del qual es mot aguda e l’autra partida es no-aguda, per so que no inscidas aquo que no es necessari, ayssi cum vezes.	"The shape of the spatula used to probe the fistula should be sharp at its curvature and not sharp on its other end, so that you do not wound what is not necessary, as happens sometimes."
De sutura de emorroydas en las quals corra sanc en la inscizio de aquelas.	"Regarding the suturing of hemorrhoids in which blood flows from the incision of those [hemorrhoids]:"
Emorroydas so segon dos manieyras, quar o so entre le cul semblantz aysi que es de carbos, o quays aquelas sian cum a gras de rasim.	"Hemorrhoids are of two kinds: either they appear between the buttocks resembling charcoal, or they seem like a mass of fat."
E de aquelas so petitas e grans, e que le sanc corr de aquelas tostemps e es una, e so motas, e so fora·l cul, e en las extremitatz de lu.	"And those are small and large, from which blood flows continuously or intermittently, they are many in number, or outside the anus at its extremities."
Mays empero aquelas que so foro le cul so segon las mes de pauca humiditat, de las quals corr aygua citrina o un petit de sanc am cos continuabla, e so segon la color del cos.	"But those that are outside the anus are caused by lack of moisture in the intestines, from which citrine water or a little blood mixed with mucus flows continuously, and they vary in color according to the skin."
E la curacio de aquela que es dedintz le cuol es que comandes al malaute que se assela e que se exprema entro que le cuol yesca e las emoroydas apparescan a tu.	"And the treatment for that which is inside the rectum is to order the patient to bend over and press while evacuating until the rectum expels and the hemorrhoids appear before you."
Adonc tu te coyte e suspen am uncis o que tenguas aquelas am la tua ungla, e aprop incideys aquelas deves las suas razitz.	"Then you take hold with your fingers or whatever you have at hand, and carefully cut those veins with a scalpel."
Mays si les uncis no so tengutz en aquelas per la humiditat de lor e mollificacio de aquelas, lahoras pren aquelas am drap aspre o am coto o am flassada de lana, e extratz aquelas am les tieus ditz, e aprop inscideys aquelas e polveriza sobre lor alcunas polveras caudas aprop la inscizio, per que sian ad aquelas en loc de cauteri; o cauteriza aquelas segon que es precedit en le capitol de cauterizar.	"But if the fingers are not held in those veins due to dryness and softening of those veins, then take them with rough cloth or with cotton or with a woolen flannel, squeeze those veins with your fingers, and carefully cut those veins and sprinkle some powdered myrrh on that incision so that they may be cauterized instead of being burned; or else cauterize them as it is stated in the chapter on cauterization."
E aprop cura aquelas am l’autra curacio entro que sian sanadas.	"And then treat those veins with another cure until they are healed."
E si le cul no obezeys a egressio, lahoras cristerisa le malaute am cristeri en le qual sia mordicacio petita, e sia lavat am aquel aquo que es en le cuol e que obezesca a egressio leugierament quan le malaute s’esprem.	"And if the anus does not yield to evacuation, then you will crust the patient with crushed bran in which there is a little bite, and wash it with that water which is in the rectum so that it may yield gently when the patient presses."
Mays si las emorroydas so defora le cul, lahoras la causa de lor es leugiera, e es que tu prenguas aquelas am la tua ungla, o que prenguas aquelas am unci, e inscidas aquelas, e aprop cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit entro que sian sanadas.	"But if the hemorrhoids are outside the anus, then their cause is slight, and you should take those veins with your finger or with a needle and cut them, and then treat them with water as mentioned earlier until they are healed."
E aquel que avoreys inscizio, cove que aministres sutura de lor segon aquesta manieyra: pren fiel envolopat e entromet aquel en agulha e aprop extratz las emorroydas a las partidas dessus, e fay aquel penetrar am la agulha en la razit del autra part, e envolveys las doas extramitatz del fiel en la partida pus dejos de la agulha, e so latitudinalment; e estrenh la emorroyda am strectura fort, e aprop noza le fiel e extratz la agulha.	"And when you have made an incision, you must administer stitches to them in this manner: take a thread and wrap it around the needle and then insert that into the vein on one side of the incision, and make the needle pierce through the vein of the other side, and wrap both ends of the thread around the needle on the other side of the incision, width-wise. Then pull the hemorrhoid tightly with a knot, and cut the excess thread, and remove the needle."
E fay aquo a totas, e layssa de aquelas una e no la cozes, per so que la superfluitat del sanc corra de aquela.	"And do this to all of them, and leave one alone without tying it up so that the excess blood may flow out from that."
E aprop pausa sobre le cul drap enfus en oli rozat o en cerot; e pausa aquel sobre·l cuol e comanda al malaute que·s repause.	"And then apply over the anus a cloth dipped in rose oil or cerote, and place it over the rectum and tell the patient to remain quiet."
E aprop layssa aquela entro que caja; e quan es casuda, cura aquelas am enguentz o am autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	"And then leave that one alone until it is dried up, and when it is healed, treat those veins with an ointment or with another cure until they are completely healed."
De curacio de fistulas.	"On the treatment of fistulas."
Motas veguadas accideys per exseccacio de fenda o per costriccio de natura.	"Frequently occurs due to dryness of skin or constriction by nature."
E cum so antiquadas e no val en aquela medicina, lahoras cove que tu razas aquelas am la puncta de spatum o am la tua ungla entro que sian faytas humidas e sia hostada de aquelas la escorsa pus desus, la qual prohibeys aquelas de consolidacio; e aprop cura aquelas entro que sian consolidadas.	"And when those are not helped by that medicine, then you should remove them with the point of a spatula or with your nail, so that they may become wet and remove the pus above them which prevents their healing; and promptly clean those that have healed."
Lahoras tu osta aquelas am razio pus vehement que la primieyra entro que mot sancno e sian excoriadas; e aprop cura aquelas entro que sian sanadas.	"Then you should remove them with a strong scraping, the first time until blood comes out and they are scraped raw; and promptly clean those that have healed."
De curacio de almesamir, so es clau.	"The key to treating leprosy is this:"
Sapias que alamermar, so es clau, e no es si no notz redon segon la color del cors semblant a cap de claviel, e es fayt en tot le cors e majorment en las partidas dejos les pes e als ditz, e endeve per aquels dolor deves le anament.	"Know that leprosy, which is the key, does not appear as a round spot according to the color of the skin like the head of a nail, and it appears throughout the body but more so on the parts away from the feet and hands, and therefore it causes pain there."
E adonc cove que sia inscidit aquo que es en le circuit del clau, e sia tengut am les forfexs o am unci, e sia eradicat de la sua razit; e aprop cura aquel.	"And then it must be incised where it is in the area of the key [i.e., the center], and held with forceps or a hook, and eradicated from its root; and promptly clean that."
E si vols, cauteriza le segont que es precedit en le sieu capitol.	"And if you wish to cauterize the second one that follows in its chapter [i.e., the next verse]."
Mays de veruca es eminencia petita aspre fistulada redonda sobre la superficia del cos, e motas veguadas veno en las mas dels enfantz.	"But a verruca is a small, rough, fleshy, round elevation on the surface of the body, and many are seen in most children."
E curacio de lu es que estendas e inscidas aquela, o que estrenhas aquela am fiel o am pel entro que caja.	"The treatment for it [a verruca] is to stretch it out and incise it, or scrape it with a file or pumice stone until it bleeds."
E si vols, cauteriza aquo, segon que havem dit, am foc o am medicina acuta.	"And if you wish, cauterize it [a verruca] with fire or with an acute medicine, as we have said."
E ja so eradicadas enversas e no-enversas am le instrument le qual yeu diyre.	"After these elevations have been eradicated, whether they are raised or not, with the instrument that I will describe:"
Mays formica es eminencia petita feutrada o fistulada grossa sobre la superficia del cos anant mot en le preon, e quan le freg atroba aquela es centit en lu semblant de mordificacio de formigua, e es fayta entorn le cos.	"But a follicle is a small, smooth or thick-walled elevation on the surface of the body, occurring especially in the face, and when it is touched it feels like an ant bite, and they are found throughout the body."
E curacio de lu es que prenguas una canula de pena de auca o de pena de voltor, e sia fort, e pausa aquela sobre la formigua entro que la contengua le cercle de la canula de las partidas de lu; e aprop revolveys la tua ma am la canula entro que inscidas aquo que es en le circuit de la formigua, e pauses aquela en le preon de la carn, e que eradiques la formigua de la sua razit.	"The treatment for it [a follicle] is to take a quill of an ostrich or a swan feather, and hold it firmly, and place it on the follicle so that its circle covers the parts around it; and promptly rotate your hand with the quill so as to incise what is in the area of the follicle, and press down on the skin, and eradicate the follicle from its root."
E si vols, fay aquo am canula de eram o de ferr segon aquesta forma:	"And if you wish, do this with a probe made of brass or iron according to this method:"
Sia la partida desus de la canulha trahent a subtilitat, sorda (so es no-perforada), envolopada per so que sobre le dit la aprencio de lu sia ablaviada e la revolucio de aquela.	"The tip of the probe should be drawn out finely and bluntly (i.e., not perforated), covered with something so that its edge is smoothened and its rotation facilitated."
E si vols cauteriza la formiga segon que es denant dit en la cauterizacio de atheyl en le capitol de cauteri.	"And if you wish to cauterize the follicle, do so according to what was mentioned earlier in the chapter on cautery regarding anthills."
De forma dels instrumentz que so aministratz a dar cristeri.	"On the form of instruments used for giving cautery."
Alcunas veguadas es fayt cristeri de argent o de lato o de eram fondut o malleat; e alcunas veguadas es fayt de aquels instrumentz petit e gran segon aquels als quals so aministratz, quar aquel que es aministrat en la curacio dels petitz enfants sia petit; e de aquel dels quals los culs son freuls o doloyrozes, les cristeris de aquels sian petitz.	"Sometimes cautery is performed with silver or lead or molten brass or iron; and sometimes it is done with those instruments that are small or large according to what is suitable, for the one used in treating young children should be small; and those whose tips are curved or spoon-shaped, their cauteries should be small."
La forma de cristeri gran e pauc:	"The form of a large cautery and how it is done:"
Le cap de la canula de lu desus en le qual es liada la borsa sia ampla segon aquesta manieyra; e sia a lu distinacio la on la borsa es liada ayssi cum vezes.	"The head of the probe should be wide according to this manner, and it should be at that distance where the bag is tied, just as was said."
E la extremitat de lu pus dejus, la qual es entromesa en le cul, sia sorda (so es no-uberta) mot leon, atrasent a subtilita; e en la un del latz de lu sian dos traucs, e en l’autre costat un trauc, e sia la amplesa del trauc segon la groseza dels rays e pus gros un petit.	"And the bottom end of it [the cautery probe] below, which is inserted into the anus, should be blunt (i.e., not hollow) and pointed finely; and on one side of it there are two holes, and on the other side one hole, and the width of the holes should be according to the thickness of the rays, with those that are thicker having smaller holes."
E sia la borsa en la qual sian pausadas las medicinas de vesica de bestia o de pel de ovelha, e la razit de lu sia un palm.	"And the bag in which medicines made from bladder or lambskin are placed should be about a span [approximately 9 inches] long."
E sia perforada per motz traucs ayssi cum es revolvuda; e si l’espazi le qual es entre les traucs la grossetut del dit.	"And it should be pierced with many holes, just as it rotates; and the space between the holes should be equal to the thickness of a finger."
E aprop entromet en aquels traucs fiel fort de fiel cru le qual sia de detz fiels, o enviro aquels; e ajusta am aquel la borsa; e quan es pausada en lu la borsa, sia streyt en le cap del cristeri entre dos distingentz am fort costriccio, e aprop cristeriza am aquel quascun trauc: Mays la qualitat de cristerizar am aquel es que tu omples la borsa de la medicina, que sia escalfada segon la quantitat de la tolleransa del malaute; e guarda te que no sia trop cauda ni trop freja.	"And promptly insert strong, fresh bile through those holes, or pour it around them; and fit the bag with that [bile]; and when you have placed it on the cautery, press it tightly onto the head of the cautery between two points with firm pressure, and then cauterize with that each hole: But the quality of cauterizing with that is such that you should fill the bag with the medicine, which has been heated according to the amount of tolerance of the patient; and be careful that it is not too hot nor too cold."
E aprop le malaute sia resupinat sobre le sieu dos, e eleva las suas cambas en sus e pausa dejos lu un cuer sobre le qual ja so les homes o un lansol; e aprop unta la extramitat del cauteri am oli o am album de huou o am mucellage de fenugrec o de semblantz; e aprop entromet aquel en le cul am facilitat, e aprop le ministre prengua la borsa e exprema aquel am doas mas e essemps am vehemencia entro que sia evacuat en le budelh tot aquo que es en le cristeri; e aprop extra le cristeri e le malaute leva las suas cambas a la paret.	"And then the patient should lie on their back, raise their hips up, and place below them either a cushion upon which men usually sit or a blanket; and promptly grease the tip of the cautery with oil or egg albumen or fenugreek mucilage or something similar; and promptly insert it into the anus easily, and then the assistant should take the bag and squeeze it twice or three times forcefully until all that is in the cautery has been expelled from the bowel; and then remove the cautery and the patient should lower their hips to the bed."
E si la medicina forsa aquel a eyssiment, tengua le tant quant poyra; e si dorm am aquel per tota una nueyt, es mays derier en juvament.	"And if the medicine forces him to evacuation, let him retain it as much as possible; and if he sleeps with that during the whole night, it is better for his recovery."
Mays si tu cristerizas aquel en las malautias de solucio de ventre e l’eyssiment de lu le coyta, lahoras tu itera le cauteri entro que sia sanat.	"But if you cauterize him in cases of diarrhea and fluid evacuation from the intestines, then repeat the cautery until it is healed."
E si en le cul so emorroydas o apostemas ledens, lahoras sia le cristeri mot subtil e leon, dels cristeris am les quals les enfantz so criterisatz.	"And if there are hemorrhoids or bleeding fistulas in the anus, then the cautery should be very fine and pointed, like those used for children."
De curacio de las plaguas.	"On the treatment of plague:"
Yeu ja e dit en la divisio de la curacio de las plaguas aquo que convenia al libre, e yeu dic assi la curacio de aquelas am ma e am medicinas segon le conpliment.	"I have already said in the division of the treatment of plague what was suitable for this book, and I now say the treatment of those [cases] with me and with medicines according to their fulfillment."
Donc dic que las plaguas son diversificadas segon aquo en que son faytas las plaguas e segon le loc sobre le qual cazo las plaquas.	"Therefore, I say that plague is differentiated according to the manner in which it occurs and according to the site where it attacks."
E las causas per que motas vetz son faytas las plaguas so ayssi cum getament de peyra, o inscisio d’espaza o de cotel, o percussio am lansa, o am fustz, o am sageta, o semblantz ad aquels de motas causas.	"And the causes why plague often occurs are such as blows from a stone, or incision with a razor or knife, or piercing with a lance, or with a club, or with an arrow, or similar causes."
Mays las plaguas que so en les locz del cos so ayssi cum plagua la qual catz sobre le cap, o·l col, o·l pietz, o·l ventre, o·l fitge, e semblantz ad aquels dels membres.	"But the plague that occurs in the locations of the body is such as plague that falls on the head, or the neck, or the foot, or the belly, or the thigh, and similar to those of the limbs."
E yeu so recomtant la curacio de alcunas plaguas per que pauses aquela ratiocinacio e regla sobre las autras plaguas.	"And I am recounting the treatment of certain plague for which this reasoning and rule applies to other plagues."
E yeu comensare de las plaguas del cap simplas, quar la rememoracio de las compostas vindra al comensament del tertz capitol.	"I will begin with simple head wounds, since the discussion of compound ones will come at the beginning of Chapter Three."
Donc dic que quan accideys en le cap plagua simpla e no es fractura, lahoras considera: si es per getament de peyra o de semblant, e ja ha trinquada la codena tant solament e es gran plagla e temes sobre aquel malaute havinement de apostema caut, lahoras tu te coyta e fleubotoma la cephalica tantost, e no tardas aquo; e extrats ad aquel del sanc segon la quantitat de la vertut de lu si no mes alcuna causa prohibent de fleubotomia, majorment si·l sanc que es eyssit de la plagua es pauc.	"So I say that when a simple head wound occurs and is not a fracture, then consider: if it is from a blow with a stone or something similar, and the chain [of events] has already begun and it is a large wound and you fear an aposteme may occur later, then immediately perform cephalic phlebotomy on him and do not delay it; and remove as much blood from him according to his strength if there is no other cause prohibiting phlebotomy, especially if the blood that has issued from the wound is little."
E sia la flaubotomia del contrari de la partida plaguada; e guardase le malaute de replecio e de vi e de viandas grossas.	"And the phlebotomy should be on the opposite side of the wound. And protect the patient from vomiting, drinking, and coarse foods."
Mays si de la minuicio prohibeys alcuna causa, lahoras sia aminorat de la vianda e no apropinque a carn ni a vi.	"But if you prohibit any food due to the minutiae [of his condition], then let him be diminished in his diet and not approach meat or wine."
E pausa sobre la plagua, si a lu accideys apostema caut, coto enfus en oli rozat solet o en vi en le qual es stipticat.	"Place pressure on the wound, if an ulcer appears cauterize it using oil that is often used or wine in which it is sealed."
Mays si est segur de apostema caut, lahoras pausa sobre la plagua, si es recent am le sieu sanc e le ayre no ha mudat aquela la polvera la qual yeu recomtare aprop petit.	"However, if you are sure of the ulcer, then place pressure on the wound with its own blood and air until it has ceased to change in appearance, as I will recommend later."
E si le ayre ja ha mudada aquela, lahoras pausa sobre alscus enguentz entro que sia sanada.	"And if the air has already changed thereupon, then press on the wound until it is healed."
Mays si la plagua es gran o es per inscizio d’espaza e de semblantz, e no so ajustadas las labias de lu per puvils, lahoras ajusta aquelas am sutura segon que yeu recomtare de la sutura de lor.	"But if the wound is large or is from an incision and does not close by itself, then join those edges with stitches according to what I recommend concerning the stitching of wounds."
Mays si la plagua ja es discuberta del os e pen, e no es retencio de lu sino un petit suspensori, lahoras inscideys aquela e aprop cura la plagua am medicinas e restaura la carn aprop en loc de codena, e comanda al malaute que sia pescut de viandas en las quals es groceza: caps e formen coyt e semblantz a lor, entro que sia compost.	"But if the wound has already exposed bone and sinew, and there is no tension but only a slight suspension, then cut away that flesh and properly cleanse the wound with medicines, and restore the flesh in place of the cord. Command the patient to be fed on foods that are coarse: heads and entrails and flesh similar to theirs until they are recovered."
E si atrobas en la codena putrefaccio e no adhereys al os, lahoras tu inscideys tot aquo poyrit e geta aquo, e aprop cura aquo.	"And if you find putridness in the cord and it does not adhere to the bone, then cut away all that corruption and cast it out, and then cleanse it."
Mays si en aquestas plaguas es arteria o vena de la qual fluxs de sanc pot evenir, e no es abscindida per medicinas, lahoras tu inquier sobre la arteria, e si atrobas aquela no-inscidida, lahoras tu inscideys aquela am spatum, o lia aquela; e si necessitat te provoca que aquo que havem dit no comfereys, lahoras tu cauteriza entro que·l sanc sia abscidit.	"But if in these wounds there is an artery or vein from which blood flows abundantly and cannot be stopped by medicines, then inquire about the artery. If you find that it is not cut, then cut it with a scalpel, or ligature it; but if what has been said does not help, then cauterize until the bleeding stops."
E si aquestas plaguas son simplas e petitas, lahoras la causa de lor es leugiere; enayssi que tu polverizas sobre aquelas aquesta polvera, quar consolidada aquela denant que l’ayre mude aquelas.	"And if these wounds are simple and small, then their cause is slight. Therefore, powder them with this powder, so that they may be consolidated before the air changes them."
E la manieyra de la polvera es aquesta: recipe oli de enses partida una, de sanc de drago partida doas, de caus no-extincta partidas tres; sia tot mot trissat e crivellat, e de lu sia la plagua omplida, e sia constrengida per bona constriccio entro que be sobre aquela aderesca, e sia coagulada am le sanc.	"And the manner of making this powder is as follows: take one part oil of sesame, two parts dragon's blood, three parts gum arabic. Grind all this together and sift it, and fill the wound with it, and bind it with a good bandage until it adheres to it and coagulates with the blood."
E aprop strengeys aquela desus am pulvils e leyssa aquela, e no la deslias mentre esta ayssi que no es apostemada, quar no es eredicada de lu la medicina entro que sia sanada.	"And then strengthen it from above with powders and leave it alone. Do not remove the bandage while it is like this until it has adhered, because removing the medicine would prevent its healing."
E alcuna vetz fa aquo sola cautz, quan no es a tu en present enses e sanc de drago.	"And sometimes cauterization alone suffices when oil of sesame and dragon's blood are not available."
E ja fa aquesta meteyssa operacio en las grans plaguas quan conveneys que sia pausada sobre aquelas e sian streytas, e so plaguas recentz am le lor sanc, las quals le ayre no ha alteradas.	"And this same operation is performed in large wounds when it is necessary to close them and they are tightened, especially fresh wounds with their blood, which the air has not yet altered."
E si le ayre las ha alteradas, e majorment quan es en temps d’estiu, lahoras no es entencio a la posicio de aquesta polvera, mays adonc cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit, enayssi que tu pauses sobre aquelas alcus enguents degistius, o que pauses sobre aquelas pols de la farina del ordi am aygua e mel entro que getan poyredura; e aprop cura aquelas am l’autra curacio entro que sian sanadas.	"But if the air has altered them, especially in summer time, then this powder is not intended for that purpose. But treat those wounds with what has been said, thus: apply to them these ointments made from pitch or apply flour of barley mixed with water and honey until corruption ceases; and then treat them with other remedies until they are healed."
Mays si accideys am la plagua fractura en os, e es petita, lahoras tu extratz aquo am gesti.	"But if a fracture of the bone occurs in the wound and it is small, then treat it with this ointment."
E yeu diyre la cura de las fracturas del cap en aquo que es envenidor.	"And I will speak about the treatment of fractures of the head in another book."
De las plaguas del col.	Of the plague of the neck.
Mays si la plagua accideys en le col, lahoras no es en lu differencia en medicacio, e entre la plagua del cap quan es simpla.	But if the plague occurs in the neck, there is no difference in treatment, and it is similar to the simple plague of the head.
Mays si ja le nervi del col es inscis o arteria, lahoras si es nervi, no es en lu engen sino que sia evitada curacio de lu am aquo que fa vehement stipticitat, ayssi cum ziniar e zegi que es vetriol e semblantz a lor quar nozo als nervis e contrazo aquel.	But if the nerve or artery of the neck is cut, then if it's a nerve, it should not be sewn up but rather avoided by cauterization with something that causes intense heat, such as vinegar and sulfur, which are like vitriol and resemble those that burn nerves.
E no pauses sobre la plagua alcuna causa de tot freja, quar la sustancia dels nervis es freja e la continuacio de lu es am le cervel, le qual es le pus aut de totz les membres.	And it is not paused over the plague of any cause of fire, because the substance of nerves is fiery and its continuation is with the brain, which is the seat of all members.
E si’ aquo am que es curat de medicinas leugieras, ayssi cum es caus lavada am aygua dousa, alcuna veguada enfusa en oli rozat o no-rozat, e thucia quan es lavada am aygua dousa e las autras peyras minarantz segon aquesta manieyra, e enguentz humitz.	And if it is cured with light medicines, such as washing with sweet water, sometimes infused in rose oil or not, and turpentine when washed with sweet water, and other soft stones according to this method, and moist heat.
Mays si la plagua es gran, lahoras aministra sutura, o coarta las labias de lu, e aprop cura aquela am pulvils entro que sia sanada.	But if the plague is large, then a suture should be administered or the lips of it should be tied up, and afterwards it should be cured with powders until it is healed.
Mays si a la plagua es profunditat o accideys en lu a la pus bassa partida poyredura, lahoras perfora aquela en le loc mays depremegut.	But if the plague has depth or occurs in its lowest part being purulent, then it should be perforated in the most depressed place.
Mays si en la plagua ja es inscisa arteria e es conseguit flux de sanc, lahoras separa o secca aquela, o lia aquela, o cauteriza aquela si necessitat te provoca ad aquo.	But if an artery has already been cut in the plague and bleeding is occurring, then separate or dry it out, or ligate it, or cauterize it if necessary.
Mays si ja ha insciditz les spondils del golayro o tot, e so salvadas las venas del col, lahoras tu ajusta las labias de la codena am sutura sobre la cana del golayro e no toques aquel; abantz egala aquel e reduzeys aquel sobre la sua figura natural, e aprop strenh aquel am strectura decent, e leyssa aquela per alcus jorns; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz en les quals es stipticitat e excitacio entro que sia sanat.	But if the spinal cord has already been cut from top to bottom and the veins of the neck are saved, then adjust the lips of the wound with stitches over the spine of the neck and do not touch it; then bind it evenly and reduce it to its natural shape, and later strengthen it with suitable traction, and leave it for some days; and afterwards cure it with medicines that have astringent and stimulating properties until it is healed.
Mays si la plagua ja en le os a fayta enprecio, lahoras percuireys aquela, e lahoras si en lu ha fragmentz de hos, extratz totz aquels que podes de lor; e aquo que a tu no es apparelhat, leyssa aquo entro que la plagua se poyrisca, e sia separat e la egrecio de lu sia alleujada.	But if the bone is already exposed in the wound, then strike it with a hammer, and remove all fragments of bone that you can; but anything that cannot be removed, leave it until the wound becomes purulent, and separate it and relieve its inflammation.
E si la plagua es recent lahoras polveriza sobre aquela polvera la qual t’e recomtada.	And if the wound is fresh, then sprinkle powder on it which has been recommended to you.
Mays si en la plagua es fayta fistula, lahoras cura aquela am aquo del qual la rememoracio vindra aprop en le sieu capitol.	But if there is already a fistula in the wound, then cure it with that remedy which will be remembered later on in its proper chapter.
De las plaguas del col o de semblantz quan fayta entre las spallas e es fayta am spaza o am cotel o am lansa o am semblantz.	Concerning wounds of the neck or similar ones when they are between the shoulders and are made with a splash or with a knife, sword or lance or similar.
Si es percussio de lansa o de cotel, e vezes de lu la profunditat, lahoras considera mays si de la plagua yeys ventositat quan le malaute elena; lahoras sapias que la plagua es mortal.	If it is a wound made by a lance or knife and sometimes its depth is great, then consider more whether the lung issues from the wound when the patient exhales; for then you will know that the wound is mortal.
E si en lu no es profunditat e la plagua es recent am le sieu sanc, lahoras tu pauses en lu de la primieyra horo polvera, e no strenhas aquel per que no sia le sanc retengut en la profunditat de lu e que retorne al cor e que aucigua le malaute, mays pausa en lu enguent atractiu, e deslia aquela doas veguadas le dia.	And if it is not deep and the wound is fresh with its own blood, then you should sprinkle powder on it first of all and not press it so that the blood is not retained in its depth and returns to the heart and aggravates the illness, but rather use an absorbent dressing and change it twice a day.
E si l’enguent no es a tu present, lahoras tu pausa en le orrifici de la plagua coto viel per que sucque aquo que yeys de las humiditatz; e fay que le malaute dorma sobre la plagua per que corra aquo que es en lu ajustat.	And if the dressing is not at hand, then close the wound with a wad of wool or anything else so that it does not suck up moisture; and make sure that the patient sleeps on the side where the wound is located so that what is inside it flows out.
Mays si ja de la plagua son passatz tres dias o mays e no accideys al malaute spasme ni tremor de cor mal ni strictura de ale, e vezes las autras dispozicios bonas de lu, lahoras sapias que plagua es salva; e adonc cura aquela am calguas e am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanada.	But if after three days or more there has been no spasm or trembling of the heart nor constriction of the throat and other conditions are good, then you will know that the wound is safe. And then cure it with warm compresses and other remedies until it heals.
Mays si la sanacio de lu es excusada, e ja tot temps es uberta, lahoras sapias que ja es fayta fistula; cura donc aquela per le sieu capitol.	But if the healing of it is delayed and at all times is open, then you will know that a fistula has already formed. Cure it therefore according to its proper chapter.
E si la plagua es per inscisio de spaza o de cotel, e es simpla en la superficia del pietz o del dos, lahoras cura aquela am aquo que es precedit de sutura, si es gran, o am polvera, si es petita.	And if the wound is made by a splash or knife and is simple on the surface of the foot or back, then cure it with that which is preceded by stitching, if it is large, or with powder, if it is small.
Mays si ja ha fayta enprecio en le os, e so ja de lu inscizas pessas, lahoras tu torqua la plagua e coyta ad extrayre aquelas pessas, si so separadas.	But if the bone has already been exposed and some fragments have already grown into it, then turn the wound and carefully extract those fragments if they are separate.
Mays si no so separadas, lahoras leyssa las entro que se poyresca la plagua, que la extraccio de lor es alleujada.	But if they are not separate, then leave them until the wound becomes purulent, for the extraction of them will be easier.
E de las autras plaguas accidentz en les autres membres le juvament en curacio es le juvament de aquo que havem dit.	And concerning other accidental wounds in the other members, the remedy in curing them is the same as that which we have spoken of.
De las plaguas del ventre.	Of the plagues of the belly
L’indisposicio la qual accideys en le ventre es o gran, o pauc, o migiera.	The condition that occurs in the belly can be great, small, or medium.
De la gran alcunas veguadas yeys le budel o nervi del budel, per que es fayta intromissio de lor e la sutura de lor esser pus vehement e pus subtil.	Regarding the large ones, sometimes the intestine or a nerve of the intestine is seen, so their intervention and suturing must be more forceful and subtle.
E disrupcio petita es fayta dificil per autra manieyra, e siec se que la reduccio de lor es pus dificil, si no te coytes de la intromissio de lor al sieu loc tantost, quar se ubre e es engrossat per que le intrament de lu es fayt difficil.	And small ruptures are difficult to repair by other means, and their reduction is more difficult unless you quickly intervene in their location because they tend to open and swell up so that entering them becomes difficult.
E donc la milhor disrupcio es migiera, quar en aquela no es dificil la reduccio del budel, ayssi cum es dificil en las doas specias denant ditas.	And therefore the best rupture is medium-sized, because in that case it is not difficult to reduce the intestine, just as it is difficult in both of the aforementioned species.
E sapias que sutura del ventre es segon quatre manieyras, mays doas suturas son comunas que conveneysso en suturas de las autras plaguas del cors.	And know that there are four ways to suture the belly, but two of these sutures are common and convenient for suturing other wounds on the body.
E duas autras suturas proprias comunican a las autras plaguas, mays empero so mays proprias en la sutura del ventre.	And the other two sutures are proper to certain wounds, but they are more appropriate for suturing the belly.
E yeu recomti a tu quascuna am exposicio e declaracio.	I will explain each one with its exposition and explanation.
Donc dic que quan la plagua es petita e es eyssit alcuna causa del budel per aquela, e es fayt dificil a reduzir aquel, lahoras aquo es en una de doas manieyras: o per parvitat de la disrupcio ayssi cum havem dit, o quan al budel es venguda inflacio per la frigiditat de l’ayre.	Therefore it is said that when the herniation is small and some cause of the intestine comes forth through that, and it is difficult to reduce it, then this is in one of two manners: either due to the smallness of the rupture as we have said, or when the intestine has come inflamed due to the coldness of the air.
E donc quan aquo es ayssi, lahora cove que tu scalfes aquel enayssi que tu submerges una sponga ho drap humit en aygua tebeza sola, o que coguas en aygua squinant, e cyperum, e spic, e embroques am aquela le budel entro que la imflacio sia resolvuda.	Therefore when this is so, then you should gently wash that area with a sponge or cloth moistened in tepid water alone, or with hot water containing cinnamon, cyperus, and spice, and wrap the inflamed intestine within it until the inflammation has been resolved.
E alcunas veguadas fa aquo vi en le qual ha stipticitat, e es milhor que la aygua sola en resolucio de la imflacio.	And sometimes you should do this with water that has astringent properties, as it is better than plain water alone in resolving the inflammation.
E donc cum tu vezes la imflacio esser resolvuda, lahoras tu humecta le budel am aygua en la qual es coyta altea e malvas, quar per aquo es alleujat le intrament de lu am pauca causa.	Therefore when you see that the inflammation has been resolved, then you should moisten the intestine with water in which is cooked marsh mallows and mallows, for through this it is alleviated from within little by little.
Mays si es escusat le intrament de lu aprop aquesta curacio, lahoras scindeys la disrupcio un petit am strument am le qual so inscididas emorroydas.	But if the inflammation has not been relieved with this treatment, then you should carefully cut open the herniation a little with an instrument having sharp edges for cutting emorroides.
E la curacio primieyra es milhor, quan es propriada que no es seccio, e no sia occupacio a seccar aprop necessitat e defaliment.	And the first treatment is better when it can be applied without causing sectioning, and it should not become necessary to cut open because of need or deficiency.
Del instrument, sec se la forma de lu:	Of the instrument used for cutting, here is its shape:
La una partida de lu torta aguda, e l’autra partida no-acuta, e la extremitat subtil, e no sia am la subtilitat de spatum, abantz sia obtusa un pauc.	"One part of the cake is sharp-edged, another not sharp-edged, and its tip is subtle, but it should not be too pointed like a spatha; rather, it may be somewhat blunt."
E donc cum la plagua es amplificada e yeys fora le budel, lahoras cove que la sua reduccio sia segon la forma de lu natural, en le sieu loc propri, si es possible sobre aquo, quar milhor es.	"And therefore when the wound is enlarged and goes out of the bowel, then it is necessary that its reduction be according to the shape of its nature, in its proper place, if possible thereupon, for it is better so."
Mays quan la disrupcio es ampla, e es en la partida pu bassa del ventre, lahoras cove que tu fassas jazer le malaute sobre le sieu dos, e pausa las suas cambas pus autas que·l sieu cap; e si es en la partida pus desus del ventre, lahoras tu pause le cap de lu e·l pietz pus autz que las partidas dejos.	"But when the disruption is extensive and is in the lower part of the belly, then you should make the patient lie on their back and place their thighs high up as much as their head; but if it is in the upper part of the belly, then you should raise their head and legs higher than their sides."
E semblantment si la disrupcio es en una de las doas partz del ventre, lahoras pausa la tua entencio e la tua consideracio tostemps en aysso per que la partida en la qual es la plagua sia pus auta que l’autra.	"And likewise if the disruption is in one of the two parts of the belly, then always direct your intention and consideration there so that the part where the wound is may be higher than the other."
E ayssi cove que tu aministres aquo en las plaguas grans e en las plaguas migieras.	"And likewise you should do this in both large wounds and medium-sized wounds."
E en las plaguas petitas, pausa aquo que es a tu preparat, e aprop fay que·l ministre sia entre las tuas mas pyatados, le qual tengua la disrupcio tota am la sua ma e ajusta las labias de lu, e aprop descuebre de aquela ad aquel que siec la sutura alcuna causa aprop autra.	"And in small wounds, prepare what is necessary and see that the one who ministers is between your hands, and let him hold the disruption entirely with his hand and adjust its lips, and then cover it from that to this so that there may be no other cause of suture."
E aquesta es la manieyra de sutura comuna: una que prenguas la agula, o comte de agula segon la cantitat de la amplitut de la plagua; e aprop layssa de la extremitat de la disrupcio del dit anular, e strenh la agula una, otre que tu no metas fiel en las doas extremitatz de la codena, am doas extremitatz del ciphac que es dejos la codena de las partidas dedintz, entro que fassas aquela penetrar de aquela partida; e tu ja has agreguadas doas extremitatz de la codena e doas extremitatz del ciphac, e so faytas quatre ordes.	"And this is the common manner of suturing: one should take a needle and thread according to the size of the wound; then lay the needle on the end of the disruption from the distal phalanx of the index finger and insert it once through both ends of the thread, without putting any knot in them. Then bring together both ends of the thread through the inside of the wound, making four rows."
E aprop strenh am fiel doble en le circuit de la agula, e alcunas veguadas de doas partz ensemps, e aprop agregua las doas labias e la plagua per agreguacio decent; e aprop layssa la grossitut del dit e fiqua una autra agulha en aquela, e aprop lia aquela am fiel ayssi cum fiest am la primieyra agulha; e no cesses far aquo si es necessitat am las agulhas entro que ajas complida tota la contriccio de la plagua.	"And then tie with a double knot around the needle, sometimes tying both ends together at once, and then bring together both lips and the wound by neat approximation; then place the thickness of the finger and insert another needle in that same place, and again tie it with thread like the first one was tied. Do not stop doing this until all contraction of the wound is complete."
E sian las agulhas migieras entre groceza e subtilitat, quar las agulhas subtils mot leugierament insciden la carn; e las grossas so de dificil intrament en la codena, e donc per aquo cove que sian migieras en subtilitat e grosseza.	"And let the needles be medium-sized between thickness and thinness, for thin needles cut the flesh too easily, and thick ones are difficult to insert into the thread; therefore they should be medium-sized in both thickness and thinness."
E no cove que la agulha sia ficada en doas extremitatz de la codena propdana mot, per so que la carn no sia inscidida leugierament e que la plagua se huebra devant la sua consolidacio.	"And it is not necessary for the needle to be inserted very deeply into both ends of the thread, so that the flesh may not be cut easily and the wound may heal before its consolidation."
E no sian prolonguadas de sutura per que la plagua no sia prohibida de consolidacio.	"And do not prolong suturing unnecessarily, so that the wound is not hindered from healing."
E aprop inscideys las extremitatz de las agulhas per so que no ledescan le malaute deves le sieu dormier; e pausaras sobre la sutura pulvils expanduts de tota partida, les quals tenguan las extremitatz de las agulhas; e layssa aquelas entro que sapias que la plagua ja es consolidada.	"And cut off the ends of the needles so that they do not cause injury when one sleeps. Then sprinkle powdered myrtle on the sutures, letting the ends of the needles remain within it until you know that the wound is healed."
E aquestas specias de sutura am agulhas en cal manieyra es pus convenient en las plaguas petitas, quar habasta en la sutura de lor una agulha o doas o entorn aquelas.	"And this kind of suturing with needles is most convenient for small wounds, since they can be closed with one needle or two or even three."
Mays la segonda sutura es cominal: e es que tu aministres am sutura las quatre extremitatz, de la codena e doas extremitatz del ciphac, en una veguada, am agulha en la qual sia fiel envolopat engual en subtilitat e grosseza.	"But the second manner of suturing is common: one should minister with four rows of sutures, that is both ends of the thread and both ends of the needle, at once, using a needle around which is wound thread of medium thickness."
E aprop quan am la agulha auras penetrat aquestas quatre extremitatz, reduzeys la agulha de aquela meteyssa partida de la qual comensest, per so que le fiel retrayt caja de la pus subirana partida a la plagua, per so que la sutura sia segon sutura de drap am la qual les draps so strengutz.	"And then, when the needle has passed through these four ends, reduce it from that same opening where you began, so that the thread may draw back on itself and thus make a suture like a seam of cloth."
E pausa entre quascuna sutura la quantitat del gros del dit mendre.	"And pause between each suture the thickness of one's little finger."
E aquesta sutura sabo les homes.	"This is how men sew."
E am tal sutura yeu cozegui la plagua la qual era accidida a un home en le sieu ventre le qual era stat plaguat am un cotel, e era la disrrumpcio de la plagua major de un palm, e era eyssit dels budels entorn dos palms del budel del mieg loc e era la disrupcio en le mieg del membre; e adonc yeu reduzegui aquel depus que le budel havia stat foro la plagua per xxiiii horas.	"And with this kind of suturing, I sewed a wound that had occurred in the belly of a man who had been cut with a knife. The disruption was more than a palm's length and issued from the bowels around two palms near the middle of the gut. It was torn apart in the middle of the member. And then I reduced it after twenty-four hours."
E la plagua fo consolidada en le spazi de xv dias o entorn, e curegui aquel e es sanat; e aprop aquo visquec per motz ans, e es conversat en las suas disposicios.	"And the wound was consolidated in the space of fifteen days or so, and he was cured and healed. And afterwards he lived many years, and was conversant with his duties."
E les autres metges havian jutgat que no fora sanat; e per miracle foc, quar yeu no curegui aquel am enguent, quar era en loc en le qual enguent no era atrobat ni deguna medicina, mays pausegui sobre la plagua coto viel dos veguadas lo dia e ablucio assiduo am aygua de mel entro que foc sanat.	"And the other doctors had judged that he would not be healed. And it was by miracle that he was cured, for I did not cure him with ointment, since there was no ointment appropriate for that place nor any medicine; but I put cotton on the wound twice a day and washed it assiduously with water of honey until it was healed."
Mays yeu diyre dos specias de sutura proprias segon narracio de Paraula.	"But I will describe two kinds of suturing proper according to the narrative of the Word."
E es que tu comenses am sutura de la codena, e entrometas agulha de la partida deforo a la partida dedintz.	"And this is how you begin with the suturing of the thread, inserting the needle from without into within."
E donc cum la agulha penetra en la codena e en aquel meteys lacertz segon rectetut e en longetut de tot le cos, e layssa la extremita del ciphac en le qual has entromesa la agulha; e fay penetrar en la autra extremitat la agulha de la partida dedintz a la partida deforo en l’autra extremitat del mihat.	"And then, when the needle has entered the thread and through the flesh according to its length and throughout the body, leave the end of the needle in that part where you inserted it. And make the needle penetrate into the other end from within outwards in the other extremity of the member."
E don cum tu auras fayta aquela penetrar, lahoras tu fay aquela penetrar autra veguada en aquela meteyssa extremitat del mihat de la partida deforo a la partida dedintz; e leyssa la extramitat del ciphac que es en aquest latz, e fay penetrar la agulha en l’autra extremitat de la partida dedintz a la partida deforo.	"And then, when you have made it penetrate once, make it penetrate again in the same extremity of the member from without within. And leave the end of the needle that is on this side, and make the needle penetrate into the other extremity from within outwards."
E fay penetrar am aquela la tua penetracio am la qual fas aquela penetrar en le ciphac en la extremitat del mirat la qual es en la partida de lu entro que tot aquel penetre.	"And then make your penetration with that, by which you cause it to penetrate into the needle in the extremity of the member that is on the inside where everything has penetrated."
E aprop comensa de aquest meteys costat e cus aquel am la extremitat que es del ciphac en l’autra latz, e extratz la agulha de la codena la qual penetrec, e aprop redutz aquela en aquela codena e cos la extremitat del ciphac que es en l’autra costat am aquesta extramitat del mirat; e extratz aquela de la codena la qual es de part de lu.	"And then begin from this side and carry it out with the end that is on the other side, which is of the needle. And withdraw the needle from the thread that has penetrated, and reduce it into that same thread and cover over the end of the needle that is on the other side with this extremity of the member. And withdraw it from the thread that is on its part."
E fay aquo una veguada e autra, e fay aquo una veguada aprop autre veguada entro que tu cozes tot aquo que es deforo segon aquel eysemple.	"And do this once and again, and do it again once more until you have sewn up all that is without according to the example given."
E la suma de aquesta manieyra de sutura es que tu cozes am sutura de pellicies am la qual cozo las pels, enayssi que tu cozes le ciphac una veguada de la part de la extremitat de la codena, e que leysses aquela autra veguada entro que la ajas complida.	"The sum of this manner of suturing is that you sew with a purse-string suture with which you sew the skin, so that you sew the needle once from the side of the extremity of the thread and leave it again until you have completed it."
Mays la segonda specia de sutura propria la qual dieys eyssament Gualia , e aquest es de sermo de lu e per lu recomtat, es que tu cozas aquela segon semilitut am la qual alcus medicantz cozo aquela, enayssi que agreguan tota partida a la sua compar partida a lu convenient per natura; e aplican la extremitat de autre de lu e la extremitat del mirat al autra extremitat de lu, e aquo es fayt segon que yeu a tu recomti.	"But the second kind of proper suturing which Guy de Chauliac describes explicitly and recommends is this: that you sew it in semilunar fashion, as some physicians do, so that they attach each part to its corresponding part according to nature. And they apply the extremity of one side to the other extremity of the other side, and this is done as I have recommended."
Cove que tu fiques la agulha en la extremitat del mirat a tu propdana de la partida deforo, e fassas aquela penetrar a la partida dedintz en aquel sol, e leysses dos extremitatz del ciphac; e aprop revolveys la agulha e fay aquela penetrar de foro a la dedintz en dos extremitatz del ciphac.	"Therefore you should leave the needle in the extremity of the member near the outside, and make it penetrate from without within on that side, and leave both extremities of the needle. And then turn the needle around and make it penetrate again from without within in both extremities of the needle."
E aprop revolveys aquelas cascunas, e fay penetrar quascunas de la partida dededintz entro a la partida deforo en dos extremitatz del mirat autras que so en le latz contrari.	"And then turn those loops around and make each loop penetrate from within outwards into the other side in both extremities of the member, except for those on the opposite side."
E aquesta manieyra de sutura es milhor de la sutura comuna leugiera, e es sutura de la qual precedic rememoracio.	"And this manner of suturing is better than common light suturing, and it is called 'running' suture."
Aquest es le sermo de Gualia	"Behold, this is the speech of Gaul."
E mays le diyssero alcus, sutura del ventre es rectificada am dos agulhas, so es que tu entrometas en aquestas a quascunas un fiel, e comensa am intromiccio de agulha de aquo que es deves tu, e fay aquela penetrar entro al autra latz segon sutura de aquels les quals cozo les cuers engualment.	"Moreover, they said to him that the suture of the abdomen is corrected with two needles, so that you shall insert a thread into each one and begin with needle insertion according to your skill, making it penetrate within the other side according to the suture of those whose hearts are joined together."
E sapias que quan disrupcio es en le mieg loc del ventre, lahoras la sutura de lu es pus difficil que dels autres locs del ventre.	"And know that when rupture occurs in the middle of the abdomen, then the suture there is more difficult than in other places of the abdomen."
Mays le juguament de medicacio de plagua es jutgament de las autras plaguas.	"The judgment of medical treatment for plague is judged by other plagues."
La qual causa es quar quan tu consieguas la plagua recent am le sieu sanc denant que l’ayre altera aquela, e reduses le budel e cozes aquela e aptas aquela decentment, lahoras pausa sobre aquela polvera encarnativa.	"And this is why when you succeed in curing plague recently with its own blood before the air alters it, and reduce the boil and close it properly, then pause over that healing powder."
E si le ayre ja ha alterada la plagua, lahoras pausa sobre aquela alcus enguentz les quals so a tu presens entro que fassan peyra dura e cajan les fiels, e sian consolidatz ciphac e mirat; e aprop cura aquela ayssi cum es la curacio de las autras plaguas entro que sia sanat.	"And if the air has already altered the plague, then pause over that one among those present who make tough and strong pegs, and let them be hardened in pitch and looked at, and cure it thus as is the curing of other plagues until it is healed."
Mays si a tu no so presens las medicinas, lahoras pausa sobre aquela tantost, pus que comensa a getar brac, coto viel, e permuta aquel dos veguadas le dia, ayssi cum a tu e ensenhat, entro que sia sanat, quar tu no indigeysses de autra medicacio en motas disposicios quan las plaguas so simplas.	"But if you are not present with medicines, then pause immediately, for it begins to emit pus, and gradually worsens day by day, thus as you have taught us, until it is healed, because you do not need other treatments in many dispositions when the plague is simple."
Mays si tu temes que la plagua comunique en lesio als membres principals, lahoras cove que tu submergas lana leon en oli de trempada qualiditat, o en oli rozat, e pausa aquela en le circuit dels locs que so entre les angonas e dejos las aysselas.	"But if you fear that the plague may communicate with injury to the main limbs, then it is necessary for you to immerse lion's wool in olive oil of good quality or in rose oil, and apply it around the places between the angles and joints."
E si sent dolor o putrefaccio en les sieus budels, quar motas veguadas aquo s’endeve, lahoras cristeriza aquel am vi stiptic negre tebe, e majorment si la poyredura es pervenguda en le budel e es fayta exitura penetrant entro la conquavitat de lu.	"And if there is pain or putrefaction in its boil because many times this happens, then cauterize it with black treacle wine and even more so if the corruption has come into the boil and is not easily penetrating within its concavity."
E sapias que aquela que es del budel gros es de pus leugiera sanacio que aquela que es en les budels subtils.	"And know that those which are in large boils are of lighter healing than those which are in small boils."
E es de dificil sanacio quar le budel le qual es apelat “gegunu” no recep sanacio de plagua que caja en lu de tot; e aquo es per la gran multitut de venas que so en lu e per la magnitut de lu que so en aquelas, e per subtilitat del cos de aquel, e per propinquitat de aquel a natura de nervis.	"And it is difficult to heal that boil which is called "gegunu" because it does not receive healing from plague that settles in it at all; and this is due to the great multitude of veins that are in it and its large size, and its subtle body, and its proximity to the nature of nerves."
Mays si aquo que procezeys de la plagua es la tela, e conseguas aquela recent, redutz aquela segon la tua rectetut am la qual reduzes les budels engualment.	"But if what proceeds from the plague is tissue and you obtain it fresh, then reduce it according to your discretion with which you reduce swollen boils."
Mays si es passat a lu spazi e ja es feyt vert o negre, lahoras que tu strenguas aquela am fiel sobre le loc que es denigrat de lu, per so que vengua fluxs de sanc, quar en la tela so venas e arterias.	"But if it has passed some time and it is now green or black, then you should strengthen it with a poultice of pitch over the place that is darkened by it, so that blood flows, because there are veins and arteries in the tissue."
E aprop inscideys aquo que es otra aquel liament, e pausa dos extremitatz del fiel pendentz de la partida dejos de la plagua foro lu, per que sobre tu sia alleujada la atraccio de lu deves le cazement de la tela e emissio del brac de la plagua.	"And furthermore, incise that thread-like matter and let the two extremities of the pitch drip from its exit so that the attraction of it may be relieved, you should remove the covering of the tissue and emit the pus of the plague."
Rememoracio de las plaguas quan accideysso en le budel.	"Reminder of the plague when it occurs in a boil."
Quan accideys disrupcio en le budel e es petita, lahoras es possibla que sia resteurada en alcus homes, per aysso quar yeu vi aquel le qual era stat plaguat en le sieu ventre am percussio de lansa et era la plagua de la part dreyta del stomac, e la plagua era antiquada e fayta fistula, e eyssic de lu gestio e ventositat.	"When rupture occurs in a boil and it is small, then it may be possible to restore it in some men, for instance when you see one who had been plagued in his belly with the blow of a lance and was the plague on the right side of the stomach, and the plague was old and fistulous, and he had been suffering from it with windiness."
Adonc yeu pansegui la curacio de lu ja sia que no era confizat en la sanacio de lu, mays cessegui subtiliar aquel entro que foc sanat e le loc es consolidat.	"Then you should consider the cure of it even if it had not been fixed in its healing, but rather seek to subtilize that which was healed and the place is consolidated."
E yeu pus que vi le loc ja consolidat, timegui sobre le malaute que endevengues sobre lu accident de mal en le sieu ventre; e no endevenc alcu per aquo mal accident e romas en las suas milhos disposicios mangant e bevent, e aprop entrec en banh e es exercitat en sos ditz.	"Then you put that you saw the place already consolidated, time the misfortune that may happen upon it from an accident in his belly; and he did not experience any pain from that accidental malady and continued in his usual dispositions eating and drinking, and even entered into baths and was exercised in his sayings."
E ja diysero alcus experimentados que quan endeve plagua en le budel, e es petita, lahoras cove que sia liada segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu prenguas fromiguas de grans caps; e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua e pausa una fromigua de aquelas que aja la boca uberta sobre las doas labias de la plagua; donc quan pren sobre aquelas e strenh la sua boca, abscindeys le cap de lu, quar adhereys e no es dissolvut.	"And some experienced ones have said that when plague occurs in the boil and it is small, then it should be tied in this manner: you should take figs with large heads; and then adjust the two lips of the plague and place one of those figs which has its mouth open over the two lips of the plague. Then when it adheres and does not dissolve."
E aprop pausa autra formigua prop la primieyra, e no cesses aquo a far am formiguas una aprop autra segon la quantitat de tota la plagua.	"And then place another fig near the first one, and do not cease doing this with figs one after another according to the quantity of all the plague."
E aprop reduzeys aquela e cos la plagua; e romanguan aquels caps annexces en le budel entro que·l budel sia sanat; e no accideys al malaute degun nocument.	"And then reduce it and close the plague; and those attached heads will remain in the boil's interior until the boil is healed, and no harm will happen to anyone."
E ja es possible que·l budel sia liat am fiel subtil lo qual es fayt del budel de bestia annexs am lu, pus que es mes en agulha; e es que tu prenguas la extremitat de aquestz fiels de budel, e sia mot descarnat, e aprop lia la extremitat de lu am fiel de li, envolopat, e aprop entromet aquel fiel en agulhas e cos am aquel le budel, e areduzeys aquel en la disrupcio.	"And it is also possible that the boil may be tied with subtle pitch which is made from the attached skin of a beast, because it is more in point; you should take the extremity of these skin threads, and let them be well skinned, and then tie the extremity of it with pitch of it, wrapped, and then insert that pitch into needles and sew it up with that boil, and reduce it at its disruption."
E aquesta manieyra de sutura am formiguas no es sino segon via de fiducia e d’esperansa.	"And this manner of suturing with figs is only a way of trust and hope."
Mays si la plagua es gran e ampla, majorment si es en un dels budels subtils, quar lahoras no es engen sino subtiliacio, e no es sanacio de lu de tot.	"But if the plague is large and extensive, especially if it is in one of the subtle veins, then it can only be subtilized, not completely healed."
De curacio de zuchem e fistula.	"About the treatment of furuncle and fistulas."
Sapias que tota plagua e apostema quan se envilheseys e se Antiqua, e es fayt ulcus, e no es consolidat e geta braç tot temps e no es abscindit, lahoras, en qualque membre sia, universalment es nompnada fistula e nos la apelam aquela azukem.	"You should know that every plague and abscess when it opens up and becomes old, and is not consolidated and continually emits pus without being incised, then generally in any member it is called a fistulas and we call that ulcer an azukem."
E fistula segon veritat es nodacio feutrada, dura, blanqua am la qual no es dolor e a la qual es conquavitat ayssi cum es conquavitat de pena de ausel; e per aysso nompnat aquela alcus rizatz, id est pena.	"And truly a fistula is a nodule made of hard, white tissue without pain and with concavity just like the concavity of a bird's nest; therefore it is called that ulcerous wrinkle, that is to say, a nest."
E es en alcus homes humida, la qual geta brac; e fort leu la humiditat es abscidida en alcunas horas.	"And in some men it is humid and emits pus; but soon the humidity is absorbed within a few hours."
E alcunas veguadas aquesta humiditat es mota, e es pauca, e es grossa, e es subtil.	"And sometimes this humidity may be abundant, scarce, thick, or subtle."
E yeu ja he denant dit en la divisio, lahoras cum yeu diyssi las plaguas, que tot ulcus que no es sanat ni no es en lu nuda carn, no es aquo sino per una de ix causas: de las quals la una es o per pauquesa de sanc en le cos; o per malicia de lu; o quar entre lu e las labias es carn dura prohibent nativitat de carn; o quar es de mota legesa; o quar aquel ulcus en si meteys es poyrit e la materia que es a lu tramesa es de mala qualitat; o quar la medicina es enconvenient en la curacio de lu; o quan corrupcio catz en la regio, e es pestilencia; o per proprietat de regio ayssi cum endeve a Saragossa , en la qual es fayta difficil degestio de las malautias, e es tardada en aquela sanacio de apostema per natura; o quar en lu es os un, o motz osses.	"And I have already mentioned before in the division that every ulcer which is not healed nor on bare flesh only happens for one of these reasons: either from lack of blood in the body; or because it is malicious; or because between it and its lips there is hard flesh preventing the growth of new tissue; or because it has a great depth; or because that ulcer contains putrefaction and the matter sent to it is of poor quality; or because medicine is inappropriate for its treatment; or when corruption spreads in the region, causing pestilence; or because of the nature of the region itself, such as in Saragossa where there are difficulties digesting illnesses, and tardiness in healing an abscess by nature; or because there is a bone or many bones in it."
Ja e mostrat totas aquelas causas, e·ls senhals de aquelas e la curacio de lor am medicinas en la divisio.	"All those causes have been shown already, along with their signs and treatments using medicines in the division."
E cove assi que yeu fassa a tu saber la curacio de fistula la qual es fayta per via de operacio am ma.	"And it is fitting that I make you know the treatment of fistulas which is done through surgical operation with a knife."
E sapias que fistula accideys en totz les membres del cos; quar de aquelas son fistulas que perveno a las venas grantz e arterias, o als nervis, o al ciphac, o al budel, o a la vesica, o ad alcuna de las costas, o ad alcu dels spondils del dos, o ad alcuna de las juncturas compostas per composicio ayssi quo de la ma e del pe; e de aquelas so que dan a lu propinquitat del membre principal e de semblantz.	"And you should know that fistulas occur in all the members of the body; for some are those that pertain to large veins and arteries, or nerves, or bladder, or gut, or urinary bladder, or any of the ribs, or any of the spine's vertebrae, or any of the joints composed by composition such as hand and foot; and some are those that affect nearby main members and similar ones."
E donc aquela de aquestas fistulas que es segon aquesta manieyra es de las malautias de dificil sanacio, e no recep curacio, e occupacio am aquela es trebalh e ignorancia.	"And therefore these fistulas that are according to this manner are of the diseases of difficult healing, and do not receive cure, and occupation with those is trouble and ignorance."
E si es de las fistulas alcuna la profunditat de la qual no perve ad aquestz locs que e dit, e esperas e confizas en la curacio de lu, e vols pervenir a cognicio de lu, lahoras pren tenta de eram o de ferr, e si la fistula va segon rectetut, e perquireys aquela am lu.	"And if there is any fistula whose depth cannot be perceived by those places that are said here, and you hope and insist on its cure, and want to arrive at knowledge of it, then take a probe of iron or steel, and if the fistula goes straight, seek it with this."
Mays si la fistula es tortuissitat, lahoras investigua aquela am tenta de plom subtil, quar plom am la levitat del sieu cors es alleujat e curvat deves la tortuositat.	"But if the fistula is tortuous, then investigate it with a probe of subtle lead, because lead with the lightness of its body is easily alleviated and curved due to its tortuosity."
E si la fistula es havent motz horrificis, no es a tu possible que signifiques sobre lu am tenta.	"And if the fistula has no mouth or horrible opening, it will not be possible for you to indicate it with a probe."
Adonc cristeriza le orrifici per sos orrificis, quar la humiditat per la qual clisterizas aquela va deves las autras orrificis e corr de lor.	"Therefore, clarify the opening by its openings, because the humidity with which you clarify that goes through the other openings and courses of theirs."
E aprop inquier exquisitament, segon qual manieyra a tu es possible que conoguas si aqui has os o nervi, e es la conquavitat de la fistula longinqua o propdana, o es una fistula a la qual so motz orrificis e esta sobre aquo tot am la suma de la tua fortaleza, am la tua enterroguacio, am la qual enterroguas le malaute, e la invencio de la dolor deves la tua compressio am la ma sobre le loc, e semblantz de las significacios e de las causas accidentz al apostema.	"And moreover inquire diligently, according to which manner it is possible for you to know if here there are bone or nerve, and whether the fistula is distant or near, or whether it is a fistula with no mouth opening and situated above all this with your utmost strength, with your investigation, with which you investigate the illness, and discover the cause of the pain by compression with the hand on the place, and similar to the signs and accidental causes in an abscess."
E cum tu auras stat sobre totas aquelas causas am stacio veraya, lahoras ve a la curacio segon confidencia: e es que tu consideras lahoras si es fistula apparent propinqua o en loc sal, longinqua de junctura, o de nervi, o de arteria, o de vena, o de un dels locs les quals yeu a tu e ditz.	"And when you have stood on all those causes with true judgment, then come to the cure according to confidence: and it is that you consider whether it is an apparent fistula near or in a healthy place, distant from joints, nerves, arteries, veins, or any of the places which I have indicated to you."
Lahoras tu secca la fistula segon que denant es dit de la naracio de lu, e osta aquo que es en aquela filtracio e de carns corrumpudas, e aquo que es nascut en le orrifici de la carn, o de theil e de semblantz, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	"Now you dry out the fistula according to what is said above about its narration, and remove that which is in that filtration and of corrupt flesh, and that which is born in the opening of the flesh or thorn and similar, and cure that wound until it is healed."
Mays si la fistula es de longinqua profunditat, e es segon rectetut, lahoras cove que inscidas aquela en le preon atant quant a tu sira possible, e aprop mondifica aquela de totas las suas carns corrompudas; e aprop administra calguas envolopadas en medicinas acutas, e intromet aquelas entro a la conquavitat de la fistula, la qual has conprenduda am ferr.	"But if the fistula is of distant depth and goes through rectum, then it is necessary that you insert that into the preon as much as it will be possible for you, and moreover cleanse that from all its corrupt flesh; and moreover administer cataplasms wrapped in acrid medicines, and introduce those dressings into the concavity of the fistula which you have grasped with an iron probe."
E fay aquo am aquela alcunas veguadas entro que la medicina acuta corroda tot aquo que es romas en la conquavitat de la fistula de la corrupcio.	"And do this several times until the acrid medicine burns away all that is rough in the concavity of the fistula due to corruption."
E aprop restaura aquela am enguentz les quals engendran carn sana entro que sia sanada.	"And moreover restore it with ointments which generate healthy flesh until it is healed."
Mays si no es sanada per aquo, lahoras tu cauteriza aquela segon que havem recomtat.	If it does not heal by this method, then cauterize according to what we have recommended.
Mays si la causa de fistula es os e es deves tu certificat aquo, lahoras tu inquireys aquela e secca aquela segon que havem recomtat, si tu no prohibeys alcuna causa de vena o de nervi o de membre principal ayssi cum havem dit.	If the cause of the fistula is bone and it must be certified, then you should inquire about this and dry it according to what we have recommended, unless there are any causes of veins, nerves or main members that should not be touched, as we have said.
Mays si le os es a tu descubert e es en lu alcuna corrupcio e negror, lahoras tu ratz aquel entro que la corrupcio sia hostada tota; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que lu encarne entro que sia sanat.	But if the bone is exposed and there is some corruption and blackness present, then you should remove that flesh within which the corruption has spread entirely; and afterwards treat it with this ointment until it heals.
E si no es sana e gieta brac ayssi cum fazia, lahoras sapias que tu no est pervengut a la eradicacio tota de la corrupcio; e adonc tu descuebre sobre lu segondanament e exquisitament fay la razio de lu e la mundificacio de lu am la deriera fortalasa tieua, e aprop restaura aquel.	And if it does not heal and throws out again as before, then know that you have not reached the complete eradication of the corruption; and therefore open it up again carefully and seek out the cause of it and cleanse it with your last forceps, and afterwards restore it.
E donc si es sanat, bo es; e sino, lahoras sapias que aquela corrupcio es en la profunditat longinqua del cors, la qual no ha conseguida, e adonc a tu en aquel no es engen sino laysar aquela.	And thus if it heals, well and good; but if not, then know that the corruption is in the remote depths of the body, which has not been reached, and therefore there is nothing to be done except leave it alone.
E si le os corromput es petit, o es a tu possible atirar aquel, lahora tu le atira am forceps subtils las quals conveno ad aquo.	And if the bone that is corrupted is small or can be removed, then you should remove it with delicate forceps suited to the purpose.
E si so motz osses, lahoras exquisitament fay la extraccio de totz aquels, e de aquels no laysses denguna causa am la tua fortaleza.	And if there are many bones affected, then carefully remove all of them, and leave behind none without a cause with your strength.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat alcuna causa de las humiditatz, e en lor inscizio no ha temor ni error, lahoras inscideys aquelas liaments o carns si so aqui, e deliura les osses.	But if there are any obstacles caused by humidity, and there is no fear or error in their incision, then incise those ligaments or flesh if they are present, and deliver the bones.
Mays si a tu no es preparacio de ostar les osses de la tua hora, lahoras pausa sobre la plagua aquo que poyresca la plagua aquela, e layssa aquela entro que aquo es al enviro de aquels osses de carns e de liamentz, e guarda la plagua que no sia consolidada, e sia constrengida la seccio la qual tu has inscidida en la tua operacio.	But if there is no preparation to remove the bones at that time, then place over the wound a dressing that will promote healing of the wound and leave it in place around those bones of flesh and ligaments, and guard the dressing so that it does not become consolidated and so that the incision made during your operation is kept open.
Habantz, si temes, pausa sobre lu coto submers en sopre trissat am oli, o coto submers en anguent egipciac, o en alcu dels enguentz vertz, quar quan poyriran aquelas liaments, e les osses son de lor seperatz la ablacio, e de aquels atraccio es alleujada.	Have ready, if you fear inflammation, a dressing soaked in olive oil, or soaked in Egyptian pitch, or in one of the green ointments, for when those ligaments have been softened and separated from the bones, their removal will be facilitated.
Mays si es un gran os ayssi cum le os de camba o de coyssa o semblantz ad aquels, e aquo que de lu es corromput es la facia de lu tant solament, lahoras ratz aquela am resio tant solament derriera entro que sia ostada aquela negror e corrupcio, e aprop restaura la plagua.	But if it is a large bone such as the thighbone or shinbone or similar, and only the surface of it is corrupted, then scrape away only that corruption with a chisel and rasp carefully until all the blackness and corruption has been removed, and then restore the dressing.
Mays si aquo que de lu es corrumpyt es gran partida, e la corrupcio ja ha conseguida la medulla del os, lahoras es causa necessaria cerrar aquel e aquel tot inscidir entro al loc on es pervenguda la corrupcio, e lahoras cura aquel entro que sia consolidada.	But if a large part of it is corrupted and the corruption has reached the marrow of the bone, then it is necessary to close that and incise all around where the corruption has penetrated, and then treat it until it is consolidated.
E yeu recomti a tu aquo que endevenc ad un home en la sua coyssa per que pausez aquela a eyssempli e adjutori sobre la tua operacio.	And I recommend to you that which pertains to a man concerning his thigh, so that you place over it this example and assistant in your operation.
Foc un home jove per etat entorn xxx ans, al qual accideys dolor en la sua cueyssa, e de las partidas dedintz mauguda es sobre la materia dedintz le cors entro que la materia es pervenguda a la cueyssa, e es materia de apostema am gran apostema, e no foc a lu causa extrinseca.	There was a young man about thirty years old to whom it happened that he had pain in his thigh, and the cause of it was from matter within the abdomen which had spread to the thigh, and it was a large abscess, and there was no external cause for it.
E adonc foc extendut le temps am aquela per la error dels metges entro que l’apostema es hubert, e acorrero de lu materias motas, e la sua curacio foc aprop pausada entro que la camba foc fistulada, e faytz son en lu motz orrificis les quals totz getavan poyredura e las humiditatz del cos.	And so much time passed with that because of the error of doctors until the abscess was opened, and a great quantity of matter flowed out, and his cure was then delayed until the thigh became fistulized, and many openings were made in it which all gave way to purification and the humidity of the body.
E adonc le curec multitut de metges entorn dos ans, e no foc en aquels savia ma en la art, entro que yeu fu appelat.	And then after much consultation with many doctors for about two years, and they knew nothing but their art, I was called.
E vi la camba de lu e las materias que corrian de lu aquels orrificis per gran cors; e ja le cos de aquel home era tot stabozit e la color de lu era citrina.	And when I saw the thigh of that man and the matter that flowed from those openings over a large area, I saw that his whole body was emaciated and his color was yellowish.
E adonc yeu intromesi la tenta ad un de aquels orrificis e pervenguec la tenta al os.	And then I inserted a probe into one of those openings and reached the bone with it.
E aprop yeu e perscrutat tostz les orrificis e trobegui aquels pervenir a lor de totas partidas de la camba.	And then I examined all the openings carefully and found that they extended from every part of the thigh.
E adonc yeu me coytegui e inscidegui sobre un dels orrificis aquels entro que descrobegui una partida del os, e atrobegui aquel corromput, e ja era terros e corrumput e denigrat; e era ja corrumpuda una partida de la camba entro que havia penetrat entro a la mezola.	And then I incised over one of those openings until I discovered a part of the bone, and I scraped away that corrupted matter which was earthy and rotting and discolored, and a part of the thigh had already been corrupted where it had penetrated into the muscle.
E adon yeu serregui aquo que a mi era discubert e preparat del os descubert.	And then I closed up what I had discovered and prepared of the bone laid bare
E yeu cujegui que no fos en le os sino aquela corrupcio la qual abscidigui e serregui, e yeu ja havia derraziguada.	And you should know that it was not in the bone but only in that corruption which I cut out and closed up, for there was already gangrene.
E aprop pausegui la restauracio de la plagua am medicina consolidativas per lonc temps, e no es consolidada.	And then I applied a dressing with consolidating medicines for a long time, but it did not consolidate.
E aprop yeu iteregui e descubregui sobre le os segondament sobre le descubriment primier, e atrobegui continua corrupcio am le os.	And then again I incised and laid bare the bone according to my first discovery, and I found continuous corruption with the bone.
E serregui aquo que a mi apares de aquela corrupcio, e aprop yeu fo perforsat fayre la curacio de lu e restauracio, e no es restaurat.	And then again I closed up what appeared to me of that corruption, and even then the cure of him was not restored.
E adonc yeu descubri sobre lu autra veguada e no cessegui inscidir le os petit a petit particuladament e perforsa la restauracio de lu, e no es restaurat entro que inscidigui entorn un palm de lu, e aquel extraxi am la medula sua, e aprop restauregui aquel am medicinas, e es consolidat leugierament e sanat.	And then again I laid bare that bone a third time and ceased to incise it little by little particularly, and even then the cure of him was not restored until I incised around about a palm of it, and extracted that with its marrow, and then restored it with medicines, and it consolidated easily and healed.
E no es necessaria iteracio en la operacio de lu e seccio de lu sino per la disposicio de la freulesa de lu e per la paucitat de la tollerancia de lu e paor de lu de mort, quar a lu accidia en totas horas per superfluitat de evacuacio sincopi mala.	And it was not necessary to repeat the operation and section of that bone except because of the disposition of his weakness and poverty of endurance and fear of death in him, for he had always been subject to syncope through excessive evacuation.
E donc sanat es per sanacio entiera, e nada es en loc de os carn dura; e es fayta bona la disposicio de lu en le sieu cors e retornec la vertut de lu; e es conversat en las suas disposicios e no fec a lu contrarietat en ambulacio ni nocument en denguna causa.	And therefore he was healed completely, and there is nothing in the place of bone or hard flesh; and his disposition in his body has been good and he has returned to his former vigor, and he has changed his habits and does not do anything contrary to his walking nor suffers any harm in any way.
Mays si es os eminent en loc del cors ja trauquat, lahoras cove que tu secces aquel segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu prenguas liament e strenh aquel en la extremitat de aquel os eminent, e comanda ad alcu que extenda aquel en sus; e pausa aquel liament de lana pus gros del primier liament; e aprop lia aquel sobre la carn que es dejos le os, e exten la extramitat de lu per que atires la carn a las partidas dejos, e tu descuebras la carn sobre le loc le qual voles serrar per que la serra no leda la carn.	But if the bone is prominent in place of the flesh and causes trouble, then you should cut it off in this manner: Take linen and strengthen that at the end of that prominent bone, and command someone to extend that on both sides; And then lay over that a thicker layer of wool than the first layer, and then bind that onto the flesh which is left near the bone, and extend the end of it so that you can draw the flesh away from its parts, and thus you uncover the flesh over the place where you wish to cut off.
E pausa fust o taula dejos le os decentment, quar quan tu fas aquo no es prohibida la serra que no secce la carn corrumpuda.	And lay a board or table underneath the bone neatly, for when you do this the saw will not cut into the corrupt flesh.
E cove que sia la serradura sobre le loc corrumput petit a petit, quar si es en la concavitat del os corrupcio e no appar en la sua apparicio al sentiment, e forssa a serratura de lu autra veguada.	And the sawing should be done little by little over the place of corruption, for if there is corruption in the concavity of the bone and does not appear externally to the touch, then it must be sawn again another time.
E si le os es corrumput e no-eminent, abantz es la una partida continuada am la autra, e la corrupcio es al mieg loc o en partida de lu, lahoras tu descuebre la carn de totas partz tota; e aprop pausa fust dejos, e aprop serra aquel de la primiera partida la on es la corrupcio entro que sia continuada la serratura del autra partida.	And if the bone is corrupted but not prominent, and one part is continuous with another, and the corruption is in the middle of it or in a part of it, then you should uncover the flesh from all parts entirely; And then lay wood underneath, and saw that first part where the corruption is until the sawing is continued to the other part.
E sia la serradura segon le loc de la corrupcio un petit, segon que havem dit.	And let the sawing be done according to the place of the corruption a little at a time, as we have said.
E si la corrupcio es en la junctura, inscideys aquela junctura corrumpuda, e serra le os la on es continuat del autra part.	And if the corruption is in the joint, then cut that corrupted joint and saw off the bone where it continues with the other part.
E si de la corrupcio es en la continuacio de doas juncturas, lahoras no es en lu razio sino engen.	But if the corruption is in the continuity of two joints, then it is not a fracture but an injury
E si la corrupcio es en le pecte de la ma o del pe, es mot dificil; empero cove que tu inquieras la corrupcio en qual manieyra appareys a tu, e que abradas aquela, e mondes aquela segon quascuna disposicio la qual es a tu possibla, e am cascum engen sia rectificat a tu, quan no fa a tu contrarietat vena o nervi.	And if the corruption is in the palm of the hand or foot, it is very difficult; nevertheless you should search for the corruption however it appears to you, and cut that away, and cleanse it according to each disposition that is possible to you, and with every injury make sure to correct it so that it does not cause harm to any vein or nerve.
E sapias qual es inscididors e las serras a inscidir aquestz osses son motz segon le situament dels osses, e la preparacio de aquels, e la grosseza de aquels, e la subtilitat e la grandeza e la parvitat de aquels, e la duricia e la lor raritat; per que cove que tu prepares a tota specia de operacio estrument convenient ad aquela opperacio.	"Know the types of chisels and saws suitable for cutting these bones. They differ according to the situation of the bones, their preparation, thickness, subtlety, size, smallness, hardness, and rarity; therefore, you should prepare appropriate instruments for each operation."
E sapias que aquela operacio significa a tu sobre la specia del strument del qual indigeysses; quan am tu es gran studi e lonc e conoyssensa de las manieyras de aquesta art, e testimoni de manieyras de malautias, quar lahoras ja tu las avias per tu meteys aquo que es convenient a lu dels sturmentz a tota malautia.	"Know that this operation requires you to use such and such an instrument. When you have thorough knowledge and long experience in the methods of this art and are familiar with various diseases, then you will know what instruments are suitable for each disease."
E yeu so a tu formant en la fi de aquest capitol le nombre dels instrumentz les quals pausaras cum eyssimples am les quals proceziras a la tua prohibicio la qual experimentaras sobre las autras.	"And at the end of this chapter, you should list the number and names of the instruments that you will use simply for your prohibition, which you will experience with others."
Forma de serra:	"Serrat form"
Forma de autra serra:	"Other saw shape"
Forma de autra serra:	"Other saw shape:"
Forma de autra serra gran:	"Form of another large saw"
Forma de ray:	"Shape of a rasp"
Sia le cap de aquest ray segon la forma de cap de clau stellat, e les puntz de lu sian segon la forma dels puntz alstefegi.	"The head of this rasp should be in the shape of a starred key head, and its points should be shaped like asterisk points."
E no conveneys sino que am aquel sian confricadatz les caps de las juncturas quan so corrumpudas, o es la boca gran ampla.	"It is not convenient except that with this [instrument] the heads of joints are rubbed together when they are corrupted or if the mouth is too wide."
Forma de razori major dels autres:	"Shape of a larger razor than others"
Forma de razori menor:	"Shape of a smaller razor"
Forma de razori lat:	"Razor shape for cutting"
Forma de serra autra decentment fayta: sia fayt arc de lu pus sobira e la acuitat de lu de ferr, e le membre de lu de boys punhal descentment fayt.	A suitable saw should be made with an arch above it, sharp-edged and pointed at its end.
Forma de lu:	Shape of it
Forma de razori en la qual ha concavitat:	razor with concave shape
Forma de razori autra subtil:	another razor with fine edge
Forma de autra razori de curvada extremitat:	Another razor with curved tip
Forma de rasori petit semblant a tenta:	Small razor resembling a stingray
Forma de incisori am le qual so inscidit les osses:	Form of an incision tool used for cutting bones
Forma de inscisori autra minor:	Another, smaller form
Forma de un autra inscissori; aquest semblant a ray, e la extremitat de lu es cum serra, e es exhibit en motz locs en la razio dels osses:	Form of another incision tool; this one resembles a lance, with its tip serrated for use in many places at the joints of bones
Forma de ray lo qual conveneys a rasio de aquel que es perforat dels osses:	A form resembling that used to bore through bones
E la extremitat de lu es triangulada e de aguda extremitat.	And its tip is triangular and pointed.
E es fayt de ferr de India , e semblantment cove que totas las causas que havem ditas de rasoris e de inscissoris e de serras.	It is made of Indian iron, resembling all the forms mentioned earlier for razors, incision tools, and saws
De inscizio extremitatz e de la serratura dels osses.	For bone cutting and sawing
Las extremitatz se poyresso o per causa intrinseca o per causa extrinseca, o cum tu auras medicat aquela corrupcio per curacio de aquelas medicinas e la curacio no comfereys, o vezes la corrupcio anar deves le membre la qual no percuteys denguna causa, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquel membre entro aquo la hon acossec la corrupcio, per que le malaute evasesca per aquo de mort o de malicia que es major defeliment del membre.	The extremities may become paralyzed due to intrinsic or extrinsic causes. If you have treated the corruption with medications and the cure does not help, sometimes the corruption can spread to a member without any apparent cause. Therefore, it is necessary to incise that member where the corruption has occurred, so that the illness will subside by either death or removal of the corrupted part, which is preferable to losing the entire limb due to paralysis.
E le senhal de aquel al qual accideys, es que·l membre es fayt negre entro que sia cujat que foc la ja comburit, o se poyreys aprop la negror entro que la poyredura aquela ane entro aquel membre que siec lu e que prengua tot le cors; e donc coyta te am inscizio de aquel.	The sign of this condition is that the member becomes blackened where it has been burned or scorched by fire, or if there is a spreading darkness as if it were being consumed from within. In such cases, incision is necessary to cut through and relieve the affected area before it spreads throughout the entire body.
E semblantment si es causa de la corrupcio percussio de alcunas causas venenosas ayssi cum de scorpio mari o de vupera o de rutela e de semblantz.	Similarly, if the cause of corruption is due to venomous bites from creatures such as scorpions, marine animals, vipers or similar.
E si la corrupcio o la percussio es en la extremitat del dit, lahoras tu inscideys le dit e no dones spazi a la corrupcio per que ane entro a la ma.	And if the corruption or venomous bite is on the tip of a finger, then you should incise the finger and not allow the corruption to spread into the hand.
E semblantment si accedeys a la ma, lahoras tu inscideys aquela de la razit del focil, e no dones spazi a la corrupcio entro que prengua en le focil del bras.	Similarly, if it affects the hand, then you should incise at the wrist and not allow the corruption to spread into the forearm.
E si envezeys aquel, lahoras inscideys le bras entro al coyde en la junctura.	And if it spreads further up the arm, then you should incision at the elbow joint.
E si passa otra la corrupcio e la vezes enviro le coyde, lahoras en aquel es la mort del malaute; e aministrar autra causa otra aquo en curacio es quantitat de vertut.	And if the corruption passes beyond that point and goes around the elbow, then death is inevitable for that limb. No other treatment can cure it at this stage, as the quantity of virtue (life force) has been exhausted.
E semblantment fay del pe quan corrupcio envezeys le dit del pe, lahoras tu inscideys aquel entro ad un dels nozes.	Similarly, when corruption spreads to a toe of the foot, you should incise it at one of its joints.
E si pren en la pente del pe, lahoras tu inscideys tot le pe.	And if it reaches the heel of the foot, then you must amputate the entire foot.
Mays si pueja entro al denol, lahoras tu inscideys la camba entro a la junctura del denol.	But if it progresses into the thigh, then you should incise the thigh at the hip joint.
E si la corrupcio ja es pervenguda sobre le denol, lahoras en lu no es engen sino dimissio, e layssar le malaute a la mort.	If corruption has already reached the bone, then in it there is only decay, and to let the patient die.
E la manieyra de inscidir le membre o de serrar lu es que tu strenhas le liament en la partida pus dejos la qual voles inscidir, e strenh autre liament sobre le loc; e extenda le ministre un liament a las partidas dejos, e extenda le ministra autra liament en sus; e tu separa la carn la qual es entre dos liamentz ain spatum lat entro que sia descuberta tota la carn; e aprop sia inscidit o serrat.	To incise or sever the member, you should stretch the ligament at the point where you wish to cut, and stretch another ligament above it. The assistant will extend one ligament on both sides of the incision, and the minister another ligament over them. Then, separate the flesh that is between the two ligaments with a spatula, until the entire flesh is exposed; then proceed with the incision or severing.
E cove que sia pausat drap de li de totas partidas per so que no toque le loc sa, e que vengua al malaute lesio ajustada e apostema caut.	It is necessary that drapes of lead be placed on all sides so that it does not touch the place where it is applied, and that the patient receives a proper dressing and cauterization.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc quan obras, lahoras tu cauteriza le loc coytadament, o pausa sus lu alcunas polveras restrenhentz le sanc; e aprop retorna a la tua medicacio entro que sia complida.	But if blood flows while performing the operation, then you should cauterize the place carefully, or cover it with some powders that will stop the bleeding. Then return to your procedure until it is completed.
E aprop lia le membre plaguat am liament al u convenient, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	Then ligature the member plague-wise with ligament at its convenient location, and dress it until it is healed.
E yeu recomti a tu aquo que endevenc a un home en le sieu pe, aquest meteys accident le qual yeu e a tu recomtat, le qual es quar accidic a lu negror en le sieu pe am adustio que era asemblada a combustio de foc.	And you should recount to him what happened to a man on his foot: this very accident that you are relating happened to him, which is that he accidentally burned his foot with heat that was similar to the combustion of fire.
E aquela corrupcio accidic primierament en le sieu dit entro que tendec tot le pe.	And that corruption first appeared in his toe before it spread throughout the whole foot.
E adonc aquel home preparec per si meteys pus que vic la curacio anar al membre am la vehemencia de lu que atrobec de dolor e de adustrio de lu, e el inscidic aquel pe entro a la junctura, e foc sanat.	Then that man prepared to apply pus because he knew that the cure would go to the member with great force of heat and pain, and he incised his foot at the joint, and it was healed by fire.
Lonc temps accidic a lu aquela meteyssa corrupcio en le dit de la ma indic.	For a long time, that same corruption occurred in the finger of his left hand.
E adonc venc a mi, e so me perforsat repercutir aquela superfluitat am aquo que pausegui sobre la ma de las medicinas, aprop la mundificacio del cos de lu; e no es repercussa la superfluitat e comensec anar al autra dit entro que comensec en la ma.	And then it came to me, and so I treated that swelling with what I applied on the hand of the medicines, particularly the purification of the body from it. But the swelling did not subside, and it began to go to another finger until it reached the hand.
E el apelec me a inscidir la ma de lu, e yeu no volgui far aquo sperant sobre la repercussio de aquela superfluitat, e mays que temegui deves la inscizio de la ma de lu mort, quar la vertut del malaute era sobre cazement.	And he asked me to incise his hand for it, but I did not want to do that hoping for the subsidence of that swelling, and more than anything fearing the death of his hand from incision, because the power of the disease was great.
E pus que el se desperec de mi, es retornat en la sua terra e pervenguec a mi que aquel home preparec e inscidic la sua ma tota, e es sanat.	And even though he left me, it was brought to my attention that that man prepared himself and incised his entire hand, and it healed.
E no he adhuzida aquesta narracio sino per que sia adjutori sobre aquo que catz de aquesta malautia, e que sia significacio per la qual sia significada e segon la qual sia obrat.	And I have only recorded this narrative so that help may be provided for those who suffer from this illness, and so that its meaning may be understood by which it is designated and according to which it should be treated.
De cura sinuum et qualitate clisterizationis cum medicinis.	Of the treatment of sinews and the quality of cleansing with medicines (enema).
Quan accideys apostema en alcus membres carnozes e·l spazi de l’apostema es prolonguat entro que fa colleccio de sania, e aprop es romput e perforat, e es eyssida de lu la sania, e roman le loc vuoyt quays cum si era vayssel, e la codena que es desobre lu ayssi cum drap subtiliat, e no es pervengut a deriera corrupcio, e no inprimeys en le os o en nervi ni en liament, es apelat sinu, e no es nompnat fistula.	When an aposteme occurs in some fleshy members and the space of the aposteme is prolonged until it forms a collection of pus, and then it bursts and is perforated, and the pus is discharged from it, and the place remains void as if it were a vessel, and the skin that is above it appears like finely woven cloth, and there is no further corruption, and it does not impress on the bone or nerve or ligament, it is called a sinew, and it is not called a fistula.
Mays empero si le spazi es prolonguat entro que la corrupcio enprema en alcun membre, lahoras es appelada fistula e no zukem.	But if the space is prolonged until corruption impresses on some member, then it is called a fistula and not sinew.
E la cura de lu es que inscidas aquela codena tota ayssi cum es revolvut, e majorment quan es subtiliada e es fayta cum drap, e comfizas que no adhereys al loc per la sua corrupcio.	And its treatment is that you incise that skin entirely as it appears, and especially when it is finely woven and is like cloth, and make sure that it does not adhere to the place because of its corruption.
Mays si tu speras que la codena adheresca e que aquela corrupcio no aja conseguit per deriera consecucio, e en la codena ha spassitut de cara, lahoras tu cura aquel am clisteri.	But if you hope that the skin will adhere and that that corruption has not yet reached its final conclusion, and there is putrefaction in the skin, then you treat it with an enema.
E es que consideras al sinu, e lahoras si es gran, e·l brac que yeys es de fetent odor, lahoras clisteriza aquel am medicament egipciac le qual es de oli e vi agre e ziniar recebent partidas enguals, e sian ajustadas en un vayssel, e sian coytas sobre le foc entro que’l medicament se fassa rog e pervengua a specitut de mel.	And if you consider the sinew, and if it is large, and the arm that appears has a foul odor, then you enema it with the Egyptian medicine which is of oil and sour wine and cinnamon bark finely ground, and they should be balanced in a vessel, and cooked over the fire until the medicine becomes thick like honey.
E aprop tu pren de lu aquo que es necessari e dissolveys lu am aygua e mel; e clisteriza am aquel le sinu, e strenh le orrifici de lu, e layssa la medicina en lu per la quantitat de doas horas.	And then you take what is necessary from it and dissolve it with water and honey; and you enema the sinew with that, and strengthen its opening, and leave the medicine in it for the amount of two hours.
E aprop extratz aquela am sprecio; e fay aquo per tantz dias entro que sia mundificat le sinu e sia remauguda la pudor.	And then you remove it with a spatula, and do this for so many days until the sinew is purified and the corruption is removed.
E alcunas veguadas es clisterizat am aygua de cendre, quan no es a tu prezent aquest medicament; e es que tu prenguas la cendra de vitz, e met sobre lu aygua; e aprop cola aquela e clisteriza aquel am ela entro que te confizes que·l sinu lahoras es ostat.	And sometimes it is enema with water of ash when this medicine is not available to you; and if you take the ashes of vitals, and put them on the water, then you enema that with it until you are satisfied that the sinew is clean.
E si le malaute no ha tollerancia sobre le medicament egipciac ni l’aygua de la cendre, lahoras clisteriza aquel am aygua e mel e quays sia mesclat ziniar trissat, e clisteriza aquel am vi e mel mesclat, quar de proprietat de mel es que mondifique e lave, e le vi fa adherir le sinu, e majorment quan en le vi ha superfluitat de stipticitat e de siccitat.	And if the disease does not tolerate the Egyptian medicine nor the water of ash, then you enema it with water and honey mixed together, to which some finely ground cinnamon is added, and you enema it also with wine and honey mixed together, for it is the property of honey to purify and wash, and wine makes the sinew adhere, especially when there is an excess of astringency and dryness in the wine.
E cum tu fas aquo alcunas veguadas e te comfizes que·l sinu ja es remaugut, lahoras clisteriza aquel am aquo que fa naysser la carn en lu.	And when you do this several times and you are satisfied that the sinew has been removed, then you enema it with something that makes flesh grow in it.
E es que prenguas de enguent dyafinicon e dissolveys aquel am oli rozat e vi stiptic; o que clisterizas aquel am alcunas medicinas e enguentz autres que hajan las proprietatz les quals ja he yeu scritz en le tractat dels enguents.	And if you take some fine diachylon and dissolve it with rose oil and astringent wine, or else you enema it with other medicines and ointments that have the properties which I have already written about in the treatise on ointments.
E si le orrifici del sinu es streyt en le qual no es recebuda la canula del clisteri, lahoras tu le amplifique aquel am ferr petit a petit, e pausa en lu calgua envolopada en enguent egipciac o en enguent basilicon entro que sia amplificat.	And if the opening of the sinew is narrow and cannot receive the tube of the enema, then you dilate it little by little with a small file, and pause in it with warm compresses wrapped in Egyptian ointment or basilicon ointment until it is dilated.
E semblantment si le orrifici es ample, lahoras tu agregua las labias de lu am sutura e layssa de lu quantitat en la qual intre le clisteri ses addicio.	And similarly, if the opening is wide, then you approximate its lips with suture and leave in it the amount that enters the enema without addition.
E si le orrifici de lu del qual corr le brac es elevat a las partidas desus, lahoras secca aquel en le pus bas loc que es en lu per que le brac corra entro dejos, quar quan le brac es coartat en la preondeza de sinu la carn esser en lu engendrada.	And if the opening of that from which the arm extends upwards is elevated to its parts above, then dry it in the pus near below where it enters so that the arm runs smoothly, for when the arm is confined within a sinew the flesh can be generated inside.
E si no es a tu possible seccar le sinu entro al enviro del os pus bas segon que voles, lahoras te perforssa que prepares le membre am preparacio per la qual corr de lu le brac leugierament segon que es a tu apparelhat e que no sia en lu retengut alcuna causa del brac.	And if it is not possible for you to dry the sinew near the bone in the pus below as you wish, then pierce the member with preparation so that the arm runs out of it lightly according to what appears to you and without there being any cause retained in the arm.
E pren medicinas consolidativas que sian pausadas sobre le sinu convenientz ad aquo que vols exxten aquelas sobre drap de li.	And take medicines that consolidate, which are applied over the sinew conveniently according to what you wish to extend them over a cloth of linen.
E le drap sia de tan gran quantitat cum fa la comunicacio de tot le sinu; e aprop inscidey am las forfexs en le dreyt del orrifici del sinu un trauc pus ample un pauc que l’orrifici del sinu; e aprop exten sobre autre drap de li dels enguentz leons segon la quantitat del trauc, e pausa le sobre aquel per posicio longinqua del orrifici del sinu per que sia aleujat le eyssiment del brac de lu e no ostes le drap gran sino aprop alcus dyas una veguada.	"Let the cloth be of such great quantity as to cover all the sinus; then quickly cut with forceps in the right side of the armpit's opening, a hole somewhat wider than the armpit itself. Then extend another piece of cloth over the wounds, according to the size of the hole, and place it there at some distance from the armpit so that it may facilitate the exit of blood without covering much of the cloth."
Mays aquel que es sobre le orrifici del sinu, le qual remauguas en tota hora per so que yesca aquo que es ajust en lu del brac.	"He who is above the armpit opening should constantly remove it so that what has gathered in the arm may flow out."
E per que sapias si aquo que corr de lu del brac es mot o pauc, o es digest, o es no-digest.	"And so you may know if what flows from the arm is much or little, whether it is digested or undigested."
E am aysso tu considera le loc de aquel sinu, si en lu sent le pacient dolor o no, e si es en lu apostema.	"And besides this, consider also the location of that sinus: if the patient feels pain there or not, and if it is an abscess."
E cum la tua medicacio es prolonguada en la tal manieyra, e vesas la matiera que es gitada sobre le orrifici del sinu ja adhereys, o se apropria adherencia, lahoras le mayti tu le deslia o le tertz dia, e quan deslias la plagua, lahoras muda le drap per autre e renova le enguent.	"And when your treatment has lasted for some time in this manner, and you see that the matter which is thrown out over the armpit opening has already adhered, or at least shows signs of adherence, then on the third day, carefully remove it. But when you remove it, immediately change the cloth for another one and renew the dressing."
Mays si del sinu aprop lon spazi yeys virus subtil, lahoras no te desperes de la adherencia de li, quar la sanacio de lu se apropria, quar so alcus homes en les quals tarda generacio de carn en las lors plaguas, e de aquels so en les quals es fayt le contrari de lu.	"But if from the sinus there extends a long distance of subtle virus, do not despair of its adhesion, for the healing will take place nonetheless. For this is what happens in some people where the generation of flesh in their wounds takes longer time, and also in those whose case is the opposite."
E si del sinu aprop motz dias es yssit brac indigest, lahoras sapias que·l sinu no adhereys; e si es tardada la adherencia del sinu e es la causa prolonguada, lahoras tu ajusta en exsiccacio de las medicinas, e si las medicinas so humidas en lor substancia e en la sua vertut, son seccas ayssi cum enguent dyafinicon, quan es en lu ajustada superfluitat de addicio de zegi.	"And if from the sinus much digested blood issues for many days, then you know that the sinus does not adhere. But if there is delay in the adhesion of the sinus and this causes prolongation, then you should aim for dryness in your medications. And if the medications are humid by nature and virtue, they should be made dry like a fine ointment, when there is excessive addition of honey."
E le mays derier am le qual es curat, es que prenguas de enguent dyafinicon e sia dissout en oli rozat, e sia sobre lu vojat vi antic engual en la sua substancia, e aprop comfeys aquel am lu, e usa de aquel.	"And the last remedy which cures it is this: take a fine ointment and dissolve it in rose oil. Then mix well until its substance is evenly distributed, and apply it thus to that limb, using it."
E ja fa semblant en aquela accio, quan no y a brac, enguent dyafinicon, mel quan es coyt entro que sia engrossat, e usa de lu; o que prenguas mirra e aloen e enses, e trissa tot e polveriza sobre le mel quan es sus le foc, e aprop lineys aquo sobre drap e strenh aquel sobre le sinu; e lineys aquel am le mel le qual has cuoyt entro que es engrossat, e polveriza sobre drap e strenh aquel.	"And it seems that in that action, when there is no blood flow, you should use fine ointment and honey which is thickened by cooking, using it; or take myrrh, aloe, and incense, crush them all together and powder them over the honey while it is on the fire. Then spread this on a cloth and place that over the sinus, spreading the thickened honey on top and then powdering the cloth."
E alcunas veguadas so administratz am lu aristologia longua e razitz de lili celesti (e es lili celesti) e farina de errs e centaurea, e usa de aquels simples o ajustatz, trissa aquels e cribela e polveriza sobre le mel le qual he recomtat; e husa de lu.	"And sometimes it is administered with the long and slender roots of celery (which is celery) and barley flour and centaurea, using those simples or adjusted ones, crushed and sifted and powdered over the honey which has been mentioned; then use it."
E si es prolonguat le sinu, e no es sanat per aquesta curacio, lahoras sapias que la corrupcio es en le preon de lu, e ja fa enquisicio en les osses o en les autres membres durs o als liaments; lahoras tu le cura am curacio fistular, ayssi cum desus es dit.	"And if the sinus is prolonged and not healed by this treatment, then you know that corruption is in its interior. And therefore, make an investigation into the bones or other hard members or to the ligaments; then treat it with a fistulous cure, as mentioned above."
De curacio de panarici et unguis attritae et incisione digiti additi et sectione.	"On the treatment of panniculus carnosus and crushed nails, additional digit cuticle and section."
Panarici es apostema le qual nays dejos la ungla del dit pous de la ma o del pe, e fort leu nays en les autres ditz, e cum es prolonguat e la sua curacio es mens prezada, o es apostemat de apostema caut, o es corrumput, e gieta brac entro que corrodeys la razitz de la ungla, e fort leu corromp aquela tota, e fort leu perve la sua corrupcio al os entro que es a lu odor fetent, e es fayta la extremitat del dit lada, e la color de lu es fayta fusca.	Wart is an aposteme that appears under the nail of the toe or foot finger, and it usually appears on others as well. When prolonged, its cure becomes more difficult; either it is a cauterized aposteme or corrupted, and it emits a dark liquid that corrodes the root of the nail, often corrupting the entire digit. Its corruption sometimes reaches the bone, causing a foul odor, and makes the tip of the toe blackened, with the color becoming darkened.
E donc quan tu auras aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu inscidas am ferr tota la superfluitat que es romasa de la ungla e aprop cauteriza la plagla aprop aquo, quar cauteri mot es juvatiu en aysso.	Therefore, when you have that which we have said in the division and it does not confirm your cure, then you should scrape with iron all the remaining superfluity of the nail and cauterize the wound immediately afterward, for cautery is very helpful in this case.
Mays si le os es sa e la ungla es sana, e las addicios de la ungla vuoydas ja compremen las carns a las partidas dedintz, e comensan lu punger e ledeysso aquela, lahoras cove que tu pauses ray subtil dejos le angle de la ungla que pungeys la carn, e impelleys aquela sus e inscideys aquela carn am facilitat, e pausa sobre aquo que roman de la carn de las medicinas comburentz corrosivas entro que sia tot remaugut; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	But if the bone is sound and the nail is healthy, but the edges of the nail begin to press on the flesh at the sides, causing itching and discomfort, then you should make a small incision at the corner of the nail that presses on the flesh, and lift up that edge and cut away that flesh easily. Then apply burn-cauterizing medicines over what remains of the flesh until all is removed; and immediately afterward treat it with healing ointments until it is healed.
Mays si la corrupcio ja enprem en le os, lahoras cove que tu inscidas le os aquel e le extraguas, car nul temps no es sanat que sia en lu le os corrumput.	But if the corruption has already reached the bone, then you should incise the bone at that point and extract it, for there is no time when such a bone can be healed once it is corrupted.
E si vezes la corrozio e la corupcio anar en le dit, lahoras tu inscideys aquel en un dels nozes segons que es premesa la sua rememoracio, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if the corrosion and corruption go up into the digit, then you should incise it at one of its joints according to its memory, and immediately afterward treat it until it is healed.
Mays si a la ungla endeve percussio o atricio, e endeve en aquela dolor vehement, lahoras cove que tu al comensament fleubotomes le malaute, e aprop secca la ungla am spatum agut am seccio transversa desus en jus, e guarda te que la seccio no pervengua entro a la carn que es dejos la ungla, quar tu faras accidir al malaute dolor vehement, e sira causa a nativitat de la carn ajustada superflua en le loc; e aprop cura aquel loc am aquo que ceda dolor.	But if the nail suffers impact or attrition and there is intense pain in that place, then you should first blister the wound. Then immediately afterward, dry the nail with a sharp spatula with a transverse section from top to bottom, but be careful not to let the section reach the flesh that is beneath the nail, for you will cause intense pain and produce excessive flesh growth at that location. Immediately afterward treat that place with something that relieves pain.
Mays dit ajustat, le qual es nat en las mas de alcus homes, fort leu es carnos tot, e fort leu so en lu osses, o fort leu es en lu ungla.	But a finger that is fixed, which is born in the case of some men, it may be entirely flesh and fat, or it may be joined to the bones, or it may be joined only by the nail.
E alcus de lu son natz en la razit de la junctura, o es la nativitat de lu en alcus nozes dels ditz.	And some of them are born at the root of the joint, or the birth is in one of the joints of these fingers.
Mays aquel que es nat en alcus nozes del dit no se mau, e aquest que es nat en las juncturas fort leu es maugut.	But that which is born in some joints of the finger is not painful, whereas that which is born in the joints is often painful.
E de aquels que son natz carnoses, la seccio es leugiera, e es que tu inscidas aquel deves la sua razitz am spatum lat.	And among those born fleshy, their section is easy, and so you should insert the scalpel there to its root.
Mays de aquel que es nat en la razitz de la junctura, la curacio es dificil; e donc guarda te de la abscizio de lu.	But if one is born at the root of the juncture, the cure is difficult; therefore beware of cutting into it.
Mays en aquel que es nat en dit deves les nozes, cove que tu inscidas al comensament la carn de lu am inscizio redonda entro al os, e aprop serra am una de aquelas serras convenientz ad aquo, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	However, if one is born at the root of the nuts, you should insert at the beginning with a round incision through the bone, and immediately saw with one of those suitable saws for that purpose, and immediately cure it where it has been healed.
Mays consolidacio la qual accideys als ditz entre lor motas veguadas o per nativitat del home que nays enayssi, o per consolidacio de plagua o per combustio de foc, o per semblantz, adonc cove que secces aquela consolidacio entro que les ditz retorno a la sua forma natural.	However, if consolidation occurs in these between their joined bones or by the nature of the person born that way, or by solidification of phlegm or burning of fire, or by similarity, then it is necessary to cut off that consolidation so that those may return to their natural form.
E aprop pausa entre lor draps de li enfuzes en oli rozat per que no sian consolidatz leugierament, e separa entre aquels, o pausa entre aquels una lamina de plom subtil entro que sia consolidat segon que cove.	And again, pause between their membranes of the lungs in rose oil so that they are not easily consolidated, and separate them or place a thin sheet of lead between them if necessary according to what is needed.
E semblantment si accideys consolidacio en alcus ditz am la palma, lahoras tu secca aquela consolidacio segon que es preparada e conveneys a la figura del membre.	And similarly, if consolidation occurs in some of these with the palm, then cut off that consolidation according to how it is prepared and convenient for the figure of the member.
De inscizio de vices, so son varicas.	Of incision of veins, there are many kinds.
Vices so son varicas, e so venas envolutas grossas plenas de superfluitatz melencolicas las quals veno en motz dels membres del cors, e le major adveniment de lor en las cambas, e majorment en las cambas dels itinerantz e dels laborantz e dels portantz.	"Varicose veins are caused by thick, twisted veins filled with melancholic excess humors that appear in many parts of the body, and most commonly in the legs, especially among travelers, laborers, and porters."
Adonc cove que tu administres purguacio del cors de colera negra alcunas veguadas am expulcio fort, e aprop sangna le pacient de la vena basilica.	"Then you should administer a purge of black bile several times with strong evacuation, and also bleed the patient from the basilic vein."
Mays la curacio de lor am ferr es segon dos manieyras: la una es que sia inscizas e sia atirat aquel sanc negre, e l’autra manieyra es que sia elevada la vena e sia extrayta tota.	"But the treatment of varicose veins with iron is done in two ways: one is to incise and draw out that black blood, and the other way is to elevate the vein and extract all of it."
La seccio de lu es segon aquesta manieyra: embroca al comensament la camba am aygua cauda mot entro que le sanc gros sia resolvut, que es feculent de la camba, e aprop strenh la camba del malaute a la partida pus sobirana de la coyssa entro a la partida dejos del denol am una benda, e aprop secca la vena en un loc, o en dos, o en tres am seccio ampla, e aprop eleva le sanc negra am la tieua ma de la partida dejos de la camba entro en sus, e desus en jus, entro que del sanc sia yssida la quantitat que voles e que vezes habastar, e la qual tollera la vertut del malaute.	"The procedure is as follows: first, embed the beginning of the vein with cold water until the thick blood is dissolved and removed, which is waste from the vein. Then, tie the vein at its departure point above the affected area with a bandage, and then dry the vein in one or two or three places with a wide cut, and finally elevate the black blood with the tube from the far end of the vein upwards and downwards until as much blood as desired is removed and the wound heals."
E aprop lia aquela, e comanda a lu que abstengua de las viandas colera negra engendrantz.	"And then bandage it up, and tell him to abstain from foods that generate black bile."
E itera la curacio per fleubotomia quan las venas so umplidas e aquo notz al malaute.	"And repeat the treatment by phlebotomy when the veins are full and this is beneficial for the patient."
Mays la elevacio de lor es segon aquesta manieyra: tu que razas la camba del malaute, si en lu so motz pels, e aprop met le en banh e embroca la camba de lu am aygua cauda entro que s’enrogesesca e las venas sian exuberadas; o que sia exercitat per exercici fort, si banh no es a tu present, entro que·l membre sia scalfat.	"But the elevation of varicose veins is done as follows: first, raise the affected vein if it is not too large, and then put it in warm water until it becomes reddened and the veins are dilated; or else have him exercise vigorously if you are not present at the bath, until his limb becomes warmed."
E aprop secsa la codena en le dreyt de la vena per seccio en le lonc o en le derier de lu deves le denol, o en le pus bas de lu deves lo talo.	"And then cut the thread on the right side of the vein in the length or at the end of it where you should cut the knot, or below that if you want to tie the ankle."
E aprop uobre la codena am uncis e excorja la vena de tota part entro que appara al sentiment, e es deves la appericio de lu que vezes aquela roga declinant a negror.	"And then tie the thread with a needle and strip the vein from all sides until it appears on the surface of the skin, and it should be done with the patient lying down to avoid blackness."
E donc cum evazeys e de la codena tu vezes aquela blanca quays sia corda.	"And then remove the thread and tie it again with a white thread that is strong."
E aprop tu met dejos aquela le ray entro que sia elevada e sia gitada de la codena, e sospen aquela am onci orp leon.	"And then place therewith something elevated until it is raised up from the vein and suspended therewith by an embroidered linen cloth."
E aprop secsa autra seccio aprop aquela seccio per tres ditz, e aprop excorja la codena de la partida desus de la vena entro que apparia.	"And then make another cut near that cut after three days, and again strip the thread from above the vein until it appears."
E aprop eleva aquela e inscideys aquela en deriera seccio deves le talo, e aprop extratz aquela e eleva aquela entro que sia yssida per la seccio segonda, e aprop extratz aquela de la seccio que es sobre aquela.	"And then elevate it again and make another cut below that, and then remove the thread from both cuts."
E fay aquo entro que extraguas aquela de la seccio que es pus sobirana o pus auta de totas las seccios, entro que tota es yssida; e lahoras inscideys aquela.	"And do this until you have removed all of that from the highest or lowest cut of all cuts, so that it is completely removed; and then close up the wound."
E si no obezeys a tu ad extrayre e elevar, lahoras intromet una agulha am fiel fort doble e ligua aquela e extratz la, o intromet dejos lu le ray e revolveys la tua ma a tota part entro qu’en sia getada.	"If you are not able to remove and elevate it, then insert a needle with strong thread doubled and tied, and remove it; or else put therewith something elevated until it is cast out."
E guarda te que no sia inscidida; quar si es trencada, es fayt a tu dificil elevar aquela mot e es vengut sobre le malaute per aquela nocument.	"And make sure that you do not cut the vein; for if it breaks, it will be difficult to elevate it again and will bring harm upon the patient through that wound."
E cum aquela tota auras fora-gitada, lahoras pausa sobre le loc de la plagua lana submerssa en vi e oli rozat e oli no-rozat, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	"And when all has been removed, then place thereupon some wool moistened with rose oil and unguent, and heal it until it is healed."
E si la vit es contrayta havent tortuositat a la qual sia envolucio a las partidas, e no es segon rectitut segon que havem dit, lahoras cove que tu fendas sobre aquela a tota partida de tortuositat de lu e als locs de envolucio de lu, e aprop suspen aquela am uncis entro que eleves aquela tota.	"And if the vein is contracted without any tortuosity where it has been wrapped around and does not follow the straightness that we have described, then you must cut all the way along its tortuous parts and places of wrapping, and then suspend it with needles until you have elevated it all."
E guarda te deves la tua seccio que no inscidas la vena e que no plagues aquela, quar dificil sira a tu elevar aquela; e serva la tua prudencia en aquela.	"And make sure that your cut does not touch the vein and does not damage it, for it will be difficult to elevate if it is damaged; be careful with this."
Forma del inscident am le qual es seccada vit:	"Form of the incision where a vein is cut:"
Forma de unci orp:	"The shape of a needle eye:"
No es a lu accuitat ayssi cum als uncis ni es de aguda extremitat per so que no plague la vena; e es de grossa flexibilitat leon, quar si era subtil, inscidira la vena per la sua subtilitat; habantz es en lu superflua grosseza ayssi cum havem dit.	It is not sharp like needles nor has it acute extremities so as not to harm the vein. It is of thick flexibility because if it were thin, it would injure the vein through its fineness; for it has surplus thickness as we have said.
De extraccio venae cruris.	Removal of a vein from the leg
Aquesta vena es engendrada en las cambas en terras caudas ayssi cum al- Ategi en terra de Arabics e en las terras de India caudas e aridas de pauca teneritat e en las quals no nays erba ni aybre.	This vein is generated in the calves of lands that are dry like those in Arabia and also those in India, which are hot and dry with little humidity and where there is neither grass nor herbs.
E fort leu es engendrada en autres locs del cors otra las cambas.	And moreover it is generated in other places of the body besides the calves
E la gestacio de lu es de putrefaccio que ve dejos la codena ayssi cum venen dedintz le cors serpentz e vermps e scarides e verms engendrantz entre la codena e la carn.	Its generation is one of putrefaction that rises from the thigh like venom inside the body's serpents, worms, crabs, and other worms generated between the thigh and the flesh.
E senhal de la suscepcio de l’adveniment de lu es de aquesta vena que accideys en la camba enflammacio vehement; e aprop le loc es vesicat; e aprop comensa la vena yssir del loc de aquela vesicacio quays sembla razit de planta.	The symptom of the advent of this condition is an inflammation in the calf with violent swelling. Around that place, there is blistering and around where it begins to appear, the vein seems like a plant shoot.
E adonc cum appar de lu la extremitat, lahoras cove que tu envolvas sobre aquela una pessa de plom del qual sia le pes de una drac. entro a ii drac., e noza aquela e layssa le plom suspendut de la camba.	Then when the vein appears at its end, you should immediately wrap around it a piece of lead weighing one dragon (about 3.5 grams) within two dragons (about 7 grams). Tie this and leave the lead suspended from the calf.
E tantas veguadas cum yeys de lu alcuna causa a las partidas defora, envolveys aquo em plom e noza aquel.	"Whenever some fluid flows out from him to outer parts, wrap that in lead and tie it."
E si mot es prolonguat, lahoras tu inscideys una partida de lu e envolopa le romanent; e no inscidas aquela de razit entro que sia fora yssida, quar si inscideys aquela es contrayta e intra en la carn e fa accidir apostema e poyredura en le loc e ulceracio mala.	"If it continues longer, then you should incise some of him and wrap the remainder; but do not insert that inside until it has come out completely, because if you insert it while still inside it will contract and go into the flesh, causing inflammation and putrefaction in the place, and bad ulceration."
Per que cove que sia tractada suaument e sia extrayta petit a petit, entro que sia fora-gitada del derier de lu e no remangua de lu alcuna causa en le cors.	"That is why it must be treated gradually and extracted little by little until completely outside of him, so that there remains nothing inside his body."
E de aquesta vena es yssit en alcus homes que es en la sua longitut de v palms e de detz e ja es pervengut a mi que yssic un de xx palms.	"And from this vein some men have extracted up to twenty palms of blood, and I have heard that one man has extracted as much as thirty palms."
E si es inscidida en la hora de la sua medicacio, lahoras intromet lo ray en le trauc de lu e perfora aquela am lonc trauc am le cors, entro que sia evacuat tot aquo que es en la materia, e administra putrefaccio del loc per alcus dias am medicinas; e aprop cura aquela per la curacio de apostemas.	"If it is incised at the time of treatment, then insert a tube into the track of it and pierce that with a long tube through the body until all of what is in the matter has been evacuated, and apply putrefaction to the place for some days with medicines; and afterwards cure it by the treatment of apostemes."
E aquesta vena alcunas veguadas ha motz ramps, e majorment quan apar a la junctura del pe o en le pe, e veno a lu motz orrificis, e es yssit de quascu orrifici ram.	"And this vein sometimes has many branches, especially when it appears at the junction of the thigh or in the thigh, and comes to have many openings, from each of which a branch can be extracted."
E donc cura aquela ayssi cum havem dit en la divisio e am aquo que es desus dit.	"And then cure it as we have said in the division above, with whatever has been mentioned above."
De sectione super vermes generatos sub cute et dicitur aegritudo bovina.	"Regarding incision for worms generated under the skin, also known as 'bovine disease'."
Aquesta malautia es nompnada en alcuna terra deves nos malautia bovina per so quar motas veguadas endeve als bious e es verm pauc un le qual es nat entre la codena e la carn, e va en tot le cos pujan e devalan, e es mostrat al sentiment deves le sieu anament de membre en membre entro que disromp la codena e yeys fora.	"This illness is known in some lands as cow disease because many times it is found in oxen and rarely one that is born between the backbone and flesh, spreading throughout the body causing pain and discomfort, noticeable by its movement from member to member until it tears the backbone and comes out."
E la generacio de lu es per putrefaccio de alcunas humors ayssi cum accideysso verms e serpentz e lombrics e ascaridas en le ventre.	"The generation of this is due to the putrefaction of certain humors, just as worms, snakes, earthworms and ascariasis occur in the belly."
E es temut per la malicia de lu, quar quan el va en le cors e es elevat al cap, e es pervengut al huel, lahoras fort leu uebre en lu e intra e destruzeys le huel, e aquo endeve motas veguadas.	"And it is feared because when it goes into the body and reaches the head, and arrives at the brain, then it opens a large wound there and enters and destroys the brain, which happens many times."
E donc quan tu voles curar aquel e extraire lu, lahoras no se fa si no deves la sieua ambulacio e apparacio de lu al sentiment, e adonc cove que tu strenhas aquo que es sobre lu e aquo que es dejos lu am liament e constriccio fort, e aprop secca sobre lu e extratz aquel.	"And therefore when you want to heal that one and remove this illness, then it is not done if not first the person's walking and appearance of the illness are felt by sensation, and then you must stretch out what is on top of it and what is below it with bandages and constriction, and carefully dry it over it and remove it."
E si es preondat en la carn e no le atrobes, lahoras tu pausa cauteri am foc sobre le loc entro que mora, e la major causa que es temuda es corrupcio de lu am la qual corrump le loc ayssi cum havem dit.	"And if it is in the flesh and you do not remove it, then you must apply a cautery with fire over the place where it resides, and the greatest cause that is feared is corruption of the illness, with which it corrupts the place as we have said."
May si tu vezes aquel esser pervengut al cap prop del huel, lahoras strenh sobre le sobrecil am fort strictura, e aprop secsa sobre lu, e extratz aquel; e cove que·l malaute use de mondificacio del sieu cors am medicinas evacuantz humors putridas malas, e guarda se de viandas generantz putrefaccio.	"And if you want that person to be freed from the head near the brain, then stretch a bandage over his forehead with strong constriction, and carefully dry it over it, and remove it; and it is necessary for the sick person to use medicines that evacuate putrid bad humors from their body, and they should guard themselves against foods that cause putrefaction."
De sectione super aegritudinem nafir.	"On cutting into the illness nafir."
Aquesta malautia es nompnada en nostra terra nafir, e es dolor la qual ve en alcus membres, e aprop es permudada de membre en membre.	"This illness is named in our land 'nafir', and it is a pain that comes to some limbs, and it is transferred from limb to limb."
E yeu ja e vista aquela segon que yeu te recomtare.	"And you have already seen this as I will tell you."
Yeu fu apelat a una femna malauta ad una vila, e descubric le sieu bras e vi una imflacio petita en la vena funis del bras, e pus que fu romas per una hora, vi aquela imflacio anar ayssi cum va verm pujan ad aquest, mays pus leugierament que esser por, ayssi cum si fos argent viu quan corr de loc en loc.	"I was called to a sick woman in a village, and uncovering her arm I saw a small inflammation on the vein of her elbow, which after an hour grew like this way it goes when it swells, but more gently than usual, as if it were living silver moving from place to place."
E adonc anet s’en la dolor de aquel loc e fiquet se en le muscle, e aprop aqui stec per una hora.	"And then the pain of that spot went away and gathered in the muscle, and remained there for about an hour."
E aprop correc en l’autre cors entro que pervenc al autre bras.	Approximately correct the other body between which it reaches to the other arm.
E aprop recomtec a mi que revolvia se per tot le cors sieu segon que yeu vi; e fo trop meravelat de la permutacio de lu e de la velocitat de membre en membre.	And I recommend that you turn yourself completely around according to what I saw; and he was too amazed by the transformation of his body and the speed of member by member.
E yeu ja havia vist denant aquo en les mieus huels segon aquela manieyra, empero yeu he vistz motz les quals atroban dolor esser permutada de membra a membre.	And I had already seen something like this in my dreams according to that manner, however, I have heard many people say that it causes pain to be transformed from member to member.
Mays no vi aquo am les huels ayssi cum en la femna.	But I do not see this in the mirrors as with women.
E yeu no cogiti esser aquo sino que es per aquo quar la femna era de viela, on so de secs cors e de venas descubertas, e en aquesta apparec al sentiment aquela ventositat permutada.	And you do not think this to be so because the woman was of age, with dry skin and visible veins, and in this appearance she feels that windy transformation.
E es necessari que no apparesca segon aquesta retro-curacio en aquels que son delicioses e am cors humitz de venas ameguadas.	And it is necessary that it does not appear according to this back-bending in those who are delightful and have moist skin with hidden veins.
E cum tu voles la curacio de lu, e le pacient sent aquela dolor, lahoras no es a tu aparent al huel ayssi cum havem dit, lahoras tu strenh sobre aquel e dejos lu leugierament e secse sobre aquel entro que sia yssida aquela ventositat coartada, e cauterize le loc.	And when you want the cure of the skin, and the patient feels that pain, then it is not apparent on the mirror as we have said, then you stretch over that one and let go lightly and carefully over that one where that windy constriction has gone out, and cauterize the place.
Mays si tu no la vezes am los tieus huels, alhoras tu cura aquel am excussio del cors e am aquo que expelleys ventositatz, e carmina aquelas am pillulas fetidas e am pillulas de serapi e semblantz.	But if you do not see it on your mirrors, then cure that with exercise of the body and with that which expels windiness, and cover those with foul-smelling pills and with pills of senna and similar things.
De extraccio de sagetas.	On the extraction of arrows.
Sagetas son diversificadas segon las specias, e segon les locs dels cors en les quals cazo, quar la lor diversitat es que de aquellas so que han grans puntas, e petitas, e concavas, e sordas, so es solidas; e de lor so que han tres angles, e de aquelas a las quals so que han lenguas; e de aquelas a las quals so astelas.	Arrows are diverse according to their species and the parts of the body in which they strike, for their diversity is that some have large points, small ones, concave ones, mute ones, solid ones; others have three angles, and those with tongues; and those that are star-shaped.
E aquela que es segon les membres e las pessas en las quals cazo es segon dos manieyras: quar les membres o so membres principals concaus, ayssi cum le cervel, le cor, e·l fitge, e le pulmo, e les ronhos, e les budels, e la vezica, e a lor semblantz; e donc quan catz en alcu de aquestz membres e aparo a tu senhals de mort, la qual causa yeu recomtare aprop, lahoras cove que tu evites extraccio de aquela sageta en aquels quar la mort siec aquel en le qual en las majors disposicios, e quan a tu no appareysso aquestz mals senhals, e la sageta no es amaguada en la profunditat del membre, lahoras tu extratz aquela e cura la plagua.	And those that are according to the members and parts in which they strike are of two kinds: for the members or principal members concussed are the brain, heart, liver, lung, ribs, bowels, bladder, and their like; and therefore when they hit upon one of these members and appear signs of death, which I will mention below, then it is necessary that you avoid extracting that arrow in those where death is imminent in the one who is in the greatest condition, and when you do not see these bad signs, and the arrow is not hidden in the depth of the member, then extract it and cure the wound.
E dels senhals del servel es quan catz en lu sageta, e trespassa le os, e es yssit del cyphac le qual es sobre le cervel, quar accideys per lu soda vehement, e scotomia, e vertige, e rogor en les huels, e imflamacio e rogor de la lengua, e spasme e permixtio de entendament e vomi de colera, e fort leu es abscindida la paraula e es destruida la votz, e es yssit del loc de la plagua humiditat blanca semblant a pols, e yeys de lu semblant ad aquositat de la carn.	And the signs of death from a brain injury are when an arrow strikes it and passes through the bone, and issues from the cistern that is above the brain, for there occurs sudden vehemence, scotoma (darkening or loss of vision), vertigo (dizziness), heat in the eyes, inflammation and heat of the tongue, spasm and mixture of understanding, vomiting of bile, and a strong flow of speech is cut off and the voice destroyed. And there issues from the wound's location white humid matter like dust, and there are signs of the watery nature of the flesh.
E donc si appareyso a tu aquestz senhals, lahoras tu abste de la curacio e de la extraccio de la sageta, si non es fora.	If these signs appear to you then abstain from treating or removing the arrow, unless it is outside.
Mays les senhals de la sageta quan catz en le cor, so que ela es prop de la mamila senestra, e sent am aquela quays sia ficada en causa dura, e no es causa vueda; e fort leu le movement de la sageta es semblant a movement del pols, e corr de la plagua sanc negra, e siec aquel fregiditat de las extremitatz, e suzor freja, e sincopi; e donc sapias que la mort descen ses tot dopte.	Know the signs of an arrow wound to the heart: it is near the left nipple, stuck in hard flesh and not soft; if the movement of the arrow resembles a pulse or breath, and there is black bloody sweat, chills in the extremities, faintness, and fainting, then know that death will soon follow without doubt.
E les senhals quan la sageta ha plaglat le pulmo so eyssiment de sanc spumos de la plagua, e les vayssels que so prop del col so apostematz, e es mudada la color del malaute, e expira sperit gran aut, e demanda atraccio de ayre freg.	And the signs when an arrow has pierced the lung are sputum of frothy blood from the wound, vessels near the neck appear collapsed, the patient's complexion changes, they breathe heavily or gasp for air.
E si catz la sageta en le velament le qual es en le pietz, e la dolor lahoras es prop de las costas petitas, e es fayt le ale gran am vehement dolor e am sospir, e no so maugutz totz les membres dels muscles.	And if the arrow strikes the pleura, which is located in the chest, there will be pain near the lower ribs, and it will cause great pain in the breath with sighing, and all the members and muscles are not moved.
E si catz la sageta en le stomac, lahoras fort leu yeys de la plagua vianda alcuna indigesta.	And if the arrow strikes the stomach, then soon afterward there will be vomiting of undigested food.
E si catz la sageta en le ventre, e es ficada en lu, yeys alcuna fenda de la plagua, o la tela, o budel le qual es disromput, e no es speransa en la curacio de lu extraccio de la sageta.	And if the arrow strikes the belly and remains inside, it causes some wound or tear of the flesh or bowel that is broken, and there is little hope for recovery by removing the arrow.
E si la sageta catz en la vesica, e es yssida defora urina, e procesesca de lu alcuna causa a las partidas defora, e fort leu es dolor sobre le malaute, lahoras sapias que es mortal.	And if the arrow strikes the bladder and urine is expelled outside, and processes from it some cause of inflammation outside, then know that there will be great pain on the wound, and that it is mortal.
Mays les autres membres ayssi cum es la cara, le col, e·l golayro, e las spallas e le adjutori, e les spondils del dos, e la furcula, e la coysa, e la camba e a lor semblantz dels membres, son salvatz segon las majors disposicios quan la sageta no atroba vena ni arteria e no es sageta venenosa.	But the other members such as the face, neck, shoulder-blades, arms and legs, spine, collarbone, ribs, and their like are saved according to the greater disposing when the arrow does not strike a vein or artery, nor is it poisoned.
E yeu recomtare aquo a tu que he vist del esser de aquestas sagetas, per que signifiques per aquo sobre la curacio tieua.	And I recommend this to you that I have seen about these arrows, so that you may know from this about their treatment.
La qual causa es, quar en un home cazec sageta en le lacrimal del huel de lu en la razitz del nas, e yeu extrayssi aquela a lu del autra partida, dejos le grays de l’aurelha de lu, e es sanat, e no accidic en le huel de lu nocument.	It happened that an arrow struck the tear duct of a man's eye near the root of his nose. I removed it from the other side and left behind a piece of its feather, and it healed without causing any harm to the eye.
E extrayssi autra sageta a un Juzeu la qual cazec en lu en lo grays del sieu huel, dejos la palpebra pus dejos, e la sageta ja era occultada e no so conseguit de aquela sino una petita extremitat am la qual adhereys al sieu fust, e era gran sageta de las sagetas agudas dels Turcs , am ferr leon en la qual no havia aurelhas.	And I removed another arrow from a Jew which had struck him in the corner of his eye, leaving behind the eyelid and also some of it was hidden. And only a small extremity remained attached to its shaft, which was a large arrow of the sharp arrows of the Turks with a lion head on which there were no feathers.
E senat es le Juzieu , e no accidic en le sieu huel mal accident.	And the Jew healed and had no harm to his eye.
E extrayssi una autra sageta a un home Crestia la qual era cazuta en le golayro, e era sageta arabica, e es aquela a la qual so aurelhas; e adonc yeu inscidegui sobre aquela entre doas guidegi, e ja era submersa en le golayro de lu; e adonc yeu so subtiliat am aquela, e aprop extraxi aquela, e es sanat le Crestia .	"One day, a man named Creslia was struck by an arrow in his thigh, which was Arab-made. It was embedded deep between two muscles and had pierced through to the other side; I carefully removed it with forceps and the man was healed."
E extraxi autra sageta a un home la qual era cazuta en le sieu ventre, e cogitegui que moris per aquela; e donc, pus que foro passatz xxx dias e no es mudat sobre lu alcuna causa de las suas disposicios, inscidegui sobre la sageta e engenagui sobre aquela, e es sanat, e no accidic a lu accident mal.	"I removed another arrow from a man's stomach. I thought he was going to die because of it; however, after thirty days had passed and there were no signs of change in his condition, I decided to operate on the arrow, extracted it, and the man recovered without any further complications."
E vi mays un home en le qual cazec una sageta en le dos de lu, e consolidada es la plagua sobre lu, e pus que foc aprop set ans, yssic la sageta en la razitz de la coyssa.	"I saw a man in whom an arrow had stuck in his back. The wound was festering and he had been suffering for three years already. Finally, the arrow came out on its own."
E vi una femna a la qual cazec sageta en le sieu ventre, e la plagua es consolidada dedintz lu, e no es mudada en las suas disposicios en re, e la femna no atrobec nocument en alcunas de las suas opperacios naturals.	"I saw a woman who had an arrow stuck in her abdomen. The wound was infected but did not affect her overall health or any of her natural bodily functions."
E vi un autre home al qual cazec sageta en la sua cara e consolidada es la plagua e romas la sageta, no atrobant aqui mota dolor, e motz semblantz ad aquestz.	"I saw another man who had an arrow stuck in his face. The wound was infected but the arrowhead had broken off and he felt no pain or discomfort from it."
E extrayssi la sageta del home dels princeps del rey que era cazuda en le mieg loc del nas sieu e ja havia declinat a la partida dreyta un petit, e occultada era tota la sageta.	"I removed an arrow from the nose of one of the king's men. The arrow had entered the middle of his nostril and had deviated slightly to the right. It was completely hidden inside his nasal cavity."
E yeu fu appelat a la curacio de lu aprop le cazement de la sageta entro a tres dias.	"I was called upon for the treatment [of this case] approximately three days after the arrow had entered him."
E adonc yeu atrobegui la plagua de la sageta mot streyta; e adonc yeu inquirigui aquela am tenta subtil, e no sentigui aquela; mays el la sentia puncio dejos la aurelha dreyta, e adonc speregui que aquela punccio era per la extremitat de la sageta.	"Then I noticed the wound from the arrow was quite inflamed. Then I felt around gently with my fingers and did not find anything; however, he felt a puncture wound behind his right ear, so I suspected that this puncture was due to the tip of the arrow."
E amplastregui le loc am emplaustre en le qual es vertut atrectiva e digestiva, confizant de mi que·l loc se apostemes per que appares a mi le loc de la sageta, per que secces sobre aquela.	"Apply plaster to the area with a plaster that has attractive and digestive properties, ensuring that the area is cleaned so that I can see the arrow's location clearly, and then cut it."
E no accidic en le loc accident significant que la sageta hagues conseguit aquel loc; e yeu continuegui am le emplaustre sobre lu per motz dias e no accidic accident; e consolidada es la plagua entretant, e romas le malaute de la extreccio de lu per spazi de motz dias entro que un jorn sentic la sageta dintz le sieu nas e recontec aquo a mi.	"The wound did not suffer any significant accident where the arrow had pierced it; I continued applying plaster to it for many days, and no accident happened. The wound healed in the meantime, and after several weeks the patient felt the arrowhead inside his nose and recognized this to me."
E adonc yeu pausegui sobre la plagua medicina acuta corrosiva per motz dias entro que foc ubert, e am la tenta yeu assagegui aquel, e atrobegui la extremitat de la sageta subtil, la qual adhereys al fust.	"I then applied a corrosive medicine to the wound for several days until it opened, and with tweezers I probed it, and carefully grasped the tip of the arrowhead, which adhered to the shaft."
E aprop yeu ajustegui en la apersio de la plagua per aquela medicina acuta entro que apparec a mi visiblament la extremitat de la sageta, e passec a mi temps am aquo per le spazi de temps entro quatre meses.	"Then I carefully adjusted the application of the medicine to the wound until the tip of the arrowhead became clearly visible. It took me about four months to complete this process."
E aprop pus que la plagua foc amplificada, e foc a mi possible entrometre las forfexs en lu, e remaure aquela, e no obezic ad eyssiment, lahoras yeu no cessegui subtiliar e ingeniar sobre aquela am manieyras de engen, entro que comensegui un dia sobre aquela am manieyras de engens pendre lu am forceps descentment faytas, segon que vindra la forma de aquelas en la fi del capitol, entro que extraxi aquela; e aprop restauregui aquela plagua.	"Then when the wound had healed and expanded enough for me to insert tweezers into it, I grasped it tightly without causing pain. However, after several attempts, I realized that I needed to be more skillful and ingenious in order to extract it successfully. One day, using a technique involving forceps, I was able to grasp the arrowhead firmly and carefully remove it, as described at the end of this chapter."
E alcus metges jutgavan que la cartillage del nas no es restaurada, e yeu restauregui aquela e la plagua es consolidada, e sanat es le malaute per sanetat entiera, e no noguec en lu en deguna causa.	"Some physicians judged that the cartilage of the nose could not be restored, but I was able to restore it and the wound healed completely, with no trace of illness remaining."
E yeu recomti a tu la qualitat de extraccio de alcunas sagetas per que pauses aquo regla e significacio sobre aquo que no he dit, quar las partidas de aquesta art e las difinicios de aquela no so conprehendudas am narracio ni no comprehen aquelas le libre.	"And I tell you this story to give an example of how some arrowheads were extracted, which may serve as a guide and have meaning for what I have not mentioned, because the details of this art and its definitions are not understood by merely reading or understanding this book."
E le artifexs savi compara am pauc sobre mot; e am aquo que es present sobre aquo que es absent; e atroba operacio novela e instrument novel deves le descendement de las causas extranhas del art quan accideysso.	"And skilled artisans compare a little about much, and prefer what is present to what is absent. They also discover new operations and instruments by considering the causes of accidents that happen."
E donc yeu dic que sagetas no son fora-gitadas dels membres en les quals son ficadas sino segon dos manieyras: o per atraccio del loc en le qual intrec; o per le contrari de la autra partida.	"And therefore I say that arrowheads are not expelled from the limbs in which they are embedded except by two methods: either by attraction of the place where it entered, or by the opposite direction of its trajectory."
E aquela que es gitada per le loc don es intrada, o es sageta procedent en loc carnos, e es atirada e fora-gitada.	"And those which are expelled by the place where they entered are either soft-tissue arrows that have been shot and forced outwards."
E si no obezeys a eyssiment de la hora en la qual catz, lahoras cove que tu la laysses per alcus dias entro que poyresca la carn que es al enviro de lu, e sia alleujada l‘atraccio de lu e la sua egressio.	"And if you cannot achieve extraction at the time of examination, then leave it for a few days so that the flesh around it can soften and its attraction and expulsion become easier."
E semblantment si es ficada en os e no obezeys a tu a eyssiment, lahoras layssa aquela per alcus dias e itera aquela am atraccio e mocio en quascun dia, e ja es fora-gitada.	"And similarly, if an arrowhead is embedded in bone and extraction cannot be achieved, leave it for several days and then try again each day with attraction and movement, until it eventually comes out."
E si no obezeys a tu eyssiment aprop alcus dias, lahoras cove que tu perforas en le circuit de la sageta en aquel os de tota partida am taravel subtil entro que·l loc sia amplificat de la sageta, e aprop extratz aquela.	"And if you are still unable to achieve extraction after several days, then drill around the arrowhead in that bone with a subtle awl so that its path is widened, and then extract it."
E si la sageta es ficada en le os del cap e ja ha procezit en un dels ventres del cervel, e apparo en le malaute alcus de aquels accidentz les quals yeu e ditz, lahoras abste de la extraccio de la sageta e layssa aquela entro que·l sieu esser sia equat aprop alcus dias; quar si la sageta perve al ciphac, lahoras la mort no es a lu prolonguada.	"If the arrowhead is embedded in the bone of the head and has already penetrated one of the ventricles of the brain, and some of the accidents which I mentioned earlier have occurred, then abstain from attempting to extract the arrowhead and leave it alone for several days until the patient's condition improves. For if the arrowhead reaches the brain, death will soon occur."
E si la sageta no es ficada sino en le cors del os tant solament e no passa entro al ciphac, e roman le malaute per alcus dias, e no accideys a lu denguna causa de aquels accidentz, lahoras tu engenia en la atraccio de la sageta e en la atraccio de lu.	"But if the arrowhead is embedded only in the bone of the skull and has not entered the brain, and the illness remains for several days without any signs of accidents occurring, then you should devise a means of attracting the arrowhead and extracting it."
Mays si es mot ficada e no obezeys a tu a extraccio, lahoras tu aministra taravels en le circuit de la sageta ayssi cum havem recomtat, e aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat.	"However, if the arrowhead is deeply embedded and extraction cannot be achieved, then drill around it using the methods I have described, and then treat the wound so that it may heal."
Mays si la sageta ja es amaguada en le loc del cors, e es amaguada del sentiment, lahoras tu inquireys aquela am tenta, e si tu sentas aquela, lahoras atira aquela am alcus sturmentz les quals so convenientz a la atraccio de lu.	"But if the arrowhead has become embedded in the flesh of the body and is hidden from view, then search for it with a probe, and if you find it, attract it using appropriate instruments."
E si no podes sobre lu per la constriccio de la plagua e per la longitut del preon, e aqui no es os ni nervi ni vena, lahoras tu fen sobre la plagua entro que sia amplificada e que sia possible extrayre la sageta.	"And if you cannot reach it due to the narrowness of the wound and the length of the probe, and there is neither bone nor nerve nor vein in its path, then widen the wound so that it becomes possible to extract the arrowhead."
E si so a lu aurelhas am las quals sia tenguda, lahoras tu deliura la carn en la qual es ficada de tota partida am tot le engen que poyras far; e ingenia sobre aquo, si no podes sobre la evasio de la carn en la fractura de las aurelhas e en torssio de aquelas entro que obezesca.	"And if the arrowhead is held by ligaments or sinews, then cut through the flesh in which it is embedded using all your skill. Then devise a means of overcoming its hold, such as cutting through the ligaments or breaking the auricular bones and twisting them."
E quan tu administras la extraccio de la sageta en quascun loc on sia, lahoras tu usa am torcio de la tua ma am forceps a totas partidas entro que fassa aquela obezir; e subtilia am deriera subtilitat que la sageta no sia trencada e que sia fayta a tu dificil atraccio de lu e de aquela extraccio.	"And when you perform the extraction of an arrowhead in any location, use your hand with a twisting motion and forceps at all times to achieve its removal. Be very careful that the arrowhead is not broken during this process and that it can be extracted with great difficulty."
E si no podes sobre aquela de la tua hora, lahoras tu layssa per alcus dias entro que se poyrescan las partidas que so en le circuit de lu, e aprop itera aquela quar lahoras es alleujada.	"If you cannot achieve extraction at the time of examination, then leave it for several days until the surrounding wounds have healed, and then attempt again when conditions are more favorable."
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat flux de sanc, lahoras tu administra aquo que havem dit de curacio en le sieu capitol.	"But if you encounter difficulty with bleeding, then administer the treatment which we discussed in its chapter on that subject."
E guarda la tua vertut de inscizio de vena o de nervi, o de corda, e aministra engen en tota manieyra a tu possibla de la evasio de la sageta; e fay aquo am facilitat e tranquillitat e tarditat e fermetat ayssi cum yeu e a tu recomtat.	"And be careful not to cut any vein, nerve, or cord. Use every possible means to extract the arrowhead gently and calmly with patience and steadfastness as I have recommended."
E donc que fassas contrayre la sageta per so que·l malaute sia segon la figura segon la qual foc deves le cazement de la sageta en lu, quar es mays juvatiu.	"And cause the arrowhead to contract according to the shape in which it was cast, so that the illness corresponds to its form. This is more helpful."
Mays si aquo no es a tu possible, lahoras tu aministra aquo que es a tu possible per las figuras.	"But if this is not possible, then use whatever means are available according to the shape of the arrowhead."
Mays las sagetas que son fora-gitadas per le contrari del autra partida, o que ja de lu procezeys alcuna partida a las partidas de fora, o fa gilbositat la extramitat de la sageta per sentiment de la partida pus desus de la codena propdana e vezes aquela eminent; adonc tu secsa sobre aquela; e sia la seccio segon la quantitat en la qual prenguan las forceps; e aprop atira aquela, quar ela es fayta leugiera a eyssiment.	"However, if an arrowhead is extracted in the opposite direction from which it entered, or if there has already been some injury to the surrounding tissues, or if the end of the arrowhead has become swollen due to inflammation and swelling, then cut through that part. Make the section according to the amount held by the forceps, and extract it gently."
Mays si es retenguda en le os, lahoras tu tortz lama segon contrarietat entro que la sageta enprema en le os, e amplifique a si meteys, e aprop extratz aquela.	"But if it is retained in the bone, then twist the arrowhead in the opposite direction until it presses against the bone. Then widen its path and extract it."
E sino, layssa aquela per alcus dias, e aprop itera aquela entro qu’en yesca.	"If not, leave it for several days and then attempt again when convenient."
E si le fust de la sageta es en aquela, lahoras tu impelleys aquela am lu.	"And if the shaft of the arrowhead is broken off inside it, push that part in with it."
Mays si le fust es cazut e voles aministrar inpulsio, lahoras tu intromet e aquela, si es sorda, sturment concau per so que intre la concavitat de lu en la coa de la sageta e aprop impelleys aquela am lu.	"But if the shaft has fallen out and you wish to apply pressure, then insert a concave instrument into the wound until it enters the cavity of the arrowhead, and then push that in with it."
Mays si la sageta es concava, lahoras tu impelleys aquela am sturment fort intrant en aquela, quar la sageta es alleujada per aquela.	"But if the arrowhead is concave, then insert a strong instrument into it and push it in gently. For the arrowhead will be eased by that."
E si la sageta es entoxiguada, lahoras cove que tu concaves tota la carn en la qual es le vere, si es a tu possible aquo, e aprop cura aquela am aquo que si conveneys.	"And if the arrowhead is poisoned, then it is necessary to cut away all the flesh around the wound if possible. Then treat it with whatever is appropriate."
E si la sageta catz en le pietz, o en le ventre, o en la vesica, o en le costat, e es propinqua per so que tu tocas aquela am la tenta, e es a tu possible secsar sobre aquela, lahoras secsa sobre aquela e guarda te de inscizio de vena o de nervi, e extratz aquela, e aprop cos la plagua si indigeys, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	"And if the arrowhead has entered the bone, or the abdomen, or the bladder, or the side, and is close enough to touch it with your hand, and you are able to cut through it, then cut through it carefully avoiding any veins or nerves. Extract it and sew up the wound if necessary. Then treat it until it heals."
Forma de forceps am las quals so atiradas las sagetas:	"The method of using forceps to extract arrowheads is as follows:"
Sian las extremitatz de lor cum a bec de ausel que son faytas cum serra quan prendon sobre la sageta per so que no la layssen.	"Their extremities are like bird's beaks that are made with saws when they grasp the arrow, so as not to let it go."
E de aquelas son faytas motas specias, grans, paucas e migieras, segon la quantitat de la grandeza de la sageta e de la sieua pauqueza, e de la amplitud de la plagua, e de la constriccio de lu.	"And of these are made many kinds, large, small and medium-sized, according to the quantity of the size of the arrow and its thickness, and the width of the shaft and the tightness of it."
Forma de impellent concau de aquesta extremitat conquava ayssi cum pena de ausel per so que sia alleujat le intrament de la sageta en lu, e impulcio de aquela sorda:	"Formed concave at this end like a bird's feather so that the entrance of the arrow into it is eased, and impulse of that closed one."
Forma de impellent de sorda extremitat:	"Form of impelling from closed extremity"
ayssi cum ray per so que sia alleujat le intrament de lu en la sageta concava e es impellida am aquel.	"like rain, so that the entrance of it into the arrow concave is eased and it is propelled with it."
De fleubotomia de las venas.	"Of phlebotomy of veins."
Las venas de fleubotomia de las quals corr costuma de fleubotomar so xxx, de las quals so en le cap xvi, so es doas venas pulsatils las quals so aprop las aurelhas, dic alhasisain; doas herbas que so en les dos templars apparentz; e doas venas que so en dos lacrimals de dos huels que son appeladas aspicientz; e la vena preparada en le mieg loc del front, e la vena que es en la extremitat del nas; e doas guidegi que so al col; e doas venas que so en la labia desus; e doas venas que so en la labia dejos; e — aquestas so las venas que so appeladas algelic —; e so doas venas que so dejos la lengua.	"Of phlebotomy of the veins that are usually flebotomized are thirty, among which are sixteen in the head: two pulsating veins near the ears, called tragus veins; two veins in the temples; two veins in the lacrimal grooves of the eyes, called canthi veins; a vein prepared in the middle of the forehead; a vein at the tip of the nose; two jugular veins on the neck; two veins above the lip; and two veins on the left side of the tongue. These are the veins called algelic veins."
Mays las venas que so fleubotomadas en les brasses so v; quar de aquelas es una cephalica, e es deves le latz silvestre; e le poble appela “la vena del cap”, e sorda, e es vena migiera, e es composta de un ram de la basilica, e de autre ram de la cephalica; e nomna aquela le poble “vena de tot le cors”, e basilica es vena la qual es pausada en le latz domestic, e es nomnada “citillar”, e nompnan aquela les vulguars “vena del ventre”; e funis del bras, e es pausada sobre le focil, e es aquela en la qual es fleubotomat, e es aquela que appar sobre le poutz per apparicio manifesta; e salvatella, e es la vena que es entre lo dit auricular e·l pus petit dit, e so en lu dos ramps.	"The veins that are flebotomized in the arms are five: of these one is cephalic, and it is on the wild side; the people call it 'the vein of the head'; and one is median basilic, and it is composed of one branch of the basilica and another branch of the cephalic; and it is called by the people 'vein of all the body'; and basilica is a vein that is placed on the domestic side, and it is called 'cubital', and it is called by the vulgar 'vena del ventre'; and funis of the arm, and it is placed above the elbow, and it is this one in which flebotomy is performed, and it is the one that appears above the pouch through manifest appearance; and salvatella, and it is the vein that is between the said auricular and the smallest finger, and there are two branches."
E en le pe e la camba so tres venas; la una de aquelas es que es dejos la curvatura del denolh del latz silvestre; e la segonda es sophena, e·l loc de lu es dejos la camba del latz domestic; e la vena sciatica, e·l loc de lu es dejos la camba del latz silvestre; e en la camba son autras venas semblantz ad aquelas.	"And in the foot and leg there are three veins: one of these is on the left side of the curvature of the little finger of the wild side; and the second is sophena, and its location is on the back of the domestic side of the leg; and the sciatic vein, and its location is on the back of the wild side of the leg; and there are other veins similar to these in the leg."
Le juvament de las venas que so aprop las aurelhas es a cataris antics e emigranea e sahafati e ulceracios del cap malas antiquas.	"The benefits of flebotomizing the veins near the ears are ancient catarrhs, migraines, and headaches, and ulcers on the face, and old bad habits."
E la qualitat de sagnar aquelas es segon que yeu recomti a tu: es que sia ras le cap del malaute, e sia freguat le cap del malaute en le occipiti en le loc de amdoas las venas am drap ample am bona fricacio; aprop strenha le malaute le sieu col am una benda entro que apparan las doas e les locs de lor so aprop las aurelhas en dos locs depremegutz del cap; e quereys aquela am le tieu dit, e si tu sentes le pols de aquelas am le dit tieu, aqui senha am tenta.	"And the quality of bleeding those is according to what you count for yourself: it should be done quickly at the time of illness, and the head of the sick person should be rubbed with a broad cloth with good friction in the occipital region where both veins are; then the sick person's neck should be strengthened with a bandage between which both veins appear near the ears in two points pressed to the head; and you will seek that with your thumb, and if you feel the pulse of those with your finger, here you should stop."
Aprop tu pren la lancea cutellar, e es aquela que es inscident, e aprop tu intromet aquel dejos la vena en la codena entro que·l fleubotomi vengua al os.	"Then you take the cutting lancet, and it is that which is inserted, and then you introduce it into the vein in the elbow until the flebotomy comes to the bone."
E aprop eleva la tua ma am la vena e la codena a las partidas desus e inscideys la vena am inscizio inscident.	"And then raise your hand with the vein and elbow upwards and cut the vein with an incising incision."
E sia la longitut de la inscizio la quantitat de dos ditz ajustatz o entorn de aquo; e fay yssir del sanc atant quant voles.	"And let the length of the incision be the size of two fingers or around that, and make the blood flow out as much as you wish."
E aprop strenh am pulvils e layssa aquela entro que sia sanada.	"And then strengthen with powder and leave it there until it is healed."
E ja e precedit en le comensament del libre la inscizio de aquelas e de lor la cauterizacio.	"And it has already been stated at the beginning of this book that those veins are cut and their cauterization is done."
Mays de las doas venas arterias que so als templars le juvament de la fleubotomia es a emigranea antiqua e sode malvada e obtalmia assidua e cors de superfluitatz acutas effusas als huels.	"Of the two arterial veins that are in the temples, the benefit of flebotomy is for ancient migraines and bad humors, and persistent ophthalmia and sharp,effusive excesses of blood to the eyes."
E la qualitat de fleubotomar aquelas es segon que yeu recomti a tu: constrengua le malaute le sieu col mot entro que apparan las doas venas al sentiment per appericio manifesta e sia demonstrat le pols de lor dejos le tieu dit; e lahoras tu senha am tenta.	"And the quality of flebotomizing those is according to what I recommend to you: make the sick person's neck straight with their mouth open until both veins appear at the touch by manifest appearance, and let the pulse of them be felt on your thumb; then you should stop."
E aprop tu eleva la codena desobre la vena a las partidas desus am le tieu dit indic, e intromet le fleubotomi inscident dejos, e eleva la vena en sus; e inscidey aquela ayssi cum has fayt en las doas venas autras; e fay correr del sanc segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	"And then raise the elbow above the vein with your thumb's tip, and introduce the flebotomy lancet incisingly there, and raise the vein upwards; and cut it thus as you have done in the two other veins; and make the blood flow according to your necessity."
E aprop deslia la coartacio del malaute, e pausa le tieu dit sobre la vena per una hora, e aprop pausa sobre aquela coto e pulvils e strenh aquela desus am fort constriccio, e layssa aquela entro que sia sanada.	"And then untie the sick person's bandage, and place your finger on the vein for an hour, then press on that with cotton and powder and strengthen it above with strong compression, and leave it there until it is healed."
E ja es precedida la rememoracio de lor, e de aquelas la inscizio, e la atraccio en le comensament del libre.	"And the memorandum of them has already been preceded at the beginning of this book, and their incision and attraction."
E donc le juvament de fleubotomia de la vena del front es aprop la fleubotomia de la cephalica a las malautias antiquas de la cara e a emigranea e rogor e ulceracios fetidas.	"And therefore the benefit of flebotomizing the vein of the forehead is to flebotomize the cephalic one for old diseases of the face and ancient migraines, redness, and stinking ulcers."
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es segon que yeu recomti a tu; so es que·l malaute strenha le sieu col am una benda entro que apparesca la vena; e aprop pren le insturment le qual es nompnat fossori del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	"And the quality of flebotomizing it is according to what I recommend to you: it is that the sick person should strengthen their neck with a bandage until the vein appears, and then take the instrument called 'fossor', of which this is its shape:"
Pausa la puncta eminent la qual es al cap del fossori sobre aquela vena e percuteys sobre lu am penche o am autre causa en la manieyra de lu, e layssa lo sanc correr segon la quantitat la qual voles; e aprop deslia la perforacio del malaute e strenh aquela entro que sia sanada.	"Press the prominent point that is at the head of the fossor upon that vein and strike it with a pen or another cause in this manner, and let the blood flow according to the quantity you desire; then untie the sick person's perforation and strengthen it until it is healed."
E alcunas veguadas es uberta am fleubotomi lat, empero no cove que·l fleubotomi sia de acuta extremitat ayssi cum les autres fleubotomis, abantz sia de lada extremitat, e fleubotoma aquela segon le tranvers, quar le os es propda e fort leu trencaria en lu le fleubotomi quan es subtil.	"And sometimes it is opened with a wide flebotomy, but it is not necessary that the flebotomy have an acute extremity like the other flebotomies, rather its edge should be flat and cutting because if it were sharp it would break the bone in it when the flebotomy is subtle."
Mays le juvament de las duas venas que so als lacrimals de dos huels per scabia del huels per rogor e sebol en les huels, e a las malautias de la cara.	"But the benefit of both veins that are in the temples is for itching of the eyelids with redness and sebaceous matter in the eyes, and for diseases of the face."
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia es que·l malaute strenha le col sieu am una benda, e aprop fleubotoma aquelas, e tu sias stant sobre le cap de lu.	"And the quality of flebotomizing is that the sick person should strengthen their neck with a bandage, and then flebotomize those veins, and you should stand above its head."
E sia fayta la fleubotomia segon le transvers a longitut un pauc am fleubotomi pauc, quar en le loc no es carn; e si le fleubotomi es subtil, fort leu la extremitat de lu es trencada.	"And let the flebotomy be done across with a little length with a small flebotomy because in that place there is no flesh, and if the flebotomy were sharp it would break its edge."
E aprop fay correr del sanc atant quant es a tu necessari, e pausa sobre aquelas coto, e strenh aquelas per una nueyt, e aprop deslia aquelas.	"And then make the blood flow as much as is necessary for you, and press on those with cotton, and strengthen them for one night, then untie them."
Mays le fleubotomi de la vena del nas es conferent a febre acuta e a soda vehement, e a las malautias de la cara e emigranea e rogor que accideys en la cara, e majorment quan es antiqua.	"But the flebotomy of the vein of the nose is beneficial for acute fever and violent humor, and for diseases of the face and ancient migraines and redness that occur in the face, especially when it is ancient."
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute strenha le sieu col e aprop te le sieu nas am la tua ma sinistra, e pren le fleubotomi subtil lonc e fica aquela en le mieg loc del cap del nas segon rectitut, quar la vena no appar al sentiment aqui, e quar le sanc comensa a fluir tantost.	"And the quality of flebotomizing it is that the sick person should strengthen their neck and then have their nose held with your left hand, and take the subtle flebotomy long and place it in the middle of the head of the nose according to its straightness because the vein does not appear to the touch here, and because the blood begins to flow soon."
Cove que tu ultimes la tua ma am le fleubotomi petit a petit e fassas correr del sanc segon la tua necessitat; e aprop lia aquela per una nuoyt, quar aquela es restaurada leugierament.	"It is necessary that you slowly withdraw your hand with the flebotomy and make the blood flow according to your need; then bind it for one night because that vein is easily restored."
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de las doas guidegui a constriccio de ale e a comensament de lepra e a motas malautias e inpetige e malas ulceracios corrosivas ayssi cum herpotromeno.	"More importantly, the relief provided by bloodletting from both arms leads to constriction of the chest and onset of leprosy, as well as many illnesses, impurities, and malignant ulcerative infections like herpes."
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquelas es que el malaute strenha dejos quascuna en le sieu col am liament; e estia le artifexs sobre le cap del malaute, e le malaute sia sezent sobre una sezela.	"And the quality of bloodletting from these is that the illness should leave each one with its own color; and the artist is positioned on the patient's head, and the patient sits on a chair."
E aprop fleubotoma la vena al lonc am fleubotomi ample petit a petit; e aprop extratz de sanc segon temprada quantitat o segon aquo que vezes de necessitat que es ad aquo; e aprop fay semblant del autra vena.	"And during bloodletting, the vein is opened slowly and carefully with a small incision; and during extraction of blood according to prescribed quantity or as needed, it should be done similarly for the other vein."
E aprop deslia le liament e strenh las doas venas am strictura migiera per so que·l malaute no sia prefocat, e laysa entro al mati quar la plagua es sanada.	"And afterwards untie the bandage and stretch both veins with moderate tension to ensure that the patient does not faint, and leave him lying down until the wound is healed."
E le juvament de la fleubotomia de las venas algerich, comfereys a petitas apostemas e pustulas de la boca e corrupcio de las gengivas e malas ulceracios e fissuras, e a malas ulceracios que so en le nas e en le circuit de lu.	"And the benefit of bloodletting from the veins of Algiers is that it removes small abscesses and pustules of the mouth, corruption of the gums, malignant ulcers and fissures, as well as malignant ulcers located in the nose and around it."
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquelas es que fases cezer le malaute denant tu, e strenh le col de lu am una benda, e aprop revolveys las labias de lu e reguarda a doas venas de las quals la una es de la dextra de la labia e la segonda de la senestra; e la demonstracio de quascuna es per la negror de quascuna de amdos, e aquo mays es quar en le circuit de aquelas so venas menudas negras; e adonc inscideys cascuna per inscizio inscident.	"And the method of bloodletting from these veins is as follows: place the patient in front of you, and stretch his neck with a bandage. Then roll back his lips and observe both veins, one on the right side of the lip and the other on the left. The demonstration of each vein is by its darkness, and even more so because in the vicinity of these there are small black veins; then incise each according to the size."
Mays si dubitacio es dejos tu, e no sabes qual es de aquelas, lahoras tu enten a inscisio de la major de aquelas, e de la pus manifesta de aquelas.	"But if there is doubt and you do not know which one it is, then go for the incision of the largest one, and where there is obvious swelling."
E fay le semblant de las doas venas que so en las labias desus.	"And make a similar cut on both veins that are on the lips above."
Mays costuma corr mays a inscidir las doas venas que so en la labia dejos.	"But it is more customary to incise both veins that are on the left lip."
Mays de doas venas que so dejos la lengua le juvament es aprop la fleubotomia de la cephalica a prefocacios que so en le guolayro, a la malautia de la uvula, e a malautias de la boca.	"Of the two veins that are on the left side of the tongue, the benefit is mainly from bloodletting of the cephalic vein for fainting spells in the throat, for disorders of the uvula, and for disorders of the mouth."
E la qualitat de fleubotomar aquelas es que segue le malaute entre las tuas mas denant le solel, e eleva la lengua de lu, e reguarda dejos la lengua, de la un latz de lu vena e del autre latz vena, e la color de quascuna es declinant a negror.	"And the method of bloodletting from these veins is as follows: follow the patient while facing the sun, raise his tongue, and observe on the left side of the tongue one vein on one side and another vein on the other side, each with a declining color towards darkness."
E adonc fleubotoma quascuna; e guarda te que no ultimes la tua ma en fleubotoman aquelas, quar dejos aquelas so arterias.	"And then perform bloodletting on each one; and beware that you do not exceed in bloodletting from these veins, for on the left side there are arteries."
E las tuas venas que so fleubotomadas en le coyde so en las quals corr costuma en totz les homes, e la fleubotomia de lor es fayta segon dos manieyras, o pongen am le fleubotomi mirtilat o olivar a subtilitat declinant; o secsar am fleubotomi cutellar, e apelha si alnessil, e aquesta es la forma de lu:	"And the veins that are bloodletted in the elbow are those which are commonly practiced on all men, and bloodletting from them is done in two ways: either by placing a flebotomy cup with a mirror or olive oil of fine quality; or by cutting with a flebotomy scalpel, called 'alnessil', and this is the method:
E aquest alnessil es que conveneys a seccio e de aquels so specias latz e subtils segon la amplitut de las venas e segon la strictura de aquelas.	"For this operation, select those forceps that are long and fine according to the width of the veins and the narrowness of those parts."
Forma de fleubotomi mirti:	How would you translate "Forma de flebotomi mirti"? Please provide only your translation.
sia le latz de lu ayssi cum vezes, e conveneys a obrir las venas concavas plenas procedentz apparentz grossas, e ad aquelas que conteno sanc gros torbat.	"Hold the forceps thus as it is often done, and be careful to open the visible, swollen veins containing thick blood."
E aquesta es la forma de fleubotomi olivar:	How would you translate "E aquesta es la forma de flebotomi olivar"? Please provide only your translation.
E aquest fleubotomi es de menor latitut e de pus subtil extremitat, e conveneys a fleubotomia de venas subtils que conteno sanc subtil citri.	"This bloodletting is of lesser width and has a more subtle tip; it is used for bloodletting from fine veins that contain clear, citrus-colored blood."
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de la vena basilica la qual es una de tres venas: quar extratz le sanc de las malautias que so dejos le guolayro e·l col, e de aquo que siec le pietz e·l ventre.	"May God grant us success in bloodletting from the basilic vein, one of three veins that draws out the bad humors causing illnesses in the chest and the throat, as well as those that affect the feet and the belly."
E conveneys al fleubotomador, quan fleubotomia aquela, que guarde be aquela e sia sobre-temor en aquela, quar dejos lu ha arteria, e si erra e ajusta en la punctura del fleubotomi, inscidira aquela arteria e accidira fluxs de sanc, per so que cove que no fleubotomes aquela am fleubotomi pungent, abantz sia sectant cum alnessil.	"And it is important for the phlebotomist to be cautious when performing bloodletting at that location, as there is an artery nearby. If they err and pierce with the phlebotomy needle, they will wound the artery and cause bleeding. Therefore, one should not perform bloodletting there with a pointed phlebotomy needle, but rather use one that is blunt."
E si no appar la basilica per apparicio manifesta, lahoras cove que tu laysses aquela e que tu mudes a la autre, o que cerques alcun ram sieu; o que fleubotomes en loc de lu finis del bras, quar aquela es manifesta; e secsa aquela am fleubotomi alnessil ayssi cum havem dit.	"And if the basilica is not apparent by manifest appearance, then you should leave that area and move to another, seeking some branch of it. You may perform bloodletting at the end of the arm where it is clearly visible, using a blunt-tipped phlebotomy needle as we have described."
Mays si tu voles la fleubotomia de lu meteyssa, lahoras cove denant la strictura del bras que toques le loc entro que conogues le loc dels pols, e aprop senha sobre lu am tencha; e aprop lia le bras e secsa la vena am seccio concava am fleubotomi alnessil ayssi cum havem dit; e guarda te que caja la percussio per alcu spazi del loc de la arteria.	"And if you wish to perform bloodletting at the elbow, then place yourself in front of the bend of the arm where you can feel the pulse. Press gently with your thumb and locate the vein using a concave section technique with a blunt-tipped phlebotomy needle as described previously. Be careful not to cause injury by piercing too deeply near the artery."
E quan tu vezes, cum strenhes le liament, imflacio en le loc que has senhat am tencha, lahoras aquela inflacio es inflacio de la arteria, e donc squiva aquela.	"When you press with strength on the ligament [the pulse], and there is swelling at the location where you pressed gently with your thumb, then that swelling indicates the presence of the artery. Therefore, avoid that area."
E si vezes le sanc fluir en la fleubotomia ayssi cum aurina de enfant, e·l sanc es subtil rog, lahoras sapias que es del sanc de la arteria; e lahoras tu coyta e pausa le tieu dit sobre aquel per lonc spazi; e aprop osta le tieu dit, e si lo sanc es abscindit, quar motas veguadas es abscindit, lahoras tu strenh le bras e layssa aquel.	"If during bloodletting, the blood flows like a child's urine and is thin and watery, then know that it is arterial blood. At this point, lift your little finger from the wound for some time, and then remove it altogether. If the bleeding stops, as often happens, then press on the arm to staunch the flow and leave off."
E guardes le malaute de la moccio de lu, e sia sobre-temor de lu e no maugua aquel per alcus dias entro que sia sanat.	"And beware of the wound from the needle's prick, for it may cause swelling and infection if you do not take care to avoid further injury by refraining from activities that might harm it for several days until it is healed."
Mays si le sanc no es abscindit, e vezes que deves tu no es present medicina ad aquo, lahoras tu inscideys la arteria, si appar a tu; quar la extremitat de lu es contrayta, e es abscindit le sanc; o que prenguas scorsa de fistic, e fen aquela, e pren la una maytat e strenh aquela sobre le loc de la vena am strictura descent am liament e am pulvils entro al autra dia.	"But if the bleeding does not stop and you realize that no medicine is present to help this condition, then know that you have pierced the artery. If it appears to you, the extremity will become contracted and the bleeding will cease. Take a piece of lint and apply it there until the bleeding stops, then take one handful of powdered frankincense and sprinkle it on the wound with strict compression using a bandage and lint for several days."
E lahoras si le sanc es abscindit, bo es; e sino, lahoras cura aquel am aquo del qual es precedit a la rememoracio del loc de las polveras abscindentz flux de sanc.	"Then if the bleeding has stopped, that is good. Otherwise, treat it with the remedy mentioned earlier in this chapter on stopping the flow of blood."
E la abscizio del sanc de lu es dificil en motas disposicios per le loc petit de la plagua e la possibilitat del liament del bras.	"And the cessation of bleeding from such wounds is difficult in many instances due to the small size of the wound and the possibility of pressure on the pulse of the arm."
Mays de la vena fusca la fleubotomia es juvament que extratz lo sanc de la partida subirana del cap e a la partida dejos del cors; per aquo quar es composta de ram de la basilica e de ram de cephalica, ayssi cum havem dit.	"However, bloodletting from the dark vein is beneficial for drawing off blood from the upper part of the head and from the left side of the body because it consists of branches of the basilica vein and branches of the cephalic vein, as mentioned previously."
E cove al fleubotomant aquela que sia sobre-temor en la fleubotomia de lu, quar dejos aquela es un nervi; e adonc si ajusta en la punctura del fleubotomi e atroba le nervi, accidira a lu stupor, e es difficil la sanacio de lu, e fort leu no es sanat de tot, E aquest nervi motas veguadas apar al sentiment; e si es ocultat ad alcus homes e es subtil e no es monstrat, lahoras cove que tu pauses le fleubotomi am le qual tu fleubotomas am seccio de alnessil, e evita le nervi am la tua fortalesa.	"And the bloodletting site should be chosen carefully during bloodletting from this vein because on its left side there is a nerve. Therefore, if it becomes injured in the phlebotomy puncture and touches the nerve, paralysis may occur and healing will be difficult. Sometimes this nerve appears at the surface, but often it is hidden and subtle and not visible. Thus, when performing bloodletting with an oblique section technique, pause for a moment before inserting the needle to avoid touching the nerve with your strength."
E si la vena es entre dos nervis, lahoras tu fen la vena en la longitut.	"And if the vein lies between two nerves, then open the vein in the longitudinal direction."
Le juvament de la fleubotomia de la vena cephalica es que atratz le sanc del cap e comfereys a las malautias dels huels.	"The benefit of bloodletting from the cephalic vein is that it draws off blood from the head and relieves illnesses of the eyes."
E cove en aquest propriament, si vols que la fleubotomes pungen am fleubotomi olivar o am fleubotomi mirti; quar es la pus salva de totas las venas, quar no es dejos lu arteria ni nervi.	"And specifically in this case, if you wish to perform bloodletting with an olive-shaped or myrtle-shaped needle, it is best suited for this vein because it is the safest of all veins as there are no arteries or nerves on its left side."
Mays empero conveneys a tu deves la fleubotomia que guardes que am le fleubotomi no punguas le cap del lacert tant solament, e cerques le loc pus leugier, e no notz a lu, si no es atrobat am la percussio primieyra que sia sobre aquela am fleubotomia alcunas veguadas.	"However, it is advisable that you guard against merely touching the head of the lizard with the needle during bloodletting and search for a lighter spot where there is no pulsation if it is not found on first percussion. Sometimes it may be necessary to perform bloodletting several times before finding such a spot."
Mays empero fort leu es apostemat en alcus homes, quan no es fleubotomat en la primieyra percussio, mays no notz en re aquel apostema.	"However, sometimes an abscess forms in some people when bloodletting is not performed on the first percussion site, but rather elsewhere."
Mays la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquela e les accidentz de lu so motz, en les quals te cove cogitar en lor rectificacio.	"However, the quality of bloodletting from this vein and its complications are many, which you should consider for their correction."
Le primier de lu es del qual cove que sapias que fleubotomia no es aministrada sino en conservacio de sanetat e per speransa de lu e cautela de aveniment de malautias, e que sia fayta fleubotomia en la una de las venas que so en le coyde, so es: cephalica, fusca e basilica; e que sia fayta fleubotomia al comensament de primaveyra, sobre dejun en primaviera e autunppne, e en invern aprop la comestio, quan apparo significacios de replecio.	"The first thing you should know about bloodletting is that it should only be performed in the preservation of health and with hope of benefit and caution against illness. Bloodletting should be done on one of the veins located on the arm, namely the cephalic, dark, or basilica vein, and it should be performed at the beginning of spring after fasting in spring and autumn, and in winter before meals when signs ofpletion appear."
E sia fayta fleubotomia e le tertz dia o al primier pus que del jorn siran passadas tres horas.	"And bloodletting should be performed on the third day or at least three hours after the start of the day's fast."
Mays fleubotomia que es aministrada, mays quan provoca convenencia e necessitat ad aquo, o de nuoyt o de dia, en tota hora e en tot temps.	"However, bloodletting should be performed when it is deemed necessary and beneficial for the individual, whether it is done in the morning or evening, at any hour and at any time."
E cove que efant no sia fleubotomat entro que aja xiiii ans, e femna que sia prenhs no sia fleubotomada sino del quart mes entro al sete, e les viels no sian fleubotomatz les quals ja han passatz lx ans.	"And it should not be performed on children under the age of fourteen; women who are pregnant should not be bled except from the fourth to the seventh month; and elderly people over seventy years old should not be bled."
E cum alcu vol esser fleubotomat per qualque manieyra sia, cove que mondifique les sieus budels denant la fleubotomia am clisteri leon, si en aquels ha mota fenda retenguda, per so que las venas no atiro las superfluitatz en la fleubotomia dels budels, que son puridas, e que no noguan als membres principals.	"And when someone wishes to undergo bloodletting for any reason whatsoever, it is advisable that they cleanse their bowels beforehand with a lion's-claw purgative, especially if there is much retained feces, so that the veins are not filled with superfluities during bloodletting from the intestines, which are purified, and do not harm the main members."
E no sian fleubotomatz les pascientz naucea sacertiva e crapula, ni evasent de malautia ni de ebretat entro que aquo sia remaugut aquo de lor, ni malaute de ydropici, e mays que fleubotomia sia temuda aprop colica passio e aprop vomit, e aprop cos de ventre, e aprop multiplicacio de coyt e de trebal e de exercici de dejunis o de vigilias e de tota causa que dissolveys la vertut, o sia corpore28 o animal.	"And patients suffering from sacred disease and drunkenness should not undergo bloodletting until these conditions are removed. Nor should those afflicted with dropsy or any disease accompanied by vomiting be bled, nor when the abdomen is painful or distended. Bloodletting should also be avoided near the time of colic pain, vomiting, diarrhea, excessive sexual activity, hard labor, prolonged fasting or vigil, and any cause that weakens the body or spirit."
E aprop considera en subtiliacio de humos denant aquo si le sanc es gros, am viandas e beures, e am medicinas si aquo es a lu possible ad aquo.	"And before bloodletting, it is important to consider the subtlety of the humors, especially if the blood is thick. This can be addressed through diet and drink, as well as medications if appropriate."
E aprop intre en banh si alcuna causa no prohibeys, o sia excersitat per alcun exercici per so que·l sanc sia subtiliat.	"And it is advisable to take a bath beforehand if there is no contraindication, or to exercise somewhat so that the blood may be subtilized."
E pausa la fleubotomia de lu en le pietz del dia, so es enviro la hora de tercia, ayssi cum havem dit.	"And pause bloodletting at the foot of the day, around the hour of terce (approximately 9 am), as we have said earlier."
E perforsa te que·l pietz de aquel sia guardat en aquel dia de totz mals accidentz animals, ayssi cum es angustia, ira, temor, e de totz accidentz corporals, ayssi cum es trebal e pena superflua e coyt e semblantz a lor.	"Protect the patient's foot from all manner of accidents that day, whether they be mental anguish, anger, fear, or bodily accidents like labor and unnecessary pain."
E a la sua sezelha fassa esser presentz las causas en le us de la qual corr costuma dels homes am aromaticitat e odorament e am bals e semblantz ad aquels segon la cantitat de possibilitat.	"And let the physician be present with those remedies used by men that are fragrant and scented, and have balms and similar things according to their possibilities."
E segua le fleubotomador sobre un coyssi que sia pus aut que·l coyssi de aquel que deu esser fleubotomat.	"And follow the flebotomist on a couch that has been placed higher than the one on which he is to perform phlebotomy."
E aprop extragua le sieu bras, e fregue aquel am la sua ma le fleubotomador doas o tres veguadas; e aprop strenha le liament am correia e involva aquel doas veguadas.	"And then he should draw out his arm and rub it with the hand of the flebotomist two or three times. Then he should quickly tie the bandage with a strap and wrap it around twice."
E sia la strictura temprada, quar la strictura quant no es engual, o la strictura es am superfluitat, lahoras prohibeys de fluxs del sanc; o es am mollificacio, e lahoras prohibeys le cors del sanc eyssament.	"And let the bandage be moderate in tightness, for if it is too loose, or too tight with excessiveness, it prohibits the flow of blood. Or if it is too slack, it hinders the course of the blood itself."
E aprop la strictura, cove que aquel que deu esser fleubotomat fregue las suas mas ensemps entre lor entro que las venas sian imfladas, e sian declaradas al sentiment.	"And then when the bandage is in place, it is necessary for him who is to undergo phlebotomy to rub his hands together and warm them until the veins are inflated and can be felt."
E aprop le fleubotomador unte le sieu fleubotomi am un pauc de oli antic propriament; e aprop pausa le sieu di indic de la ma senestra sobre aquela vena, dejos le loc del qual vol la fleubotomia, per que la vena fuja un pauc, e la percussio sia sessada quar de las venas es la qual atrobas ayssi cum corda fugent deves la fleubotomia, e de aquelas es que es plena de ventositat e quan pauses le fleubotomi sobre aquela es contrayta deves le fleubotomi, e es desceubut le fleubotomador; e le fleubotomi no uobre la vena, e si uobre, aquela es streyta.	"And then the phlebotomist should anoint his scalpel with a little of old oil properly. And then he should place his left index finger on that vein where he wishes to perform phlebotomy, allowing the vein to swell slightly so that percussion may determine which vein is suitable for bleeding, as those veins that resemble pulsating cords are not suitable for phlebotomy. Those veins that are full of windiness and contract when pressed are suitable for phlebotomy, and the phlebotomist should place his scalpel on them without opening the vein, and if he does open it, it should be narrow."
E donc, per aquo cove que·l fleubotomador sia fermat e sia sollicit en totas aquestas causas.	"And therefore it is necessary that the phlebotomist be firm and attentive in all these matters."
E aprop depause le fleubotomi, mays si la vena es huberta en una veguada, lahoras bo es; e sino, tu itera aquo autra vaguada dejos aquel loc un pauc, o sobre lu am festinacio, si le loc no es apostemat.	"And after the phlebotomy is finished, if the vein is emptied in one attempt, that is good. But if not, then it is necessary to repeat this process another time, leaving that place a little, or above it with haste, if the location is not inflamed."
Et si le loc es apostemat, o le malaute se spauresca, lahoras tu le layssa per un dia o per dos, e no strenha le liament, quar fort leu atirara apostema caut, ni no intre en banh.	"And if the location is inflamed or the illness worsens, then it is necessary to leave it for a day or two, and not to strain the ligature, because it would draw out an ulcerous inflammation, nor put it in water."
E aprop itera la fleubotomia si la ama.	"And then repeat the phlebotomy if desired."
E si la apercio es petita e corr sanc subtilment, e temes que non yesca sanc la cantitat que voles, lahoras tu itera le fleubotomi en aquel trauc segon rectitut e ajusta en la appercio un pauc, e fay aquo am festinacio denant que·l loc sia apostemat, quar le loc es apostemat en motz homes deves pauca apercio.	"And if the opening is small and blood flows subtly, and you fear that it will not come out in the desired quantity, then repeat the phlebotomy in that same spot according to rectitude and adjust the opening a little, and do this with haste before the location becomes inflamed, because many men become inflamed even with a small opening."
Mays si vezes aquel ja apostemat, lahoras no iteres sobre lu, quar no escusa a tu alcuna causa; e pausa sobre aquel alcuna partida de la fenda de oli, quar alleuja le cors del sanc.	"But if that location is already inflamed, then do not repeat on it, because there is no cause for you to do so. And press on some part of the wound's edge with a piece of oil-soaked cloth, because this calms the heart of the blood."
E es milhor en aquest loc que oli e que les autres olis.	"And it is better in that location than other oils."
E semblantment aministra fenda de oli en tota fleubotomia am la qual fleubotomes las venas deves la prohibicio de cors de sanc, e fan aquo tyriaca alfadoc e sagzenea quan es pausat de la una de aquelas sobre le loc, quar le sanc es subtiliat e es revolvut quan es gros.	"And similarly, administer oil-soaked cloth in all phlebotomies where veins are opened with the prohibition of blood flow, and they do this with triaca althea and sagzene when pausing one of those on the location because blood is subtilized and stirred when it is thick."
E si en le loc de la fleubotomia es engendrat gran apostema, quar motas veguadas accideys, e majorment ad aquel que no es stat sangnat sino aquela veguada, o en la apercio de la vena pauca, e lahoras tu coyta, e pausa sobre le loc sponja infuza en aygua e sal, un pauc scalfada, e strenh aquela per una hora, quar es dissolvut.	"And if a large inflammation is generated in the location of phlebotomy, because many times this happens, especially to those who were not properly bled or whose vein opening was small, then it is necessary to cauterize, and press on the location with a sponge soaked in water and salt, a little scalded, and hold it there for an hour, because it will dissolve."
E cove que fassa aquo aprop le yssiment del sanc de aquela vena am compliment de lu o de autra vena.	"And it is necessary to do this after the extraction of blood from that vein with completion of it or another vein."
E si roman en le loc per alcus dias alcuna negror o viriditat, no notz aquo; e si voles, pausa sobre aquel alcuna causa de aloen e de mirra dissolvut, o alcuna causa de suc de mentastre o de calament o semblant de lu.	"And if there remains in the location for a few days some blackness or greenness, do not worry about it. And if you wish, press on that location with some cause of aloe and myrrh dissolved, or some cause of mint juice or catmint juice or something similar to it."
E motas veguadas accideysso apostemas e eminencias deves fleubotomia de la basilica.	"And many times apostemata and swellings happen after phlebotomy in the basilica [i.e., church]."
E donc pausa la tua ma sobre aquela, e si lahoras tu atrobas mollicia deves la tua compressio sobre aquela, lahoras aquela eminencia es malvada e mala; e adonc guarda te que pauses sobre aquela alcuna causa de aquo que havem dit, quar fort leu fluira de la arteria sanc.	"And therefore press your hand on it, and if by chance you find softness under your compression, then that swelling is bad and harmful. And therefore be careful to press on it with some cause of what we have said, because much blood will flow from the artery."
E fay emplaustre am aquo en que es stipticitat, per que le loc sia endurat, e aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	"And make a plaster with that which has astringent qualities so that the location may endure, and then treat it with another treatment until it is healed."
E cove que extraguas del sanc a tot hom segon la quantitat de la sua vertut e segon la color vencent sobrc le sanc segon que appar.	"And it is necessary to extract blood from every man according to the quantity of his virtue and according to the color that appears above the blood."
Quar si le sanc es negre, lahoras tu le layssa yssir entro que sia rog; e semblantment si tu le vezes gros, lahoras tu le layssa yssir entro que sia subtiliat; e semblantment si es agut, entro que sia ostada la acuitat de lu.	"Because if the blood is black, then you should let it flow until it becomes red. And similarly, if you find it thick, then you should let it flow until it becomes subtilized. And similarly, if it is bitter, until its bitterness is mitigated."
E cove ad aquel que es ple e fort e ha necessitat de extraccio de sanc en una veguada, que sia amplificada la fleubotomia de la vena e le fleubotomi sia lat.	"And it is necessary for those who are full and strong and have a need for blood extraction in one session that the phlebotomy of the vein be enlarged and the incision be wide."
E en aquel que es freul, sia fayt le contrari de aquel, e cove que extragua aquel en tropas veguadas, e que le trauc sia streyt.	"And in those who are weak, do the opposite of that, and it is necessary to extract blood from them in small sessions, and for the spot to be narrow."
E le milhor que es administrat en fleubotomia de vena es que sia la seccio transversa, no punctura.	"And the best that is administered in phlebotomy of veins is that it should be a transverse section, not a puncture."
E aquesta manieyra de fleubotomia es salva de flux de sanc e de inscizio de nervi, e es pus lausabla e pus salva que fleubotomia segon latitut e longitut.	"And this manner of phlebotomy is safe from blood flow and nerve incision, and it is more laudable and safer than phlebotomy according to latitude and longitude."
E a la qual es acostumat sobrevenir sincopi deves la fleubotomia, e cove que tu cures aquel denant la fleubotomia am un petit de pa infus en vi de milgranas o de oximel simple scalfat; e extratz a l u del sanc en tres veguadas o quatre.	"And those to whom syncope is accustomed to occur during phlebotomy, and it is necessary for you to treat them before phlebotomy with a little bread infused in pomegranate wine or simple oxymel slightly scalded; and extract blood from them in three or four sessions."
E si es enfregiditat de compleccio, lahoras prengua denant la fleubotomia pa infus en eyssarop de mirra o en eyssarop de mel aromatizat am specias ayssi cum am pebre, canela, gingiebre e semblantz, o en eyssarop aromatizat e mot odorant.	"And if there is coldness of complexion, then take before phlebotomy bread infused in syrup of myrrh or in aromatic syrup with spices such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and similar ones, or in very fragrant aromatic syrup."
E si accideys sincopi deves la fleubotomia, e es causa de lu issiment de mot sanc, lahoras cove que prengua en beure aygua de carn e eyssarop mot odorant subtil; e use de aromaticitat am algualea, e sia linit le sieu pietz am aquela.	"And if syncope occurs during phlebotomy and it is caused by the extraction of much blood, then it is necessary to drink water of meat and very fragrant syrup. And use aromatics with aloe, and apply them on his forehead with that."
E usa de las autras causas que havem ditas en la divisio en le capitol de sincopi per evacuacio.	"And use the other causes that we have said in the division in the chapter of syncope by evacuation."
E qui vol eventar le sieu bras e dissolver le sieu sanc segonda veguada, cove a lu del qual la fleubotomia es per mota evacuacio, e la vertut de lu es freol, que evacue le sanc petit a petit, so es segon la quantitat de la vertut en les dias continuables.	"And those who wish to evacuate their blood and dissolve it in the second session, it is necessary for them that phlebotomy be performed with moderate evacuation, and their virtue should be weak, so that they evacuate blood little by little, according to the quantity of their virtue in consecutive days."
Mays qui vol eventar le sieu bras, e gitar lo sieu sanc segonda vetz, e le sieu cors es fort, lahoras fassa aquo aprop vii horas o ix de la primieyra fleubotomia.	"But those who wish to evacuate their blood and draw it again in the second session, and their body is strong, then do this approximately six or nine hours after the first phlebotomy."
Mays qui vol atirar le sanc del cors sieu al contrari de la partida a la qual declina, cove que sia eventat en le segon dia o le tertz.	"But those who wish to draw blood from their body in opposition to the part to which it declines, it is necessary for them that it be evacuated on the second day or the third."
Mays aquel cors en le qual es mot sanc ja scalfat e es acuit e fa accidir febre, cove que sia gitat de lu sanc en una veguada e sia de lu gitada gran cantitat e sia amplificada la apercio entro que accidesca sincopi, pus que tu auras conservadas totas las condicios de fleubotomia; e que pauses la tua ma sobre le pols de lu deves le cors del sanc, per que no endevengua mort en loc de sincopi, quar motas veguadas endeve aquo quan le fleubotomador es ignorant e negligent.	"But that body in which there is little blood already scalded and it is acute and causes fever, it is necessary for him to draw blood from it in one session, and extract a large quantity of it, increasing the opening as much as possible before syncope occurs, because you will have kept all the conditions of phlebotomy; and that you place your hand over his pulse near the vein where the blood is drawn, so that death does not occur instead of syncope, for many times this happens when the phlebotomist is ignorant and negligent."
E no cove quan tu voles desliar le bras e evacua le sanc segonda veguada, cum ja sia claus le orrifici de la vena e sia fayt difficil issiment del sanc, que tu premas subre aquel am vehemencia e encurvat sia extendut leugierament, quar aquo es trop mal.	"And it is not necessary to desire to untie the arms and evacuate blood at will, since once the orifice of the vein is closed, it becomes difficult to draw out the blood; therefore press under it with vehemence and extend it slightly bent, for this is too harmful."
Habantz le layssa entro que sia fleubotomat segondament; o remau aquo am la acuitat del fleubotomi que es coagulat del sanc en le orrifici de la vena; o pausa sobre aquel de tyriaca alfarach, o de sagzenea, e comprem aquel am compressio leugiera entro que·l sanc sia fora yssit.	"Have the patient lie down so that they can be flebotomized secondarily; or use this with the sharpness of the flebotome, which is coagulated blood in the orifice of the vein; or press upon it with a compress of tyrian aloe or saffron, and compress it gently until the blood flows out."
E si la vena es apostemada, lahoras layssa aquela e no la toques entro que·l apostema sia sedat.	"And if the vein is inflamed, leave that one alone and do not touch it until the inflammation has subsided."
E si necessitat te provoca a evacuar le sanc segondament, e no es excusacio, lahoras tu sagna aquel sobre aquel loc o en l’autre bras en autra vena.	"And if there is need to provoke bloodletting secondarily and it is not possible, then you can bleed that person on the other arm or another vein."
E la vena apelada “funis del bras” es fleubotomada en loc de la fusca o de la basilica, quan no so atrobadas o so amaguadas, quar es composta de aquelas.	"And the vein called 'the rope of the arm' is bleeding in place of the humeral or the basilica veins when they are not apparent or hidden, because it is composed of those."
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute intrometa la sua ma en aygua cauda entro que·l focil se enrogezesca e que la vena apparia manifestament.	"And the quality of bleeding from the arm is that the patient puts their hand in cold water until the vein becomes visible and appears manifestly."
E aprop sia strengut sobre aquel am liament am strictura migana; e aprop fleubotoma segon le tranvers petit, no latitudinalment ni segon la longitut.	"And properly, it should be strengthened over that with a bandage with moderate tension; and properly, bloodletting is done according to the transverse line, not latitudinally nor according to length."
E sia la apercio ampla e sia la tua fleubotomia am la qual tu fleubotomas aquela sobre la junctura de la ma un petit.	"And let the opening be wide and let your bloodletting be such that you bleed that person over the junction of the hand a little."
E si es prohibit le fluxs del sanc, lahoras tu itera la ma en l’aygua cauda e layssa le sanc correr en la aygua entro que consieguas la tua necessitat.	"And if the flow of blood is prohibited, then you should immerse your hand in cold water and let the blood run into the water until your need is fulfilled."
Mays si tu eras en les dias d’estiu, lahoras tu yest excusat de la iteracio de la ma en l’aygua cauda, e le mes es pausat le cors del sanc en aygua cauda en temps de yvern.	"But if you are in the days of summer, then you should excuse yourself from immersing your hand in cold water, because the body's circulation is slowed down by cold water in wintertime."
E la fleubotomia de aquesta vena es pus salva que de totas las autras venas, quar dejos lu no ha vena pulsatil, ni nervi.	"And bloodletting from this vein is safer than from all other veins because there are neither pulsating veins nor nerves in it."
E la fleubotomia de la savatella de la ma dreyta es conferent a las malautias del fetge.	"And bloodletting from the wrist of the right hand corresponds to diseases of the liver."
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que tu strenguas la ma am liament o am la tua ma, pus que tu l’as mesa en ayga cauda, entro que la vena sia imflada e sia be demostrada al vezement; e aprop fleubotoma aquela transversan; e si inscidas aquela de tot no nozera aquo en re.	"And the quality of bloodletting from there is that you should strengthen the hand with a bandage or with your hand, because after you have placed it in cold water until the vein becomes inflated and clearly visible; and properly, you should bleed transversely across it; and if it opens completely, do not worry about anything."
E conserve que no ultimes la tua ma am la fleubotomi, quar dejos lu so les nervis dels ditz denudatz de carn.	"And be sure that you do not leave your hand in the bloodletting because there are nerves exposed without flesh."
E aprop itera la ma en l’aygua cauda e laysse correr le sanc en aquela, quar si tu no iteras aquela en l’aygua cauda, le sanc sira coagulat en lo orrifici de la vena, e es prohibit de flux.	"And properly, immerse the hand in cold water and let the blood run into it because if you do not immerse that in cold water, the blood will coagulate at the opening of the vein and flow is prohibited."
E cum es extrayt le sanc segon la quantitat de necessitat, lahoras tu pausa sobre la vena oli e sal, per que no sia consolidada coytadament; e semblantment cove que tu fassas en tot ram streyt.	"And when blood has been extracted according to the quantity needed, then you should place oil and salt over the vein so that it does not become accidentally coagulated; and similarly, you should do this for any wound."
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de aquela de la ma senestra, es que es conferent a las malautias de la melsa.	"But the benefit of bloodletting from that of the left hand is that it corresponds to diseases of the spleen."
E fay semblantment en la fleubotomia de lu ayssi cum has fayt en l’autra.	"And do similarly in bloodletting from there as you have done in the other one."
E le juvament de la vena sephena de la fleubotomia es a las malautias que so en la partida dejos del cos, ayssi cum so malautias de la mayre, e a retencio de mestruas, et a las malautias dels ronhos e ulceracios de coyssas e de cambas antiquas, e a lor semblantz de las malautias.	"And the benefit of bloodletting from the saphenous vein is for diseases that are in the lower parts of the body, such as diseases of the mother, and retention of menstruation, and for diseases of the joints, ulcers of the skin, and old wounds, and their similar diseases."
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute entrometa lo sieu pe en aygua cauda e fassa sobre aquel fricacio entro que be apparen las venas; e lia sobre la junctura del pe am correia; e le loc de la vena le talo apparent deves le dit pous, e de aquela so ramificatz en la facia del pe motz ramps.	"And the quality of bloodletting from there is that the patient should immerse his foot in cold water and rub it until the veins appear well; then he should place a bandage over the junction of the foot and tie it with a rope; and the location of the vein that appears obvious is below the said foot, and from that many branches extend to the surface of the foot."
E donc fleubotoma le pus ample ram o dejos la camba deves le talo deves la agreguacio de lu, quar es milhor e pus sal.	"And then bleed the largest branch or one near the ankle below its junction because it is better and safer."
E si fleubotomas aquela en la facia del pe, lahoras tu te guarda dels nervis que so dejos aquela sobre la facia del pe, e pausa la tua fleubotomia am la qual tu fleubotomas per le travers, quays cum si tu la volias inscidir.	"And if you bleed that on the surface of the foot, then beware of the nerves that are near it on the surface of the foot, and pause your bloodletting with whatever vein you are bleeding until it becomes transverse, as if you wanted to cut it."
E sia le fleubotomi vosil.	"And let the bloodletting be sufficient."
Mays si es prohibit le issiment del sanc; lahoras tu itera le pe de lu en l’aygua cauda e layssa correr le sanc en aquela entro que sia evacuat.	"But if the emission of blood is prohibited, then immerse the foot in cold water and let the blood run into it until it has been evacuated."
E si le fleubotomador erra en la primieyra veguada, lahoras itera am le fleubotomi en sus un pauc, quar le loc es sal; e no temes de lu malician, mays que te guardes dels nervis ayssi cum havem dit.	"And if the bloodletter errs on his first attempt, then he should continue bleeding with the bloodletting tool until it is safe because the location is safe; and do not fear bloodlettion, but beware of nerves as we have said."
E semblantment fay de la sophena del autre pe engualment.	"And similarly do for the saphenous vein of the other foot accordingly."
E de la vena sciatica, le loc ayssi cum havem dit es deves le talo dejos la cavilha de la partida silvestra.	"And as regards the sciatic vein, its location is below the ankle near the outer ankle bone of the lower leg."
E le juvament de la fleubotomia de lu es a dolo de anca quan es per sanc caut.	"The benefit of bloodletting from it is for pain in the hip when it is due to retained blood."
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute intre en banh, e festine e strenha la cueyssa de lu del latz de la ancha entro desus le talo desus quatre ditz an una benda longua subtil, quar no appar sino per aquo.	"And the quality of bloodletting from it is that the patient should enter a bath and quickly rub his thigh from the side of the hip upwards above the ankle with a long thin bandage so that only the vein appears."
E donc quan appar, lahoras tu fleubotoma aquela segon cascun engen que es a tu possible e segon le tranvers, e es milhor; o inscidas aquela per inscizio o secces aquela per seccio, quar le loc de lu es sal.	"And then when it appears, you should bleed that according to your skill and according to the transverse method, which is better; or cut that with a lancet or tie that with a ligature because its location is safe."
E ela es en motz homes mot ameguada; e si atrobas aquela, e no appar al sentiment de tot, lahoras fleubotoma alcun ram de lu, e es aquel que appar en le dos del pe enves le dit auricular e le anular.	"And it is in many men much obscured. And if you find that one does not appear at all, then bleed some branch of it, and that is the one that appears on the back of the foot near the said little toe and the ring finger."
E guarda te dels nervis, e fay correr del sanc la quantitat que voles.	"And beware of nerves, and let run the blood to the quantity you want."
E aprop deslia la strictura e pausa sobre le loc de la fleubotomia coto e strenh le loc, quar leugierament es sanat.	"And properly untie the bandage and place it over the location of the bloodletting cut and press the location gently because it is easily healed."
De ventozacio e de las qualitatz de uzar de aquelas.	"On evacuation and on the qualities of using those (veins)."
Ventozas so de corns, o de eram, o de veyre.	"Evacuation occurs through cornuta, or erema, or vein."
E ventozacio es fayta segon doas manieyras: la una de lor es am scarificacio e extracio de sanc, e l’autra es ventozacio ses scarificacio.	"And evacuation is performed in two ways: one of them is with scarification and extraction of blood, and the other is evacuation without scarification."
E aquesta ventozacio que es ses scarificacio es segon doas manieyras, quar o es am foc o ses foc.	"And this evacuation that is without scarification is performed in two ways, for it can be done with fire or without fire."
E a las ventozas que so administradas am scarificacio e extraccio de sanc son xiiii locs del cors, dels quals la un en lo qual so pausadas ventozas es alnocrati, e es la deriera partida del cap; e le mieg loc d’el de doas partz del col ensemp; e ventozas del mento dejos la mandibula pus dejos de la boca; e ventozas de doas spatulas; e ventozas de alohoster, e es sobre la fi de la coeta; e ventozas de dos focils, e so de dos brasses; e ventozas de doas cavilhas; e ventozas de doas cuoyssas.	"And the evacuations that are administered with scarification and extraction of blood are fourteen locations in the body, among which one where evacuations are placed is the nose, and it is the last part of the head; and the middle location of it on both sides of the neck similarly; and evacuations from the chin near the jawbone below the mouth; and evacuations from both spatulas; and evacuations from Alohoester, which is over the end of the stomach; and evacuations from two small thighs, which are on both arms; and evacuations from two ankles; and evacuations from two thighs."
E ventozacio no extratz le sanc sino de las venas menudas sparssas en la carn, e per aquo no catz la vertut per aquelas, ayssi cum es cazement per fleubotomia; ni no cove que ventozacio sia fayta am foc o ses foc en alcuna malautia fayta per replecio entro que le cors tot sia evacuat.	"And evacuation does not extract blood but from the small veins scattered in the flesh, and therefore it does not draw the virtue through those, just as bloodletting does not; nor is it necessary that evacuation be done with fire or without fire in any illness caused bypletion within which the entire body has been evacuated."
Mays si necessitat provoca a ventozacio per malautia o per continua, aministrem aquela en tota hora al comensament del mes e en la fi de lu, e en le mieg loc de lu e en qualque temps sia.	"But if evacuation is provoked by illness or continuously, administer it at any hour at the beginning of the month and at the end of it, and in the middle of it and at whatever time it may be."
La qual causa es quar dels homes es en les quals es sanc multiplicat entro que indigeys de extraccio de lu per ventozacio e atroba en le sieu cap graveza e soda; e de aquels es que atroba replecio e rogor en la sua cara e en le sieu cap, e en le sieu col; e de aquels es que atroba pruziment en la sua cara e en le sieu front e tenebrositat e hebetut en les sieus huels; e de aquels que gieta le loc de la sua ventozacio; e de aquels es que le lor ris es multiplicat; e de aquels es que atroba gustament de sanc en la sua boca, o que la lengua es apostemada e escup sanc; e de aquels es que lor dormir es multiplicat, e de aquels que vetz sanc en lo dormir rogor e antics e plaguas e autras causas a lor semblantz.	The cause is that in some men the blood is multiplied within, requiring evacuation by vomiting and it appears on their face grave and pale; and others have redness and heat in their face and head, and neck; and others have pressure in their face and forehead, darkness and dullness in their eyes; and others who vomit blood; and others whose laughter is multiplied; and others who have a taste of blood in their mouth, or the tongue is inflamed and spits blood; and others whose sleep is multiplied, and those who see blood in their dreams red, ancient and plagues and other causes apparent to them.
E donc quan vezes en alcuna causa de aquelas, e propriament si es en le tertz o miga del mes, lahoras comandam ventozacio esser fayta pus que so passadas del dia dos o tres horas.	And therefore whenever in some cases of those aforementioned, and especially if it is in the third or mid-month, we command vomiting to be done after the hours passed of two or three days.
E juvament de ventozacio de la nuca es que quan aquela confereys a gravitat en le cap e ad aquo que es efondit als huels; mays cove que aquo sia aprop evacuacio de tot le cors.	And the advantage of vomiting from the stomach is that when it refers to gravity in the head and falls to the eyes, but it should be that this is proper evacuation of the whole body.
E aquesta ventoza es en le loc de fleubotomia de la cephalica.	And this vomiting is in the place of trepanation of the cephalic area.
E no es legut que use de lu aquel que es de frega complecio, o en le qual es catarr, quar dona ad aquel gran nocument.	It is not right to use him who is of humid complexion, or in whom is catarrh, for it gives great harm.
E per aquo no cove que uso de aquela les vielhs, e en les caps dels quals so malautias frejas.	Therefore it should not be used on those with weak thighs and on the heads of those suffering from humid illnesses.
Mays ad aquel que sobre aquela es continuant sobre lu es fayta oblivio; e per aquo cove que tu comandes al ventozador que depause la sua ma un petit am la ventosa a las partidas dejos, temen de la generacio de oblivio.	But upon that it is immediately forgotten about him; and therefore you should command the assistant to pause his hand somewhat away from the cup at the beginning of suction, so as to avoid generating forgetfulness.
Mays ventozacio de alkehel es en loc de fleubotomia de la vena fusca e de la basilica: e per aquo confereys a asma, e a la constriccio de ale e a la scissura del sturment de ale, e a tos, e a replecio.	But suction with alkahest is in place of phlebotomy of the black vein and the basilica: and therefore it cures asthma, and the constriction of the lung and the cut of the instrument of the lung, and coughing, and fullness.
E cove que sia enpellida la ventoza alkehel un petit, quar si es pausada dejos, engendra debilitat en le cors e en le stomac.	And it is necessary that the alkahest suction be somewhat repeated, for if it is paused early, it generates weakness in the body and stomach.
E la ventozacio de alhagdahan confereys a las dolors accident en le cap e a obtalmia, e emigranea, e prefocacio, e a dolors en las razitz de las dentz; e es en loc de fleubotomia de la basiliqua.	And suction with alhagdan cures accidental pains in the head and inflammation of the eyes, migraine, and prefrontal headache, and pains in the roots of the teeth; and it is in place of phlebotomy of the basilica.
E cove que comandes al ventozador que no prema la sua ma am scarificacio per que no inscida la arteria e accida fluxs de sanc.	And you should command the assistant not to press his hand at scarification so as not to wound the artery and cause a flow of blood.
E ventozacio dejos le mento comfereys a alcola en la boca, e a corrupcio de la gingiva, e a semblantz a lor de las malautias que so en la boca, e stan en loc de fleubotomia de aliheric que so en las doas labias.	And suction from the chin cures bad breath in the mouth, and corruption of the gums, and the appearance of diseases that are in the mouth, and it is in place of phlebotomy of alihere that are on the two lips.
Mays la ventozacio que es fayta sobre las doas spatulas confereys a caphatan, le qual es fayt per replecio de caliditat.	But suction that is done over the two spatulas cures catarrh, which is caused by fullness of heat.
E la ventosacio de las doas partidas dedintz dels focils confereys juvament de la fleubotomia de tres venas, so es de la basilica, fusca e cephalica, quar aquela atratz le sanc de totas aquelas venas pus manudas que so en la carn, e aquelas venas menudas de las autras venas pus grossas entro que pervengua la atraccio a las tres venas.	And suction from between the two parted teeth of the cheeks cures the benefit of phlebotomy of three veins, namely the basilica, black and cephalic, for it attracts the blood from all those large veins that are in the flesh, and those small veins of other veins thicker within which the attraction reaches to the three veins.
E comanda al ventozador que trop no procezesca en scarificacio, quar le loc es denudat de carn, e dejos lu so nervis e arterias.	And command the assistant not to proceed with scarification, for that place is denuded of flesh, and there are its nerves and arteries exposed.
E es una ventoza am la qual es ventozat sobre alshosses e confereys a las emorroydas del cul e a las ulceracios pus dejos.	And it is one suction with which is sucked over the buttocks and cures hemorrhoids of the anus and ulcers that are there.
E cove que comandes al ventozador que sia gran ventoza, e que sia de eram, quar le loc indigeys de fort seccio; e fort leu so traucadas ventozas subtils e sia scarificat am scarificacio.	And you should command the assistant that it be a large suction and that it be of brass, for that place requires strong sectioning; and strong are the subtle attractions that are drawn out by scarification with scarification.
Mays ventozas de las cambas minueysso per minuicio manifesta, quar atiran le sanc de tot le cors, e comfereysso a dolors antiquas dels ronhos e de la mayre, e de la vesica; e provocan las mestruas, e comfereysso a bothor e ademil; e stan en loc de fleubotomia de doas sophenas, e alahorcoben, e de doas cavilhas.	But suction from the camber of the small finger diminishes by diminution manifestly, for it attracts blood from all over the body, and cures old pains of the loins and belly, and of the bladder; and it provokes menses, and cures dropsy and diarrhea; and it is in place of phlebotomy of two sophenes, alahorcoben, and two cavillas.
Enpero mot debelitan tot le cors e fan accidir sincopi en motz homes.	But great ones weaken the whole body and cause syncope in many men.
E de las ventozas alahorcoben le juvament es propda al juvament a las ventozas de doas cambas.	And of the suction of the armpits, the benefit is near to the benefit of the suction of two palms.
E la qualitat de la posicio de las ventozas es que pauses la ventoza al comensament vueda e sucguas per succio temprada, e no prolongues la posicio de las ventozas, mays pausa aquelas leugierament, e reman aquelas coytadament, e que las humors venguan al loc per adveniment engual.	"The position of the cupping glasses should be placed at the beginning of the vein and followed by gentle suction, not prolonging the position but pausing lightly, retaining those that come comfortably, allowing the humors to gather at their location."
E no cesses iterar aquo e continuar entro que veja le loc ja enrojezir e inflar e que appara la rogor del sanc.	"And do not cease to repeat this until you see the place redden and swell, and the color of blood appears."
E lahoras tu scarifiqua e itera la succio pauc a pauc, e aprop considera en la dispozicio dels cors.	"Then slowly scratch and repeat the suction little by little, carefully considering the disposition of the veins."
Quar aquel home que es de tendra carn de rars pors, cove que tu le scarifiques una veguada e no pus, per que le loc no sia ulcerat.	"For that man who has tender flesh and few pores, it is necessary that you scratch him once and not more, so that the place does not become ulcerated."
E comanda al ventozador que amplifique la scarificacio e pronde un pauc, e atempre la succio am facilitat.	"And instruct the cupping glass operator to widen the scarification slightly and press a little, applying suction gently."
E si en le sanc es grossitut, lahoras cove que scarifiques doas veguadas, quar en la primieyra veguada es uberta la via de subtiliacio al sanc e a la aquositat de lu.	"If the blood becomes thickened, then it is necessary to scratch twice, because in the first instance the path for subtilization of the blood and its moisture is opened."
Mays en la segunda a la perscrutacio aquisida de la extraccio del sanc gros.	"But in the second, the precise extraction of thick blood is achieved."
E si le sanc es mot feculent, lahoras sia fayta scarificacio la tersa veguada per que consiegua le derier.	"And if the blood is much fetid, then there should be no scarification on the third attempt so that it achieves its conclusion."
E derierament, quan volem extrayre le sanc pauc a pauc o un petit, abasta a nos una scarificacio.	"Finally, when we want to extract blood little by little or a little, one scarification suffices."
E si volem extraccio de mot sanc, scarificam am mota scarificacio; e si nos conoyssem que·l sanc es gros, lahoras cove que scarifiquem per scarificacio preonda.	"And if we want to extract much blood, we should make many scarifications; but if we know that the blood is thick, then it is necessary to make scarifications with care."
E le terme de scarificacio en la qual es la profunditat de la codena tant solament.	"The term 'scarification' here refers only to the depth of the cut, not its length or width."
E si aquel del qual la codena es grossa, dura, fusca, e les sieus pors so streytz, cove que les locs de las ventosas sian untatz lenitius, apertius resolutius; si es en temps d’estiu, ayssi cum es oli de aloen o oli de violat, o oli de amellas dossas, o oli de cemensa de coja; e si es en temps ivern, lahoras oli narci, o oli de liri, o oli de camamilla, o de sanc, e ad aquels semblantz.	"And if the vein is thick, hard, dark, and its pores are narrow, then the places for the cupping glasses should be anointed with lenient, resolvent oils such as olive oil or violet oil, or oil of sweet almonds, or oil of cypress; but if it is wintertime, then narcissus oil, or lily oil, or camomile oil, or blood oil should be used for those resembling this."
E si la superfluitat es grossa, freja, lahoras le oli sia amaranti, o oli de balsamita, o oli de aloen, o oli aneti, e a lor semblantz.	"And if the superfituity is thick and phlegmatic, then the oil should be amaranthine, or balsamite oil, or aloe oil, or aneth oil, and those resembling them."
Mays si le ventozador es de amples pors de tendra carn, lahoras cove que sia prohibit de oli, e cove que ad aquest les locs de ventozas de lor aprop la ventozacio sian lavatz am ayguaros o am aygua freja de solatrum, o am aygua de coja, o am aygua de bordolaguas, e semblantz ad aquelas.	"But if the cupping glass is of wide pores and tender flesh, then it should be prohibited from oil, and the places for cupping near its approach should be washed with warm or hot water of solatrum, or cypress water, or Bordeaux water, and those resembling them."
E aquel del qual le sanc es de mota humiditat, lava las suas ventozas am vi agre, o am aygua de mirt e sumac e semblant ad aquels.	"And for that person whose blood has great humidity, wash their cupping glasses with sour wine or myrtle and sumac water, and those resembling them."
E de aquel del qual las superfluitatz son grossas, lava las suas ventozas am vi antic, o am aygua de sansuc, que es majorana, o de decoccio de anet, o de camamilla, e a lor semblantz.	"And for that person whose superfituities are thick, wash their cupping glasses with old wine or water of hyssop, which is marjoram, or decoction of aneth, or chamomile, and those resembling them."
E cove que la ventozacio sia guardada denant de banh; habantz cove que sia aministrada aprop issiment del banh per una hora o per doas, e cove que dorma aprop la ventozacio.	"It is necessary that cupping be performed before bathing. It should be administered near the time of bathing for one or two hours, and it is necessary to sleep after cupping."
Quid est quo oportet ut regatur ventosandus aus phlebotomatus ante ventosationem.	"What is it that makes it necessary for a person who is going to be cupped to regulate himself before cupping?"
Cove que consideras al comensament: lahoras si le ventozador o aquel que·s deu fleubotomar es coleric e ventz sobre lu sanc agut e imflamacio, lahoras cove que prengua causas infrigidantz, ayssi cum milgranas acetosas, e endivia an vi agre e laytuguas, e secanabin, e julep, e a lor semblantz.	"At the beginning, if the person performing cupping or phlebotomy is choleric and vents upon hot blood and inflammation, then they should take cooling causes such as sour mulberries, endives with vinegar and lettuce, secanabin, julep, and those resembling them."
E pausa a lor viandas ayssi cum poletz, e carns de auzels serbiges, e viandas conditas am agras, e a lu semblantz.	"And pause from foods such as polets, roasted meats of birds, and dishes seasoned with vinegar and those resembling them."
E de aquel del qual la compleccio es freja, cove que prengua en beure eyssarop almiva, o eyssarop de alsecanabin de semensas, e sumac, e vi mot odorant migier entre viel et noel; e que a lu sia comendat que use de paucitat de beure e de mangar, e pausa las viandas de lu poletz e canabir e pissers e petitz auzels e colombat.	"And for that person whose complexion is phlegmatic, they should take to drink iris syrup with honey or iris syrup of seeds and sumac, and mild aromatic wine between old and new; and it should be recommended that they use moderation in drinking and eating, and avoid foods such as polets, cannabis, pheasants, small birds, and doves."
E cove que en lo dia de ventozacio e de fleubotomia le beure sia major que la vianda.	"And it is necessary that on the day of cupping and phlebotomy, drinking should be greater than eating."
E cove que sia donat en beure en alcunas horas ad alcus homes tyriaca alpharac, o medicamentz de musc, so es muscada, o alcelita denant la ventozacio o denant fleubotomia o aprop, per so que·ls membres principals sian confortatz e que·l sanc sia subtiliat; e no cove que prenguan aquela scalfatz.	"And it is necessary to give some men tyriaca alpharac or muscatel wine, musc drug, or alcelet before cupping or phlebotomy, or during them, so that the principal members may be comforted and the blood subtilized; but they should not take that scald."
Mays las ventozas que so ses scarificacio sian ventozas que so pausadas sus le fetge, e sobre la melsa e podagra, e sobre le umbelic, en les locs dels jonolhs, e la pixida del ancha, quar aquestz membres no suffertan scarificacio sobre si.	"But cupping that is not accompanied by scarification are those that are performed for the liver's sake, and on the spleen and gout, and on the navel, in the joints of the ankles, and the hollow of the knee, because these members do not tolerate scarification upon them."
E no es querit per aquelas sino atraccio de sanc de membre, ayssi cum pausam ventosa sobre mamilha en malautia de flux de sanc del sanc de las nars; e usam de aquela per que sia dissolvuda ventositat freja inviscade del membre, ayssi cum pausam sobre le ventre e l’umbelic; quar aquela rarifique le membre e scalfa lu e ramau la dolor quar resolveys ventositat.	"And it is not sought in those cases except for the attraction of blood from members, such as placing a cupping glass on the breast in a disease of bloody flux of the nose; and use is made of it so that phlegmatic cupping may be dissolved and removed from the member, such as placing it on the belly and navel; because that rarifies the member and scales it, and relieves pain by resolving cupping."
E ja es pausada sobre les ronhos quan accideys en lor opilacio o poyra, quar per vertut de atraccio fort leu huobre opilacio e erradica le poyra de son loc.	"And cupping is applied to the temples when it occurs in their congestion or fever, because by virtue of strong attraction it draws out oppression and expels fever from its place."
E semblantment fa quan es pausada sobre le fetge e la melsa deves ventositat en aquels enclausa.	"And similarly it does when it is applied to the liver and spleen for their cupping in those enclosed."
E aquestas ventozas so administradas vuedas amb succio tant solament; e alcunas veguadas so administradas am foc.	"These cupping glasses are administered wet with suction alone; but some are administered with fire."
E alcunas veguadas so administradas plenas de aygua tebeza en las malautias de la melsa.	"And sometimes they are administered full of hot water in diseases of the spleen."
E aquo es per que la ventoza sia umplida e sia pus gran, so es aygua cauda sola o aygua en la qual sian cuytas herbas ad aquo convenientz.	"And that is why the cupping glass may be filled and made larger, such as with hot water alone or water in which herbs suitable for that purpose have been cooked."
Forma de ventoza aministrada am foc: sia la amplitud del orrifici de dos ditz, segon que nos la havem formada; e la quantitat del preon sia la maytat de un palm; e sia en lo latz de lu, en le loc que es en le circuit, la maytat de lu, le trauc sia petit segon la quantitat que intre en lu una agulha.	"The method of cupping administered with fire: the circumference of its opening should be about two fingers wide as we have formed it; and the quantity of the powder should be half a palmful; and it should be placed on the side, in the place that is in the circuit, at most half full; and the wick should be small according to the quantity that goes into it through a needle."
Sia fayta de eram rog o citri, de grosses marges, leon, enguals e terses per so que no leda le membre deves la sua posicio sobre lu.	"It should be made of red wax or citron wax, thick margins, lion's fat, egg yolks, and clear honey, so that the member does not feel pain because of its position on it."
E sia al mieg de lu vergua transversa de eram o de ferr, on es pausada candela am lo foc.	"And let there be in the middle of it a transverse wick of wax or iron, on which the candle with fire is placed."
E ja sia aquesta ventoza gran major de aquela la qual havem recomtat; e la pauca mendre de aquela segon las malautias e la etat de aquel que usa de aquela.	"And this cupping glass should be much larger than that which we have recommended; and the small one smaller according to the diseases and the condition of the person who uses it."
E las ventosas dels efantz e extenuatz so autres que las ventozas dels joves e de grosses corssas.	"And the cupping glasses for children and those who are weak should be different from those used for young people and robust persons."
E la qualitat de pausar aquesta ventoza am foc sobre le membre es que extenda la meca am foc de lenha decentment denant una pauca candela de cera, e pausa aquela sobre le mieg de la vergua transversa en le mieg loc de la ventoza, per que le foc sia accendut enviro la partida dejos per que no sia comburit le cors del malaute.	"The quality of placing this cupping glass with fire on the member is that you should light the wick with fire from a small candle of wax before a few logs of dry wood, and place it on the middle of the transverse wick in the middle of the cupping glass, so that the fire may be kindled around its edge without burning the skin of the patient."
E aprop sia pausada sobre le membre del malaute, e le dit sia sobre le trauc que havem dit, entro que quan tenem las ventozas e non indigem que osten le dit e que yesca la vapor sobre aquel trauc, lahoras la ventoza sira tantost dissolvuda.	"And then it should be applied to the member of the patient, and let there be on the wick that we have mentioned, until when you hold the cupping glasses and do not need to keep your finger over that wick, because the vapor has come out onto it, then the cupping glass will soon dissolve."
E prop igneys la meca segon la sua manieyra, e itera aquela si indigeyssas de aquela.	"And then extinguish the wick according to its manner, and repeat that if necessary."
Mays en ventosa que es aministrada en la malautia de plauressi, am aygua, en la qual no ha vergua transversa ni trauc, e no es aministrada sino que sia umplida de aygua, e es pausada sobre le membre tant solament.	"In a cupping procedure administered for the disease of pleurisy, with water in which there is neither transverse nor crosswise thread, and not administered unless filled with water, and placed upon the limb alone."
E aquesta es la forma de lu: E aquesta ventoza quant plus es gran, tant es milhor, per que puya recebre gran quantitat de aygua.	"The larger this cupping glass is, the better it is, because it can hold more water."
Capitol .xcvii.	"Chapter 97."
Sanguissuguas no so administradas en motz membres sino en les membres en les quals non es possible posicio de ventosas, per la parvitat de aquels, ayssi cum le pot e gingiva e semblantz a lor; o en membre denudat de carn, ayssi cum le dit e·l nas e lors semblantz.	"Bloodletting is not performed on small members where it is not possible to apply cupping glasses due to their small size, such as the toes and gums and similar ones; or on bare flesh, such as the fingertips and nose and their like."
E la qualitat de usar de aquelas que si has trobadas sanguisugas que so en las ayguas dossas de poyredura mundas.	"And it is better to use those that have found leeches in clean waters of rivers."
E aprop sian layssadas le dia e la nueyt en aygua dossa entro que sian famolentas, e que no romangua alcuna causa en le ventre de aquelas; e aprop sia evacuat le cors en le comensament am fleubotomia e am ventozas; e aprop fregua le membre del malaute entro que s’enrojezesca; e aprop sian pausadas sobre lu.	"And they should be placed day and night in clean river water until they are hungry, and there is no cause left in their bellies; and the body should be emptied at the beginning with phlebotomy and cupping; and the limb of the sick person should be rubbed until it becomes reddened; and they should be placed on top of it."
E cum son umplidas e caso.	"And when they are full, they should be removed."
E si es possible succio del loc am ventoza, es mays derier en juvament.	"If it is possible to suck out the spot with cupping, it is better to do so in healing."
E sino, lahoras lava le loc am vi agre e aprop am mota aygua; e sia freguat e expremut.	"Otherwise, wash the spot with sour wine and also with plenty of water; and rub and squeeze it out."
E si es prolonguat le cors del sanc aprop le cazement de las sanguissuguas, e es aquo resudan, lahoras tu enfon un drap de li en aygua freja, e pausa aquel de sobre entro que sia abdida la resudacio.	"If the body of blood is prolonged by the biting of the leeches and it is necessary to dissolve them, then you should put a cloth soaked in hot water on top until the coagulation is absorbed."
E si le sanc es multiplicat, lahoras polveriza sobre lu vitriol trissat, o guallas e semblantz a lor de las causas stipticas, entro que·l sanc sia abscidit; o sian pausadas sobre le loc las maytatz de favas excocicadas, e sian layssadas entro que las favas aderescan al loc, e es le sanc abscidit.	"And if the blood is multiplied, then powdered vitriol trisulfate should be sprinkled on it, or dried gallstones and similar ones of styptic causes until the blood is coagulated; or the major part of cooked fava beans should be placed on top of the spot, and left until the beans stick to the spot, and the blood is coagulated."
E cove, si es necessaria, iteracio de sanguissuguas, quan es possible mudar aquelas.	"And if necessary, itching with leeches should be repeated, whenever possible changing them."
E si las sanguissuguas son prohibidas de suspenssio, lahoras sia freguat le loc am sanc recent o fique una agulha en les locs entro que yesca sanc; e aprop sian pausadas, quar aquelas quan sento alcun sanc tantost adarysso.	"If the use of leeches is prohibited by suspension, then rub the spot with fresh blood or stick a needle into it until some blood comes out; and also place them there, because those creatures are attracted as soon as they sense any blood."
E quan voles que cajan, polveriza sobre aquelas un pauc de aloen trissat, o sal, o cendre, e cazo tantost.	"When you want them to let go, sprinkle some powdered aloe, salt or ash on them and they will soon detach."
Ayssi comensa lo prolec de la tersa partida: de restauracio.	"And thus begins the prologue of the third part: On Restoration."
Aquest capitol es motas veguadas necessari en la art de medicina; e es restauracio de fractura e de dislocacio accident en les osses.	"This chapter is very necessary in the art of medicine, and it deals with the restoration of fractures and accidental dislocations of bones."
O, filh, sapiatz que jactan se de aquest capitol les fols metges e les vulguars e aquels que degun temps no reguardero les libres dels Antics ni legiro de aquels una letra.	"Oh, son, know that many foolish doctors and laymen boast about this chapter who at no time regard the books of the Ancients nor read even a single letter from them."
E per aquesta causa es fayt que aquesta manieyra dels scients in terra nostra es privat; e yeu no ho e obliat en aquo degun temps be de tot; e no he adhibit aquo que apres, sino per longitut de lectio dels libres dels Antics e studi sobre le entendement de aquels, entro que extrayssi la sciencia de aquels.	"And because of this reason, the manner of the sciences in our land has become private; and you have not forgotten this in any way during your lifetime; and I have not added what follows, except for the length of reading the books of the Ancients and study on the understanding of them, among which I have extracted the science from them."
E aprop adirigui a experiment e studi en la longitut de la mieua vida.	"And therefore I direct myself to experiment and study throughout the length of my life."
E yeu ja he de aquo descrit en aquest capitol tot aquo que conte la mieua sciencia e sobre le qual es passat lo mieu experiment; pus que agui abreujat aquo a vos autres e deliuregui aquo de occupacio de elonguacio; e abreujegui aquo en la fi de abreujacio; et e monstrat aquo en la fi de declaracio; e formegui en aquo motas formas dels sturmentz que so administratz en aquel, cum es fayt per addicio de declaracio, ayssi cum he fayt en dos capitols precedentz.	"And I have already described in this chapter all that contains my science and on which my experiment has passed; because here I have abbreviated it for you others and delivered it from the occupation of lengthening; and abbreviated it in the end of abbreviation; and shown it in the end of declaration; and formed in it many forms of instruments that were administered there, as is done by addition of declaration, as I have done in two preceding chapters."
Capitol primier.	"Chapter One."
Summae et collectiones ex esse fracturae ossium, ex eis quarum praemissio necessaria est, antequam incipiamus rememorationem membrorum fraftorum et diversorum si uniuscuiusque.	"Summaries and collections from the consideration of fractures of bones, from which a preamble is necessary before we begin to remember the members broken and diverse in each."
Cove donc que diguam en le prohemi de aquest capitol las summas del sermo; e les capitols al entendament dels quals en le comensament es forsat le artifexs e a stacio sobre la veritat de aquels; so es vos e aquels que so promptz que sapian o aprenguan aquesta art nobla autres de vos.	"Therefore it is necessary that I say in the prologue of this chapter the summaries of the sermon, and the chapters for the understanding of which in the beginning the artisans are forced and to stand on the truth of them; so it is you and those who are prompt who know or learn this noble art other than you."
E donc dic que quan accideys a alcu fractura o dislocacio o torcio o cazement, lahoras cove que tu te coytes al comensament am fleubotomia o aleyar aquel, o quascu ensemps, si no prohibeys alcuna causa, ayssi cum debelitat de vertut, o es aquel al qual accideys effant, o viel en decrepitat, o es temps de vehement calor, o de vehement freg.	"And therefore I say that when it happens to someone fracture or dislocation or torsion or crushing, it is necessary at the beginning that you choose either flebotomy or bleeding him, or sometimes both, if no prohibition prevents it, such as debility of virtue, or if he is a child, or old in decrepitude, or it is time of vehement heat or cold."
E aprop sia content en vianda sieua de erbas frejas e de carns de auzels e de crabotz; e prohibem carns grossas e umplir si de viandas e de tota vianda que umple las venas de sanc, entro que siras segurat de apostema caut, e si no temes efusio de materia al membre.	"And it is appropriate that he be content with his diet of fresh herbs and of the flesh of birds and crabs; and prohibit fats meats and filling foods and all food that fills the veins with blood, lest you are sure of a safe cauterization and if you do not fear effusion of matter in the member."
E lahoras retorne le malaute al sieu regiment primier am le qual corr costuma de lu.	"And therefore return the sick to his first regimen with which he is accustomed."
E donc cum le os trencat comensa esser restaurat, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia pascut de viandas nutritivas de nutriment mot e gros e greu en les quals sia viscositat, ayssi cum so viandas faytas de froment cueyt am aygua, e ris, e caps, e pes, e ventres de vacas, e huous, e peys fresc, e vi gros e semblants ad aquels, e am aquest regiment es fayta coagulacio de fractura pus leugierament e miels.	"And therefore when the broken bone begins to be restored, it is necessary that the sick person be nourished with foods rich in nourishment and heavy and thick, in which there is viscosity, such as foods made from wheat cooked with water, rice, meat, intestines of oxen, fat, fresh fish, thick wine and similar ones; and with this regimen coagulation of fracture occurs more gently and better."
E sapias que les osses trinquatz quan so en les homes que so en la primiera vilura e en los decrepitz, no es possible que sian continuatz e sian consolidatz segon lur natura per la exsiccacio dels membres de lor.	"And know that bones broken in the first youth or in the decrepit ones cannot be joined and consolidated according to their nature due to the dryness of the members thereof."
E son consolidatz e continuatz segon lor natura tot temps per la exsiccacio de aquels membres, e so continuatz e consolidatz aquels que so de lor en la fi de la lenitat, ayssi cum les osses dels petitz effantz.	"And they are joined and consolidated according to their nature at all times due to the dryness of those members, and they are joined and consolidated those that are of them at the end of growth, such as the bones of little children."
Mays empero natura ajusta e amnecteys sobre le os trencat de tota partida alcuna causa semblant a glut en le qual es grossitut que adhereys e strenh aquel entro que so ensemps conglutinatz e liatz ensemps, entro que venen la fi de fortitut e de fermesa, ayssi cum foc al comensament, entro que denguna causa no prohibeys aquel de las suas obres.	"But nonetheless nature adjusts and connects the broken bone of any part with some cause similar to glue in which there is thickness that adheres and strengthens it until they are together conglutinated and joined together, until the end of fortitude and firmness comes, such as fire at the beginning, provided that no cause prevents it from its work."
E per aquesta causa es necessari que pauses las viandas del malaute, viandas en las quals so gravitat e viscozitat e grosseza, ayssi cum havem dit.	"And for this reason it is necessary that you reduce the diet of the sick person to foods in which there is gravity and viscosity and thickness, such as we have said."
Mota diversitat de fractura segon diversitat del membre.	"Great diversity in fracture according to the diversity of the member."
E sapias que las specias de fractura son diversas segon la diversitat dels membres, quar fractura del os de la camba es diversa de la fractura del os del cap; e la fractura del os del pietz es divers de la fractura del os del dos; e semblantment totz les autres membres son diverses entre lor.	"And know that the species of fracture are diverse according to the diversity of the members, for a fracture of the bone of the leg is different from a fracture of the bone of the head; and a fracture of the bone of the foot is different from a fracture of the bone of the arm, and similarly all other members are diverse among themselves."
E yeu venc am rememoracio de tota specia de fractura, expausada en le sieu capitol distincta del autre.	"And I come with memory of every species of fracture, explained in its own chapter, separate from the others."
Mota diversitat de fractura en si meteyssa.	"Great diversity within itself."
E son diversificadas las specias de fractura del os en lor meteyssas; quar es fayta fractura arcuada otra aquo que accidan en lu stellas; e alcunas veguadas es fayta fractura segon la longitut del os: e so las fracturas de lu satagia e astelhas e addicios procedentz e no-procedentz, ayssi cum es fayt en la pena quan es preparada a escriure, e es fractura am plagua e disrupcio en le cap, e es fractura fissura petita.	"And the species of bone fracture are diversified within themselves; for an arched fracture occurs differently than what happens in its stars, and sometimes it occurs according to the length of the bone: these are the fractures of the satagia and stars and additional ones that do not proceed, such as those that occur in the pen when it is prepared to write, and there is a fracture with plague and disruption in the head, and there is a small fissure fracture."
E a tota specia es engen o turment propri en restauracio de lu segon que vindra rememoracio de lu distincta en les sieus locs.	"And for each species there is a proper treatment in its restoration according to what will come later, explained separately in their places."
Mota senhal de fractura del os.	"Great sign of bone fracture."
E per aquo es conoguda fractura del os: es tortuositat de lu, e de aquel eminencia e appericio de lu al sentiment, e so de lu quan compremes aquel am la tua ma.	"And for this reason bone fracture is known: its tortuosity and the prominence and roughness of it to the touch, and that you perceive it with your hand."
E donc quan no es en le loc tortuositat apparent ni so no es feyt deves le tieu tocament quan toques le os am agitacio e le malaute no atroba gran dolor, lahoras no es aqui fractura.	"And therefore when there is no apparent tortuosity nor is it done by your touch when you touch the bone with agitation and the sick person does not feel great pain, then there is no fracture here."
Habantz es possible que sia tortuositat o petita fissura, adon no cove que tu mauguas aquel am la tua ma e am compressio de tot; habantz pausa sobre lu de las medicinas de las quals ve rememoracio aprop aquel moment le qual conveneys al loc; e aprop sia streyt per strictura subtil.	"It is possible that there may be tortuosity or a small fissure, therefore you should not move it with your hand nor compress it entirely; rather pause on it with the medicines of which mention will be made at that moment suitable to the place; and especially let it be tightened by subtle straitness."
E sapias que·l loc quan es arcuat e no es scindit en dos o otra aquo que no accidan en lu satagie, cum es remauguda tota partida de la sua compar, lahoras cove que comenses de la tua hora a rectificacio de lu habantz que a lu accida apostema caut.	"And know that when the place is arched and not split into two or anything else does not happen in its satagia, since all its parts are removed, then it is necessary for you to begin immediately its rectification with this, provided that an incautious apostema occurs there."
E si a lu accida apostema caut, lahoras layssa aquel per alcus dias entro que cesse le apostema; e aprop engualha aquel segon quascuna manieyra que podes de levitat e de engen.	"And if an incautious apostema occurs there, then leave it alone for some days until the apostema ceases; and afterwards reduce it according to each manner that you can of elevation and treatment."
E sapias que restauracio de lu e agulacio de lu es pus leugiera que del os en le qual accideysso sathagie.	"And know that restoration and union of the bone is easier than that in which satagia occurs."
E aprop strenh aquel segon que vindra la rememoracio de lu.	"And especially strengthen it according to what will come later its mention."
Mays si en le os so satagias, lahoras es necessaria extencio de aquest membre trencat de doas partz, si es la ma o le pe; o am la tua ma si le membre es petit; o am doas cordas o am una corda e la ma.	"But if satagia occurs in the bone, then it is necessary to extend this broken member from both parts, if it is the hand or the foot; or with your hand if the member is small; or with two cords or with one cord and your hand."
E sia la tua posicio am la qual pauses le membre loc engual segon la sua figura natural, mentre que las partidas so extandudas del membre trenquat, lahoras te perforsa que fassas retornar aquelas addicios am engen e segon quascuna manieyra que poyras en lor locs.	"And let your position be such that you stop the member in its natural figure while the parts of the broken member are extended, then it is necessary for you to persevere in returning those additional ones with treatment and according to each manner suitable in their places."
E guarda te segon la tua forssa que no accida sobre le malaute per la tua operacio delor ni lesio; e perforsa te segon le tieu poder que tu appliques la un os am l’autre son companho segon lors milhors formas.	"And watch according to your ability that you do not cause harm to the sick person through your operation of them nor injury; and persevere according to your ability in applying one bone to its companion according to their best forms."
E cove que en aquela hora aprofitablament tu toques am la tua ma aquel, e si vezes aqui alcuna causa diversa, rectifiqua aquel e enguala aquel per la quantitat de la tua vertut.	"And it is necessary for you to touch it appropriately at that time with your hand, and if sometimes some different cause occurs here, then rectify it and reduce it according to the quantity of your virtue."
E exquiva vehement extenssio e compressio, ayssi cum fan mots fols metges que motas veguadas fan accidir apostema caut per la sua operacio, o fan accidir contraccio en le membre ayssi cum havem vist aquo per la operacio de lor motas veguadas.	"And avoid violent extension and compression, as many foolish physicians do who often cause an incautious apostema through their operation, or cause contraction in the member, as we have seen this happen many times due to their operation."
E aprop annecteys, aprop equacio e decent operacio e strictura de aquel membre, e repaus e tranquilitat; amoneste le malaute sobre aquo e fay le squivar que no maugua aquel en la hora de las suas vigilias e del sieu dormir, e ves la sua revolucio e agitacio, e deves la sua egestio, e deves totz les sieus movementz am tota la sua vertut; e aguarda se que la posicio del membre sia posicio am la qual sia asegurada la dolor, la qual causa es quar quan sent en la disposicio de la posicio del membre delor o lesio; lahoras cove que permutes aquel ad autra disposicio de aquela am la qual non senta dolor; e guarda am aquo que la posicio de lu aquela sia dreyta e engual, per so que al membre non accida tortuositat quan es restaurat.	"And also join it, equate it, perform decent operation and restraint on that member, and give rest and tranquility; warn the sick person about this and make them avoid moving that during their watchful hours and sleeping, and wait for their revolution and agitation, and attend to all their movements with all your virtue; and await until the position of the member is a position in which it is assured that there will be no pain, which is the cause when they feel discomfort in the disposition of the member or injury. Then it is necessary for you to change that to another disposition without pain; and watch carefully that that position is straight and equable, so that the member does not become twisted when it is restored."
E la qualitat de la strictura del membre tranquat es aquela que yeu recomti; per que sapias que·ls membres trencatz so diversificatz en lor parvitat e en lor grandeza e en la forma de aquels.	"The condition of the fracture of the limb is as follows: know that broken limbs are varied in their thinness, size, and shape."
E de aquels que son petits ayssi cum le bras e·l dit e·l focil e semblantz ad aquels, lahoras cove que la envolucio sia de drap mol subtil.	"And of those that are small, such as the arm, the hand, and the foot, it is necessary for the dressing to be made with very fine cloth."
Mays aquels que so grosses ayssi cum la cuoyssa o la camba, cove que en aquels sia envolucio lada e dura, quar la liadura lada connecteys le membre gran e strenh aquel de tota part am strictura engual, enayssi que en lu no intre macula.	"But those that are large, such as the thigh or the leg, must be dressed with a hard, tough fabric, because a tight dressing connects the limb closely together on all sides with a strong bandage."
E aprop comensa, aprop la tua evacuacio de equacio, pausar liament convenient ad aquo, sobre le loc de aquela fractura am tres envolucios o quatre segon que·l membre mereys; e strenh la tua ma un petit am le liament.	"And then, gradually and carefully, begin your bandaging from the location of that fracture with three or four layers according to what the limb deserves, using a moderate amount of linen; and firmly press it with your hand using the linen."
E aprop ve am aquel a la partida pus sobirana del loc de la fractura, e strenh mens que no foc la tua strictura am la qual has strengut le loc de la fractura.	"And then go up to where the upper part of the fracture begins and make your bandage tighter there than you have made it elsewhere."
E aprop elongua te am envolucio del loc de la fractura un pauc, e mollifiqua la strictura petit a petit, entro que prenguas del loc sa una gran partida.	"And then extend the dressing from the location of the fracture a little ways down and gradually loosen the bandage until you take up about half of its length."
E aprop pren una autra benda e envolveys aquela autra veguada sobre le loc trenquat am envolucio, e aprop ve am las envolucios a la partida pus dejos de la fractura; e sia la tua operacio en la strictura de la envolucio e en mollificacio de aquela segon que havem dit en la envolucio primieyra desus.	"And then take another bandage and wind it around again over the location of the fracture with a dressing, and go back up along the dressings beyond the fracture; and your operation should be to tighten the dressing in its strapping and loosen that which we have mentioned above in the first dressing."
E aprop pausa entre las volucios de stopa leon o drap am le qual sia engualada la tortuositat de la fractura, si en lu es tortuositat; e sino, no pauses en lu alcuna causa.	"And then pause between the layers of linen or cloth with which you have wrapped the fracture if it is bent; and if not, do not pause there for any reason."
E aprop pausa sobre lu autra benda, e aprop enguala sobre aquestas envolucios stelhas decentment faytas tantost, si en le loc no es imflacio o apostema caut, e lahoras pausa sobre lu aquo que sede le apostema aquel e que oste la imflacio; e layssa aquela per alcus jorns; e lahoras tu strenh sobre lu las stelhas.	"And then pause over the other bandage and then wrap these layers decently around it, so long as there is no inflammation or abscess cautery in that location. And afterwards pause over what sits on top of the abscess or swelling; let that be for some days; and then you can tighten the dressings."
E sian las stelhas de la maytat de canna lada raza, e be formada saviament; o sian de fust de pi; o de ramps de palma ; e sia le ample de quascuna stelha segon aquesta forma e aquesta figura:	"And let the splints be of mature cane that is well-formed; or they may be made of oak wood or palm branches; and let the width of each splint be according to this pattern and figure:"
Empero cove que la astelha que es pausada sobre aquela fractura sia pus grossa e pus lada un petit que las autras astelhas, e la longitut de la stela segon qu’es legut al membre en magnitut e parvitat; e aprop strenh sobre las astelhas am autra benda segon la tua primieyra strictura; e aprop lia desus am fiel decentment segon que havem dit de strictura, e es que sia la tua strictura segon le loc de la fractura mes, e quant mes es alonguat de la fractura, es mendre la strictura.	"However, the splint that is placed over that fracture should be thicker and wider than the other splints, and its length according to how much the limb measures in magnitude and smallness. And then tighten the splints with another bandage according to your first strapping; and then lay them gently on top of each other as we have mentioned above concerning strapping, so that your strapping may be according to the location of the fracture, more so the closer it is to the fracture, and the further away from the fracture, the less tight it should be."
E cove que les fils sian migiers en grossesa e subtilitat, e sian de li mol; e si les fils so grosses, ayssi cum yeu he vist per la operacio de alcus fols pausantz les lors fils de cordas de li tort, e es error gran, quan catz la strictura fora equalitat.	"And it is necessary that the threads be medium in thickness and fineness, and made of linen; and if the threads are thick, as I have seen some foolish people doing when they tie their threads with cords of twisted flax, this is a great error when the strapping becomes uneven."
E eyssament fils subtils no so convenientz, quar tu no consaguiras per strictura am aquels aquo que voles, e no cove que entre astela e astela haja mens de un dit.	"And also very fine threads are not suitable because you will not be able to strapping with them as you wish, and there should be at least the thickness of a finger between splint and splint."
E si le malaute es ledit per las extremitatz de las stelas aprop la strictura en les locs sas, lahoras pausa dejos aquelas de stopa leon o lana carmenada entro que aquo no li fassa lesio.	"And if the patient feels pain at the ends of the splints near the strapping in the raw places, then pause over those with linen or wool wadding until that does not cause him injury."
Alcunas veguadas fractura es am plagua, e accideys disrupcio en la codena, e yeu vindre am rememoracio en aquela en le capitol segon singularitat.	"Sometimes a fracture is with plague and occurs disruption in the elbow, as I remember in that one mentioned in the chapter on peculiarities."
E sapias que ges tot membre trencat no es streyt am stelhas al primier dia; la qual causa es quar le membre, quan es gran, no cove que pauses sobre lu stelhas sino aprop v dias o vii o mays, segon la tua seguratat de adveniment de apostema caut.	"And know that not every broken limb should be immediately splinted on the first day; for which reason is that when a limb is large, it is not necessary to pause over splints until about five or seven days have passed, according to your certainty of the advent of an abscess."
E aquesta es la manieyra dels emplaustres am les quals les Antics restauravan, les quals so pausatz sobre fractura e dislocacio e torcio.	"And this is the way in which the ancient embalmers used splints to restore fractures, dislocations and deformities."
Manieyra de emplaustra comu abruejat de restaurament de fractura, convenient a motas compleccios e majorment a las femnas e als efantz, quar es de aquo sobre le qual no ventz calor ni freg: e es que prenguas de polvera de moli, e es la medula de la farina que pen deves le movement de la mola en las paretz del moli.	"Way of splinting commonly used for the restoration of fractures, convenient for many complexities and especially for women and children, because it does not allow heat or friction; and that you take powdered chalk, which is the marrow of flour that you must take from the movement of the millstone on the walls of the mill."
E comfeys aquel ayssi cum es, sino que cribelles aquel am album de huou, e pausa la comfeccio de lu no-spessa ni subtil; e aprop usa de aquela.	"And prepare it thus as is, except that you sieve it with egg white and apply the mixture neither too thick nor too thin."
Autra manieyra de emplaustre restaurant fractura e dislocacio e torcio: recipe de assafetida, de lapdanum, de acacia, de enula, e migrach, que es razit de milgraner salvage, de totz ana drac. x; de mirra e aloen ana drac. v; alochil ana drac. xx; totz sian trissatz e cribellatz e sian mesclatz am aygua alichil o am album de huou si la compleccio del malaute es scalfada; e aprop usa de aquest emplaustre, quar es de bona composicio e restaura les osses trencatz leugierament, e confereys a motz homes.	"Another way of splinting for the restoration of fractures, dislocations and deformities: take asafetida, laudanum, acacia, enula, and millet flour which is rye ground with all things mixed together in equal amounts; mirra and aloins each five drachms; alochil twenty drachms; all are finely powdered and sieved and mixed with water of aloe or egg white if the condition of the patient is scabbed. And apply this plaster, for it is of good composition and restores lightly broken bones, and it is suitable for many people."
Autra manieyra de emplaustre le qual comfereys a fractura e torcio: recipe migrach e met de altea blanca ana drac. x; de mirra e de aloen ana drac v; de acacia drac. vi; de bol armenic drac. .xx.	"Another way of splinting that suits fractures and deformities: take millet flour and white lead each ten drachms, mirra and aloins each five drachms, acacia six drachms, and dragon's blood twenty drachms."
Totz sian trissatz en mortier am mota contricio, e sian cribellatz, e sian comfitz am aygua o am album de huou e sia administrat.	"All are ground in a mortar with much trouble, sifted, and mixed with water or egg white to be administered."
Manieyra de emplaustre a juncturas e osses separatz de lors locs, e seda dolor accident en aquels e a fissuras e fractaduras: sia presa lana sutza e sia submersa en vi agre e oli cuyt e sia pausat sobre le loc.	"Way of splinting for joints and bones separated from their places, and also for pains that happen in those parts and for fissures and fractures: take clean wool and immerse it in vinegar and oil of cypress and apply it to the place."
Mays en aquest emplastre no es vertut de restauracio, de apostema caut e expelleys dolors propriament.	"But in this plaster there is virtue of restoration, of drawing out an abscess, and expelling pains specifically."
Autra manieyra de emplastre que restaura os trancat: pren fuelas de figuier sort e fuelas de papaver salvatge; contereys tot e fay emplastre de lor.	"Another way to make a plaster that restores broken bones: take leaves of fig tree and leaves of wild poppy; count them all and make a plaster of them."
Manieyra de emplastre abreujat aministrat deves la restauracio de fractura de os e quan tu voles resolucio del romanent de apostema: recipe razitz de altea, de camamilla e flors de violes, de farina de ers, de totz ana partida i; sian totz trissatz e sian cofitz am vi, si·l membre no es scalfat.	"Way of making a plaster briefly administered for the restoration of fractures of bone and when you want resolution of the remaining abscess: take powders of white lead, chamomile flowers, violet flowers, barley flour, all equal parts; grind them all and mix them with wine if the limb is not inflamed."
Mays si es scalfat, lahoras comfeys aquel am aygua de coliandre humit o am aygua e usa de lu.	"But if it is inflamed, then prepare it with water of fresh coriander or water and apply it."
Autra manieyra de emplastra pus fort en resolucio que aquest primier, quan accideys apostema dur deves la restauracio del membre: recipe de razitz de altea e de semensa de li, e de balaustia, e mellilot, majorana, flors de viol, de camamilla, de totz ana partida i engual; totz sian trissatz e sian cofitz am aygua de sauze o am aygua dousa o am vi, tot aquo segon la qualitat del membre e le repaus de la color de lu.	"Another way of making a plaster even stronger in resolution than the first one when there occurs a hard abscess during the restoration of the limb: take powders of white lead and its seeds, balm, millet flour, marjoram flowers, violet flowers, chamomile flowers, all equal parts cooked together; grind them all and mix them with water of willow or sweet water or wine, according to the quality of the limb and the rest of its color."
Mays Ypocras no diyssec en le sieu libre que sia pausat sobre le membre trenquat deves la restauracio de lu sino cerot fayt de cera e de oli e no autre causa; e recomtec que sia migier entre grossitut e subtilitat.	"But Hippocrates does not specify in his book that splints should be applied to the broken limb during its restoration, but rather wax made of wax and oil only for no other reason; and he recommends that it should be medium between thickness and subtlety."
Mays a Gualia es vist que sian pausatz sobre le membre trencat deves la restauracio de lu e las causas en las quals es exsiccacio am petit de caliditat so ayssi cum mirra, enses e semblantz a lor de aquelas causas que havem recomtadas.	"But in Galen it is seen that splints should be applied to the broken limb during its restoration and the causes for which there is drying with little heat are as follows: such as mirra, incense, and similar ones of those causes that we have recommended."
Manieyra de emplastre que comfereys a lesio e dolor: recipe migat, de cezes, de pels de home inscizes o pena de auzel, e de altea, e sal, partidas enguals; sian trissatz e cribellatz e sian cofitz, e sia fayt emplastre.	"Way of making a plaster that alleviates injury and pain: take myrrh, resin, human skin shavings or bird feathers, white lead, salt equal parts ground together; grind them and sift them and mix them to make a plaster."
Mays la quantitat segon la qual cove que romangua la liadura e aprop sia disliada, es que consideres si no es accidit dolor ni pruziment ni le os es trencat no es maugut de son loc, lahoras tu no deslies de motz jorns.	If the amount by which the ligature should remain and then be untied is such that you consider whether pain or pressure has occurred nor the bone broken from its place, then do not untie too quickly.
E si accideys al loc dolor vehement o prusiment o imflacio, lahoras tu te coyte o deslie aquel en la hora, e osta le emplastre de lu.	And if intense pain or pressure or inflammation occurs there, then you should cut it or untie it at that moment and apply the plaster to it.
E pren drap de li e spongia marina leon humida, e submergeys aquela en aygua tebeza, e am aquela lava le loc entro que cesse aquel pruziment e la dolor sia sedada; e aprop layssa repausar le membre per una hora; e aprop pausa sobre lu lana sutza submersa en vi agre e oli o oli rozat, e lia sobre lu per una nuoyt entro que sias segur de apostema caut, e que repause la imflacio del membre, e sia remauguda la dolor de lu.	Take linen cloth and sea sponge moistened in warm water, submerge it in tepid water, and with that wash the internal part until pressure and pain cease; then let the limb rest for an hour. Afterwards, apply poultice made of flaxseed submerged in vinegar and oil or rose oil, and lay it on it for a night so that you are sure of cauterizing the apostema and that the inflammation of the limb has subsided and its pain is relieved.
E aprop itera aquela strictura subtil e emplastre petit e no·l strenhas per la tua constriccio primieyra, e subtilia am aquel entro que sia sanat.	Then iterate that subtle ligature and apply a small plaster and not tighten too much with your first tightening, and subtly continue until it is healed.
E si vezes que le apostema e la rogor e la dolor e la imflacio e tots les accidentz ja so remaugutz de tot, e indigeysses de emplastre e de strictura, lahoras tu itera aquel ayssi cum has fayt al comensant engualment.	And if at times the apostema and heat and pain and inflammation and all accidents are completely relieved, and you need plaster and ligature, then repeat that as you did at the beginning.
E si no accideys al membre alcuna causa de aquelas que havem ditas, lahoras no deslies aquel sino aprop tres dias o quatre o v o vii; e alcunas veguadas tot aquo es layssat per xx dias segon que a tu appar per la desliadura del membre, ayssi cum havem dit, entro que la fractura adhereys, e se acosta a la coagulacio de la carn sobre aquel.	And if no cause of those mentioned occurs in the limb, then you should not untie it but let it remain for three or four days or five or seven; and sometimes all that is left is for twenty days according to what appears to you through the untying of the limb, as we have said, until the fracture adheres and approaches coagulation of the flesh on that.
E lahoras ajusta en la strictura mays que en la tua strictura primieyra tota, e ayusta en la engrossacio de la vianda del malaute, segon que es precedida la rememoracio de lu.	Then tighten the ligature more than your first tightening completely, and adjust it according to the thickness of the flesh of the sick person, according to what is remembered about it.
Mays si tu vezes le loc de la fractura ja desiccar e extenuar mays que no cove, lahoras sapias que·l nutriment es prohibit pervenir ad aquel; e donc embroca aquel am aygua tebeza deves tota veguada que delias aquel; e sia aquo en totz tres dias; e alleuja la strictura un petit, e per aquesta operacio corr al membre le nutriment, e es sanat leugierament.	But if the place of the fracture dries and wastes more than it should, then know that nourishment is prohibited from coming to that area. Therefore, moisten that with warm water every time you untie it, and do this for all three days; and loosen the ligature a little, and through this operation the limb receives nourishment and is easily healed.
Mays aquo que fan les fols restauradors de la fractura del membre autra veguada quan no es restaurat al comensament, segon que cove, e es restaurat segon tortuositat, es error segon la operacio de lor, e temor gran, e si fos dreyturier aquo agrandit les Antics en lors libres e agueran am aquo obrat.	But what foolish restorers of the fracture of the limb do at another time when it is not restored at first, according to what is necessary, and is restored crookedly, is an error according to their operation, and great fear, and if that were rightly done the Ancients increased in their books and taught with that operated.
E yeu no he vist ad alcu de lor aquo far, per que es pus razonable que aquo no fassa.	And I have not seen any of them do that, so it is more reasonable that they should not do it.
Capitol segon: De fractura quan accideys en le cap.	Chapter Second: Of fracture when it occurs in the head
Las specias de fracturas son motas, e las figuras de lor son diversas, e las causas son distinctas, quar de fracturas alcuna es fayta per percussio de spaza, e la percussio osta tot le os entro al ciphac, le qual es dejos le os, ayssi cum fay ayssa en le fust, e per aquo aquesta specia es nompnada ascial; o la spaza inscideys alcuna partida del os, e inscideys la carn de lu e no passa la inscizio entro al derier de lu; e aquesta specia de fractura es nompnada levatio absoluta.	The types of fractures are many, and their figures are diverse, and their causes are distinct. For some fractures are caused by the impact of a blow, which shatters all the bone inside the skull, leaving the bone behind, just as it happens in wood, and this species is called "crushed"; or the blow cuts through some part of the bone without entering the brain, only cutting into the flesh of it; and this species of fracture is called "complete removal".
E la plagua de aquestas doas fracturas o es gran o pauca, e de fractura que es contricio o atricio; e causa de lu es percussio am poyra o cazement sobre peyra, e a lor semblantz.	The pain of these two fractures is either great or slight, and the cause of it is percussion with heavy force on bone.
E aquesta fractura o es penetrant que ja apropinqua al pannicol le qual es dejos le os; o es en la facia del os, e la plagua de aquestas doas fracturas o es gran o pauca.	This fracture may be penetrating and close to the muscle, or it may be on the bone's surface. The pain of these two fractures is either great or slight.
E de fractura es que es ameguada en le os, en la subtilitat del cabel petita, e per aquo es nompnada aquesta specia fractura capillar.	This fracture is hairline and thin like the finest thread of hair.
E es fractura que es fayta o per cazement o per percussio de peyra e a lu semblantz, que fa intrar alcuna lamina del os a las partidas dedintz, e es fayta en le loc concavitat ayssi cum accideys als payroles de eram quan accideys a lor percussio e es partida de lor intrada a las partidas dedintz.	This fracture is made either by falling or by being struck on the bone. It causes some of the bone's lamellae to enter its interior, and it occurs in the concave location, as happens with sparrows when they are struck and their bones become split from within.
E majorment es fayt aquo en les cors de osses humitz, ayssi cum so caps de efantz.	This commonly occurs in the bodies of moist bones, such as the heads of infants.
E so a totas aquestas specias fracturas satagias, so son pessas ayssi cum stelhas separadas.	And so, all these types of fractures are like stars separated from each other.
E yeu vindre am reremoracio de tot aquo en son loc.	And I have spoken about all this in its proper place.
E conoyssem totas aquestas specias de fractura per deteccio sobre aquelas e per inquisicio de lor am tentas e ostament de carn corrumpuda que es sobre lor.	I know all these types of fracture through detection by touch, and through inquiry using probes and the smell of rotting flesh that is on them.
E specia capillar es conoguda per aysso que es descubert sobre le os, e es abstergit, e linit sobre lu am tentha, quar la fractura appar negra.	The capillary type fracture is recognized in this way: it appears as an opening on the bone, which can be wiped away. When it is felt with a probe, it looks black.
Mays en la curacio de fractura considera al comensament les accidentz del malaute, e lahoras si tu vezes per los accidentz que signifique per significacio manifesta sobre paor, ayssi cum es vomit de colera, e extencio, e perdement de entendament, e abscizio de votz, e sincopi, e febre acuta, e eyssiment dels huels e rogor de aquels, e semblantz a lor dels accidentz en las majors disposicios, ses dopte no es sanat.	In the treatment of fractures, first consider the symptoms of the illness. Then, if you see signs that indicate pain that is obvious and manifest, such as vomiting due to cholera, extension, loss of consciousness, fainting spells, fever, sweating from the eyes and reddening of those areas, and similar accidents in the greater parts of the body, do not attempt to heal it until it is clear.
E si vezes accidentz no-correntz tu speras salut, lahoras tu comensa la curacio de lu.	And if you see non-current accidents (i.e., symptoms that are not typical of fractures), then you can begin treating the fracture.
La qual causa es quar si es vengut a tu le plaguat en le comensament cum es plaguat e aquo es en les dias de ivern, lahoras cove que tu studias en le ostament del os denant le dia xiiii segon tota disposicio.	"The cause of this is that if it has come to you lately in the beginning as it was and it is now during the winter days, then it is necessary for you to study the bone before the day 14th according to all disposition."
E si es en les dias d’estiu, lahoras cove que te coytes ostar le os denant le vii dia, habantz que aquo que es dejos le os sia corromput del pannicol, e que accidescan les accidentz que havem recomtatz.	"And if it is during the summer days, then you must remove the bone before the seventh day, having made sure that what remains of the bone is corrupted with the flesh, and that the accidents we have mentioned occur."
E si la fractura ja es pervenguda al pannicol cubrent le cervel, e es am partidas menudas e atricio, lahoras cove que inscidas la partida conminuta e atrita, segon que yeu recomtare a tu.	"And if the fracture has already reached the flesh covering the brain, and is in several small parts and crushed, then you must insert the compressed and crushed powder, according to what I will tell you."
E es que tu razas le cap del malaute plaguat, e descuebres sobre le os segon costuma e manieyra a tu possible segon la figura de la plagua, e que sia leugier sobre le malaute.	"And if the head of the patient is affected by the disease, and you uncover it according to your custom and manner as much as possible following the figure of the disease, and that it be light upon the patient."
E si accideys a tu deves la deteccio del os, fluxs de sanc o apostema caut, lahora tu te oppausa a lu am aquo que cove, e es que huemplas le loc de draps infuzes en vi e oli rozat, e fassa repausar la plagua entro que sia sedat le apostema, e sies segur de fluxs del sanc; e aprop comensa en la circuicio del os e en la ablatio de lu.	"And if it happens to you that you detect the bone with blood flowing or a hot boil, then you should pause with this, and it is appropriate that you prepare a place with cloths infused in wine and rose oil, and let the disease rest until the boil is sedated, and be sure of the flow of blood; and then begin in the circumcision of the bone and its ablation."
E aquo sia segon una de dos manieyras de operacio.	"And this is according to one of two operative methods."
E la una manieyra es que tu inscidas le os am inscisori de streyt tal, e aquesta es la forma de lu: E aprop administra un autre inscissori aquest, un pauc pus lat que aquel; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	"And the first method is that you insert the bone with a straight incision of this form:
E aprop administra mays le inscissori pus lat que·l segon.	And next, administer more of the incisors but broader than the second ones.
E cove que sia deves tu nombre de inscissoris diverses, dels quals alcus so pus latz que alcus autres; e alcus de lor so pus breus que·ls autres e sian en le derier de acuitat de las suas extremitatz, e sian de ferr indi o felod.	You must have several different incisors available, some of which are broader than others; some are shorter than others and should be very sharp at their tips, made of iron or steel.
E usa de lor am facilitat en percussio sobre le inscissori per so que no concutesca le cap e leda aquel.	And use them with ease in percussion to ensure you do not hit the head and hurt that person
E si le os es fort, dur, lahoras cove que perfores en le circuit de lu denant que tu administres los inscissoris am les taravels, les quals so nomnatz taravels no-profundantz.	And if the bone is strong and hard, you should then drill around it first before administering the chisels with the non-depth gauges
E no so nomnatz ayssi sino quar aquels no pausan le terme de l’os del test ad aquo que es aprop lu, per so quar al taravel es redonda extremitat o marge sobre aquel que es dejos le cap de lu agut semblant a marge o a cercle petit, le qual prohibeys esser submergit e passar la spissitut del os.	And they are not called thus but rather those which do not exceed the limit of the bone of the head at that point where it is near because at the chisel's rounded end or edge above it, there should be a margin on either side of the sharp point similar to an edge or small circle, which prevents being submerged and passing through the thickness of the bone.
E es convenient que tu prenguas de aquestz taravels gran nombre dels quals quascu convenesca a la spicitut de quascun os, entro que sia a tu present en tottz testz del cervel la extremitat del qual sia aguda, la quantitat en longitut e brevitat sia segon la quantitat de spicitut de aquest test.	It is advisable that you take many of these gauges, each convenient for the thickness of each bone, so that for every skull present, the tip of the gauge should be sharp and its length and width should correspond to the thickness of that skull.
E aquesta es la forma de tres specias de teravels: La qualitat de perforar en le circuit del os trencat es que pauses le teravel sobre le os e revolvas aquel am les tieus ditz entro que sapias que l’os ja es penetrat; e aprop permuda le terevel ad autre loc, e pausa aquo que es entre tot trauc la quantitat de la grosseza del ray o enviro aquo.	And this is the shape of three types of gauges:
E aprop inscideys am inscissoris aquo que es entre quascun trauc del os, e fay aquel pus subtil que podes sobre aquo en fi de levitat, ayssi cum havem dit, entro que erradiques le os, o am la tua ma, o am alcuna autra causa per alcus sturmentz les quals auras apparelhatz ad aquo, ayssi cum tanalhas e forceps subtils.	E aprop inscideys am inscissoris aquo que es entre quascun trauc del os: "Then proceed to cut with scissors between each track of the bone:"
E cove que tu guardes am tota cautela que l’inscissori no toque alcuna causa del ciphac.	"And be sure to take all precautions so that the scissors do not touch any part of the hip."
E donc cum auras circuit le os perforan, e sira separat del ciphac si es continuat am lu, e auras aquel extrayt, cove que razas e enguales aquel en la asperitat de lu de aquo que es en le os am autra sturment semblant a inscissori, mays empero cove que sia pus teon e pus subtil que les autres inscissoris.	"And then when you have circumcised the bone and separated it from the hip if it is attached to it, take out that piece with care, scraping and polishing it on its roughness in order that it may be as thin and subtle as possible."
E si roman alcuna partida dels osses petitz e satagias, lahoras pren aquela am facilitat am aquo que es deves tu dels sturmentz; e aprop aquo cura la plagua am lichinis e enguentz les quals havem ditz.	"And if any fragment of the little bones escapes and is lost, then promptly take it with the suitable tool."
E l’autra manieyra de operacio es leugiera, longinqua de paor, la qual diyssec Gualia e la lauzec per gran lausor; e aquest es le sermo de lu: necessari es a tu en le comensament que comenses descobrir la partida del os del loc en le qual es la fractura pus vehement e pus manifesta, entro que quan auras descubert aquela partida e auras pausat dejos lu la extremitat de aquest inscissori lent e alegre del qual aquesta es la forma:	"And the other way of operating is light and free from fear, which Guglielmo Guadagni describes with great praise; this is his method:
E es que la partida lenticular es leon e no inscideys alcuna causa, e la partida aguda es de lu en dos latz avantz en longitut, ayssi cum vezes; que la partida lenticular sia ajustada al ciphac am la facia de lu inscident aguda en le os.	The lens-shaped incision is made first and no cause is inscribed. The acute incision is made in two directions ahead in length thus: so that the lens-shaped incision fits onto the hip joint with the sharp edge of the bone incident upon it.
E aprop percuteys sobre le inscissori de una partida am un petit malhet entro que inscidas tot le os am facilitat ayssi cum es revolvut, e tu sias segur del pannicol que no accida en lu accident que temas en denguna manieyra, e si le medicant14 era le pus fol de totz les homes e le mays ignorant de lor; certament, e si era dorment.	You should percuss the incision edges of one section with a small hammer that incises all the bone easily as it is turned. And you should be sure of the paniculus [sic] so that no accident happens in any manner. Certainly, if the medicant was the most foolish of all men and the most ignorant of them; certainly, he was asleep.
Lahoras si romania alcuna causa annexa al os del pannicol en alcus locs de os, inscidira aquel de lu am la extremitat del inscissori aquel lenticular, e deliuraria aquel de lu am facilitat, quar es deliurat de lu ses nocument e ses paor.	If the panniculous causes any attachment to the bone in certain places, incise that of it with the extremity of the lenticular incision and detach that from it easily; for it is detached from it without harm or fear.
E si fractura del os no penetra entro al pannicol, e aquo que es abscidit o es ostat del os es la facia de lu, e roman en lu asperitat e satagias subtils, lahoras cove que razas aquela asperitat e erradiques aquelas satagias am razoris subtils per les quals tu has preparat le nombre, de diversas quantitatz per que sia a tu possible administrar de aquels en tot loc les pus convenientz de lor e le pus dreyt de aquels segon aquo en que te perduzeys la tua operacio aquel os trencat e la figura de lu.	And if the fracture of the bone does not penetrate into the panniculus, and that which is cut off or remains on the bone is its face, being rough and with subtle points, then it is necessary to scrape that roughness and eradicate those points with sharp razors prepared for the number, of diverse quantities so that you can administer them in all places where they are most convenient and straight according to how you have planned your operation upon that broken bone and the figure of it.
E cove que administres en la tua razio am la qual razes le os al comensament le pus lat de aquels razoris, e aprop usa aprop lu del pus subtil de lu, e no cesses far aquo segon continuitat entro que pervenguas ad aministrar le pus teon e·l pus subtil de totz aquels.	And it is necessary that you use in your razing of the bone at its beginning the widest razor that you have, and gradually use the narrower ones, and do not cease doing so continuously until you arrive to administer the thinnest and sharpest one of all.
Mays en quascuna de las autras fracturas petitas capillars e fractura subtil, cove que administres cura segon aquo que perduseys ad rectificacio de lu.	But in each of the other small capillary fractures and subtle fractures, you should administer cure according to how you have planned for their rectification.
E es causa que no es ameguada sobre totz les quals han studi en aquela art.	And it is cause that it should not be diminished among all those who have studied in this art.
E stec sobre aquo que nos scriut havem mostrat en grans fracturas.	And this is what we have shown concerning the treatment of large fractures
E si le pannicol es retangut quan tu erradiques le os, lahoras cove que prenguas drap de li segon la quantitat de la plagua, e submergeys aquel en oli rozat, e pausa aquel sobre le orrifici de la plagua; e aprop pren autre drap doblat o triplicat e submergeys lu en vi e oli rozat e pausa aquel sobre drap prim e fay aquo al pus leugierament que podes sobre aquel, que no graves le ciphac; e aprop administra sobre aquel liament lat, e no strenhas aquel sino per quantitat que tengua la plagua tant solament.	And if the panniculus is torn when you eradicate the bone, then you should take cloth according to the quantity of the wound and immerse it in rose oil and place it upon the opening of the wound. Then take another folded or tripled cloth, immerse it in wine and rose oil, and place it upon the first cloth and do this as lightly as possible so that you do not press down on the flesh; then apply a thick bandage and do not bind it too tightly but only according to the quantity that the wound can take alone.
E layssa aquel am aquesta cura per un dia o per dos entro que sias segur de apostema caut; e aprop deslia aquel e aprop aministra medicinas am las quals es superflua siccitat, ayssi cum razitz de lin e farina de errs, e polvera de enses e de aristologia, e de semblantz ad aquels.	And leave it with this cure for one or two days until you are sure that there is no impending abscess. Then untie it and apply medications which promote dryness, such as linseed ointment, powdered frankincense and aloe, and similar powders.
E es que tu fassas de aquestas medicinas polvera que sia pulverizada sobre la plagua, ayssi cum son secas; e universalment, administra en aquel tota medicina de proprietat de la qual es que abstergesca e no mordique.	And you should make these medications into powders which are finely powdered and applied dry upon the wound. Generally speaking, apply whatever medicine has the property of cleaning and not irritating.
E guarda te segon la tua vertut que la plagua en la tua curacio sia neta; e no sia en lu surdicia de enguent ni autra; ni no layssas agreguar virulencia en lu; quar quan es ajustada sobre le pannicol del cervel, corromp aquel e poyreys aquel, e accideys sobre le malaute aprop aquo malicia maligna.	And guard with your skill that the wound in your care is clean and not surging with moisture or any other impurity. Do not allow it to become virulent, for when it becomes attached to the panniculus of the brain, it corrupts it and causes illness, sometimes even a malignant one.
E accideys en le ciphac del cap, cum de lu es mondificat le os e majorment quan es menspresada la cura de lu, e es negror en la superficia de lu; e donc considera lahoras si accideys al malaute les accidentz que havem ditz, sapias que es parnicios ses tot dopte.	And it happens in the flesh of the head, especially when the bone has been freed and during the care of it, that blackness appears on its surface. And therefore consider at this time if you are suffering from any of the accidents which we have mentioned, for then you will know that they are incurable without doubt.
E si no accideys negror sino de la medicina que es pausada desus, e es en vertut de aquela medicina que fassa aquela negror, lahoras cove que tu prenguas de mel una partida e de oli rozat partidas iii, e am aquels linieys un drap, e aprop pausa aquel sobre le ciphac; e aprop cura aquel am las specias de curacio que conveneys entro que sia sanat.	And if there is no blackness except from the medication which has been applied, and that medication causes this blackness, then you should take a portion of honey and three portions of rose oil, mix them together with a cloth, and place it upon the flesh. Then treat it according to the appropriate methods until it heals.
Capitol .iii.	Chapter III
De restauracio del nas quan es trincat.	Concerning the restoration of the nose when it is crushed
Sapias que no es trencat del nas sino doas partidas ensemps pus sobiranas, o una de aquelas alcunas veguadas, per so quar en lu has dos osses, quar la partida dejos es cartillaginosa, e no es trencada e no accideys a lu sino atricio e tortuositat e sinuitat.	Know that the nose is not broken except when both parts are crushed simultaneously and lifted up, or one of them is displaced. For there are two bones in it, with the cartilaginous part being unbroken; nothing happens to it except friction, distortion, and curvature.
Mays si es trencada la una de las doas partidas de lu, lahoras cove que tu intrometas le dit petit en le sieu nas, e que engualhas aquela fractura dedintz am le tieu dit indic, e am le dit pous defora, entro que retorne le nas segon la sua figura natural.	But if one of the two parts of it is broken, then you should insert your little finger into its opening and reduce that fracture from within using your thumb and index finger from outside until the nose returns to its natural shape.
E sia fayt aquo per tu am facilitat, e guarda te que no caja per aquela tua operacio sobre le malaute delor.	And may you do this with ease, but be careful not to cause harm to the patient during your operation.
E si la fractura es en la pus sobirana partida del nas, e le dit no perve ad aquela, lahoras cove que sia equat am la extremitat del ray en le qual sia petita grossitut.	And if the fracture is in the upper part of the nose and your finger cannot reach it, then use a probe with a small thickness at its end to reduce the fracture.
E si la fractura es en doas partidas, lahoras tu fay le semblant de aquo.	And if the fracture is in both parts, then follow this procedure accordingly.
E coyta te am restauracio de lu en le primier dia de la fractura, si es possible; e sino, lahoras aprop le vii o·l x deves le repaus del apostema caut.	Be careful to restore it on the first day after the fracture if possible; but if not, then you should wait until the seventh or eighth day until the swelling has subsided.
E aprop entromet en la extremitat del nas una meca de drap de li, si la fractura es en una partida, o metz doas calguas, si la fractura es en doas partidas, e sia en la calgua grossitut de tanta quantitat que umpla le trauc del nas.	And then insert into the tip of the nose a wick made from linen cloth if the fracture is in one part, or two cotton swabs if it is in both parts, with their thickness being enough to fill the space within the nose.
E diysso alcus dels antics restauradors que las calguas sian enfundudas en boder, e sian permudadas en tot dia, mays no es vist a mi; habantz cove que la meca sia enfunduda en album de huou comfit am polvera de moli; e aprop layssa la qualgua entro que l’os sia fermat e sia endurazida la cartillage.	Some ancient restorers say that the cotton swabs should be wrapped in wool and changed every day, but this is not visible to me. Instead, the wick should be soaked in egg white mixed with rose oil powder, and then left in place until the bone has set and the cartilage has hardened.
E alcunas veguadas sia entromes en le nas, en loc de calgua, pena de auca pus que es envolopada de drap de li leon; e sia que ja te la fractura del nas pus vehement e que le malaute no sia prohibit de inspiracio.	Sometimes, instead of cotton swabs, a pledget made from linen cloth is inserted into the nose, but this should only be done when there is no inflammation and when the fracture of the nose is not severe enough to prevent breathing.
E aquesta causa no es a tu necessaria; e si voles, fay aquo, e si voles, fay calguas.	This method is not necessary for you, so if you wish, do it this way, but if you prefer, use cotton swabs instead.
E si accideys autra veguada apostema caut, emplastra le nas am cerot o am coto enfus en vi agre e oli rozat, o am diaquilon.	But if there is another swelling, apply to the nose cerote or cotton soaked in vinegar and rose oil, or use diacylion.
Mays si no accideys apostema caut, lahoras cove que emplaustres aquel defora am farina de sizami e am polvera de enses cofitz am album de huou; e aprop pausa sobre lu stopa leon, e no lies le nas am alcuna causa.	But if there is no swelling, then apply externally to the nose a mixture of sesame flour and powdered rose oil with egg white. Then cover it with a linen bandage and do not allow the patient to blow their nose for any reason.
Mays si so trencats les osses del nas am fractura petita o so conminuitz, lahoras cove que scindas sobre aquels, e extraguas aquels am insturmentz que conveno ad aquels; e aprop cos la scissura, e cura aquela am aquo que encarna e consolida, e am emplastres ad aquo convenientz.	But if the bones of the nose are broken with a small fracture or are crushed together, then you should cut over them and extract those which need to be removed using appropriate instruments. Then close the incision and treat it with something that stimulates healing and promotes consolidation, along with suitable plasters.
E si accideys plagua dedintz le nas, lahoras cove que cures aquela am calguas e administra canulas de plom entro que sia de tot sanat.	And if there is an ulcer inside the nose, then you should treat it with cotton swabs and administer leaden tubes until it is completely healed.
Capitol .iiii.	Chapter IV
De restauracio de la mandibula quan es trincada.	Concerning the restoration of the jaw when it is crushed
Quan la mandibula dejos es rompuda e la fractura de lu no es am plagua, reguarda lahoras si la fractura es deforas tant solament, e no es trencada en dos e es curvada a las partidas dedintz, lahoras la sua cognicio es leugiera.	When the left jawbone is broken and the fracture does not involve an ulcer, first examine whether the fracture is only external, with the bone being broken into two parts and bent inward at its ends. If this is the case, then recognizing it will be easy.
E cove donc, si la fractura es en la part dreyta, que tu intrometas le tieu indic senestre en la boca del malaute; e semblantment si la fractura es an la mandibula senestra, lahoras intromet le dit indic de la ma dreyta; e impelleys am aquel la gilbositat de la fractura dedintz am facilitat a las partidas defora, am la tua autra ma de la partida defora del os; am aquel decentment equa aquelam.	And then, if the fracture is on the right side, insert your left index finger into the patient's mouth and press gently on the swelling of the fracture from inside with your other hand placed outside the bone. Do the same if the fracture is on the left jawbone, using your right index finger instead.
E si la fractura de la mandibula ja es separada en doas, lahoras cove que administres extensio de doas partz segon rectitut entro que sia possibla la equacio de lu.	"If the fracture of the jawbone is already separated into two parts, then you must apply extension to both parts according to the straightness between them in order for it to be possible to bring them together."
E si accideys conmocio de dentz a disrupcio, lahoras strenh aquelas de las quals speras que romandran am fil de aur o de argent o de ceda; e aprop pausa sobre la mandibula trencada cerot, e aprop pausa sobre lu drap duplicat, e pausa sobre le drap gran stelha decentment fayta, o una pessa de sola engual a la longitut de la mandibula; e aprop lia aquela desus segon que a tu es apparelhada la liadura de lu e que conveneys la applicacio, entro que no es destruida.	"If it happens that some teeth are loose or displaced, then reinforce those which you expect will break with gold or silver wire or gutta-percha; and first apply a compress over the broken jawbone and another over the doubled cloth, and one over the large round pad properly made, or a rolled-up bandage along the length of the jawbone. Then tie it down above according to how you have prepared its binding and what seems appropriate, so that it is not destroyed."
E comanda al malaute que use de repaus e tranquilitat, e pausa la vianda de lu sorbicios leons.	"Command the patient to rest and be calm, and keep their diet soft and liquid."
E si extimas que ja es alterada la figura en alcuna manieyra, lahoras tu te coyta e deslia aquel al tertz dia; e aprop rectifica aquo que ja es alterat de lu e emplaustra aquel am polvera de moli, am album de huou, o am farina de cisami, pus que tu auras ostat le cerot de lu, e pausa sobre le emplastra lana leon.	"If you notice that the figure has already been altered in some way, then on the third day cut and remove it; and then correct what is already altered from it and apply plaster with powdered chalk, album of egg white, or semolina flour, since you will have removed the compress from it, and cover it with a soft linen dressing."
E adonc cum sta annex e ajustat aquel emplastre sobre lu, e la disposicio del os no es alterada, layssa aquel, que no le deslies entro que sia sanat e strenh la fractura; quar motas veguadas aquesta fractura es streyta en tres sempmanas.	"And then when the plaster is attached and adjusted over it, and if the position of the bone is not altered, leave it alone until it is healed and the fracture has become strong; for many times this fracture becomes firm in three weeks."
E si autra veguada accida apostema caut, lahoras administra aquo que havem dit motas veguadas en la sedacio de lu entro que sia sanat, e sia remaugut aquel apostema.	"And if another time an abscess occurs, then administer what has been said many times in the treatment of it until it is healed and the abscess is removed."
E si la fractura es am plagua, lahoras considera si es pessa del os separada o satagias, lahoras tu te subtilia que ostes aquelas satagias am aquo que conveneys ad aquo en la remocio de aquelas dels sturmentz.	"And if the fracture is with pus, then consider whether it is separated or connected; and if it is connected, then carefully remove those connections with what seems appropriate for their removal by means of the instruments."
E si le orrifici de la plagua es streyt, lahoras tu le amplifique am le fleubotomi segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	"And if the opening of the pus is narrow, then widen it with a trocar according to your necessity."
E aprop quan tu auras ostat aquelas satagias, e de aquelas no sira remaugut re, lahoras tu cos le orrifici de la plagua si es ampla; e sino, pausa sobre aquela un dels emplaustres que conveneysso ad aquo e encarnan aquela, entro que sia sanada.	"And then when you have removed those connections and if there is nothing remaining from them, then close the opening of the pus if it is large; but if not, then cover it with one of the plasters that seems appropriate for it and bind it until it is healed."
Capitol .v.	Capítulo V.
De restauracio de la furcula quan es trinquada.	Chapter on restoring the clavicle when it is broken.
Motas veguadas es trencada la furcula de la partida denant deves le muscle, e aquela fractura es fayta en una de tres manieyras.	"Very often the collarbone breaks at its starting point in front of the muscle; this fracture occurs in one of three ways."
Quar o es trencada, o seperada, o es seperada en doas partz otra que no accidan satagias; e es leugier a la restauracio de lu; o es ayssi que accideysso en lu satagias, e es dificil a restauracio de lu; o es ayssi que la fractura es am plagua.	When it is broken, separated or separated into two parts without any displacement; and its restoration is easy;
E la operacio en aquela, quan la fractura es ses plagua, es que tu fassas esser present dos ministres, per so que la un tengua le adjutori e siegua la furcula trencada, e l’autre extenda le col ves aquela partida.	"And during that operation, when the fracture is not yet set, have two assistants present: one to hold the crutch and follow the broken collarbone, and the other to extend the patient's neck towards that direction."
E aprop enguala la fractura am les tieus ditz entro que sia fayta la forma de lu segon que cove, e no sia en lu eminencia pauca ni concavitat.	"And then bring together the ends of the fracture in such a way that it matches its original shape as closely as possible, ensuring there are no gaps or depressions."
E si indigeysses mes de extencio, lahoras cove que pauses dejos le titillic del malaute spera de drap o de lana, e sia la grandesa de lu segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat; e exten e eleva la furcula e coarta la spera am la tua ma entro que enguales la frectura segon que cove.	"And if more extension is needed, then place a pad of cloth or wool behind the patient's chest and shoulder, whose size should correspond to your needs; extend and raise the collarbone using this pad and press it with your hand while bringing together the fracture as necessary."
E si no podes atirar la extremitat de la furcula a las partidas defora, per so quar es pervenguda al preon, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sua cervitz, e pauses sobre le muscle de lu un coyssi migier en grandeza.	"And if you cannot bring the end of the collarbone to its proper position outside, then have the patient lie on their back and place a rolled-up towel of appropriate size under the shoulder blade on the affected side."
E le ministre prema le muscle de lu a las partidas dejos entro que l’os de la furcula sia elevat que es en le preon en sus, e lahoras tu rectifique la fractura e enguala aquela am les tieus ditz.	"And the assistant presses on the shoulder blade at its upper edge until the collarbone is raised and returned to its proper position; then you can reduce the fracture and bring together the ends as needed."
Mays si sentes satagias de la furcula e so maugudas, lahoras cove que fendes sobre aquela e extraguas aquelas satagias am facilitat.	"But if you feel spurs or projections from the collarbone that are sharp and painful, then you should cut over them and remove those projections with ease."
E si es retenguda en le os, lahoras tu ingenia inscisio de lu am un dels inscissoris les quals has apparelhatz ad aquo, pus que havias pausat dejos la furcula le sturment que serve le ciphac; e es sturment de fust o de ferr del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	"And if it is retained within the bone, then you should make an incision into it using one of the incising instruments that you have brought with you for this purpose, since you had placed the collarbone on a wooden or iron instrument that serves as a splint; and this is the shape of such an instrument:"
E es semblant a culier del qual aquesta es la concavitat; e sia la sua latitut segon aquo que has necessitat de lu, segon la grandeza del os o la pauqueza de lu.	"And it resembles a spoon with this concavity; and its width should be according to your needs, corresponding to the size of the bone or the depth of the incision."
Mays la longitut de lu sia segon que es a tu possible a la operacio; que haja doas extremitatz ayssi cum vezes, e la una extremitat sia ample e l’autre streyta.	"But its length should be as short as possible for the operation; it should have two ends, one of which is wide and the other narrow."
E si la disrupcio de la plagua la qual has inscidida quan has extraytas la satagia del os es ampla, e yest segur de apostema caut, lahoras tu ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura.	"But if the tear in the pleura that you have made when removing the spur from the bone is large and you are certain of an impending abscess, then you should approximate the two edges of the pleura with sutures."
E si la disrupcio es pauca, o temes apostema caut, lahoras tu uemple la plagua am draps e pulvils segon la quantitat de la scissura de la plagua.	"But if the tear is small or you suspect an impending abscess, then you should fill the pleura with dressings and powders according to the size of the pleural opening."
E si accideys apostema caut, lahoras infon drap en vi agre e oli rozat e vi, e pausa sobre aquel.	"And if an abscess occurs, then apply a dressing made of wine vinegar, rose oil, and wine, and place it over that [abscess]."
Mays la strictura del os quan es ses plagua e ses seccio, es que pauses emplastre fayt de farina de moli am album de huou, e pausa sobre lu stopa leon, e aprop pausa la spera dejos le titillic de lu, si indigeyssas de aquela, e aprop pren humemate, so es torca la qual teno les Sarrazis , que sia mot longua, e sia latitut de lu de un palm o entorn aquel; e aprop pausa pulvils duplicatz sobre la stopa e l’emplastre; e aprop pren una stela de taula subtil de la qual la latitut d’ela sia de tres ditz e en longitut semblantment; e aprop envolopa aquela en drap, e aprop envolopa aquel drap am la stela en lo loc sobre le loc de la fractura; e aprop pausa humemati ayssi cum es revout, e revol aquela sobre le col de lu e dejos le titillic de lu sa e dejos le titillic de lu malaute, e reduzeys aquela sobre tota partida, e quan vezes que la strictura de la fractura am strictura descent, e es aquo que no es occultat sobre tu.	"But the tightening of the bone when the pleura and its section are closed is that you apply a plaster made of wheat flour with egg white, and place it over it; and similarly apply pressure with your hand over the collarbone if necessary, and also take a long bandage called 'torsion' by the Saracens, which should be about the width of a palm or somewhat more; and then fold it double over the plaster; and also take a thin table cloth strip about three fingers wide in length, wrap it around that bandage, and wind it around the collarbone and over both sides of it; and then apply torsion as needed, reducing it across all parts until the fracture is tightly bound together."
E tot, que no sia mauguda la stelha desobre le os trencat; e per so cove que tu vejas le malaute quascun dia, que quan le liament es mollificat o vezas la stela ja esser remauguda, lahoras tu rectifica aquo e strenh la liadura.	"And all of this is done so that the bandage does not slip off the broken bone; and therefore, you should check it each day to see if the wound has softened or if the bandage has slipped; and then you should adjust and tighten the bandage accordingly."
E aprop pausa le dormir del malaute sobre le col de lu, e pausa dejos le titillic de lu deves le dormir de lu en la nueyt un petit coyssi; per so que am aquel sia elevat le adjutori de lu del latz de aquel, e donc es elevada la la fractura de la furcula a elevacio del muscle; o sia le bras de lu liat al col de aquel.	"And also have the patient sleep on his back with his elbow elevated slightly off to the side of him at night; so that this helps elevate the broken collarbone away from the chest or prevents the arm from being pressed against the neck."
E no deslies le liament si no accideys en le loc prusiment o apostema, entro a xii dias.	"And do not remove the bandage unless it occurs in its proper place or there is an abscess, within twelve days."
E aprop renovelha le emplastre si has vista la facia de lu ad aquo, e ajusta en la strictura e restaura aquel e layssa entro que sia restaurat e sia coagulat la fractura de la furcula.	"And also renew the plaster if you see any discharge from it; adjust the bandage and restore that [bone], and leave it until it is restored and the collarbone fracture has healed."
E es strenguda e comfortada segon le mes en xxviii dias, e alcunas veguadas en alcus homes es fayt en mens de temps de aquel.	"And it becomes strong and comfortable in about twenty-eight days, although in some men it may take less time than that."
Capitol .vi.	Chapter VI
De restauracio de fractura de la spalla.	About the healing of fractures of the shoulder.
Spatula tart es trencada en le loc lat de lu e no so trencatz de lu sino les marges.	The blade of the scapula is broken on its lateral side and not just its edge but also its margins.
E donc quan es trencat le loc de lu — e es trencat en le mieg loc de lu — e no es conogut sino per tocament, lahoras segon que es la figura de la fractura sforsa te la preparacio de lu e reduzir aquela segon la figura natural en tota manieyra de engen la qual es a tu possible.	"Therefore, when the spot is broken - and it is broken in the middle of him - and it is known only by touch, then according to what is the shape of the fracture you should prepare for him and reduce that according to its natural figure in every way that is possible for you."
E aprop pausa sobre le loc polvera de moli am album de huou e stopa leon; e aprop pausa pulvil de drap duplicat; e aprop pausa sobre lu stela lada de taula subtil segon la quantitat de la spatula tota o mays un pauc.	"And then pause on the powder of ground aloe with albumen of egg and stop the bleeding; and then pause with doubled gauze poultice; and then pause on him with a subtle silvered table spoon according to the quantity of the whole spatula or a little more."
Mays si dejos la stela es concavitat en alcu dels locs de la spatula, lahoras tu enguala aquela concavitat am stopa leon, e aprop pueja la stela segon equalitat.	"If however the spoon has concavity in some of its places, then you should fill that concavity with stopple and then gently place the spoon according to equality."
E aprop strenh desus am humemati longua ab constriccio decent e am fermesa de la stela entro que no sia remauguda del sieu loc.	"And then strengthen it above with a long humid bandage with proper constriction and with firmness of the spoon within that it not be removed from its place."
E considera le liament en quascun dia; e totas veguadas que sia mollificat, lia autra veguada e stren le e equa la stela si es remauguda del sieu loc.	"And consider the dressing every day. And whenever it is softened, change it on another occasion and strengthen it and place the spoon if it has been removed from its place."
E jagua le malaute sobre le sieu latz sa.	"And judge the illness upon his own face."
E la spatula es restaurada en xx dias o en .xxv.	"And the spoon is restored in 20 days or at most 25."
E donc quan es complit aquest nombre, lahoras tu dissolveys le liament, e que tu scias ensegurat quar aquela es dels osses dels quals la cominicio no es temuda ni lor dissolucio.	"And when this number is completed, then you should dissolve the dressing, and know for certain that what has been accomplished belongs to those bones whose union is not feared nor their dissolution."
E si procezeys del loc del os pessa e pongeys dejos la codena, lahoras tu scindeys sobre lu, e osta le, e fay segon que havem dit en la fractura de la furcula de sadacio de apostema caut si accideys aqui.	"And if you are proceeding from the location of the heavy bone and place your finger there, then you should incise over it, drain it, and do according to what we have said in the fracture of the clavicle of suction of abscess if it occurs here."
Capitol .vii.	"Chapter VII."
De restauracio de la fractura del pietz.	"Of the restoration of a fracture of the foot."
Le pietz alcunas veguadas es romput en le mieg loc de lu e aquo tart endeve; mays las extremitatz de lu mot endeve que so ciccadas e comminuidas.	"Sometimes, especially in the middle of labor, the woman's pelvis breaks and this often happens suddenly; but its extremities move more slowly that they are curved and shattered."
E dels accidentz de lu quan es trencat le mieg de lu es que declina a las partidas dedintz e accideys a lu gran dolor, e dificultat en lo hale, e tos, e fort leu e vomeys sanc; e es declarada en lu cavitat en le os trencat e no es occulta al sentiment.	"And when the woman's pelvis breaks during childbirth, it tends to lean towards the inside and causes accidents such as intense pain, difficulty breathing, coughing, strong bleeding, and the cavity of the broken bone is evident to the touch."
E la restauracio de lu es que sia resupinat le malaute sobre le sieu dos, e pausa entre las spallas de lu un coyssi; e aprop prem als muscles de lu, e ajusta las costas de lu am las mas de dos costatz, e subtilia te en la operacio de lu e en la equacio segon tota manieyra que es ad aquo possibla e que conveneys ad aquo, entro que retorne la figura del os segon que cove.	"And the treatment of this is that the sick woman should be placed on her back, and a cushion should be placed between her thighs; and carefully press down on her muscles, adjust her spine with the support of two pillows, and take care in the operation according to all possible manner and what is convenient for her, until the figure of the bone returns to its proper place."
E aprop pausa sobre lu emplastre e estopa e pausa desobre astela de taula subtil de sauze o de caligi e de a lor semblantz en levitat, pus que tu envolopas aquela en drap; e aprop subtilia te en lian aquela sobre le os trencat que no sia maugut; e vay am liadura segon retonditat al dors alcunas veguadas, e strenh aquel am strictura decent; e aprop considera la liadura en tota hora, e quan es mollificada strenh aquela.	"And carefully place gauze and cotton on the plaster, and then place a subtle tablecloth of flax or calico on top, because you will wrap it in cloth; and carefully place that over the broken bone so that no harm comes to it; and wrap it around the back with bandages according to its shape several times, and tighten it with proper binding; and always check the bandage and when it becomes moist, tighten it."
E si necessitat provoca a desliament de aquela deves corrossio o pruziment, o dolor, o apostema que accideysso en le loc, lahoras tu coyta e deslia aquela e erradica le emplastre e rectifique aquo que accideys per aquo am manieyra de curacio de lu; e aprop reduzeys le emplastre, si vezes ad aquo la facia; e ajusta a lu strictura entro que sia sanat.	"And if it is necessary to remove the bandage due to discomfort or pressure, pain, or an abscess that occurs in the area, then carefully cut and untie that and remove the plaster, and rectify what has happened there with a manner of treating it; and also reduce the plaster, sometimes on the face; and adjust the binding until it is healed."
Capitol .viii.	"Chapter VIII."
De restauracio de las costas quan son trincadas.	"On the Treatment of Broken Ribs."
Sapias que fractura de las costas no catz sino en locs grosses que siegon le dos; e de las extremitatz de lor de la partida denant no accideys ad aquelas contricio sino per aquo quar so cartillaginosas.	"You should know that fractures of the ribs only occur in large places where they are located on the back, and at the extremities of their ends towards the front, no great injury occurs to them except for those which are cartilaginous."
E cognicio de lu no es amaguada al sentiment deves la inquisicio de lu am les ditz.	"Understanding of him is not concealed from feeling through his interrogation with said devices."
E la restauracio sia ayssi que enguales la fractura am les ditz segon la manieyra possibla, entro que sia engulhat segon que cove, e aprop emplastre e strenh le os trencat am stela, si indigeys de aquel.	"And the reduction was as good as possible with the devices according to the method available, ensuring that it is well set according to what was necessary. Then apply plaster and strengthen the broken bone with steel if needed."
E si la fractura de las costas es declinant a las partidas dedintz, lahoras accideys al malaute dolor vehement e punctura, ayssi cum punctura que accideys ad aquel que ha pleureci, e per aquo quar le os ponh le velament; e accideys a lu difficultat de hanelit, e tos, e vomit de mot sanc; e aquesta es de dificil curacio.	"If the fracture of the ribs is displaced inward, then intense pain and sharp puncture occur, similar to that which happens to those who have cried. Because of this, when the bone pierces the pleura, difficulty in breathing, coughing, vomiting much blood occurs; and this is difficult to cure."
E ja les Antixs so engeniatz en aquela am motz engientz.	"And already the Ancients knew how to treat it with many ingenious methods."
E de lor so que diso: cove que pauses viandas del malaute que engendro imflacio e ventositat, per que le ventre sia imflat e sia extendut, e la fractura sia impellida a las partidas defora.	"And they also said this: it is necessary to pause from eating foods that cause inflammation and wind, so that the belly may be inflated and extended, causing the fracture to be pushed outward."
Mays nos avoreyssem aquo per so que no sia causa leugiera a generar apostema caut, si no accideys; e si ja accideys, lahoras ja ajuda ad aquo.	"But we would not advise this for fear that it may easily cause an abscess to form if it has not already happened. And if it has already happened, then it will help with that."
E diyssero alcus de lor que sia pausada desus ventoza e aprop que sucque am fortitut; e es semblant a ratiocinacio, mays empero es temut que la ventoza atire las superfluitatz al loc per la debilitat.	"And some of them said that it is necessary to pause from windy foods and immediately suck with force. This seems reasonable, but however, it is feared that the wind may drive the excesses to the location due to weakness."
E diyssero alcus de lor: cove que·l loc sia cubert am lana que ja es submersa en oli caut, e sian pausatz pulvils entre las costas entro que sia umplida, que sia la liadura engual quan envolopas aquela segon retonditat; e aprop sia curat le malaute am curacio de pleuresi de vianda e de medicina.	"And some of them said: it is necessary to cover the location with wool that has already been submerged in hot oil, and let powders be placed between the ribs until it is filled. Then wrap it according to its roundness; and immediately treat the illness with pleurisy medication."
E si causa vehement constrenh le malaute la qual no sufferta, e le os punh le velament am punctura ledent, temem sobre le malaute, lahoras cove que fendam sobre le loc, descubram de la costa trencada, e aprop pausem desobre aquela instrument que conserve le ciphac, la rememoracio del qual es precedida, e que inscidam le os am facilitat, e extraguam aquel.	"And if the illness causes violent pain that is not tolerated, and the bone pierces the pleura with sharp punctures, then fear about the illness arises. Therefore, it is necessary to open on the location, uncovering the broken rib, and immediately place above that instrument which preserves the cicatrix, the remembrance of which has been preceded, and to cut the bone with ease and remove it."
E aprop que ajustem las doas labias de la plagua, si es gran, am cozidura, e curem aquela am emplastres entro que sia sanada.	"And immediately join the two lips of the wound, if it is large, with stitching, and treat it with plasters until it is healed."
E si accideys dedintz apostema, lahoras tu coyta e enfon pulvils en oli rozat e pausa sobre le loc, e que sia curat le malaute am aquo que cove a la apostema dedintz.	"And if an abscess happens inside, then immediately take and put powders made from roasted oil and place them on the location. And treat the illness with what is necessary for the internal abscess."
E sia ressupinat sobre le latz sobre le qual dorm, entro que sia sanat.	"And let him be propped up on pillows on the side on which he sleeps, until he is healed."
Capitol .ix.	"Chapter nine."
De restauracio de fractura del spondil del dos e del col.	"On the restoration of spinal fractures in the lumbar spine and neck."
Alcunas veguadas endeve fractura als osses del col, e tart endeve a lor atricio, e semblantment als spondils del dos.	Sometimes fracture occurs in the bones of the neck, and starts to move them apart, and similarly in the vertebrae of the back.
E cum aquo accideys ad alcu e voles saber si sara sanat o no, lahoras considera, quar si vezes las sieuas mas ja mollificadas e stupefaytas e mortas e no pot maure aquelas ni extendre ni strenher aquelas e quan constrenges aquelas am les tieus ditz o punges aquelas am agulha e no sent en aquelas dolor, lahoras sapias que no es sanat, e en las mes de disposicios es mortal.	If this happens to someone and you want to know if they will be healed or not, consider that if often the muscles are already softened, stunned, deadened, and cannot move them, extend them, nor contract them. When you press them with your fingers or prick them with a needle and they do not feel pain there, then you know it is not healing. In such cases it is mortal.
E si mau aquelas e sent en aquelas constriccio am les ditz e punctura, lahoras sapias que la nucha de l’os es salva e que le malaute guereys am curacio.	If those (bones) move and are felt to be constrained with the said points, then you know that the neck of the bone is saved and the patient will recover with treatment.
E si ve als spondils del col le semblant ad aquo e voles saber si sira sanat o no, lahoras considera als pes de lu.	If you see the spine of the neck resembling this (indicating) and want to know if it will heal or not, then consider its size.
Lahoras si tu vezes que so ja mollificatz, accideys ad aquels aquo que es accidit en las mas, e aprop quan jatz sobre le sieu dos, yeys ventozitat e egestio ses la sua volontat, e alcunas veguadas es resupinat sobre le sieu dos e vol urinar e no pot, lahoras sapias que es mortal, e adonc no trebales en la curacio de lu.	Then if you see that it is already softened, it has happened to those as it happens in most cases, and especially when lying on its back, it becomes ventilated and evacuates without control, and sometimes it is suddenly raised on its back and wants to urinate but cannot. Then you know that it is mortal, and therefore do not attempt to treat it.
Mays si no accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, la causa es milhor e pus leugiera.	But if none of those things happen, the case is better and easier (to treat).
E la curacio de lu es que te perforses a la sedacio del apostema caut que pauses sobre le spondil atrissat oli rozat sol, o am mugols de huous asatz; pausa sobre aquela aquel alcunas veguadas le dia entro que sia sedat le apostema caut.	The treatment of it is to apply compresses soaked in hot water over the injured spine or grease made from onions and honey; apply it several times a day until the hard swelling is softened.
E lahoras pausa un dels emplastres confortantz e exsitans, e strenh sobre aquel am liament; e comanda al malaute que use de repaus e de tranquillitat e que no dorme sobre la partida am la qual atroba dolor entro que sia sanat.	Then apply one of the comforting and soothing plasters over that with linen; and command the patient to use rest and tranquility, avoiding sleeping on the painful part until they are healed.
E si accideys deves la atricio del os satagias o alcuna causa que ja es seperada de lu, lahoras cove que secces sobre la codena e que ostes aquel os; e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua, am sutura si es gran; e aprop cura aquela am alcu encarnatiu dels enguentz, entro que sia sanat.	And if a fracture of the bone is suspected or any cause that has already separated from it occurs, then it must be immobilized on a splint and that bone must be kept at rest. And especially join the two lips of the wound with stitches if it is large; and also treat it with some ointment for wounds until it is healed.
Mays si es trencat le derier del os alhoses, e es la fi de la coeta, lahoras cove que tu entrometas le dit pous de la ma senestra en le cul, e que enguales le os trencat am l’autra ma segon que es possible per equacio segonda; e aprop pausa sobre lu emplastre e astelha, si indigeysses de aquels, e aprop strenh aquel.	But if the end of the bone is broken off and it is the hip joint, then you must insert the thumb of your left hand into the anus and grasp the broken bone with your other hand as much as possible according to the position. And apply plaster and bandage over it, if necessary, and also support it.
E si sentes satagias trencadas en lu, lahoras tu fen sobre aquela, e osta aquel, e cura la plagua am la curacio que es precedida entro que sia sanada.	And if you suspect that the ribs are broken, then feel over that area and keep it at rest, and treat the wound with the treatment described earlier until it is healed.
Capitol .x.	Chapter X
De restauracio de la ancha.	On restoration of the ankle joint.
Les osses de las anchas tart so trencats, e si trencan, lahoras la fractura de lor no es sino communicio en las extremitatz de aquelas e son inscidas en la longitut e declinan a las partidas dedintz; e accideys al malaute dolor en le loc e punctura, e la camba es stupefacta quan es fractura.	Broken bones of the wide hips are shattered, and if they shatter, then their fracture is only union in the extremities of those parts, aligned along length and inclined toward the inner sides; thus causing pain at the site and puncture wounds, with stiffness in the limb when fractured.
E la restauracio de lu es que tu extendas la tua ma sobre aquel entro que sia sobre la fractura qual es la figura de lu.	To restore it, you should place your hand over that part which is above the fracture, as shown by its figure.
E si fractura es en la extremitat de lu tant solament, lahoras tu enguala aquela segon que a tu es apparelhat per equacio engual entro que sia asemblat a la sua figura natural.	If the fracture is only at the extremity of it, then you should reduce it according to what appears equal through equation, so that the part is assembled in its natural figure.
Mays si la fractura es en le lonc o que ja declina a las partidas dejos, lahoras tu fay jaser le malaute sobre le sieu ventre entro que sia preparada a tu la restauracio de aquela fractura.	But if the fracture is in the long bone or one that already declines toward the inner sides, then you should make the patient lie on their belly so that you may prepare for the reduction of that fracture.
E donc quan auras engualada aquela, pausa sobre lu emplastre, e aprop pausa sobre aquel astela de fust o de codena, e strenh per strictura sobre la qual no temas punctacio de fractura ni remocio de la stelha.	And once you have reduced it, apply plaster to that part, and also place splints of wood or iron on either side, securing them with strapping so that there is no fear of puncture wounds from fracture or displacement of the splint.
E enguala la concavitat am aquo que uempla aquela entro que aquela prengua la strictura segon equalitat, e comanda al malaute que dorma sobre le sieu dos o desobre le sieu costat sa.	And reduce the concavity with whatever it may be filled with so that it takes the strapping according to equality, and command the patient to sleep on their back or on their side.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras tu cessa de extencio de lu e de la sua restauracio entro que sia sedat le apostema caut, e pausa sobre lu aquo que sede aquel segon que es precedit; e aprop retorna a la restauracio de lu, e strenh aquel ayssi cum cove.	But if gangrene occurs after cauterization, then cease the extension and reduction until the gangrene is sedated, then apply whatever is used to sedate it as previously mentioned. Then return to the reduction of the bone and secure it thus as necessary.
E si accideysso en le os satagias o son comminuidas, lahoras tu las tratz.	And if this happens in the bones of the foot or they are comminuted, then reduce them.
Capitol .xi.	Chapter xi
De restauracio de la fractura del adjutori.	Of the reduction of fractures of the jawbone.
Adjutori es aquo que es entre le coyde entro al cap de la spalla.	The jawbone is that which is between the cheek and the head of the shoulder bone.
E si es trencat, lahoras la restauracio de lu es en una de doas manieyras, de las quals es la una que tu prenguas fust pla de migiera groceza segon aquesta forma:	"And if it is broken, then its restoration is in one of two ways, the first of which you may take a piece of flat oakwood of this form:"
E sian liatz en doas extremitatz dos liamentz, e aprop sia suspendut del loc elevat.	"When there are two extreme ends, tie them together and hang it from an elevated place."
E segua le malaute sobre una sezela; e aprop gieta fora le sieu bras trencat sobre le fust entro que pervengua al titillic de lu en le mieg loc del qual sia annexa la curvitat del fust.	"And then have the patient sit on a chair; and carefully place their broken arm on top of the wooden board, with the elbow at its midpoint."
E aprop suspen sobre aquel alcuna causa greu, o·l minestre extenda aquel a las partidas dejos; e aprop le metge eque la fractura am las sieuas mas ensemps, entro que la fractura retorne segon que cove.	"And then suspend from that some heavy weight, or let the servant extend it to its proper parts; and then let the physician reduce the fracture with his hands simultaneously, until the fracture returns to its proper position."
E l’autra manieyra es que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sieua cervitz e suspen la ma del col de lu am liament; e aprop comanda a dos ministres que la un de lor tengua aquo que es desobre la fractura am las suas mas; e l’autre tengua le pus dejos de lu; e quascu de lor extenda a la sua partida.	"And the other way is for the patient to sit upright and suspend their arm with a cloth sling; then command two assistants, one of whom holds above the fracture with both hands, and the other holds below it, each extending to its respective part."
E si voles que la extencio sia pus fort, lahoras tu strenh sobre la fractura am liament e sobre aquela am autre liament, e quascu dels dos ministres extendan a doas suas partidas.	"And if you wish the extension to be stronger, then place a splint on top of the fracture with linen and another one underneath it, and each assistant shall extend to their respective parts."
E donc si la fractura es propinquada a la extremitat del muscle, lahoras cove que sia pausat la mitat del liament sobre le citillic e l’autre dejos la fractura deves le coyde.	"And then if the fracture is near the end of the muscle, it is necessary that half of the linen be placed above the elbow and the other below the fracture near the joint."
E semblantment si la fractura es propdana al coyde, lahoras cove que sia pausat le liament sobre aquel loc e sobre aquel coyde.	"And similarly if the fracture is near the joint, then the linen should be placed on that location and also on that joint."
Enguala aquela am facilitat e ses trebal, e aprop quant sira engualada segon que cove e es applicada per bona applicacio, lahoras strenh aquela si no accideys apostema caut.	"And then apply it with ease and without difficulty, and as soon as it is applied according to what is necessary and in the correct manner, then bind it securely so that there may not be an accumulation of pus."
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras layssa la strictura entro al vii dia, e pausa sobre lu lana sutza enbeguda en vi agre e oli rozat entro que repause le apostema, e lahoras tu stren aquela.	"But if there is an accumulation of pus, then wait seven days and remove the splint, and place over it clean linen soaked in warm water and rose oil until the pus has drained out, and then bind it again."
E la manieyra de strenher aquela es que pauses emplastre sobre la fractura, e aprop pausa envolopament de drap nau sobre le emplastre; e aprop ajuste le bras sobre aquel adjutori, e pause la sua ma uberta sobre le sieu muscle.	"And the way to bind it is to place plaster over the fracture, then wrap a cloth napkin over the plaster, and adjust the arm over that support, and place his hand covered over his own muscle."
E pausa le drap e strenh sobre le adjutori le bras per so que·l bras sia en loc de stelhas, si no prohibeys de aquo alcuna causa del os trencat.	"And then fold the cloth and bind it over the support of the arm so that the arm remains in place without any prohibited movement due to the broken bone."
E lahoras usa de stelhas.	"And then use splints."
E es que pauses sobre la fractura aquela stela que sia pus lada e pus fort de las autras stelas; e pausa entre quascuna stela la latitut del dit, e sia la longitut de las stelas segon la trencadura am addicio de tres ditz de tota partida.	"And then place over the fracture that splint which is the widest and strongest of all the others; and place between each splint the width of a finger, and let the length of the splints be according to the break with an addition of three fingers on either side."
E aprop strenh sobre las stelas am la strictura la qual he dita al comensament del capitol.	"And then bind over the splints with the bandage which was mentioned at the beginning of this chapter."
E es que la tua strictura sobre le loc de la fractura sia pus streyt.	"And ensure that your bandage is as tight as possible on the location of the fracture."
E quant pus es alonguada la fractura sia la strictura menor.	"And when the fracture is long, make the bandage loose."
E donc si vezes le situament de las stelas e la strictura ayssi cum havem dit en la hora en la qual restauras le membre al sieu assituament, lahoras tu fay.	"And then if you find the situation of the splints and the bandage to be as we have said in the time when you restore the limb to its proper position, then you are finished."
E si temes apostema caut, lahoras tu layssa la strictura e las stelas entro al dia vii ayssi cum havem dit.	"And if you suspect an accumulation of pus, then wait seven days and remove the bandage and splints as we have said."
E aprop considera le liament en totas partidas per tres dias per so que no accida en le loc pruziment o imflacio; o es prohibida la vianda pervenir al membre per disposicio de superfluitat de strictura; e donc rectifiqua tot aquo segon que havem dit.	"And then examine the linen on all sides for three days to ensure that there is no pressure or inflammation in any location, or that food does not reach the limb due to an excess of tightness; and therefore correct everything according to what we have said."
Mays si tu yest sobre confizanssa que no accida alcuna causa de aquo, lahoras no deslias la liguadura sino aprop tres dias o mays.	"But if you suspect some confusion that nothing will happen because of it, then do not loosen the bandage but rather wait three days or more."
E sia la sua dormicio del malaute sobre le sieu dos, e las sieuas mas sian sobre le stomac.	"And let his sleep be on his back and let his hands be on his stomach."
E pausa sobre le adjutori cocena plena de lana engualment, e considera en tota hora de la nueyt o del dia que no sia deliada ni dissolta la figura del membre trencat, o que sia le liament mollificat, donc rectifica aquo tot am la tua vertut.	"And place over the chest a bolster full of wool and examine at all times whether the limb is still in its proper position or if the bandage has become moist and loose; therefore correct everything with your own skill."
E pausa la vianda del malaute segon le orde le qual havem denant mes, enayssi que la vianda sia subtil en le comensament entro que es comensat strenher; e lahoras cove que egrossas la vianda de lu.	"And provide the patient's food according to the order which we have mentioned earlier, ensuring that at first the food is thin until he begins to recover; and then gradually make his food thicker."
Quar de constuma del adjutori e de la camba de lu es que sian strengutz en xl dias; e lahoras cove que sian desliatz e sia administrat banh e sia medicat am enguentz los quals rectifican aquel.	"For the custom of the splint and the sling is that they should be bound for forty days, and then they should be loosened and a bath administered and treated with ointments which correct it."
E si la fractura es layha atrita, lahoras tu no deslies de aquela le liament e las stelhas entro a l dias o entro a dos meses.	"And if the fracture is laid bare and exposed, then do not loosen the bandage or splints for seven days or until two months have passed."
Capitol .xii.	Chapter XII
De restauracio de fractura del bras.	"On the Restoration of Fractures of the Arm"
Bras es compost de dos osses les quals so appelatz dos focils; dels quals la un es petit, e es aquel que siec le dit pous, e l’autre es gran e es aquel le qual es pausat dejos le petit dit, de la partida pus dejus.	"The arm is composed of two bones called the two forearms. Of these one is small and that which supports the thumb, and the other is large and that which extends downwards from the little finger."
E fort leu es trencat le focil major solament, o le petit, e fort leu son trincatz ensemps.	"And it often happens that only the large bone of the forearm is broken, or sometimes both together are fractured."
E quan es trencat le focil petit desus, lahoras la restauracio de lu es leugiera, e la sanacio de lu es pus leugiera.	"And when the small bone of the forearm above is broken, then its restoration and healing will be easier."
E quan es trencat le focil de lu dejos la fractura de lu es mala, e la sanacio de lu es dificil.	"But when it is broken below, the fracture is bad and its healing is difficult."
E pus mala de aquela es quan son trencatz dos osses essemps.	"And the worst of all is when both bones are fractured together."
Donc si l’os le qual es trencat es le focil petit desus, lahoras es convenient al metge, deves la restauracio de lu, que pauze petita extencio am facilitat entro que aquel sia engualhat.	"Therefore if the bone which is broken is the small one above, it is advisable for the physician to restore it with gentle extension until it becomes straight."
Mays si le focil gran es aquo que es trincat, lahoras cove que pause extencio pus vehement.	"But if the large bone is that which is broken, then a stronger extension must be applied."
E si les dos focils so ensemps trincatz, lahoras cove que tu pauses la extritura mot pus fort.	"And if both bones are fractured together, then you must apply traction with great force."
E cove que pauses la figura de la ma deves la restauracio de lu e la extencio de lu estenduda sobre un coyssi, e sia le pols de la ma a las partidas desus, pus aut que totz les autres ditz, e le dit auricular sia pus bas dels autres ditz, e le malaute sia cezent sobre una cezela cayrada.	"And you must maintain the figure of the hand during its restoration and extension, with the hand extended on a pillow and the thumb uppermost among all the fingers, and the little finger lowest among them, and let the patient lie on a well-cushioned couch."
E sia un coyssi denant lu en la altetut o endreyt de lu, per so que·l malaute no encorra trebalh.	"And place a pillow before him at his height or towards his right side, so that the patient does not have to strain himself."
E aprop le ministre extenda le bras de la partida pus dejos am la sieua ma o am liament, e autre ministre extenda desus semblantment.	"Then let one attendant extend the arm from below with his hand or with a bandage and another attendant do likewise from above."
E aprop le metge engualhe le os entro que redugua aquel segon la milhor figura que pot.	"And then let the physician straighten the bone until it reduces into its best possible position."
E si en la factura del os so satagias, lahoras te perforsa raduzir tota pessa en le sieu loc am la tua vertut.	"If in the fracture of the bone you find any displacement, then use all your skill to reduce it back into its proper place."
E si appar en lu satagia separada que punh la codena e no es a tu speransa en la restauracio de lu, lahoras tu fen sobre lu e osta aquela segon la manieyra la qual havem dita desus.	"If during the reduction you find that there is separation at the elbow and it does not meet your expectations in the restoration of it, then proceed as we have described above."
Mays si la fractura es am plagua, yeu ja he fayt ad aquo capitol singular, e donc pren la curacio de aquel.	"But if the fracture is associated with infection, I have already dealt with that in another chapter, and therefore take care of it accordingly."
E si accideys apostema caut al comensament de la tua restauracio, lahoras tu lineys un drap am cerot fayt de oli rozat e cera blanca, e sia migier entre specitut e subtilitat, e strenh drap sobre aquel am strictura subtil entro que le apostema sia cedat; e lahoras remau le cerot e pausa emplastre preparat de polvera de moli am clayre de huou, e aprop pausa stelhas; e sia la stela la qual es pauzada sobre aquela fractura pus lada e pus fort.	"And if you encounter an accumulation of pus at the beginning of your restoration, then apply a cloth with cerate made from rose oil and white wax, and let it be equally between solidity and subtlety; and stretch the cloth over it with gentle tightness until the abscess is absorbed. Then remove the cerate and apply a plaster prepared from powdered frankincense with clay of hydrated lime, and then apply splints, ensuring that the splint placed over the fracture is broadest and strongest."
E sapias que·l nombre de las stelas del bras so vi en las majors disposicios, o sia la fractura en un focil o en dos focils ensemps.	"And know that in the case of fractures of the arm there are usually many splints used, whether it is a fracture of one bone or both bones together."
E aprop pausa la tua strictura sobre le loc de la fractura pus fort e pus vehement, e quan mays sira la extrictura a las partidas desus de la fractura o a las partidas pus bassas de lu, pausa la strictura un pauc pus molh segon que es precedida la rememoracio de lu en le comensament del capitol.	"And then apply your bandage over the site of the fracture with great strength and force, and if you find that the extension is more prominent above or below the fracture, then apply a gentler bandage according to what was said at the beginning of this chapter."
E les draps que so envolopatz sobre la fractura sian draps mols humitz, e no sian durs ni aspres, e·l fiel am le qual es strenhut sia de li propriament migier entre subtil e gros, ayssi cum havem recomtat.	"The cloths that are wrapped around the fracture should be soft and damp, not hard or rough. The adhesive with which it is strengthened should be medium between thin and thick, as we have recommended."
E considera le membre e·l liament aprop alcus dias.	"Consider the limb and its ligaments after several days."
E si accideys alcuna causa de la qual rectificacio es necessaria, ayssi cum prusiment le qual accideys al membre, e lahoras cove que tu enbroques le membre am aygua cauda entro que cesse aquel pruziment.	"If it happens that some cause arises for which correction is necessary, thus prudently you should search for the cause in the member, and then cover the member with cold water until that swelling ceases."
E leysses le membre no costreyt entro que repause, e aprop torna la strictura.	"Leave the member alone so it can rest, and then gradually tighten it again."
E si la extrictura ja es mollificada e l’os ja es remaugut e semblantz ad aquels, lahoras rectifiqua tot aquo am la tua vertut.	"And if the swelling has been softened and the bone has been removed, then you shall correct everything with your own strength."
E considera mays si le nutriment es prohibit pervenir al membre per superfluitat de strictura, quar lahoras cove que mollifiques aquel un petit e laysses aquel per alcus dias entro que corra ad aquel le nutriment, e aprop strenh aquel.	"And also consider whether the nourishment is prevented from reaching the member due to an excess of swelling. If so, then you should soften it a little and leave it alone for several days until the nourishment reaches it, and then strengthen it."
Mays si al malaute no accideys alcuna causa de aquelas que havem ditas, lahoras no cove que sia desliat entro aprop xx dias o enviro de aquels.	"But if the illness is not caused by any of those [conditions] that we have mentioned, then it should be released after approximately twenty days or so."
E aprop sia suspenduda la ma del malaute per la sua vertut de movement agitatius, e fay aquel dormir sobre le sieu dos.	"And then the hand of the patient should be suspended by its own power of movement and agility, and that [the patient] should sleep on his back."
E sapias que aquesta fractura es restaurada en xxx dias o en xxxii dias, o fort leu es restaurada en xxviii dias, e tot aquo es segon la disposicio de las compleccios e las disposicios de la vertut.	"And know that this fracture is healed in thirty days or thirty-two days, but often it is restored in twenty-eight days, and all of this depends on the disposition of the complexion and the dispositions of power."
Capitol .xiii.	Chapter XIII
De restauracio de fractura de la pinche de la ma e dels ditz.	On the restoration of fractures of the wrist and fingers.
Sapias que a la pinche de la ma e als nuzes dels ditz tart endeve fractura, e no accideys a lor sino atricio motas veguadas.	"I know that in the pinch of the hand and in the joints of these fingers there is a fracture, but it does not happen to them without much rubbing."
E quan accideys a la ma fractura o atrissio, lahoras cove que·l malaute segua cayrat e denant lu lies cezent segon equalitat, e aprop pausa la ma de lu sobre aquela extenduda.	"And when it happens that the hand has a fracture or rubbing, then the patient must lie down and let their head hang down, facing forward in an upright position, and place their hand on top of the extended one."
E aprop le ministre extenda les osses trencatz e·l metge engualhe aquels entro que sian congongitz am bona congoncio.	"Then the minister will extend the broken bones and the doctor will align them, ensuring they are properly aligned with good congruence."
E lahoras cove que pause emplastre e estopa, si no accideys apostema caut; e aprop pausa stela desus segon la quantitat del loc, e tu ja has envolopada aquela en drap de li.	"And then it is necessary to apply plasters and bandages, unless there happens to be a cauterized ulcer; and then place a compress on top according to the amount of space, and you have already wrapped that in linen cloth."
Mays si la trincadura es en las partidas dedintz deves le ventre de la palma, e lahoras fay semblant de spera de drap, e comanda al malaute que strenha aquela am la sua palma trincada; aprop sia strenguda am drap lonc.	"But if the fracture is in the palm of the hand inside the belly area, then make it resemble a bandage shape, and command the patient to hold that with their palm closed; also wrap it with a long cloth."
E sia la stelha de cuer am drap en le qual sia levitat, per so que le cuer sia aplicat a la palma; e strenh aquela segon que cove.	"And let there be a compress of linen cloth elevated in such a way that the flesh is applied to the palm; and hold it according to what is necessary."
Mays si la fractura es a las partidas defora, lahoras cove que pauses desus stela e autre estela de la partida dejos en la palma, per so que la ma sia uberta e dreyta; e aprop pausa la strictura, ayssi cum es revolvuda la ma a la rateta entre les ditz am liamentz.	"But if the fracture is on the outside of the hand, then it is necessary to place a compress on top and another compress from the side of the palm in such a way that the hand is supported and straight; and also apply the splint, just as it is wrapped around the wrist between those said bands."
E si accideys fractura a alcu dels nozes dels ditz, lahoras si es le dit pous, sia engualat segon que cove e aprop sia strenhut am la palma e si·t voles, pausa a lu astela petita dreyta per so que sia elevada la fractura e no sia mauguda.	"And if there happens to be a fracture in one of the joints of the said fingers, then if it is the thumb, align it as necessary and hold it with the palm; and if you wish, place a small splint on top to elevate the fracture and prevent movement."
Mays si la fractura es en les autres ditz, ayssi cum en aquel del mieg loc, o en le indic, o en le auricular, o en le anular, lahoras sia engualhat e liat am le dit sa le qual siec aquel; o sian totz liatz segon continuacio, e es milhor; o pausa sobre aquel stela petita, ayssi cum havem dit en le pous.	"But if the fracture is in one of the other said fingers, such as that of the middle joint, or the index finger, or the ring finger, then align it and tie it with the finger that is next to it; or they can all be tied together in continuation, which is better; or place a small splint on top, just like we said for the thumb."
E considera, en la tua restauracio, e aprop aquela, la disposicio de apostema caut e oppose — am la tieua operacio — am aquo que cove quan accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, segon que es iterada la narracio de lu.	"And consider, in your reduction and application, the disposition of cauterized ulcer and opposing sides - with your operation according to what is necessary when any cause arises from that, as it has been narrated."
Capitol .xiv.	"Chapter XIV."
De restauracio de fractura del os de la coyssa.	Restoration of a bone fracture in the thigh.
Le os de la cueyssa motas veguadas es trencat e es declarat al sentiment segon que es convertit a la partida denant e a la pus sobirana.	The thighbone is often broken and is declared painful according to its position, which is anterior and superior posterior.
E la restauracio de lu se fa enayssi que·l liament es strenhut sobre la fractura e autre liament dejos la fractura, e le malaute sia prostrat sobre le sieu ventre e sobre la cara.	The patient's restoration is done thus: the bandage is stretched over the fracture and another bandage placed below it, and the patient is laid on their stomach facing downwards.
E aprop le ministre extenda tot le liament a la sua partida segon la qualitat, quan la fractura es en le mieg loc del os.	And furthermore, the priest extends all the bandages to his departure according to their quality when the fracture is in the middle of the bone.
Mays si es propdana a la razitz de la cueyssa, lahoras sia le liament propda al denolh a la partida del pentenilh, per so que la extencio caja en sus, e le autre liament dejos la fractura.	But if it is applied to the edge of the thighbone, then the bandage should be placed close to the knee at the departure of the penitent, so that its extension comes up from below, and the other bandage below the fracture.
E semblantment si la trencadura es propdana al denolh, lahoras sia fayt le liament propda al denol, e sia la extencio a las partidas dejos.	And similarly if the fracture is applied to the knee, then let the bandage be placed close to it, and its extension should go from below.
E aprop le metge enguale le os am amduas las sieuas mas entro que reduzesca aquel segon la semblansa natural e l’os es conjungit per bona conjunccio; lahoras cove que pauses emplastre e strictura, si no accideys al membre apostema.	And furthermore the physician equalizes the bone with both his hands within so that it reduces according to its natural similarity and the bone is joined together by good union; then plaster and strapping are necessary if otherwise a member aposteme occurs.
Mays si accideys en lu apostema, lahoras tu layssa aquel per alcus dias entro que l’apostema caut sia cedat, e aprop retorna a la tua curacio.	But if there is an aposteme occurring then you leave it alone for some days until the aposteme becomes dry and then return to your treatment.
La strictura de lu sia ayssi fayta: cove que envolopes sobre la fractura una benda dura, e dobla aquela dos o tres veguadas, e remaugua de lu superfluitat; e aprop envolopa la camba entro que pervengua al talo e a la razitz de la cueyssa.	The strapping should be done thus: one should wrap a hard bandage around the fracture and fold it two or three times, removing any excess; then the limb should be wrapped with another bandage so that it reaches the ankle and thigh.
E intromet lonc fiel entre la cueyssa e la camba prop del denol a las partidas dejos, e venguan las extremitatz del fiel de la partida pus sobirana de las doas partz, e aprop revolveys sobre la camba e la cueyssa aquo que superflueys de la benda.	And place a long piece of linen between the thigh and the bandage near the knee on both sides; then bring the ends of the linen from above the parted area on both parts, and then wrap it around the bandage and thigh what is excess of the bandage.
E aprop pausa sobre la cueyssa en le loc de aquela fractura astelhas, e pausa de aquelas una stela sobre le os de la camba.	Then place a splint on the thigh at that fracture thus, and then place another splint on the bone of the leg above it.
E aprop uempli las vacuitatz entre la camba e la cuoyssa am draps mols, per so que sia coagulada la extrictura.	Then fill the spaces between the leg and thigh with soft cloths, so that the union is consolidated.
E aprop comensa am strictura fort del mieg sobre le loc de la fractura am tres envolucios o quatre, e quant mays tu te alonhas am liament del loc de la fractura, la tua strictura sia menor e pus leugiera e pus molha.	Then begin with a strong strapping of the middle over the location of the fracture with three or four wrappings, and as you move away from the location of the fracture, make your strapping weaker, lighter, and softer.
E aprop exten a doas extremitatz del fiel a las partidas dejos entro que pervengua a la cavilha del pe, e strenh amdoas las extremitatz de las stelhas del autra part per so que·l liament no sia remaugut del sieu loc.	Then extend the two ends of the linen to both sides below until it reaches the ankle of the foot, and then strengthen both ends of the splints on the other side so that the bandage is not removed from its place.
E aprop leyssa la strectura sobre aquel, don esta ayssi que no accideys al membre corrosio ni apostema caut ni emflacio e semblantz ad aquels; e si accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, adonc cueta te am desliament de lu, e rectifica aquo que accideys tot aprop, segon que havem dit motas veguadas.	Then leave the strapping on like this so that no corrosion of the member nor dry aposteme nor inflammation occurs nor anything like them; and if any cause of these occurs then take care of it immediately and correct what has happened at once, according to what we have said many times.
Mays si en le os es pessa del os la qual pongua, lahoras cove que tu engualhes aquel segon que a tu es possibla; e sino, fen sobre lu e remau aquel, e cura am aquo del qual es precedida la rememoracio entro que sia sanat.	But if the bone has come through the flesh which covered it, then you should reduce it as much as possible; and if not, cover it with a poultice and remove it until it is healed according to what precedes the treatment.
E alcunas veguadas es strenhuda aquesta fractura de la coyssa otra aquo que sian ajustadas a lu stelhas, ayssi cum havem dit en le adjutori e·n le bras.	And sometimes this fracture of the thigh is strengthened with splints like those used for adjusting the arms as we have said in the assistant and the arm.
Mays empero en la restauracio de lu en tal manieyra fayta no accideys al malaute claudicacio; e si es restaurada sola, otra aquo que li sia applicada l’autra camba, lahoras es necessari que claudique aquel del qual es tostemps.	However, in the healing of the thigh done thus, limping should not occur; and if it is healed alone without applying the other leg, then it is necessary that it limp all the time.
E sapias que la coyssa es strenhuda en xl dias o un pauc mes o un pauc mens, e tot aquo es segon la diversitat de las compleccios e de las autras dispozicios.	And know that the thigh is strengthened in forty days or a little more or less, and all this is according to the diversity of the complexities and other dispositions.
Capitol .xv.	Chapter XV
De restauracio de la fractura de la rodela del denolh.	Of the restoration of the fracture of the kneecap.
Sapias que fractura de la rodela del denol tart endeve, mays accideys a lu motas veguadas atrissio.	Know that fracture of the patella is rare, but bruising occurs to it very often.
Mays si accideys a lu fractura, lahoras no es sino fissura o trauc en las suas partidas, e aquo es am plagua o ses plagua, e sobre aquo tot es estat am le sentiment.	But if fracture occurs to it, then it is only a split or crack in its parts, and this is with great pain or slight pain, and on top of all that there is swelling.
E la restauracio de lu es enayssi que sia engualat aquo que es romput de las partidas de lu am les ditz entro que sia agreguat e conjongit segon que es possible per equacio e facilitat e fabricacio.	And the restoration of it is done thus: that which is broken of its parts should be reduced with those splints until it is approximated and joined according to what is possible by equity and facility and construction.
E aprop pausa emplastre e pausa sobre aquel stela redonda, si indigeysses de aquela; e strenh desus am strictura ad aquo convenient.	And then apply plaster and then place on top of it a round splint if necessary; and strengthen above with strapping as is appropriate.
E aprop considera totas las disposicios las quals havem recomtadas en las autras fracturas, ayssi cum es apostema caut e semblant ad aquels enaissi que se oppause a tot accident am aquo que a lu es convenient entro que sia sanat.	And then consider all the dispositions which we have recommended in other fractures, such as dry aposteme and similar things so that it may be opposed to all accidents with what is appropriate for it until it is healed.
Capitol .xvi.	Chapter XVI
De restauracio de la fractura de la camba.	"For the restoration of a broken bone."
Sapias que en la camba so dos osses dels quals la un es gros, e es le nompnat per nom de la camba; e l’autra es subtil, e es nompnat focil.	"Do you know that in the limb there are two bones of which one is thick and is named after the limb itself; and the other is thin and is called fibula?"
E accideys a quascus de las specias de fractura aquo que accideys als dos osses del bras, e per aquo es fayta restauracio de lu ayssi cum restauracio del bras engualment, e la operacio de lu es una.	"And it happens that in some species of fracture what happens to the two bones of the arm also happens, and for this reason restoration of it is made just like restoration of the arm simultaneously, and its operation is one."
E si so trincatz dos osses ensemps, la camba es convertida a totas partidas.	"If two bones are broken at once, the limb becomes completely shattered."
E si es trinquat le os pus subtil, la camba es convertida a las partidas Denant.	"And if only the thinner bone is broken, the limb becomes partially shattered in front."
E si es trincat le os pus gros, atrobas aquel dejos, e es de aquelas causas que no so a tu ameguadas.	"And if only the thicker bone is broken, then that one on its own is enough cause for it not being able to move."
E aprop aministra extencio e equacio e liguacio de las astelas segon aquel engualment.	"And appropriately administer extension and traction and fixation of the fragments according to that same principle."
Mays empero cove, si la fractura de la camba es laja havent motas satagias, que la extencio sia mendre e pus leugiera, e alleuja am la tua vertut.	"But beware, if the fracture of the limb is old with many attempts, then make the extension smaller and lighter, and alleviate it with your virtue."
E en la camba es alcuna causa de operacio sobre le bras, e es quan tu engualas las stelhas e que comples tota la tieua operacio, lahoras tu prendras pessas de fustz de pi le qual es pausat dejos las cauzas las quals so pausades en solies, e so faytas eyssament de brancas de palma; aligeys de aquelas a las quals es petita groceza, e no sia ges de las manudas, e sia la longuesa de aquelas segon la longuesa de la camba, e del denol entro al pus dejos.	"And in the limb there may be some cause for operation on the arm, and this is when you align the fragments and complete all your operation; then you will take pieces of wood from pine which are placed close to the causes which are placed in usual places, and they should be made evenly from palm branches; lighten those ones that have less thickness, and do not use any large ones, and their length should be according to the length of the limb, and from within outwards."
E aprop envolopa sobre quascuna drap en doas envolucios segon la longitut de lu, e pausa la una sobre la partida de la camba de la una part e l’autra del autra part, e sian del denol entro al pus bas loc del pe.	"And appropriately wrap each splint in two wrappings according to its length and place one on the proximal fragment of the limb on one side and the other on the other side, and they should be from within outwards towards the sole of the foot."
E aprop lias las doas stelhas en tres locs de doas extremitatz e al mieg loc, quar am aquesta strectura la camba es prohibida de clinar a la partida dextra e sinistra, e sta per bona stacio.	"And appropriately tie the two fragments in three places on both extremities and in the middle place, for with this structure the limb is prevented from bending at the right or left fracture site, and it remains in good position."
E ja es aministrat un brasset de fust segon la longuesa de la camba; e sia pausada en lu la camba per so que conserve aquel de movement.	"And already having administered a splint of wood according to the length of the limb, place it there with the limb so that it maintains its position."
E majorment cove que tu fassas aquo en fractura, e quan am aquela es plagua propriament.	"And especially beware that you do this in fracture, and particularly when it is properly united."
E aprop considera en quascun jorn la camba e studia am aquel per derier studi, e tu le guardes de apostema e de imflacio o de autres causas semblantz; e cum accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, lahoras opausa te a lu am aquo que cove entro que sia sanat.	"And appropriately consider the limb every day and study it with that purpose for final study, and you will guard it from inflammation, from swelling or from other similar causes; and when any cause of those occurs, then promptly attend to it with whatever is necessary until it is healed."
Capitol .xvii.	"Chapter XVII."
De la fractura del talo e dels osses del pe e dels ditz.	"Of the fracture of the heel bone, and of the bones of the foot."
Al talo no accideys fractura de tot; mays als osses del pe accideys fractura alcunas veguadas; e als ditz del pe pauc accideys fractura, e no accideys a lor sino atricio en las mes de disposicio.	"The heel bone does not often fracture completely; however, fractures of the bones of the foot do occur sometimes; and those of the toes rarely fracture, but rather they become displaced in their places."
E si als osses del pe endeve fractura e vezes aquels osses esser elevatz sobre si entre lor, lahoras le malaute pause le sieu pe sobre la terra preparat ayssi cum anant.	"And if the bones of the foot receive fracture and sometimes those bones become elevated among themselves, then the patient should place his foot on the ground prepared thus while walking."
E aprop pausa la un pe sobre aquo que es elevat de aquels osses, e aprop calca aquels, e prem, e engualha aquels entro que torno en los locs.	"And appropriately press one foot on what is elevated by those bones and appropriately press them down, compress them, and turn them back into their places."
E aprop pausa emplastre e stopa desus, e pausa dejos le ventre del pe una petita taula a la qual sian dos caps plas.	"And appropriately apply plaster and bandage over it, and place a small table under the sole of the foot with two flat heads."
E aprop strenh aquela am le pe am strectura descent, pus que tu has envolopada aquela am draps e am autres causes de las quals indigeys.	"And appropriately support that with the foot in downward traction, because you have wrapped it with bandages and other causes of which you have need."
E cum a lu passan tres dias o quatre, lahoras tu deslia le liament, quar tu atrobaras les osses engualatz, o sian trincatz o sian dislocatz, e la operacio en aquels es ayssi co coneysses.	"And when three or four days have passed, then untie the bandage, for you will find the bones turned back into their places, either united or compressed or reduced, and the operation in those is as known."
Mays si alcus ditz son trincatz, lahoras restaura aquels, e enguala aquels ayssi cum yeu e recomtat a tu en la restauracio dels ditz de la ma.	"But if some of these are compressed, then restore them and turn them back thus as I have taught you and explained to you in the restoration of the fingers."
E aprop pausa al dit trincat stela segon la longitut del dit, e sia pus lada de lu un pauc; e aprop dejos le pe aquesta taula la qual e a tu recomtada, e strenh aquela am strictura decent.	"And appropriately tie the compressed toe with string according to its length and place it thus somewhat elevated; and appropriately place under the foot this table which has been recommended to you, and support that with downward traction."
Mays si aquo que es trincat dels osses so dos o tres o mays, lahoras tu pausa sobre quascun dit astela de la sua quantitat envolopada en drap leon, e strenh la taula en le pus bas del pe, e sia stant sobre la un dels caps de la taula foro le ventre del pe per que la tengua am bona retencio.	"But if what is compressed of the bones are two or three or more, then place over each toe a string tied according to its quantity wrapped in linen and support the table under the sole of the foot with one of the flat heads facing upwards so that it may have good retention."
E es convenient a tu que no oblides que no consideres totas las causas las quals que e ditas a tu en las autras fracturas dels accidentz que havem dit; e opausa te a tot accident am aquo que cove.	"And it is convenient for you not to forget that you do not consider all the causes which have been mentioned to you regarding the other fractures of the accidents which we have spoken about, and attend promptly to each accident with what is necessary."
Capitol .xviii.	"Chapter XVIII."
De fractura del conh de la femna e del os del pentenilh e de la vergua del home.	Fracture of the bone of the woman's thigh and the bone of the hip joint and the bone of the man's penis.
Quan le conh de la femna es trincat, lahoras fay aquela ceser en cezela cayrada, e aprop enclina aquela a la partida del dos un petit, e sia tenguda detras.	When the thighbone of the woman is broken, immediately apply that plaster in its cavity, and then bend her knee slightly backwards, holding it there from behind.
E aprop la matrona umpla le conh de coto, e sia fayt en le conh de lu ayssi cum spera; e aprop la femna sia concutida, e eleva le dos de lu petit a petit, quar tot aquo es fora-getat entro que sia denant la partida del conh ayssi cum spera e l’os trincat retorna.	And promptly the midwife will apply traction to the leg at the ankle, ensuring that it is aligned properly with the thighbone; and then the woman should be tilted slightly forward, so that everything is brought into line before the broken bone can return to its original position.
E aprop pausa pulvils sobre le dos de lu, e quan vol urinar remaugua le coto am facilitat e aprop urine, e reduzeys e retorna aquel segon la manieyra segon la qual mezist aquel al comensament, e aprop retorne al sieu pulvil primier.	And also sprinkle powder on the bone; and when she wants to urinate, gently move the leg away and allow her to do so; and reduce it again and return it according to the manner in which you first placed it at the beginning; and then return to your original position.
E fassa ayssi per vii dias o enviro aquels, quar aquel es restaurat.	And do this for seven days or about that time, for it is restored.
E si voles, pren una vezica de ovela e strenh sobre le trauc de lu una canula de canavera; e entromet tota la vesica en le conh de lu, e aprop ensuffla en la canula am vertut entro que la vesica sia imflada dedintz le conh, quar la fractura retorna.	And if you wish, take a bladder of a sheep and stretch it over the traction device on the leg; then insert the entire bladder into the cavity of the bone, and blow air into the cannula with force until the bladder is inflated inside the bone, for this will help the fracture to return.
E aprop sia umplida de coto e estia per alcus dias segon que havem recomtat, entro que sia sanat.	And then it should be filled with plaster and left like that for some days as we have recommended, until it is healed.
E quan le os del pentenil de home o de femna es trincat, lahoras aministra en la restauracio e agulacio de lu aquo que havem recomtat en l’os del anca.	And when the bone of the penis in a man or woman is broken, then apply the same treatment and reduction as we have recommended for the hip bone.
E aquo que es dreyt no es occultat en aquestas fracturas proprinquas e que pauc endeveno, majorment ad aquel al qual es alcun studi e us e enten aquest meu libre mot; quar aquela fractura significa a tu en las majors disposicios via dreyturiera en la restauracio e en la strictura de lu, e donc enten be.	And what is correct is not concealed in these nearby fractures and those that are less difficult, especially for one who has some study and experience with this my book; for that fracture signifies to you the greater dispositions via direct reduction and fixation of it, and therefore understand well.
Mays en la vergua del home quan es trincada, pren guarguamela de auca, e met la vergua en aquela; e aprop pausa sobre lu envolucio de drap, e sia envolopada, e aprop sia layssada per tres dias o enviro aquels, e sia sanada.	But in the fracture of the penis in a man, take a gourd of pumpkin, and put the penis into it; then wrap it with cloth wrappings, and let it be wrapped up, and leave it for three days or about that time until it is healed.
Capitol .xix.	Chapter XIX
De restauracio de fractura dels osses quan es am plagua.	Of reduction of fractures of the bones when they are displaced.
Convenient es ad aquel al qual accideys fractura am plagua, e majorment si le os es gran ayssi cum es le os de la cuoyssa o de l’adjutori, o semblant ad aquel, que tu te cuoytes e fleubotomes aquel tantost si las condicios de fleubotomia a tu o testifican ayssi cum desus havem dit.	It is convenient for one who suffers a fracture with displacement, especially if the bone is large such as the thighbone or the humerus, or similar to it, that you should perform trepanation immediately if the conditions of trepanation apply to you as we have mentioned above.
E si la plagua eflueys sanc, lahoras cove que tu te coytes a la retencio de lu enayssi que tu polverizes sobre lu zegi trissat, si a tu autra causa no es present.	And if the displacement flows out with blood, then it is necessary for you to remove it in such a way that you powderize upon it three times broken, unless another cause presents itself.
E aprop comensa restaurar la fractura en aquel meteys dia, e no prolongues aquo, si no accideys apostema.	And then begin to reduce the fracture on that same day, and do not delay this if there is no inflammation present.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras tu layssa la restauracio de lu entro al ix dia, entro que sia cedat le apostema, e no apropinques a lu en le tertz dia e·l iiii de tot, quar tu faras accidir mals accidentz.	But if inflammation is present, then wait to reduce it until the ninth day, until the inflammation has subsided, and do not approach it on the third or fourth day of all, for you will cause bad accidents.
Mays si le os trencat es eminent sobre la codena descubert, lahoras cove que te perforses reduzir aquel e engualar aquel am las tuas mas am facilitat e am pauca extencio.	But if the broken bone is prominent above the skin, then it is necessary for you to perform reduction and fixation of it with your hands with ease and little extension.
Mays si extencio no es a tu preparada e la equacio de lu am las tieuas mas, lahoras tu reduzeys aquel am las tuas mas am aquest sturment; e es sturment le qual es fayt de ferr, la longitut del qual es de vii ditz o de viii e la latitut del qual es segon la quantitat de la plagua; e per aquo es necessari al metge que prengua de aquels tres o quatre segon la quantitat que indigeys ad aquo en la curacio en tota specia de fractura.	But if extension is not prepared for you and the equination of it with your hands is difficult, then reduce it with this instrument: which is made of iron, whose length is seven or eight digits and whose width is according to the amount of displacement; and therefore it is necessary for the physician to take three or four of these according to the quantity that is needed for this in the treatment of all kinds of fractures.
E sia redon, e sia en lu pauca groceza per so que no sia doblat deves la comprecio sobre aquel en la hora de la operacio.	And let it be rounded and let there be little roughness on it so that it is not doubled by the pressure upon it during the operation.
E sia de aguda extremitat al qual sia marge en las sieuas extremitatz; e sia le desus de lu a grossetut tendent, e de la maytat de lu entro a las partidas.	And let its end be sharp, with edges at its ends; and let it be thicker at the top tending towards the thickness of the bone, and of moderate size within the parts.
E aquesta es la forma de lu:	And this is its shape:
E es nompnat en grec “labre volentz atelarem”, so es paleta pauca.	And it is called in Greek "labyrinthus volatilis" meaning little winged palette.
Per que cove que sia pausada la extremitat de lu acuda elevada sobre la extremitat del os eminent.	For the acute end of it should be elevated above the prominent end of the bone so that it is supported.
E inpelleys aquel en una veguada entro que retorne le os, e sia engualat am alcuna equacio.	And press it in such a way that the bone returns and becomes fixed with some equination.
E donc esforsa te engualar las extremitatz de la fractura entre lor, e si la extremitat de lu trencada es subtil, e no pren aquela le sturment per bona axcepcio, lahoras cove que tu inscidas la extremitat de aquel os entro que l’insturment haja poder de aquo.	And then strive to fix the ends of the fracture together, and if the end of the broken bone is thin, and does not receive the instrument well, then insert the end of that bone so that the instrument has power over it.
Mays si no podes reduzir le os de tot am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras enscideys aquel am aquo que coveneys a lu dels inscizoris les quals havem ditz; o serra aquel am una de las serras en qualque manieyra sia a tu possible.	But if you cannot reduce the bone completely with what we have recommended, then incise it with one of the knives which we have mentioned; or saw it with one of the saws in whatever manner is possible for you.
E aprop ratz aquel que roman en le os de asperitat e de scorsas menudas.	And then rasp that which remains on the bone and remove the small sharp edges.
E cum le os es reduzit, e aprop la reduccio le malaute atroba dolor vehement ledent, lahoras sapias que le os no es retornat al sieu loc natural; e adonc fay aquo quar tu confereyses al malaute gran juvament.	And when the bone is reduced and the patient suddenly feels violent pain, know that the bone has not returned to its natural place. And then do this for you will greatly relieve the patient.
Cum es complida la tua restauracio la qual fas al os, e lahoras submergeys drap en vi stiptic negre, e propriament si es en estiu, e no pauses sobre la plagua cerot ni autre causa en la qual sia oli, per so que no fassa en lu accidir poyredura e corropcio.	When your reduction of the bone is complete, then immerse a bandage in black stiptic wine, especially if it is summer, and do not apply cerote or any other ointment on the wound, for fear that putrefaction and corruption may occur.
E aprop aministra stelas en la hora del tieu compliment de la restauracio de l’os, e layssa la plagua descuberta enayssi que inscidas le trauc am forfexs e uses de envolucios segon la quantitat de la plagua.	And then administer bandages in the hour of your completion of the reduction of the bone, and leave the wound exposed so that you insert traction with forceps and use wrappings according to the quantity of the displacement.
E guarda te am tota cautela que no strenhas la plagua am la fractura, quar motas veguadas an fayt aquo les fols metges, e fero accidir sobre les sieus malautes mort o malautia corrodent o zuthement, so es sania.	And be careful that you do not stretch the wound with the fracture, for many times foolish physicians have done this and caused death or corrupting disease or great harm to their patients. So it is harmful.
E si la tieua strictura leugiera, molli, diversa de la strictura de las autras fracturas.	And if your splint is light, soft, and different from the splints of other fractures.
E si la plagua es gran o es plagua mala, e temes sobre aquel alcus accidentz mals les quals havem recomtatz, e atrobas dolor en le loc, lahoras no cove que pauses sobre aquel astelas, mays fay ad aquel envolucio de draps durs en loc de stelas e strenh lu am aquelas.	And if the wound is large or bad and you fear that some of the bad accidents which we have mentioned may occur there, and you feel pain in the place, then it is not necessary to apply bandages, but rather make a dressing of hard cloth in its place and stretch it with that.
E cum aprop un dia o dos vezes ja la plagua comensar, que en lu sia engendrat brac, lahoras tu osta desus le drap le qual havias pausat sobre aquel am vi, e aprop aministra calguas, enguentz am les quals de nostra constuma es que mediquem las plaguas, ayssi cum enguentz tetrafarmacon e semblantz ad aquel.	And when about a day or two later the wound begins to form crusts, then remove the cloth which you had placed over it with wine, and then apply cataplasms, as is customary for us to do for wounds, such as terra firmata or similar ones.
E conveneys a tu que deslias le liament e considera la plagua en quascun dia mati e vespre entro que sia consolidada e fermada, e cove que·l membre sia preparat en tal manieyra que la poyredura corra de lu a las partidas dejos am facilitat.	And it is necessary for you to loose the bandages and examine the wound every morning and evening until it is consolidated and firm, and that the limb be prepared in such a way that putrefaction flows away from it towards its parts with ease.
si a la plagua passan motz dias, e no es consolidada ni es abscindit de lu le brac, lahoras sapias que aqui so satagias de las petitas per que cove enquieras la plagua am tenta.	If many days pass and the wound is not consolidated nor separated from it by a crust, then know that here are small bone fragments for which you should examine the wound with a probe.
E de aquelas satagias aquelas que so separadas remau e extratz, aquelas que de lor no so separadas e pongen le membre e fan accidir dolor, perforsa te a inscidir aquelas segon que a tu aquo es possibla.	And of those fragments, remove and extract those that are separated; but those which are not separated and put pressure on the limb and cause pain, strive to incise them as much as is possible for you.
E si accideys a la plagua zuchem o eluchen, so es stiomenios, o autra specia de corrupcio e de putrefaccio, lahoras cove que pauses a quada un de aquels am aquo que conveneys a lu de la curacio del qual es precedida narracio en le sieu capitol.	And if you notice swelling or inflammation in the wound, then it is an indication of corruption and putrefaction; therefore it is necessary for you to apply one of those with which we have said that the cure of this is preceded by a narration in its chapter.
E de aquo en le qual cove que stia lo mieu sermo e tu fassas present la tua pessa: quan os gros es trincat, emineys sobre le membre ayssi cum le os de la coyssa e del ajutori e semblantz ad aquels dels membres grans, e que no presumas atraccio de lu, ni la extraccio de lu quar motas veguadas accideys per aquo la mort; habantz layssa aquel entro que poyresca, quar fort leu cayra per si aprop xx dias o xxx; e lahoras cura la plagua si a tu es vist, e si no layssa aquela.	And concerning that about which my speech is more important and you make your decision: when the large bone is crushed, emerge over the limb as the bones of the foot and hand and similar ones in the large limbs, and do not attempt to pull it out nor extract it because many times death has occurred through this; leave that alone until putrefaction occurs, for it will fall away by itself after about 20 or 30 days; and then treat the wound if you see fit, otherwise leave it alone.
Capitol .xx.	"Chapter Twenty."
De la curacio de nodacio que accideys en le vestigi de alcuna fractura.	About the treatment of swelling that occurs at the site of some fracture.
Motas veguadas accideys aquesta nodacio en le vestigi de sanacio de fractura, e majorment que es prop de las juncturas, e es orrasada per lu la figura del membre; e fort leu prohibeys le membre de la sua operacio natural.	Often this swelling occurs at the site of the healing of a fracture, especially if it is near joints, and it distorts the shape of the limb; therefore you should forbid the member from its usual movement.
Adonc considera si la nodacio es recent e aministra en aquela medicinas que han stipticat ayssi co es aloen, e enses, e mira, e sercacollo, e acrassia, e semblantz ad aquels; enayssi que prenguas de aquela alcunas o totas, e comfesiys aquelas am vi stiptic, o am album de huou, o am vi agre, e pausa aquela sobre la nodacio en estopa, e constringeys aquelas sobre lu per bona constriccio.	Then consider whether the swelling is recent and apply those medicines which have astringent properties such as aloë, senna, myrrh, and acacia, and others like them. Take some of these, crush them up, mix them with stiptic wine, album of egg white, or vinegar, place that on the swelling wrapped in linen, and bind it firmly to the limb with a good bandage.
E leyssa extrictura que no deslies aquela per motz dias; e aprop deslia aquela e itera autra, entro que sia remauguda la nodacio; o strenh sobre aquela lamina de plom descentment, quar plom ha proprietat de remaure tot aquo que es imflat en les membres.	And let this be done for several days without removing the bandage; and afterwards remove it and apply another one until the swelling has disappeared. Or else place over it a plaster made of lead, because lead has the property of reducing all swellings in the limbs.
Mays si nodacio ja es en peyra convertida e streyta es e nessessitat provoca a ostar aquela coytadament, e lahoras scindeys aquela per la partida pus sobirana de lu, e inscideys la superfluitat e eminent, o ratz aquela am alcus rezoris entro que sia remauguda; e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	But if the swelling has already turned into bone and is causing pain, it will be necessary to remove it carefully, first cutting through the skin above it with a scalpel, then incising and scraping away the excess bone and flesh until it is removed. After this, stitch up the wound and treat it until it heals.
Capitol .xxi.	Capitulum XXI.
De restauracio de fractura quan es restaurada e aprop aquo roman le membre subtil e freul no segon la sieua natura.	"Upon restoration of a fracture, if the limb remains delicate and does not heal as it should."
Quan fractura de os es restaurada, e aprop aquo roman le membre subtil e freul, lahoras aquo no es fayt sino per motas causas: de las quals la una es multitut de solucio del liament e de la liguacio de lu fayta no segon que cove; o per superfluitat de strictura dels liamentz entro que·l nutriment sia prohibit correr al membre; o per multitut de embrocaccio superflua; o per movement superfluent no en la sua hora; o per pauquesa de sanc en le cors del malaute e per debelitat de lu.	"When a bone fracture is restored, if the limb remains delicate and does not heal as it should, this may occur for several reasons: one of which is an abundance of fluid in the ligament that does not adhere according to what is necessary; or due to excess stiffness of the ligaments preventing proper nutrition from reaching the limb; or due to excessive rubbing; or due to unnecessary movement at the wrong time; or due to a lack of blood in the patient's body and weakness."
E curacio de aquo es dar a mengar al malaute e far le cor de lu tendre entro que·l sanc sia multiplicat en lu; e aministra banh; e entromet gaug e leticia sobre lu.	"And its treatment involves feeding the patient to strengthen their heart so that blood is multiplied within them; and administering baths; and applying gauze and happiness upon it."
E aprop pausa pegua sobre le membre, per so que la pegua atire a lu mot nutriment, o continua embrocacio de lu am aygua tebeza, entro que·l nutriment corr e retorne a la sua figura natural.	"And similarly, pressure should be applied to the limb, so that the pressure draws nourishment towards it, or continuous rubbing with hot water, until nutrition returns to its natural form."
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter XXII
De curacio dels osses trincatz quan so restauratz tortuozament e prohibeys la operacio de lor de aquo que cove.	"Regarding the treatment of bones that are broken and heal crookedly, and how to operate on them in order to correct this."
Quan accideys al membre ja restaurat aprop la sanacio de lu de tortuositat e eminencia al os trincat e nodacio, e es per aquo fededa de forma del membre, mays empero le membre no es prohibit de la sieua operacio natural, lahora no cove que tu recipias la paraula de aquel que exsistima aquel membre sia de novel trincat.	"If a limb that has already healed becomes crooked and prominent at the site of the fracture and knot, causing deformity in the shape of the limb, but the limb is still capable of its natural operation, then you should not accept the claim of anyone who insists that the limb has been recently re-broken."
Mays ja so statz motz fols metges e restauradors les quals han fayt aquo en nostra tera; e aquesta operacio es mot vituperable perduzent a gran temor le senhal de la qual es mortal.	"But many foolish doctors and healers have done this in our land, and this operation is very reprehensible, leading to great fear, the sign of which is death."
Mays si claudicacio e nodacio son recentz, lahoras cove que sian enbrocatz am aygua tebeza en la qual so coytas erbas mollificantz, ayssi cum son fuelas de altea e razitz de lu, e mellilot, e semblantz ad aquels; e sia fayt a lu emplastre am emplastre mollificatio ayssi cum dyallaquilon ben fayt; o que sia preza mucillage de razit de altea e sia contucida am gray de gualina o am oli de cirami, e sia emplastrat am aquel; o que sian prezes figuas grassas e sian trissadas am fems de colom, e semblantz ad aquels de las medicinas que son nompnadas amermans consolidacio.	"But if the limb is weak and knotted recently, then it should be rubbed with hot water containing herbs that soften, such as marshmallow root and rose petals, mallows, and similar ones; and a poultice of mollifying plaster should be applied to it, made from dill well-prepared; or honey made from marsh mallow root should be crushed and mixed with dough of wheat flour or oil of camphor, and then applied; or figs that are plump should be pressed and crushed with pigeon feathers, along with similar medicines called amermans consolidatio."
E alcunas vetz es dissolvuda am assidua fricacio leugiera que sia am las mas humidas, e sia administrat movement del membre a tota partida en totas horas.	"And sometimes, with continuous gentle rubbing that is done with the most humid hands, and administering movement of the limb at all times in every hour, it can be dissolved."
Mays si tortuositat ja es anada denant e es fayta fort e convertida es en peyra e provocada es necessitat a curacio de lu am ferr, lahoras cove que sia le pus desus cecsat e la continuacio del os sia dissolvut, e sia inscidit aquo que superflueys de nodacio de aquel meteys am le os am inscissoris subtils, e sia aministrada facilitat en aquel am sollicitut e studi.	"But if the crookedness has already hardened and turned into bone, and there is a need for surgical treatment with iron, then it is necessary to make an incision above the prominence of the bone and dissolve the continuity of the bone, and to excise what is superfluous in that place with subtle bone-cutters, and to facilitate mobility there with care and diligence."
Capitol .xxiii.	"Chapter xxiii."
De sermo en dislocacio.	"On the matter of dislocation."
Dislocacio es eyssiment de alcuna de las juncturas del sieu loc, per que es prohibida de movement, e es orrezada la figura del membre, e fa venir sobre le malaute dolors e lesios grans.	Joint dislocation is the displacement of some of the joints in its place, preventing it from moving, and causing distortion of the limb's figure. This results in great pain and injuries for the patient.
Donc quan accideys ad alcu dislocacio, lahoras cove tantost perforsar que sia reduzit, e no tarde aquela reduzir, quar si es tardada, le loc es apostemat e fort leu am aquo es fayta dificil la reduccio de dislocaccio.	Therefore when a dislocation occurs, it is important to reduce it as soon as possible. Do not delay in reducing it, because if it is delayed, the joint becomes inflamed and swollen, making reduction of the dislocation difficult.
E per aysso no cove que sia maugut ni stendut en la hora de la apostemacio, quar motas veguadas fa venir spasme e dolors ledentz.	And at that time it is not necessary to move or stretch the patient during the inflammation phase, because many times this can cause spasms and intense pain.
Mays quan aquo accideys, lahoras cove que tu te coytes a la flaubotomia del malaute, e aprop sia layssat entro que repause le apostema; e aprop le membre sia embrocat am aygua cauda e oli, e aprop sia reduzit am facilitat.	But when this happens, it is necessary that you cover the patient's wound and allow the inflammation to subside. Then the limb should be wrapped with cold water and oil, and reduced gently.
E tot membre sia curat am aquo del qual la rememoracio vindra en son loc.	And all members should be treated in such a way that they return to their original place as soon as possible.
E yeu ja e ordenatz les capitols de dislocacio segon que es precedit en fractura; de la partida del cos pus sobirana entro a la partida pus dejos.	"I have already arranged the chapters on dislocation according to what is stated about fractures."
Capitol .xxiiii.	"Chapter twenty-four."
De curacio de dislocacio de la mandibula dejos.	"The treatment of dislocation of the jawbone."
So dislocadas las doas mandibulas si no tart; e la dislocacio de amdos es fayta segon una de dos manieyras: que o son remaugudas de lurs locs per pauca remocio, e so mollificadas un petit; o so dislocadas per entiera dislocacio e complida, entro que sian mollificadas a la partida de la junctura entro que corro saliva del malaute e que no puesca tenir aquela ni puesca claure la sua boca, e la lengua de lu sia envolopada en sa paraula.	"When both mandibles are dislocated, they are not reduced immediately. The dislocation of both occurs in one of two ways: either the condyles are removed from their sockets by slight movement and softened a little; or they are completely dislocated with sudden force, so that they become mollified at the junction of the articulation before any saliva is secreted by the patient and he cannot speak nor close his mouth, and his tongue remains wrapped in his palate."
Mays quan la dislocacio de lu es pauca, lahoras en las majors disposicios retorna per si an pauca causa.	"When the dislocation is slight, it often returns spontaneously with little effort on its own."
Mays si la dislocacio es entiera e complida, lahoras cove que sia administrada reduccio de lu leugierament, e no sia tardada de tot.	"But if the dislocation is complete and severe, it must be reduced gently without any delay."
E es que·l ministre tengua le cap del malaute, e entrometa lo metge le dit pous de la una sieua ma en la razit de la dislocacio de la mandibula dedintz la boca de lu, si la dislocacio es de la una part; o que entrometa les sieus dos pouzes ensemps, si la dislocacio es de doas partz, e les autres ditz de las mas de lu sian defora am les quals enguale; e comanda al malaute que cesse las suas mandibulas e absolva aquelas anar de quascuna partida; e le metge engualhe la mandibula e enpellisca la mandibula entro que retorne al sieu loc.	"And then the minister must hold the patient's head, and insert his index finger into the socket of the dislocated jawbone inside the mouth on one side if the dislocation is on that part; or insert both fingers together if the dislocation is on both sides, while the other fingers remain outside to steady him. And he commands the patient to cease moving his jaws and relax them in each direction, and then he guides the mandible back into its socket and presses it in until it returns to its place."
E si dificil es la reducio de lu, e majorment si amdos las mandibulas so essemps dislocadas, lahoras aministra evoporacio am aygua cauda e oli, entro que sia fayta leugiera la reduccio de amdos e no tardes la reduccio de amdos de tot, ayssi quo havem dit.	"And if the reduction is difficult, especially if both mandibles are dislocated at once, it is advisable to administer evaporation with hot water and oil to facilitate easy reduction without delay."
E donc cum retornam e so engualadas, e es clausa la boca del malaute e no es mollificada, lahoras pausa sobre aquelas polvils de drap am cerot, e sia fayt de cera e oli rozat; e aprop sia liat am facilitat am liamens mols.	"And then when the reduction is complete and the mouth is closed and not softened, it is advisable to apply powder of wax mixed with oil on linen cloth over it, and let it be made of wax and olive oil; and then bind it gently with soft bandages."
E sia le dormir del malaute sobre le sieu dos, e·l cap de lu sia stant entre dos aurelhes, per so que no maugue aquel a la partida dreyta ni a la sinistra; e no li fassas per forsa masteguar alcuna causa; habans la sieua vianda sia forbicio leon, entro que quan las dolors sian remaugudas e las mandibulas so nozadas, lahoras maugue aquo que vol.	"And let the patient sleep on his back with his head supported between two pillows, so that he does not move his jaw to the right or left; and do not force him to eat anything until the pain has subsided and the jaws are healed. Then he may eat whatever he wishes."
E aquo sia aministrat am facilita, e no trebalhe sobre la apercio de la boca deves la comestio e beure e ocitatio, entro que la mandibula sia nozada e sanada.	"And let him be treated gently until the opening of the mouth is healed for eating and drinking and speaking. Until then he should avoid opening his mouth too wide."
E si es dificil la reduccio de duas mandibulas quan so dislocadas en alcuna hora e no so convertidas als lors locs, lahoras motas veguadas accideysso febres e soda assidua, e fort leu es alerguat le ventre del malaute, e fort leu e vomeys colera pura.	"And if the reduction of both jaws is difficult when they are dislocated and do not return to their places, it often happens that fevers and continuous thirst occur, and a strong desire to vomit or purge. Therefore it is advisable to purge the stomach with calomel."
E quan tu vezes aquo, lahoras sapias que es perdicio; e motas veguadas mor aquel al qual accideys aquo en x dias.	"And when you do this, know that it is harmful and many times the patient dies within nine days if such a thing happens to him."
Capitol .xxv.	"Chapter XXV."
De reduccio de la dislocacio de la furcula e de la extremitat del muscle.	"On reduction of dislocation of the clavicle and the extremity of the muscle."
Furcula no es dislocada del latz dedintz per la sua continuacio am le pietz; e alcunas veguadas es dislocada a la partida defora, e aquo es declarat al sentiment.	The shoulder blade is not dislocated within the chest due to its connection with the ribs; sometimes it can be dislocated at the joint itself, which is discernible through touch.
E la restauracio de lu es que·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu dos e extenda les sieus brasses.	To restore it, have the patient lie on their back and stretch out their arms.
E aprop coarta le loc am la tua palma am fort coartacio, quar ela retornara.	And press the spot with your palm firmly, as it will return to its place.
E aprop pausa sobre aquela emplastre e pulvils e strenh aquela.	Then apply plaster and powder there and strengthen it.
Mays la extremitat de aquel que siec le coyde e·s continuat am aquel, no es dislocada en alcun dia; lahoras cove que sia reduzida e engualhada segon que havem dit e segon que es a tu aparelhat.	But if the end of that which is connected to it [the shoulder blade] is not dislocated on its own, then it must be reduced and immobilized as we have said and according to your apparatus.
E aprop pausa sobre aquela emplastre, e pulvils, e extrictura, e comanda al malaute adherir a trenquilitat e a repaus entro que sia sanat.	Then apply plaster, powder, and bandages there, and instruct the patient to maintain tranquility and rest until it is healed.
E am aquesta meteyssa curacio es reduzida la extremita del muscle quan es separada del sieu loc.	And with this same treatment, the detached end of the muscle is reduced as well.
Capitol .xxvi.	Chapter XXVI
De la reduccio de la dislocacio del muscle.	On the reduction of dislocation of the muscle.
Sapias que·l muscle no es dislocat sino segon tres manieras, de las quals es la una que sia dislocat a la partida del titillic a la partida dejos.	"You know that muscles can be dislocated in three ways; one of them is when they are dislocated at the exit point from the nipple."
E la segonda es que sia dislocat a la partida desus del muscle, e aquo es fayt tart; e no es dislocat a las partidas detras per la spalla; e no es dislocat a las partidas denant per les nervis.	"The second way is when it [the muscle] is dislocated at its attachment point above the muscle, which is rare; and it is not dislocated at its posterior attachments by the shoulder blade or its anterior attachments by the nerves."
E majorment es dislocat e defora eyssit a las partidas dejos deves le titillic, e majorment en aquels dels quals las carns son paucas, leugierament es dislocat; mays en aquels en les quals so motas carns, es eyssit fora am dificultat.	"Muscles are more often dislocated and exit outwards at their attachments near the nipple area, especially in those individuals with less flesh, where it can happen easily; but in those with a lot of flesh, it is harder to dislocate."
E fort leu accideys ad alcus homes percussio o cazement, e le muscle de lu es apostemat de apostema caut, e es cujat per aquo que ja sia dislocat.	"And sometimes, due to a blow or fall, the muscle is trapped by a closed hematoma, and it becomes swollen."
Adonc cove que tu sproes aquo entro que estias sobre-sertetut de lu, e lahoras procesiscas en la curacio de lu.	"So you should speak about what you know regarding this matter, and later discuss its treatment."
E es conoguda la dislocacio de lu quan es a las partidas dejos deves le titillic; per so que distingescas entre le muscle dislocat e·l muscle sa, quar tu atrobas entre aquels diversitat manifesta; e atrobas en le cap del muscle concavitat e dejos le titillic deves le tocament del cap del muscle ayssi quo un huou, e al malaute no pot redusir la sua ma a la sieua aurelha, ni maure aquela per totz movementz.	"And the dislocation is recognized when it occurs at its attachments near the nipple; so that you can distinguish between the dislocated muscle and the normal one, since there are many differences between them. You find a concavity in the head of the muscle on its underside near the nipple, and in affected individuals they cannot reduce their hand to their ear or move it freely with any movement."
Si es dislocat deves le pietz o ensus, e tu lahoras atrobas manifest tocament, e no es amaguat.	"If it [the muscle] is dislocated towards the foot or outwards and you then find a palpable lump, it will not be hidden."
E de aquesta dislocacio es fayta leugiera reduccio quan es fresca e le malaute es enfant.	"And easy reduction can be made for this dislocation when it is fresh and the patient is a child."
E la reduccio de lu es que·l ministre eleva la ma de lu a las partidas desus; e aprop pause les tieus pouses dejos le titillic de lu, e eleva la junctura am fortaleza en sus al sieu loc, e·l ministre eleva la ma de lu, e extenda aquela en sus; e aprop pausa aquela dejos quar ela retorna leugierament.	"The reduction of it is that the minister raises his hand from above on him; then place your thumb near his navel, and raise the joint with force to its proper place."
Mays si per aquo que havem dit no retorna, e so del comensament que accidic la dislocacio, motz dias, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia banhat en aygua cauda e sia aministrada enbrocacio que mollifique e liniesca ayssi cum si so coytz razitz de altea, e fenugrec, e melillot en aygua, e sia administrada.	"If what we have said does not succeed, and it is from the beginning that the dislocation occurred, then after many days, sometimes it is necessary for the patient to be bathed in cold water and administered an ointment that softens and smooths them like if they were comfrey roots, fenugreek, and mallows in water."
E aprop le malaute sia ressupinat sobre le sieu dos e sia pausat dejos le titillic de lu espera de lana que sia engual entre levitat e strictura, e aprop le metge pause le sieu talo sobre la spera, e eleva le cap del muscle am vertut, e atire la ma del malaute per que no sia mauguda a las partidas dejos, e autre ministre tengua le cap del malaute, que no sia maugut a las partidas dejos, quar aquela tantost retorna al sieu loc.	"Then the patient should be placed on their back and place your thumb near his navel while waiting for it to be between levitation and tightening, then the doctor places their heel on the sphere and raises the head of the muscle with force, and pull the patient's hand so that it does not move from its position."
E si voles, reduzeys aquel segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu fassas esser prezent un home le qual sia pus lonc que·l malaute, e estia de la part de aquel latz, e entrometa le sieu muscle dejos le titillic del malaute e eleve le titillic de lu a las partidas desus entro que·l malaute sia suspendut en ayre, e autre ministre tire la ma del malaute de las partidas dejos del sieu ventre.	"And if you wish to reduce it in this manner: If you have a man present who is taller than the patient and stands on the same side as him, place his muscle near the navel of the patient and lift the navel upwards while the patient is suspended in the air. Another helper pulls the patient's hand away from their belly."
Mays si le malaute es leugier, lahoras cove que am lu que autre causa sia suspenduda, per so que grave aquel, quar la dislocacio retorna tantost.	"But if the patient is light, then it is necessary that another cause be suspended while doing this so that he does not fall down suddenly, for the dislocation returns quickly."
E es reduzit eysament segon autra manieyra: e es que sia ficat en terra un fust lonc le cap del qual sia redon de figura, ayssi cum pilo de mortier, que no sia gros ni subtil, e aprop sia pausat dejos le malaute; pus que so pausatz sobre·l cap del fust draps leons, e·l malaute sia stant segon la longitut del fust, e aprop sia extenduda la ma de lu a las partidas dejos del autra part; e sia extendut le cos de lu del autre part am fortaleza, quar la junctura retorna al sieu loc am velocitat.	"And it is also reduced in this way: Place on the ground a pole whose head is rounded like a mortar pestle, neither thick nor thin. Then place the patient near the pole with a lion's skin spread out on top of the pole's head. The patient stands along the length of the pole and extends their arm to the other side. Then extend their body from the other side with force, for the joint returns to its place quickly."
E si es dificil reduccio de lu per totas las causas que havem ditas, lahoras usa de aquesta cura: e es que tu prenguas un fust la quantitat del qual sia en le lonc de dos brasses, e latitut de aquel sia de quatre ditz, e la grossetut de lu sia aleujat en le preon del tittilic segon aquesta forma:	"And if the reduction is difficult due to all the causes we have mentioned, then use this treatment: Take a pole whose length is two spans, width four digits, and thickness is decreased at its navel in this way:"
E aprop sobre le cap redon sian liatz drap leons per so que·l fust no ledesca le malaute.	"And place lion's skin on top of the rounded head of the pole to prevent it from slipping when placed against the patient."
E aprop sia pausat dejos le titillic del malaute, e sia extenduda la ma o le bras sobre·l fust entro a las partidas dejos, e sia liat le fust sobre le adjutori e le bras e la extremitat de la ma.	"And then place it near the navel of the patient and extend their hand or arm over the pole until it reaches the desired position. Then tie the pole to the assistant's body, as well as the elbow and wrist of the hand."
Aprop sia pausat le bras sobre un scalo de scala segon la latitut, e la ma sia extenduda a las partidas dejos, e l’autre cos sia suspendut de l’autre part, quar la junctura intra tantost.	"And then place the arm on a ladder step according to its width and extend the hand to the other side. Suspend the rest of the body on the other side because the joint enters quickly."
E cum le intrament de lu es complit segon quascuna maniera que es a tu possibla, e lahoras cove que tu pauses dejos le titillic spera de lana de engual quantitat; e aprop pauza emplastre perparat de polvera de moli am enses e album de huou sobre tot le muscle, ayssi quo es revolvut desus, e aprop strenh dejos le titillic am strictura decent; e le liament sia revolvut sobre le emplastre, e la ma de lu sia annectida al col de lu, e sia leyssat, e no sia mauguda la ma de lu per vii dias.	"And when the joint has entered according to any method you can manage, then place a lambskin pad near the navel of the patient. Then apply a plaster made from ground barley flour with sesame seeds and egg white over all the muscles that have been rotated upwards. Then wrap it with an appropriate bandage around the navel. The plaster should be wrapped in the bandage and the patient's hand should be tied to their neck and left like this for seven days without moving it."
E cove que sia pausada la vianda del malaute pauca, entro que·l membre sia confortat, quar es pus leugier a la sanacio de lu.	"And it is necessary that the patient's diet be light during this time until the member is strengthened because it is easier for it to heal then."
E aprop la vianda sia donada major aprop vii o v e sia exercitat un movement; e donc si es fermat e no es mollificat, lahoras ja es sanat.	"And then increase the patient's diet gradually over seven or nine days until they can move their limb. And when it is firm and not swollen anymore, then it is healed."
Mays si la junctura es dislocada motas veguadas per humiditat que accideys a lu o per autra causa, lahoras cove que en aquela sia administrat cauteri am tres traucs, segon que denant es dit en le capitol de cauteri.	"But if the joint is dislocated many times due to humidity that occurs there or another cause, then it is necessary to administer a cautery with three incisions according to what was said earlier in the chapter on cauteries."
E si tot aysso es fayt e aprop vii dias es desliat le liament e la junctura no es fermada, e le emplastre e la strictura son reduzitz sobre lu alcunas veguadas, e no es fermada e catz e no pot elevar aquel bras a las partidas desus, lahoras sapias que·ls nervis de lu, les quals so al cap del muscle, ja so inscizes o extendutz o mollificatz, e sapia que la junctura nul temps no sira ficada en loc sieu.	"But even if this is done and after seven days the bandage is removed but the joint is not firm and it cannot raise its arm upwards, then you should know that the nerves at the head of the muscle are injured or extended or softened. And you should realize that the joint will never be returned to its proper place."
De la dislocacio de aquela qu’es fayta deves le pietz e la mamilha o las partidas detras, la reduccio es fayta am impulcio e extencio am las mas, entro que retorne.	"For dislocation of the elbow and kneecap or any other joint behind it, reduction is done with pressure and extension using hands until it returns to its place."
E sia administrada en aquela l’autra strictura, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	"And apply the other bandage there and treat it until it heals."
E si accideys aprop la sanacio gravitat en le membre e tarditat en le movement de lu, lahoras le malaute uze de banh motas veguadas entro que aquela gravitat sia alleujada e que retorne a la natura de lu primiera.	"And if heaviness and slowness of movement occur during the healing process, then the patient should use hot baths many times until that heaviness is relieved and it returns to its original nature."
Capitol .xxvii.	"Chapter XXVII."
De curacio de dislocacio del coyde.	"On the treatment of dislocation of the hip joint."
Sapias que la junctura del coyde es dislocada am difficultat e semblantment retorna am difficultat; e aquela es dislocada a totas partidas, e majorment a la partida denant a la partida detras, e la dislocacio de lu no es amaguada a tu quar es cazent dejos le vezement o dejos le tocament segon qualque figura sia dislocat, e quan ajustes le coyde disloguat am le sa, aquo es a tu declarat manifestament, quar la junctura es concavada e no pot doblar le bras, ni tocar am aquel le sieu muscle.	"You should know that the hip joint is easily dislocated and also returns with difficulty. It can be dislocated in all directions but especially anteriorly or posteriorly. When the hip joint has been dislocated, you will not be deceived because it is apparent if it is placed near the surface of the thigh or touched according to any figure that may have been displaced. And when you reduce a dislocated hip by placing it in its socket, this is clearly evident because the joint is concave and cannot bend the leg or touch itself with its own muscle."
E cove que·t coytes, e reduzescas la dislocacio tantost denant que vengua a lu apostema caut, quar si ve a lu apostema caut, dificil es la reduccio de lu, e fort leu no es sanat de tot; e majorment quan es a las partidas detras, quar pus mala es de totas las autras specias de dislocacio, e de major dolor, e motas veguadas deyssen am aquela la mort.	"And you should know that you must reduce the dislocation immediately before an abscess occurs because if an abscess occurs, reduction becomes difficult and often it cannot heal completely. And especially when it is dislocated posteriorly, for this is worse than all other kinds of dislocation and causes greater pain, and many times death ensues from it."
E la restauracio de lu, quan es aquela que es possibla reduzir, es que la ma de lu sia extenduda am doas mas, e le bras de lu sia expandut, e las mas del metge sian sobre le coyde e dejos lu, e el empellisca la junctura am les pouzes de las suas mas ensemps, o am la razit de la sua palma entro que torne en son loc.	"For reduction of this hip dislocation, if it is possible to reduce it, place the patient's hand on two hands and extend their arm. Then place your hands on both sides of the hip joint with your palms facing down and press the joint back into its proper place using your palms."
Mays si la dislocacio es a las partidas denant, lahoras retorna ayssi que dobla la ma am la sua ma, entro que percuta le coyde am la razit de la sua palma.	"But if the dislocation is anteriorly, then it should be reduced in this way: bend the hand with your hand and strike the hip joint with the palm of your hand."
E si la dislocacio no obezeys a la reduccio, lahoras aministra vehement extencio e mot fort.	"But if the dislocation does not yield to reduction, then apply strong extension and force."
E es que dos ministres extendan le bras, e tenguan aquel eyssament dos ministres per so que no sia remaugut deves la extencio.	"And it is necessary for two assistants to extend the leg and hold it firmly in place during the reduction so that it does not move away from the extension."
E aprop sia revolvut le bras deves tota part, pus que es envolopat drap doblat lonc sobre la ma de lu, o liament.	"And then rotate the leg towards all parts because it is wrapped with a folded cloth or bandage on its hand."
E quant le metge toca la junctura am la sua ma, unte aquela am alcun oli per so que aquo sia aquelas causas las quals ajudan en lubricitat de la junctura am facilitat; e aprop empellesca la junctura am empulcio vehement entro que retorne.	"And when the physician touches the joint with his hand, he should anoint it with some oil so that this helps to lubricate the joint and make reduction easier. Then press the joint forcefully until it returns."
E aprop la reduccio de lu cove que sia pausat sobre aquela empastre en le qual sia stipticitat e excequacio am album de huou, e sia extrenhut am strictura descent, e·l bras sia suspendut del col, e sia layssat per alcus dias.	"And then after reducing it, apply a plaster containing styptic and absorbent white of egg over the hip joint. Then compress it with a descending bandage and suspend the leg from a collarbone sling for several days."
E aprop sia desliat; e donc si la junctura es formada en le sieu loc, lahoras tu deslia le liament de lu e layssa aquela.	"And then when it is healed, you can remove the bandage. And if the joint has returned to its proper place, then leave it alone."
E si vezas la junctura no be strenher, lahoras tu itera le emplastre e·l liament, e layssa aquela per alcus dias entro que sia extrenhuda; e aprop deslia aquela.	"If the joint does not strengthen, then repeat the plaster and bandage for several days until it becomes strong. Then remove them."
Mays si accideys a lu gravitat aprop la reduccio de la junctura, e la disposicio de lu es en movement, lahoras aministra humectacio en banh e fricacio subtil, e comprecio, entro que sia aleujat; o pausa sobre la junctura aleliati, so es coyssa de moto grassa; e aprop sia liada, e layssa aquela sobre le os le dia e la nueyt.	"But if it happens that the patient experiences great pain during the reduction of the joint and their condition is worsening, then apply moist compresses and gentle friction followed by pressure until they are relieved. Or place a poultice on the joint to draw out the inflammation. Then bind it and leave it alone for day and night."
E aprop osta aquela, e met aquel en banh; e quan suza, lahoras tu fregua la junctura am fricacio temprada, e aprop itera sobre aquela aleliati, so es ronhonal de moto, una veguada, e la segonda, e la .iii.a.,	"Then take that one and put him in a bath; and when he is risen, then you shall rub the joint with gentle friction, and again repeat it upon that side once, twice, thrice."
am intrament de banh, entro que sia linit.	"I have entered the bath, until I am covered up."
E si voles, pausa sobre aquela fenda de vaca humida e scalfada am boder e stren sobre aquel; e fay aquo alcunas veguadas, quar aquela es humida e reduzeys a la sua disposicio.	"If you wish, pause upon that moist and smooth furrow with the edge and press upon it; do this several times until it is wet and ready for its disposition."
Capitol .xxviii.	"Chapter XXVIII"
De curacio de dislocacio de malassen, so es de la junctura que es entre·l bras e la ma.	"Regarding the treatment of dislocation of the shoulder blade, which is located between the arm and the hand."
Malassen de la ma alcunas vetz es deslocada, e la reduccio de la dislocacio de lu es leugiera, e·l contrari es de las autras juncturas, mays empero cove que sia velocitat en la reduccio de lu en la hora en la qual es deslocada, denant que le loc sia apostemat o que accida en lu apostema caut.	"Sometimes the hand is dislocated, and the reduction of dislocation in it is easy; but on the contrary, for other joints, however speed is required in reducing it at the time when it is dislocated, before swelling occurs or an abscess forms."
E la reduccio de la dislocacio de lu es que tu pauses la junctura de la ma del malaute sobre una taula e le ministre extenda la ma de aquel, e le metge pause la sua ma o o la sua palma sobre la iminencia de la junctura, e empellisca aquela entro que retorne al sieu loc.	"And the reduction of dislocation in it is that you place the joint of the patient's hand on a table and the assistant extends the patient's hand; then the physician places his hand or palm over the prominence of the joint and pushes it until it returns to its proper place."
Mays empero cove que sia considerat si la palma ja es ostada al ventre de la ma, lahoras le malaute pause le dos de la sua ma sobre una taula deves la extencio e la reduccio; e si la dislocacio es precedent deves le dos de la ma, lahoras sia la posicio de la ma de aquel intrinicequement sobre la taula, per so que la ma del metge caja sobre aquela iminencia de la junctura.	"But it is necessary to consider if the palm has already been turned towards the belly of the hand, at that time the patient places the back of their hand on a table with the extension and reduction; but if the dislocation precedes on the back of the hand, then the position of the hand should be intrinsically on the table so that the physician's hand can press against that prominence of the joint."
E donc si retorna tantost, bon es; e sino, lahoras strenh aquela am empastre cedant le apostema e layssa aquel; e no iteres aquo, quar sino, no soferta ni no podes sobre la reduccio de lu pus que passan a lu dias.	"And then if it returns quickly, that is good. But if not, then press upon the arm gently until the swelling subsides and leave him. And do not repeat this treatment for several days, because if you do, it will cause pain and you will not be able to effect reduction."
Mays empero la junctura roman segon la sua tortuositat; e no notz al malaute alcuna causa, sino que la ma es mollificada e no pot strenher alcuna causa; lahoras sapias que les nervis son trincatz o trissatz, e lahoras no es engen en lu sino que sia strenhuda am cauteri prop le cazament de lu e fort leu aquo confereys alcuna causa.	"But the joint moves according to its curvature. Do not tell the patient any cause, but that his hand is relaxed and he cannot move it for some reason. Then you will know that the nerves are compressed or severed; then do not engage in anything except cauterize around the opening of the wound with fire, and afterwards confer some cause."
Donc cum malassem es retornada, lahoras pausa sobre lu empastre le qual havem recomtat, e sia layssat e strenhut per v dias; e aprop sia desliat e sia layssat e la ma de lu sia excercitada.	"So when the joint has returned to its proper place, then apply over it the compress which we have recommended, and let it rest for a few days. Then remove it and exercise the hand."
Mays si le movement de lu es ostat e accideys en lu alcuna gravitat, lahoras leniys aquela am aygua cauda e am fricacio alcunas veguadas, entro que sia alleujat.	"But if the motion of it is retained but some stiffness occurs in it, then apply to it cold water and friction several times until it is alleviated."
Capitol .xxix.	**Chapter xxix.**
De la curacio de dislocacio dels ditz.	**On the treatment of dislocation of the said joints.**
Alcunas veguadas so dislocatz les ditz a tota partida.	"Sometimes these joints are entirely dislocated."
E quan es dislocat alcun dit de aquels al dos de la palma o al ventre de lu, lahoras sten le dit e impelleys la dislocacio de lu am les tieus pouses, entro que retorne.	"And when some of these digits are dislocated on the back of the palm or on the belly of it, then straighten the digit and reduce the dislocation with your hands until it returns."
E aprop sostenta le cap del dit, e suspen aquel deves la part a la qual es dislocat, e layssa aquel per dos dias.	"And likewise support the head of the digit, and suspend that above the part where it is dislocated, leaving it for two days."
E aprop suspen aquel e exten aquel entro que dreyt sia engualhat en aquel sieu dia.	"And likewise suspend that and extend it until it is completely reduced in its day."
E quan sira noyt, lia aquel segon aquela narracio, e no cesses desliar aquel en le dia e exercitar am movement, e lia aquel en la noyt; e fay aquo per alcus dias entro que sia streyt.	"And if it does not reduce, bind that according to this method and do not cease loosening it during the day and exercising with motion, and bind it at night; and do this for several days until it is straightened."
E fay semblant am aquo, si es dislocat al ventre de la ma, e lia aquel ad aquela partida e fay am aquo la tieua primiera operacio, entro que sia sanat.	"And do likewise if it is dislocated on the belly of the hand; and bind that to this part and perform your first operation until it is healed."
E semblantment fay am aquo quan es dislocat a las autres partidas.	"And similarly do this when it is dislocated at other parts."
Capitol .xxx.	"Chapter XXX."
De la curacio de dislocacio dels spondils del dos.	"Of the treatment of dislocation of the vertebrae of the back."
Quan accideys ad alcun dels spondils del dos o del col dislocacio complida, e so remaugutz motz spondils de lors locs, lahoras en aquela no es curacio, quar la mort se coyta al malaute.	"When it happens that some of the vertebrae of the back or neck become completely dislocated and some are moved from their places, then there is no remedy for this condition because death soon follows."
E senhal de aquo es que la egestio del malaute es fora-eyssida ses voluntat, e no pot retenir aquela; e motas veguadas so mollificatz alcus membres de lu o doas cambas de lu o dos brasses de lu, o un de aquels; o es remaugut un spondil de son loc, quar motas veguadas es remaugut e motas veguadas es fayta la remocio de aquels a quatre partidas.	"And this is indicated by the fact that the evacuation of waste occurs involuntarily and cannot be retained; many times some members such as legs or arms are paralyzed on one side or both, or one of them; or one vertebra has moved from its place because very often they have moved and very often their dislocation occurs in four directions."
Donc aquela ja es remauguda a las partidas detras e es nompnada gelbozitat.	"Therefore that is already dislocated towards the posterior parts and is called lumbago."
Mays la curacio de lu es que lahoras consideras si la gelbozitat accidey de puerissia, quar lahoras en aquela no es curacio ni de aquela no es sanacio de tot.	"But the treatment for it is that if lumbago occurs in childhood, then there is no remedy nor can it be healed completely."
Mays en aquela que ve per cazement o per percussio o per semblant ad aquels, ja diyssero les Antics las manieras de curacio am sermo prolixs, del qual lo mays retorna am profieyt; mays yeu ja e abreujat de aquel del qual lo pauc escusa del trop de lu, per la mieua propinquitat a la entencio mieua exposicio, am la qual he aquo expausat et format ex instrument divers de aquel am le qual mostrero aquo e espausero aquel.	"But as for that which occurs by accident or by percussion or similarly to those, the Ancients have already described the methods of treatment in long speeches, from which there is great profit; but I have abbreviated this because it would excuse me little from its length given my proximity to the intention of my exposition with which I have explained and formed this chapter from diverse instruments with which I will show it and explain it."
E dic que en gelbosita que accideys de la partida denant en le pietz, no es engen ni sanacio de aquela; e semblantment en aquela que es fayta a dos latz.	"And I say that in lumbago which occurs at the front of the hip there is neither remedy nor healing for it; and similarly with that which occurs on both sides."
E de aquelas no es curada sino aquela que accideys en le dos propriament am aquo que yeu recomti.	"And among those, only that one which occurs properly at the back can be healed, according to what I have counted."
E es que·l malaute sia extendut sobre la sua cara sobre pug engual prop de paret, e sia extendut dejos lu esturment molh per so que no sia lidit le pietz de lu.	"And it is that the patient should lie on his face with his belly close to the ground near a wall and extend his arms out to the side so that his hip does not rest on the bed."
E aprop un fust dreyt sia pausat, ficat en la terra en la extremitat del pug entorn le cap de lu, e autra fust en aviro les pes de lu en l’autra extremitat del pueg.	"And have a straight stick placed near him, put into the ground at the end of his belly near his head, and another stick under his feet at the other end of his belly."
E·l ministre tengua le fust, e no sia fermat en fossa; e autre ministre tengua l’autre segon aquela forma.	"And let one minister hold the stick so that it is not fixed in a hole; and let another minister hold the other according to this form."
E aprop envolopa sobre le cap del malaute e dejos les titillic liamen leon ferm; e exten la extremitat del liamel al fust le qual es deves le cap de lu, e lia aquel en lu; e aprop strenh l’autre liament sobre las ancas de lu les denols de lu, e deves las cambas de lu; e aprop ajusta totz les liamentz e lia aquels en l’autre fust le qual es deves les pes de lu.	"And wrap a cloth over the head of the patient and tie it tight with strings; extend one end of the string to the stick that is in front of his head and tie him to it; and stretch another string across his hips on both sides of him and attach it to the other stick that is in front of his feet."
E aprop le ministre cascu extenda le liament a la partida del fust, e no sian remaugutz les dos fustz e les liamentz dels sieus locs en les quals son ficatz, mays empero no so fermatz ayssi cum havem dit.	"And then each minister should extend the string to the point of the stick and the two sticks and strings of their places in which they are placed should not be dislocated but rather not fixed as we have said."
E le metge pause las suas palmas sobre le spondil am fortaleza entro que retorne, o que pause sobre aquela una taula, e aprop que ajuste sobre la taula les sieus pes entro que retorne.	"And the doctor should place his palms on the back with force so that it returns to its place, or if he places one table there, he should adjust his feet on the table so that it returns."
Mays si no retorna per aquesta forma, lahoras pren una taula de la qual la latitut o la longitut sia en aviro de tres brassas, e cava en la paret de la qual havem dit que es prop le malaute un loc en le qual intre la extremitat de la taula.	"But if it does not return by this method, then take a table whose width or length is about three braccia and dig in the wall near which we have said that the patient is lying a hole into which one end of the table fits."
E aprop pausa la maytat de la taula sobre le spondilh, e·l metge pause les sieus pes sobre l’autre extremitat, e estrenha be entro que le spondil sia coartat e que retorne al sieu loc.	"And then place the top of the table on the back and the doctor should place his feet on the other end and stretch well so that the back is compressed and returns to its proper place."
E si tu voles, obre am torn le qual es revolvut am la ma; e es que tu fiques en terra deves le cap del malaute en le derier del pug dos fustz, la longitut dels quals sia d’un bras, e deves le cap de lu en le derier del pug eyssament dos fustz; e sia la longitut que es entre quascun fust un palm, e ja es fayt en quascun fust trauc en le qual corr torn, e quascun sia mot fermat en terra per so que no sia maugut.	"And if you wish, open with a twist using your hand; and it is that you lie on the ground in front of the patient's head at the end of his belly between two sticks, each one braccio long and placed between his head at the other end of his belly similarly two sticks; and let there be a hole made in each stick into which a cord is threaded and let each stick be firmly fixed to the ground so that it does not move."
E sia mes un fust redon en le qual es le torn, e sia revolvut en les dos traucs dels dos fustz.	"And put another round stick through the hole in which the cord is threaded and let it be turned in the two holes of the two sticks."
E en la extremitat de lu es un trauc en le qual es format le fust, la longueza del qual es un palm am aquo que es revolvut; e en les dos autres fustz es semblant de aquel.	"And at one end of it there is a hole in which the stick is formed, one palm long with that which is turned; and the other two sticks are similar to this."
E aprop strenh les liamentz que has streyt en le pietz del malaute en le trau le qual es deves le cap de lu, e les liamentz que has streyts en las coyssas de lu en le torn le qual es deves les pes de lu.	"And then stretch the strings that you have tightened on the hip of the patient to the hole that is in front of his head and the strings that you have stretched on his knees to the stick that is in front of his feet."
E aprop deves quascun torn e stia un ministre que torssa le torn am la sua ma, e le metge engualhe le spondil segon que havem dit.	"And then over each hole there should be a minister who turns the hole with his hand and the doctor should press the back as we have said."
E aquesta es la forma del torn:	"And this is the form of the turn:"
E aprop pus que le spondil es retornat, e le loc es engualhat, lahoras cove que pauses empastre exciccatiu am album de huou, e aprop estopa; e aprop pause sobre le empastre astela de taula de la qual la latitut sia de tres ditz o enviro aquels, e la longitut de lu sia quantitat que prengua le loc de la gelbositat, e sobre la partida del spondil sa.	"And when the back has returned to its place and the location is pressed together, then you should put on a poultice with alum of wood ash and wool; and then place it over the poultice like a table whose width is about three digits or thereabouts, and whose length is as long as the location of the stiffness and on the point of the spine."
E aprop sia liat am liament le qual havem dit, e uze le malaute de nutriment subtil entro que sia sanat.	"And then let it be tied with the string that we have mentioned and let the patient be given subtle nourishment until he is healed."
E si roman alcuna iminencia en le loc en la fi de la sanacio, lahoras cove que sian aministradas medicinas que moilifico e liniscan am aministracio de la taula per lonc temps, la qual havem recomtada; e ja es aministrada en aquel loc lamina de plom.	"And if there is still some inflammation in the location at the end of the healing, then medications that moisten and cleanse should be administered with the application of the table for a long time, which we have recommended; and also a lead plate should be applied to that location."
E alcunas veguadas accideys imminencia en le derier dels spondils del dos, e es cujat per aquela dislocacio; e es aquel os le qual ja imineys per que no cove que sia fayta prosompcio a lu am aquesta medicina, quar fort leu fara a tu accidir mort.	"And sometimes inflammation occurs in the lower part of the spine and it is caused by that dislocation; and this bone is already inflamed so it should not be touched with this medicine because strong ointment will cause you to die."
Capitol .xxxi.	Chapter LXXXI.
De curacio de anca dislocada.	Of the treatment of a dislocated hip.
Sapias que la junctura del ancha e la junctura del muscle no endeve sino dislocacio tant solament, e no accideys ad aquelas aquo que accideys a las autras juncturas de petita remocio e concavitat.	Know that the joint of the hip and the joint of the thigh bone do not usually deviate except in dislocation alone, and it does not happen to them as it happens to other joints with small movement and concavity.
E la junctura de la ancha es dislocada segon quatre manieyras, quar es dislocada a las partidas dedintz, o a las partidas defora, o a las partidas denant, o a las partidas detras.	And the hip joint is dislocated in four ways: it can be dislocated inwardly or outwardly or anteriorly or posteriorly.
E majorment es dislocada a las partidas dedintz, e pauc a las partidas denant o a las partidas detras.	Most often it is dislocated inwardly and less often anteriorly or posteriorly.
E senhal de la dislocacio de lu a las partidas de dintz es quar, quan tu ajustas la camba del malaute sana am la malaute, es pus longua e·l denolh es pus heminent que de la sana, e·l malaute no pot doblar le sieu pe deves le lenguonar, e es le loc que siec le lengonar apostemat de apostema caut, per so que·l cap de la coyssa ja es pervengut aqui.	The sign of hip dislocation inwardly is that when you put the sound leg together with the diseased one, it becomes longer and the thigh bone becomes more prominent than the healthy one; the patient cannot bend their knee towards their body and they have to lean on a stick, and there will be swelling at the point where the head of the femur has moved.
E·l senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio es a las partidas defora, es que les accidentz de lu so contraris ad aquest accident.	The sign of dislocation occurring outwardly is that its accidents are opposite to this one.
E senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio a las partidas denant es quar expan la camba sieua segon compliment, mays empero no dobla aquela ses dolor que es en le denol, e si se perforsa ad anar e no pot sobre aquo a las partidas denant; e la urina de lu es retenguda e l’engonar de lu es apostemat, e deves la ambulacio de lu sobre le talo.	I suspect this sentence discusses symptoms of a dislocated shoulder. Here's my line-by-line guess:
E senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio a las partidas detras es que no expande le denol, ni no puesca doblar aquel denant que doble le engonar, e la camba de lu es pus breva que l’autra, e l’engonar es mollificat, e·l cap de la coyssa es deves aquel loc.	"The sign of one who has suffered dislocation in the hip is that they cannot straighten their leg nor bend it without experiencing pain. The thigh appears shorter than usual, and the joint feels softened; the head of the hipbone seems deviated from its normal position."
Mays reduccio de las specias de aquesta dislocacio es que tu consideras, lahoras, si la dislocacio es vetusta et antiqua, que ja es anticada am le havent aquela aprop tu aministras reduccio de lu e roman segon la sua disposicio, lahoras no es en aquela curacio de tot; e adonc no cove que en aquela sia fayta prosompcio.	"One reduction method for this dislocation is to consider whether the dislocation is old and chronic. If so, approach it accordingly. However, if reduction is not possible at that moment, do not proceed with surgery."
Mays en aquel del qual la dislocacio es recent, e es una de las quatre specias de dislocacio, lahoras te coyta ad aquo que volvas la junctura e extendas aquela a las partidas dedintz e a las partidas defora, e mau aquela a la dextra e sinistra, quar fort leu retorna e no indigeys de autra cura.	"If the dislocation is recent and belongs to one of the four main types, then you should aim to reposition the joint, extend the limb both inward and outward, move it to the right and left. With gentle force, it will return to its normal position without requiring further treatment."
Mays, si no retorna en aquesta manieyra, lahoras cove que tu prepares ministre fort e extendas la camba de lu de la partida pus dejos, o am las suas mas, o am liament lo qual es liat sobre la camba desus le denol; e autre ministre extenda la ma de aquel desus enayssi que meta las suas mas dejos les titillics de lu; e aprop strenha am liament leon sobre la razit de la coyssa, e tengua autre ministre ters le extremitat del liament.	"If it does not return to its normal position in this manner, then you should prepare a strong rope and extend the thigh bone from the part that is most displaced. You can do this by tying one end of the rope to the bone above the hip joint, or by using two ropes that are tied together over the bone. One assistant should pull the rope with both hands while another assistant extends the leg by placing their hand on the patient's foot and pushing it downwards. Finally, a third assistant should hold the distal end of the rope."
E sia extencio de lu o de la partida dedintz a l’angonar a la partida de la furcula, o de la partida detras a la partida del dos.	"And extend it either from the front to the angle of the hip bone, or from behind to the posterior edge of the iliac bone."
E sia la extencio de totz aquels en una veguada entro que·l malaute sia elevat am le sieu cos de terra e que romangua pendent.	"And perform these extensions all at once while the patient is lying on their back with their hips elevated and knees dangling."
E aquesta specia de extencio es specia cominal a totas quatre.	"This type of extension is common to all four types of dislocation."
E donc si la dislocacio retorna am aquo que havem dit, sira bo; e sino, lahoras es necessari a tota specia aquo que dire de la propria curacio.	"If the dislocation returns with what we have described, it will be good. But if not, then it is necessary to describe the specific treatment for each type of dislocation."
En la reduccio de lu propria, quan es dislocada, e la dislocacio es a las partidas dedintz, cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre le sieu latz sa; e aprop pausa les liamentz sobre la razit de la coyssa en aquel loc le qual entre le cap de la coyssa e·l loc que es dejos le langonar; e aprop exten le liament en sus de la part del angonar a la pus auta partida de la furcula.	"In the case of reducing this type specifically, when the dislocation is inwards and to the back, the patient should be propped up on their left side. Then place your hands on either side of the hip joint where it meets the greater trochanter. Next, extend the leg by lifting the thigh bone from the angle of the hip to the upper edge of the acetabulum."
E aprop autre ministre fort prengua les brasses de lu, e amerme le loc gros de la coyssa malaute e extenda a las partidas deforo per extencio vehement, quar aquela retorna en le sieu loc.	"And then another person should firmly grasp the thighs of the leg on the affected side and rotate the hip joint medially while extending it forcefully outwards so that it returns to its proper position."
E aquesta specia es de pus leugiera curacio am la qual aquest membre es reduzit que las autres specias.	"This type is the easiest to reduce, as the limb is easily returned to its proper position compared to other types."
Mays si es excusat sobre tu e no obezeys al entrament am aquesta specia de curacio de tot, lahoras cove que sian liatz les dos pes del malaute ensemps am liament fort, leugier, sobre amdos les talos e amdos les denols.	"But if this type of reduction is not successful, then both feet should be lifted together using strong, lightweight supports placed under the soles and heels."
E sia la longitut de quascun de son par la quantitat de quatre ditz, e sia la camba malaute extenduda mays que l’autre per quantitat de dos ditz.	"And let each support be four finger-breadths in length, with the limb on the affected side extended about two finger-breadths more than the other."
E aprop le malaute sia suspendut sobre le cap del fust, e que sia en la mayso; e sia la longitut de lu de la terra la quantitat de dos brasses.	"And then suspend the patient from a hoist by their head and keep them in this position while extending the limb on the ground to the length of two cubits."
E aprop comanda a un jove fort que minuesca le cap de la coyssa, e sia suspendut am le malaute autre jove, e l’autre jove minuent la coysa am fortaleza empellesca, quar la junctura retorna al sieu loc am velocitat.	"And then order a strong young man to grasp the head of the femur and suspend it while another young man pushes on the hip joint with great force so that the joint returns to its proper place quickly."
Mays en la reducio propria, quan es dislocacio a la partida defora, cove que·l malaute jaga sobre pug segon que havem recomtat en le havent gelbozitat; e sia strenhut le liament sobre la camba malauta propriament e sobre le pietz de lu.	"But in the specific reduction when there is a dislocation outward, the patient should lie on their back according to what we have recommended earlier. Then press the limb of the affected side firmly onto the bed and on its foot."
E aprop dos fustz sian pausatz, la un als pes de lu, e l’autre al cap; e aprop sian pausatz fustz ajustatz al mieg del pueg ficat sobre·l qual draps humitz sian envolopatz, per so que·l malaute no sia dampnajat per que·l fust sia entre las coyssas de lu, per que deves la extencio a las partidas dejos no sia atirat.	"And then two poles should be placed one on the foot of the leg and one on its head. And another pole adjusted to the middle of the elbow should be placed there upon which wet cloths are wrapped so that the patient is not hurt by the pole being between their legs, for fear that the extension outward may be drawn too far."
E aprop quascun ministre extenda a la sua part, e·l metge am la sua ma enguala la reduccio segon l’art.	"And then each assistant should extend at his own part and the physician with his hand shall guide the reduction according to the art."
Donc, si obezeys a revercio, sira bo grandament; e sino, pausa sobre aquela diligentment e ayssi quo havem dit en gelbozitat per aquela engualment.	"Therefore, if this is done correctly, it will be very good. But if not, then pause on that and proceed diligently with what we have said in the chapter on reduction."
Mays cove que·l malaute jagua sobre les sieus latz sa quetament.	"But the patient should lie quietly on their side."
E quan la dislocacio es a las partidas denant, lahoras cove que la camba sia extenduda leugierament, e es segon aquesta meteyssa narracio sobre pueg; e le metge pause la palma de la sua ma dreyta sobre·l langonar malaute, e aprop coarte aquel am l’autra ma, e am aquela coartacio pausa aquel extendut a las partidas dejos a la partida del denol.	"But when the dislocation is anterior, then the limb should be extended lightly. And according to this method, the physician places the palm of his right hand on the thighbone of the affected side and with his left hand he rotates that while extending it outward at the ankle."
E si la dislocacio es a las partidas detras, lahoras no cove que·l malaute sia extendut a las partidas dejos, e es elevat sobre la terra; habantz cove que sia pausat sobre causa dura, ayssi cum cove le eyssament si l’ancha de lu es dislocada a las partidas defora, segon aquo que havem dit del jasement de lu sobre dos anchas; e es sobre la sua cara e les liamentz sian extendutz, segon que havem dit, no ha guayre.	"But when the dislocation is posterior, then the limb should not be extended outward and it should be elevated on the ground. And a hard support must be placed under it, just as it is necessary to place two supports for the elbow when its head is dislocated outward, according to what we have said about the reduction of that joint; and the patient lies on their face with the limbs extended accordingly."
E cove que sia aministrada compressio am taula sobre le loc al qual yeys la junctura.	"And compression must be applied using a board placed over the location where the joint is dislocated."
Donc cum la reducio es complida segon que cove — e·l senhal de la reduccio de lu no es amaguat a tu, e es que tu extendas del malaute doas cambas, e quan tu vezes aquelas enguals e le malaute extrenh la sieua camba e expandeys aquela ses excusacio, lahoras sapias que·l membre segon que cove es retornat — e lahoras tu ajusta doas coyssas e pausa empastre e extrenh am benda ayssi que la ancha no sia mauguda en alcuna de las partidas; e adheresca le malaute a repaus per tres dias o per quatre.	"So when the reduction is completed as it should be – and the sign that the joint has been reduced will not escape you, for it is that when you extend both thighs of the patient and when you move those joints and the patient extends their thigh without difficulty, then you know that the limb has returned to its proper place – then you should apply two splints and bind them firmly with bandages so that the joint does not move from either side. And the patient should remain at rest for three or four days."
E aprop deslia le liament e l’empastre, e compara la una camba am l’autra.	"And then remove the bandages and splints and compare both thighs with each other."
Lahoras, si vezas aquelas enguals en vustament, lahoras sapias que la dislocacio ja es fermada, e adonc layssa le malaute anar.	"Then if those joints move freely, you will know that the dislocation has been firmly reduced, and then you may allow the patient to walk."
E si vezas alcuna causa de mollificacio, lahoras tu retorna e emplastra aquel, e extrenh aquel segon la tua primiera strectura, e layssa aquel en tres dias.	"But if you notice any signs of relaxation, then return and apply splints again and extend the limb according to your initial traction. Then allow it to rest for three days."
E aprop deslia aquel, e fay aquel tardar en ambulacio sobre quascu per alcus dias, entro que sia confortat.	"And then remove the splints and allow the patient to walk gradually over several days until they are strengthened."
Capitol .xxxii.	Chapter XXXII
De curacio de dislocacio del denolh.	Of the treatment of dislocation of the ankle joint.
Le denolh es dislocat segon tres manieyras, quar es dislocat a las partidas defora, e a las partidas dedintz, e a las partidas dejos mays a las partidas detras; e a las partidas denant no es dislocat.	The ankle joint is dislocated in three ways: it can be dislocated outward, inward, or more commonly outward and backward. It is not dislocated anteriorly."
E le senhal de dislocacio de lu es que comandes al malaute que aplique la sua camba am la coyssa; lahoras sapias que·l denol es dislocat.	"And the sign of dislocation of the ankle joint is that when you tell the patient to place their thigh on the knee, they will not be able to do so because the ankle is dislocated."
E la restauracio de totas las manieyras de lu es que fassas cezer le malaute dreyt, enayssi que ja extenda la sieua camba, si pot sobre aquo; adherir le tieu dos a la cara de lu, e pausa le pe de lu entre les tieus pes; e aprop fay adherir le denol de lu am las tuas palmas, e rete aquelas entre les tieus ditz sobre le denolh de lu am fortaleza, e autre ministre extenda le sieu pe entro que·l denol retorne a son loc.	"And the reduction of all types of dislocation of the ankle joint is as follows: make the patient sit down with their leg extended if possible. Then grasp their thigh with both hands and place your feet on either side of theirs. And then press the ankle with your palms, grasping it between your fingers. Hold it firmly while another assistant extends their foot until the ankle returns to its proper position."
E senhal de reddicio de lu es que la sua camba adharesca am la coyssa am levitat no-laboroza.	"And the sign of successful reduction is that the patient can raise their thigh against the knee with ease without difficulty or pain."
E aprop emplastra aquel e fay adhirir la camba am la coyssa, e aprop lia aquelas emsemps am una benda per tres dias o per quatre, e aprop deslia aquelas.	"And then apply splints and bind the thigh to the knee. Then bind these together with a bandage for three or four days. And then remove them."
E no uze le malaute de ambulacio per alcus dias, entro que sia sanat e cofortat.	"And do not allow the patient to walk for several days until they are healed and strengthened."
Mays si la reduccio de lu a tu es excusada, lahoras aministra fort extencio am liamentz dels quals en la curacio de la hancha precedit narracio.	If reduction of it by you is excused, then administer strong extension with bandages as mentioned in the preceding narration of hip joint treatment.
Capitol .xxxiii.	Capital XXXIII
De la curacio de la dislocacio del talo.	About the treatment of ankle dislocation.
Le talo alcunas veguadas es remaugut per petita remocio, e alcunas veguadas es dislocat segon compliment, e la dislocacio de lu es fayta o a las partidas dedintz o a las partidas deforo.	The ankle sometimes gets displaced by minor trauma, and sometimes it becomes dislocated upon completion of movement, and this dislocation occurs either on the interior or exterior aspects.
E le senhal de la dislocacio de lu es que vezes le talo imflat procedent a la partida a la qual es dislocat.	And the sign of ankle dislocation is that sometimes the ankle becomes swollen at the point where it has been dislocated.
Mays la curacio de la remocio de lu es de leugiera reddicio, e es que sia extendut am facilitat am las mas e sia engualhat entro que retorne.	However, the treatment for displacement of the ankle is easy reduction, and this should be done by extending it gently with the hands until it returns to its normal position.
Mays en la curacio de lu quan es dislocat segon compliment, cove que fasses cezer le malaute dreyt, e tengua aquel un ministre fort e valent de la partida detras del dos de aquel en le mieg loc de lu.	But in the treatment of ankle dislocation upon completion of movement, you should make the patient lie down on their back and have them hold a strong and sturdy assistant by the back of their thigh at mid-calf level.
E aprop te tu am la tieua ma dreyta le pe de la pus sobirana part, e am la tua ma sinistra de la part pus dejos del pe en le loc de la cavilha.	And then place your right hand on the superior aspect of the patient's foot and your left hand on the inferior aspect near the heel bone.
E aprop atira le pe a tu am la tua ma dreyta, e aprop am la sinistra per dos veguadas, e aprop exten am la sinistra; e empelleys le pietz del pe am la dreyta deves la camba ses trebalh.	And then gently pull the foot towards you with your right hand, and twice with your left hand, and then extend it with your left hand; and push the heel bone downwards with your right hand without twisting.
E fay aquo doas veguadas segon que havem comtat.	Repeat this procedure two times as described above.
E aprop empelleys le pietz del pe a la camba la tersa veguada, e tu es a la cavilha.	And then on the third attempt, push the heel bone downwards and you will feel it click into place at the ankle joint.
Donc si retorna en una veguada o en dos segon aquesta manieyra, e si vezes le pe engualhat, es bo; e sino, lahoras sobre lu itera la operacio, quar aquel retorna.	If the foot returns to its normal position in one or two attempts using this method, and if the foot appears swollen, then that is good. But if not, repeat the procedure until the ankle joint has returned to its normal position.
Mays si a tu es prohibida la reduccio de lu am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras fay jaser le malaute sobre le sieu dos sobre terra, e estrenh un paysel mot en terra fermat, e que caja entre las coyssas de lu, e tu ja has envolopat sobre lu drap per so que no ledesca le malaute.	However, if you are unable to perform the reduction of the ankle using the method described above, then have the patient lie down on their back on the floor. Take a folded towel and place it under the heel bone to elevate it slightly, and then wrap another towel around the foot to prevent further injury to the patient.
E aprop le ministre de lu tengua las suas coyssas, e aprop autre ministre extenda le pe am las suas mas o am liament que lie sobre le col del pe; e aprop extenda aquel quascun ministre contre extencio del sieu par, e le payssel sia extant entre las coyssas del malaute retinent aquel, per so que·l cos de lu no sia atirat a las partidas dejos deves la sua extencio.	And then the assistant holding the foot should have their hands firmly in place, and another assistant should extend the leg with their hands on the calf of the leg or on a linen cloth laid over the collarbone. And each assistant should extend against the other's resistance, keeping the towel between them so that the body of the patient is not pulled towards the side during extension.
E aprop le metge enguala la dislocacio am las sieuas mas, e autre ministre tengua la coyssa sana a las partidas dejos, quar la dislocacio retorna am la facilitat.	And then the physician will reduce the dislocation with their hands, and another assistant should hold the healthy ankle joint at the outside to prevent it from moving back into place too easily.
E donc cum retorna la dislocacio e es declarada a tu la sanetat de la reduccio de lu, lahoras pausa emplastre e extrenh aquela am liamentz fortment, e ligua le pe am liament a la camba.	And then once the dislocation has been reduced and the physician declares that the reduction is successful, immediately apply a plaster cast and reinforce it with splints. Then tie the foot in place using bandages.
E cove que temes o te guardes dels nervis les quals so detras sobre le talo, per que le liament sobre aquel no sia vehement e leda aquel fortment.	Be careful or guard against compressing the nerves that lie behind the ankle joint, so that the bandage does not press too tightly and cause injury to them.
E aprop layssa aquel per dos dias o per tres; e si le liament es mollificat, extrenh aquel.	And then leave him for two or three days; and if the bandage becomes loose, reinforce it.
E aprop deslia aquel en le ters dia o en le quart, e prohibeys le malaute de anament per xl dias.	And then on the third or fourth day, remove the cast and prohibit the patient from walking for 40 days.
Mays si es forsat de anar denant aquel spazi, no es fayta segurtat que la dislocacio no sia sobre lu dissolvuda e corrumpuda, e aprop aquo que no recipia curacio.	However, if it is necessary for the patient to walk during this period, then there is a risk that the dislocation may recur and become worse without proper treatment.
E si accideys a lu apostema caut, lahoras cove que tu aministre en la cedacio de lu aquo en lo qual precedic la nostra narracio, en autre loc de curacio e de embrocacio, entro que sia remauguda.	And if an abscess forms at the site of injury, then you should administer treatment according to the instructions given earlier in this text regarding incisions and dressings, until it has healed.
Capitol .xxxiiii.	Chapter XXXIV
De curacio de dislocacio dels ditz dels pes.	Of the treatment of dislocation of the said feet.
Cove que aquel qu’es dislocat sia engualhat am pauca extencio ses trebal; e aquo que no es dificil, abantz es leugier.	The dislocation should be reduced with minimal extension without difficulty; it is easy to do.
Mays si la dislocacio es en alcus nozes del dos del pe, lahoras cove que fassas cezer le malaute le sieu pe sobre loc engual de la terra o sobre taula, e sia estant ayssi cum si anava.	But if the dislocation is in certain angles of the ankle joint, then have the patient lie on their back on the floor or table, with their leg extended as if walking.
E aprop tu sta de pes, e pausa le tieu pe sobre aquo que imineys de las juncturas, e aprop calca aquel am le tieu pe am vertut entro que retorne, e que vejas aquel ja engualhat e no aparesca en le loc eminencia.	And then you stand on the floor, and place your foot on top of where you see the prominence of the joints. And then press down with your foot using force until it returns to its normal position, and verify that it has been reduced and that there is no longer any prominence in that location.
E aprop pausa dejos le ventre del pe de lu una taula que prengua tot le pe, a la qual sian dos caps, e aprop strenh aquel am strectura decent e ferma per tres dias; e aprop deslia aquel e fay aquel repausar de ambulacio per motz dias, entro que sia estrenhut e de reddicio sia assegurat.	And then place the back of the patient's foot on a table that can support the entire leg, with two ends. And then apply a plaster cast that is proper and firm for three days; then remove it and have the patient rest from walking for several days until it has healed properly.
Capitol .xxxv.	Chapter XXXV
De las specias de dislocacio que sian faytas am plagua o am fractura o am quascuna ensemps.	Of the different kinds of dislocation that can occur with a wound, fracture or both together.
Quan accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, e tu te perforssas en la curacio de aquela e en la restauracio de lu, motas veguadas succezeys la mort.	When such an accident occurs and you attempt to treat it and restore the patient's health, very often death may follow.
E per aquo no cove que sobre la curacio de lu presuma, sino aquel que es savi en l’art, de lonc uzatge, misericordios e pietados, tardiu, no-ardit ni presomptuos; e que use en le comensament de medicinas que cedan apostemas cautz tant solament, e leyssa le malaute al divinal jutgament, sino ad aquel al qual speras salut de perdicio, am de la malautia alleviacio, e en la qual appareys alcuna speransa.	Therefore, one should not presume to treat such cases unless they are skilled in the art, with long experience, compassionate and merciful, cautious but not overly timid or arrogant. And at the beginning of treatment, use medications that can heal cauterized wounds alone, and leave the patient's fate to divine judgment. Only attempt treatment when there is hope for recovery, alleviation of symptoms, and some chance of success.
E adonc esforsa te tantost far de lu la reduccio en le comensament de la causa, denant que endevengua apostema caut.	Therefore, make every effort to reduce the dislocation at the outset of the injury, before an abscess forms.
E adonc si le membre retorna segon que volem, lahoras aministra regiment le qual ceda apostema caut e cura la plagua am aquo que conveneys a lu dels enguentz desiccatius.	And then if the limb returns to its normal position as desired, apply treatment that will heal the wound and any associated abscess. Use dry dressings for the injury.
E si dislocacio es am fractura e accideys en le os satagias separadas, lahoras tu perforsa le stement de lor, e fay en aquo so que havem dit en las malautias simplas de aquo que es precedit en les locz de aquels.	But if the dislocation occurs with a fracture and there is separation of the bones, then try to reduce the fragments and follow the procedures that have been mentioned earlier for simple injuries.
E guarda e esquiva segon la tua vertut aquel del intrament en las vias de temor segon que a tu es precedida la mia predicacio; quar aquo es milhor a tu deves le tieu Creator, e mays permanent a la tua gloria, e mays saludos al tieu cos verays aquels en le tieu temps.	Guard and avoid internal injuries in the blood vessels according to your ability, as I have previously instructed. For this is better for you before your Creator, more lasting to your glory, and more beneficial to your true body during your lifetime.
Ayssi fineysso las paraulas de Albucasim perfieytament de las quals Dieus ne sia benezeyt.	Thus ends the words of Al-Bukhtishu' perfectly, may God bless him.
Amen.	Amen.
