Ayssi comensan las paraulas de Albucasim .	"Thus begin the words of Albucasis."
O, filhs, pus yeu he a vos complit aquest libre, le qual es le derier de la sciencia de medicina, per le compliment de lu so consequit la fi en lu, e per las exposicios de lu, e per las declaracios de lu, es a mi vist que yeu complesca aquel a vos am aquest tractat, le qual es partida de la operacio am ma, so es cyrurgia.	"O, children, since I have completed this book for you, which is the last of medical science, to achieve its completion and purpose, it seems to me that I should fulfill my promise to you with this treatise on surgery."
Quar la operacio am ma es prostrada en nostre regio e en nostre temps de tot privada, entro que fort leu peric la sciencia de lu, e le vistigi de lu es ostat; e no romasero de lu sino alcunas petitas descripcios en les libres dels Antics, les quals mudero las mas e endevenc ad aquels error e heyssitacio entro que son clausas las entencios de lu e es elonguada la forsa de lu e l’art.	Because the art of surgery is greatly neglected in our region and time, and its science has greatly declined, leaving only a few traces behind. And unless it were for some brief descriptions found in the books of the Ancients, which are now muddled and unclear due to changes over time, leading to errors and misconceptions, so that their true meanings are obscured and their strength diminished.
E es vist a mi que yeu vivifique aquela am ordenacio de aquest tractat en aquela segon la via de exposicio e de declaracio e de abreviacio; e per que vengua am las formas dels ferramentz de cautheri e dels autres instrumentz de la obra cum sia per addicio de la declaracio, e per preparacio de lu, la qual causa es necessaria.	"And it seems to me that I should revive this art with a well-ordered treatise following the path of explanation, declaration, and abbreviation; also including figures of cautery instruments and other tools used in surgery, both for addition to the explanation and preparation thereof, which is necessary."
Mays la causa per la qual no es atrobat bo artifex am la sieua ma en aquest nostre temps, es quar la art de medicina es longua, e que cove le sieu actor denant aquo esser excercitat en la sciencia de anotomia la qual recontec Gualia entro que sapia les juvament dels membres e las formas de aquels, e la conjunctio e la separacio de lor; e haia la conoyssensa dels osses, dels nervis e dels lacertz, e·l nombre de aquels, e la egrecio de lor; e de las venas pulsatils e de las quietas, e dels locs del eyssiment de lor.	"But the reason why there are few skilled surgeons in our time is because the art of medicine is lengthy, and its practitioner must first be well-exercised in the science of anatomy, which contains knowledge of the joints of members and their shapes, connections, and separations; also knowing the bones, nerves, and sinews, their number, size, and location of the pulsating veins and quiet ones, and the places where they discharge."
E per aquo ditz Ypocras que am u nom es mot, mays en l’obra petit, e majorment en la art de la ma.	"And therefore Hippocrates said that 'in words little, but in deeds much, especially in surgery.'"
Mays nos ja avem dit de aquel en l’introit de aquest libre; quar qui no es scient aquo que li avem dit de anotomia, no es evacuat que no caia en error per la qual siran mortz les homes, ayssi cum yeu he vist trops de aquels, quar alscus son formatz en esta sciencia e gettan se de aquela ses sciencia e ses experiment.	"But we have already said this at the beginning of this book: whoever is not knowledgeable about what we have said about anatomy will surely fall into error, causing many deaths among men, as I have seen too often. For some are formed in this science but lack its knowledge and experience."
Quar yeu vi un metge folh e enperit aver incidit un apostema escrophilos en le colh de una femna, e incidic alcunas arterias del colh per que fluic gran sanc entro que la femna cazec morta entre las mas de lu.	"For I once saw a foolish and inexperienced doctor who incised an escrofulous abscess in the neck of a woman, cutting some arteries of the neck so that much blood flowed, causing the woman to suddenly die."
E vi un autre metge que pres que el traguera una peyra d’un home le qual avia procesit en sa etat, e la peyra era gran, e venguet a lu e trayssec aquela peyra am un tros de la vesiqua, per que aquel home al tertz dia es mort.	"And I saw another doctor who tried to remove a stone from the bladder of a man who had fallen into that state, and the stone was large. He came upon it and removed that stone with a piece of the bladder wall, causing that man to die on the third day."
E yeu ja apelat fuy a estrayre aquela, e vi que per la grandesa de la peyra e per la disposicio del malaute conogui subre lu que morira.	"And I had already foreseen that this would happen, and when I saw the size of the stone and the condition of the patient, I knew for certain that he would die."
E vi un autre metge le qual prenia stipendic de un duc de nostra terra per cyrurgia, e endeven a un crastrat negre le qual era deves lu fractura en la coyssa de lu; e perparec le metge am la sua ignorancia, estrayssec la fractura, sobre la plagua, am pulvinas e astelas am forta strectura, e no layssec a la plagua espiracio.	"And I saw another doctor who was paid by our Duke to practice surgery. He attended a blacksmith who had fractured his hip joint; due to the doctor's ignorance, he reduced the fracture with pillows and bandages of great tension, not allowing room for respiration."
E aprop le desliet segons los sieus desiriers, e aprop le relieg, e aprop le leyssec per alcus jorns e comandec que nos deslies le liament; e estec ayssi entro que la coyssa e·l pe foro apostematz, e pervenguet a perdicio.	"And he kept him bound up according to his desires, and then released him, and allowed him to rest for several days, commanding that the bandages be loosened. And so it happened that the hip joint became inflamed, and the thigh flesh putrefied, resulting in ruin."
E yeu fuy apelat a lu, e aparelhegui a desliar le liament, e conseguida es tranquilitat e enayssi amermet de sas dolors.	"And I was called to him, and I prepared to loosen the bandages. And thus there was tranquility and alleviation of his pain."
Mays empero ja corrupcio era confermada en le membre, per que no pogui refrenar aquela, e no cessec perambular la corrupcio en le membre entro que·l malaute peric.	"But nonetheless, corruption was already confirmed in the member, so that I could not prevent it. The corruption did not cease to spread throughout the limb until the patient perished."
E vi un autre metge le qual perforec un apostema cancros, e fo ulcerat aprop alscus dias, entro que foc magnificada la malicia de lu am lo senhor de lu.	"And I saw another doctor who perforated a cancerous abscess. It was soon ulcerated, and the evil of it greatly magnified in its lord."
La qual causa es quar le cranc caut es pur de humor melencolic, lahoras no cove que pervengua a lu am ferr de tot, sino que sia an membre le qual suffertes que de tot fos hostat.	"This is because the cancerous caul is pure of melancholic humor. Therefore, it should not be cauterized with iron in its entirety, but only where necessary on the member that suffers from it."
E per aquo, filhs, necessari es a vos que la operacio am ma sia devisada en dos devesios: so es en operacio a lu qual es associada salut, e en obra am la qual es perilh en las majors disposicios.	"And therefore, my children, it is necessary for you that the operation with the hand be divided into two parts: one is the operation associated with health, and the other is the work in which there is danger in the greatest situations."
E yeu ja he exsitat aquo en tot loc de aquest libre en le qual venc opperacio en la qual es error e temor; per que necessari es a vos que guardetz aquo e layssetz aquel, per que les folhs no atrobo via a parlar e a vos desonestar.	"And I have already mentioned this throughout the entire book wherever operation is spoken of where there is danger and fear. Therefore, it is necessary for you to keep watch over this and leave that alone, so that foolish people may not find an opportunity to speak against you."
E donc prenetz las vostras armas am sollicitut e am proteccio de Dieu , e les vostres malautes am falicitat e am fermetat.	"And therefore take up your weapons with sincerity and protection of God, and deal with illnesses with gentleness and firmness."
E usatz de la milhor via per la gracia de Dieu perdusent a salut e a lausabla successio, e laysatz las malautias terriblas de difficil sanacio, e ostatz las vostras armas de aquo que vos fa temer, per so que ysitatio en vostra fe e en le vostre nom no vos evasisca: quar mays es remanent a la vostra gloria, e pus aut en le mon e en derier a las vostras sanctitatz.	"And use the best way by the grace of God to bring about health and praise-worthy success. Leave behind terrible illnesses that are difficult to cure, and put aside your weapons at that which makes you fearful, so that you may remain steadfast in your faith and in your name: for more remains to your glory, both now and in the future, than in your sanctity."
Gualia ja diyssec en alcunas sieuas monicios:	"Wherefore, as I have said in some of my writings:"
“No mediquetz malautia mala, per so que mals metges no siatz nompnatz”.	"Do not treat illnesses badly, lest you be called bad doctors."
E yeu ja he devesit aquest libre segontz tres capitols.	"And I have already divided this book into three parts."
Comensa la divisio del libre, e primier de la primieyra partida.	"Here begins the division of the book, and first of the first part."
Le primier capitol ordenat del cap entro·s pes, en las formas dels instrumentz e en les ferrementz dels cauteris, e de aquo que necessari es en la opperacio.	"The first chapter ordered in this manner: regarding the weights of tools and their shapes, and concerning the instruments for burning, and that which is necessary in operation."
La divisio de la segonda partida.	"Here begins the second part of the division:"
Le segon capitol, de siccio e perforacio, e de ventosas, e de plaguas, e de extractio de sagetas e de semblantz ad aquelas, tot capitolat e ordenat de las formas dels instrumentz.	"The second chapter: concerning incision and perforation, and of cupping glasses, compresses, and the extraction of arrows and similar things. This chapter is ordered regarding the shapes of instruments."
Divisio de la tersa partida.	"Here begins the third part:"
Le tertz capitol, de restauracio e de dislocacio, e de curacio de torcio e de semblantz ad aquels; capitol ordenat del cap entro·s pes, e de las formas dels instrumentz.	"The third chapter: concerning reduction and dislocation, and the cure of torticollis and similar conditions. This chapter is ordered regarding weights and the shapes of instruments."
De cauteri am foc e am medicina aguda e rememoracio de la opperacio.	"Concerning cautery with fire and medicine, and a reminder of operation."
Am aquel comensa le tractat de tot le libre.	"With this begins the treatise of the entire book."
Cove que yeu digua la qualitat dels juvamentz de aquel cauteri e dels noccumentz de lu, e en qual compleccio sia prohibit cauteri.	"It is necessary for me to speak of the qualities of the cauteries used in that operation and their contraindications, and in what condition cautery should be prohibited."
Donc dic que·l sermo de la qualitat del juvament de cauteri e del noccument de lu es sermo lonc e prolixs, e subtil per sciensa, e secret amaguat; e ja de lu a parlat gran multitut de savis, e de lu se son desacordatz, et a mi abasta un petit dels sermons de lor, temen perlonguacio.	"Therefore I say that the discussion of the qualities of cautery and its contraindications is lengthy and drawn-out, subtle in knowledge and secretive. Many wise men have spoken about it, and they disagree among themselves regarding this matter. It suffices for me to discuss a little of their sermons, fearing lengthiness."
E donc dic que cauteri comfereys a tota compleccio universalment la qual es am materia o ses materia, exceptat dos compleccios, las quals son compleccios caudas ses materia .	"And therefore I say that cautery benefits universally every condition regarding matter or lacking matter, except for two conditions which are devoid of matter:"
En la compleccio cauda e secca am materia se desecordero; quar alcus dyssero que cauteri es juvatiu ad aquela, e les autres dyssero le contrari de aquel, que cauteri no es convenient en malautia la qual es per qualiditat e per siccitat, quar natura del foc es qualiditat e siccitat, e enconvenient es que malautia cauda e secca am aquo que es caut e sec sia sanada.	"In the case of a dry and hot complexion that is disorderly; for some say that cautery is beneficial for this, but others say the opposite, that cautery is not suitable for an illness which is caused by heat and dryness, as fire's nature is heat and dryness, and it would be inappropriate for such an illness to be treated with something that is hot and dry."
E diysec aquel que ditz le contrari de aquel, que per cauteri es fayt juvament en tota malautia cauda e secca que ve en les cors dels homes, quar quan tu comparas le cors de home e las humiditatz de lu a la compleccio del foc, atrobas le cors de home freg.	"The one who says the opposite of this argues that cautery is beneficial in all dry and hot illnesses that occur in men's bodies. For when you compare the body of man and its humidity to the complexion of fire, you find that the body of man is cold."
E yeu dic per le sermo de aquel, que esperiment aquo ja a mi alscunas vetz a descubert.	"And I say, based on what that person has said, that I have experienced this many times in practice."
Mays empero no cove que vengua sobre aquo aquel que ja es exproat e excersitat en le capitol de cauteri per derier exercici, e a conogut la diversitat de la compleccio dels homes e la disposicio de las malautias en lor meteyssas, e las causas de aquelas, e·ls accidentz de lor, e l’espasi del temps de aquelas.	"However, it is not necessary to add anything more about this subject that has already been thoroughly discussed in the chapter on cautery through repeated exercises. For having understood the diversity of men's complexions and the disposition of illnesses in their members, as well as their causes, accidents, and duration, is sufficient."
Mays en las autras compleccios, no es sobre vos temor, e majorment en las malautias fregas e humidas, quar ja totz les metges se son acordatz sobre aquels, e no so desecordatz en le juvament am cauteri en aquelas.	"But in other complexions, there is no fear for you, and especially in hot and humid illnesses. For all doctors agree on these matters, and they are not divided regarding the benefit of cautery in those illnesses."
E sapiatz, filhs, que del secret de curacio per cauteri am foc e de la bontat de lu, so sobre cauteri am medicina comburent, es quar le foc es simple, la accio del qual no perven sino al membre le qual es cauterizat e no notz al autre membre am lu ajustat sino am petit nocument.	"And know, my children, that the secret of curing by cautery with fire and its goodness is spoken about in the chapter on cautery with medicine that burns. For fire is simple, whose action only reaches the member that is cauterized and does not harm any other adjacent member unless it causes some slight injury."
Mays la accio de medicina comburent perven ad aquel en les membres le qual de lu alunhat, e fort leu fa venir en le membre malautia de dificil sanacio e fort leu ausit.	"But the action of burning medicine reaches those who have taken it in their members. Often it causes illness that is difficult to cure and often it harms."
Mays le foc, per la sua sublimitat e de la sua substancia bontat, no fa aquo sino que superfluisca E ja es a nos conogut per experiment e per longitut de servitut de studi am l’art sobre le veritat de las causas; e per aquo yeu so excusat de la longitut del sermo E si no fos que no es legut al mieu libre en aquest pausero a vos secret amaguat am le foc, e la qualitat de la operacio de lu en les cors e de la sieua expulcio per la qual expellis las malautias, am sermo philosophic demostratiu, le qual siria acuit en las vostras pessas.	"But fire, due to its sublimity and the goodness of its substance, does nothing but remove excesses. And this is already known to us through experience and long study in this art regarding the truth of causes; and for that reason I am excused from prolonging this discussion. However, if it were not hidden in my book in this passage about the secret of cautery with fire, and its operation on bodies and its expulsion by which illnesses are expelled, demonstrated philosophically, it would sharpen your minds."
E sapiatz, filhs, que els se desacordan del temps en le qual es convenient far cauteri e pausan le milhor temps de primaveyra.	"And know, my children, that they disagree about the time when cautery should be performed and they consider the best time to be in spring."
E yeu dic que cauteri es convenient en tot temps, per so que le nocument per le temps accident es submergit en le juvament de aquo que am le cauteri es atirat, e majorment si le cauteri es per dolors o de dolors necessaries, fortz e fistinas, las quals no suffertan tarditat per so que es temut de aquelas que vengua malicia, que es major que petit nocument entrant per lo temps.	"And I say that cautery is convenient at all times because the harm caused by accidental time is submerged in the benefit of what is attracted by cautery. And especially if cautery is performed for pains or necessary surgeries, such as those that cannot wait due to fear of greater harm, which is worse than a small injury entering through time."
E aysso no catz en vostras pessas, o, filhs, aquo no estiman sino le poble vulguar e les fols metges, so es que ad aquela malautia que es sanada per cauteri no es redicio tot temps, e pausan aquel consequen.	"And do not think that, children, this is only estimated by the vulgar people and foolish doctors. For they consider that in those illnesses which are cured by cautery, there is no recovery of time, and they leave it at that consequence."
E la causa no es ges ayssi quo els cuydan per aquo, quar cauteri no es sino en loc de medicina la qual altera la compleccio e esicca las humiditatz las quals son causa per que veno las dolors.	"And the reason is not as they imagine it to be for this: that cautery is only in place of medicine which alters the complexion and dries out the humors which are the cause of pains."
Mays empero cauteri superflueys sobre la medicina per volicitat de la sua valitut e vertut de la sua operacio e grandesa del sieu senhor.	"But nevertheless, cautery is preferable to medicine because of its volatility, virtue, and power of operation, and the greatness of its Lord."
E es possible que la sua malautia retorne en alcuna hora del temps, segon la compleccio del malaute e la locacio de la sua malautia, e la vertut de lu, e aquo que es preparat en le cors de lu de la agreguacio de las superfluitatz en lu, e aquo que es pervengut a lu en la sua acquisicio en viandas e semblantz de aquelas causas; sino que la malautia en la qual sia aministrat cauteri sia malautia subtil en membre de paucas superfluitatz e humiditatz, ayssi cum cauteri de dent per dolor e semblantz ad aquel, possible es que en lu no retorne aquela dolor, mays aquo se fa en petitz.	"And it is possible that the illness returns at some time, according to the complexion of the sick person, the location of the illness, and the virtue of cautery, as well as what has been prepared in the body from the accumulation of excesses there, and what has been acquired through food and similar causes. But if cautery is administered for an subtle illness in a member with few excesses and humors, such as toothache or similar ones, it is possible that the pain does not return, but this happens rarely."
E mays sermo vulgar es que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina, e es sermo dreyturier, no ad aquo que els entendo en lu, quar els crezo que no es curacio que aprofieyta am medicina ni am autra causa aprop cauteri.	"And the common saying is that cautery is the last resort of medicine, and this saying is truer than they understand it to be. For they believe that nothing is cured by medicine or any other cause except cautery."
E la causa es en contrari de aquo; e la entencio que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina no es sino quan administram las manieyras de curacio en alcunas malautias, e aquelas medicinas no conferieysso, e aprop en la fi de la causa aministra hom cauteri, e aprofieyta ad aquela.	"And the cause is contrary to that; and the intention that cautery is the last resort of medicine only applies when other methods of treatment have been tried for certain illnesses and they have not worked. And then, at the end of the illness, cautery is administered, which is beneficial in this case."
E lahoras de aqui cat16 que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina, no segon la entencio la qual entendo les vulgars e trops dels fols metges.	"And from now on, know that cautery is the last resort of medicine, not according to the intention understood by the vulgar and most foolish doctors."
E diyssero les antics que cauteri am aur es milhor que cauteri am ferr, e no diyssero aquo sino per la equalitat del aur e sublimitat de la sua sustancia.	"And the ancients said that cautery with gold is better than cautery with iron, and they did not say this except for the equality of gold and the sublimity of its substance."
E diyssero que le loc de cauteri no fa brac, cum aquo no sia absolutament vertat, quar yeu ja he aquo proat e he atrobat que aquel no fa aquo sino en alcus cors ses les autres, e cauteri am aquel es bo e milhor que am ferr ayssi quo els diyssero; mays empero quan tu fas cauteri am foc am de aur, no es a tu declarat, quar es egnit segon la quantitat que tu vols per la rugor de l’aur, e quar prepara a recebre freg; e si ajustas sobre lu ignicio se fon l’aur per le foc, e caso en le foc alcunas laminas per que le artifex catz per la occupacio de aquel.	"And they said that the location of cautery does not matter, which is not absolutely true. For I have seen and proven that this is not always the case, except in some bodies without others, and cautery with gold is good and better than with iron, as they said. But when you perform cautery with fire using gold, it is not clear to you because its ignition depends on the quantity of gold you desire according to its purity, and because it prepares itself to receive heat; if you apply ignition precisely on top of it, the gold will melt in the fire, and sometimes some plates fall into the fire due to the carelessness of the artisan."
E per aquo es fayt cauteri am ferr deves nos pus leugerament e pus propdanament a rectitut de operacio.	"And for that reason, cautery should be performed with iron more lightly and more moderately according to the rectitude of its operation."
E yeu ja he ordenat aquest capitol en le cauteri segon capitols, et he ordenat aquels del cap entro les pes, per so que aleugo le demandant aquo que vol de lu.	"And I have already arranged this chapter on cautery according to chapters and those of the head inside the weights, so that later you can ask me whatever you want about it."
De cauteri de dolor de cap per frigiditat e humiditat.	"On cauterizing headaches caused by coldness and humidity."
Le capitol primier.	Chapter one
Aquesta cauterizacio confereys a la humiditat e frigiditat sobre le servel accident de la qual so doas causas, so es causa de soda e multitut de flux raumatic, apelat corissa, del cap a las partidas dels huelhs e de las aurelhas fluent, e multitut de dormir, e de dolor de dentz e del guolayro, e universalment de tota malautia que ve per fregiditat, ayssi cum paraliticament, sodo e apoplexio, e semblantz en aquelas malautias.	"This cauterization addresses humidity and coldness, which are the accidental causes of such diseases as sodden flux, called corrosion, from the head to the parts of the eyes and ears flowing abundantly; also excessive sleeping, toothache, and throat pain, generally all illnesses caused by coldness, such as paralysis, epilepsy, apoplexy, and similar ones in those diseases."
La forma de aquesta cauterizacio es aquesta, que primieyrament comandes al malaute que sia evacuat am medicina lacsativa le cap mondificant, per tres o per quatre nueytz, segon que exhigeys la vertut del malaute e la edat de lu e la sua costuma.	"The form of this cauterization is as follows: first, you should command the sick person to evacuate the head with laxative medicine for three or four nights, depending on the virtue of the illness, the age and habit of the patient."
E aprop comanda li que raza le sieu cap am razor, e aprop fay aquel sezer entre las tuas mas sobre una banca cayrada e que pause las suas mas sobre le pietz sieu.	"And then command him to shave his head with a razor and also have him sit on a bench covered with wool or feathers, placing his feet on the ground."
E aprop pausa la razit de la tua palma aprop le pous sobre la razit del nas entre les huels sieus.	"Then place the palm of your hand over the bridge of his nose between his eyebrows."
Mays empero, cum le tieu dit del mieg loc es pervengut, signa aquel loc am tenta, e aprop igneys le cauteri olivar del qual aquesta es la forma:	"But first, when your middle finger reaches that spot, mark it with ink and then light the olive-oil cautery lamp, whose form is as follows:"
E aprop pausa aquel sobre le loc senhat am tenta, a manieyra que descent, am la qual la tieua ma sia constrengida petit a petit, e tu revolveys aquel.	"And then place that on the marked spot in such a way that it descends gradually with your hand pressed down slightly while you rotate it."
E aprop leva la tua ma leugerament e reguarda le loc, e si veses ja del os esser descubert alcuna quantitat del cap, ayssi cum la quantitat de gra de errs, lahoras eleva la tua ma, e si no torno la tua ma am aquel ferr, am autre de aquel, si es enfrigidat, entro que sia vist del os aquo que yeu he dit a tu.	"And then raise your hand lightly and observe the spot; if you see some of the bone already exposed on the head, about the size of a grain of barley, then lift your hand up again and replace it with another one until you see what I have told you to."
E aprop pren un petit de sal e disolveys aquel sobre le loc e leyssa aquel per tres jorns.	"Then take a pinch of salt and dissolve it on the site, leaving it there for three days."
E aprop pausa sobre lu coto enbegut en boder e leyssa aquel sobre lu entro que sia destrusida la scara del foc.	"And then pause over the wound on the edge and leave it there until the skin of the fire is destroyed."
E aprop cura le loc am anguent tetrafarmacon entro que sia sanat.	"And then treat the area with a quadruple antibiotic ointment until healed."
E ja diyssero que quant la plagua roman uberta, tant mielhs geta le brac, per que es milhor e mays juvatiu.	"And as they said, when the plague is fully opened, the better it casts out the brace, because it is better and more beneficial."
E diyssero alcus de lor que sia cauterizada la codena entro al os, e sia tengut le cauteri entro que sia adhurida alcuna partida de la specitut del os.	"And some of them said that the spine should be cauterized down to the bone, and the cautery should be held there until any portion of the spinal cord is adhered."
E aprop sia ras aquo que es adhust del os, e aprop sia curat.	"And then scrape off what adheres to the bone, and then it should be treated."
E diyssero autres que am lo cauteri pervengua al derier, entro que enprema en le os forta enprecio entro que le os caga, e aquesta es la forma de alphecati petit:	"And others said that with the cautery they should reach the end, so that it presses on the bone with great force until the bone breaks, and this is the form of alphecati minor:"
E estiman de aquel loc expiran la vapors del cap.	"And they estimate from that place the fumes of the head expire."
E sia tenguda la plagua uberta per lonc temps, e aprop sia curada entro que sia consolidada.	"And let the wound remain open for a long time, and then treated until it is consolidated."
Mays a mi no so vistas aquestas doas specias de cauteri de tot, sino en alcus homes segon via de temor; e layssa aquel, deves mi, milhor es am salut, quan es; quar le cap es develitat per solucio de continuitat de lu ayssi cum havem testificat en les autres membres, e majorment quan le cap del malaute es de freul natura.	"But I do not see these two kinds of cautery in any whole person due to fear; and that, it seems to me, is better with health when they are; for the head is devitalized by the solution of continuity from such a wound as we have testified in other members, and more so when the head is naturally prone to disease."
E la specia de cauteri primieyra es mays salva e milhor deves mi; e de aquela husi e am aquela obra am salut.	"And the first kind of cautery is safer and better, in my opinion; and with that method and with that procedure there is health."
Capitol segon.	"Chapter II"
Del cauteri del cap.	Of the Cautery of the Head
Quan en tot le cap accideys dolor cronica e longua e aquo es en le malaute prolonguat, e usa de gerras e de cochias e de capipurges e de emplaustres e de guatz e de cadels e de gualinas e de semblantz, e majorment si ja es cauterizat am un cautere le qual recontam e no aprofieyta a lu deguna de aquelas causas, lahoras considera quar si le cap del malaute es de fort creacio en la sua natura; e no es freul et atroba mot gran freg, lahoras aquel cauterisa am autra cauteri dejos aquel un pauc.	"When in the whole head there occurs chronic and long-lasting pain, and that is in prolonged disease, and they use plasters and poultices and fomentations and emplasters and ointments and cataplasms and similar things, and especially if it has already been cauterized with one cautery which did not profit from any of those causes, then consider whether the head of the patient is naturally strong in its creation; and if it is not weak or frail at all, then cauterize with another cautery a little lower than that one."
E aprop cauterisa aquel sobre le corn del sieu cap am cauteri entro que la codena es partida.	"And then cauterize there over the horn of his head with a cautery until the cord is severed."
Incisa la codena e sia descuberta del os la quantitat la qual havem recontat e cauteriza aquel am un cauteri en la partida deriera del cap en le loc le qual es apelat vas, — e es aquel loc en le qual es pausada ventosa.	"Cut the cord and uncover the bone the amount we have mentioned and cauterize there with a cautery at the last part of the head in the place which is called 'vess', — that is the place where cupping glasses are placed."
Et alleuja la tua ma en aysso, e no descobras le os, quar le malaute per aquo atroba mot gran dolor diversa de la dolor de totz les autres cauteris del cap.	"And be gentle in this, and do not uncover the bone, for by this method there is much less pain than with all other cauteries of the head."
E yeu diyre aquest cauteri en son loc, quar cove que·l cauteri am le qual so cauterisatz les corns del cap e le occiput es pus subtil cauteri que aquel am le qual es cauterisat le mieg loc del cap; e aquesta es la forma de lu.	"And I say this cautery in its place, for it is necessary that the cautery with which you cauterize the horns of the head and the occupit be more subtle than that with which you cauterize the middle part of the head; and this is its form."
Capitol ters.	"Chapter III"
De cauterisacio de emigranea no-antiqua.	"Of cauterization for non-ancient migraine."
Quan endeve en la partida del cap dolor sodo, o es stenduda dolor entro al uelh, sia evacuat am medicinas le cap mondificantz, e sia aministrada l’autra curacio, la qual yeu he dita en las devesios de las malautias; e tot no aprofieyta, lahoras cauterisacio en lu es en dos manieyras: o cauterisacio am medicina acuta comburent, o am ferr.	"When, despite endeavoring to relieve the head of its sudden pain or if it is spread throughout the whole body, it has been evacuated with medicines for clearing the head and other appropriate treatment has been administered as indicated in the methods for illnesses; and yet no improvement occurs, then cauterization may be employed in one of two ways: either cauterization using an acutely burning medicine or by means of iron."
Mays cauteri am medicina comburent es que tu prenguas una dolsa de alh, e escorgas aquela e abcindas las extremitatz de lu de amdos les caps.	"To cauterize with a burning medicine, you should take some salt and pour it onto the affected area while scraping off both ends of it."
E aprop incideys le loc de la dolor en la templa am una lanceta lada entro que sia en lu feyt loc dejos la codena, entro que sia occultada.	"And appropriately, you should cut into the location of the pain in the temple with a sterile lance until blood flows from that precise spot, so that it may be concealed."
E aprop strenh sobre lu am stopada per descent constreccio, e layssa aquel per le spazi de tres horas; e aprop deslia le e tratz le alh, e laysa la plagua per dos o per tres jorn, e aprop pausa sobre lu coto submergit en boder entro que le loc fassa brac.	"And then strengthen it with pressure by applying constriction, leaving it there for the space of three hours. Then remove it and wipe off the salt, allowing the wound to dry for two or three days. Finally, apply a bandage over the submerged area until the location becomes better."
E aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia sanat.	"And then treat it with an ointment so that it may heal."
E si tu voys, fe aquo am alcunas medicinas comburentz las quals yeu he scriutas en le douse tractat de medicinas comburentz.	"And if you wish to do this using some burning medicines which I have written about in the second treatise on burning medicines."
Mays la cauterisacio am ferr segon aquesta manieyra: igneys per cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma:	"Now, cauterization with iron according to this method is performed using a cautery that has this shape:"
e es apelat claus clavilhs, quar le cap de lu es ayssi cum forma de clavel en le qual es alcuna curvitat, e·n le mieg loc de lu es eminensia petita.	"And it is called the 'closed nail' cautery, because its head is shaped like a nail with some curvature and a small prominence in the middle."
E aprop pausa sobre loc de la dolor, e rete la tua ma — per que no sia adhurida la arceria la qual es dejos — e revol le ferr petit a petit am velocitat.	"And then place it on the location of the pain, hold your hand steady so that the heat of the cautery does not burn you, and slowly rotate the hot iron with moderate speed."
E si la quantitat de lu que es adhurida per la specitut de la codena ayssi quo la maytat de lu, e elava la tua ma per so que la arteria no sia adhurida la qual es dejos, per so que no vengua flux de sanc.	"And if the amount cauterized becomes equal to half of it due to the specificity of the blood vessels, then lift your hand away so that the artery is not cauterized any further, preventing bleeding."
E aprop enbibeys coto en aygua de sal e pausa aquel sobre le loc, e layssa aquel per tres dias; e aprop pausa coto mulhat am boder, e aprop cura am enguent entro que sia sanat.	"And then moisten the area with salt water and apply it to the location, leaving it there for three days. Then apply a poultice with a bandage, and treat it with an ointment until it heals."
E si voys, cauterisa am la extremitat del cutellari segon cauteri, e guarda te de incisio de arteria en aquesta emigranea propriament no-antiqua.	"If you wish to cauterize the tip of the scalpel according to cautery, be careful not to cut an artery in this particular migraine that is not ancient."
Capitol quart.	Chapter Four
De cauterizacio d’emigranea antiqua.	On cauterizing an ancient migraine.
Quan tu curas emigranea am aquo que havem dit de la curacio precedent, e aquo que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias, e no aprofieyta la curacio, e vezes per la malautia que no abasta a lu aquo que havem dit del primier cauteri am medicina o del cauteri am foc, lahoras cove que tu igniscas le cauteri cutellar entro que sia albificat, pus que significas sobre le loc de la dolor am linha de longuesa de la qual sia la maytat del dit, o quays aquel; e depausa la tua ma per una veguada e strenh aquela entro incidiscas la arceria e pervengua entro al os.	When treating a migraine using the methods we have described for the previous cure and those listed in our divisions of illnesses, but finding that these treatments are ineffective, then it is necessary to cauterize with the scalpel cautery until it becomes red hot. Apply it to the location of the pain with a line of about half its length, or use the tip; then pause for a moment and strengthen the heat until you can hear the artery hiss and perceive the bone beneath.
Empero necessari es a tu que guardes de la continuacio de la mandibula, la qual es mauguda deves la masticacio, e que le lacert no sia adhurit e le nervi le qual mau aquela, e que no s’endevengua espasme.	However, it is necessary for you to be careful not to damage the continuity of the mandible, which is moved by mastication; not to burn the nerve or the muscles that move it; and not to cause spasms.
E si es sobre la custodia e cautela de flux de sanc de l’arteria que es abciza, quar en la abcizio de lu es temor, e majorment ad aquel le qual ignora aquo que fa e no es studios e esproat; e layssa la operacio en lu al comensament.	"And if it is about the safeguard and caution regarding bleeding from the artery that is opened, because there is fear during its opening, especially for those who are inexperienced, uninformed, and not skilled. Leave the operation until the beginning."
E yeu vindre am rememoracio del regiment de flux de sanc accident de la arceria segon la sieua manieyra, en le sieu loc de aquest libre.	"And I will bring to mind the regulation of accidental bleeding from an artery according to its manner, in its proper place in this book."
E si veses de aquesta malautia que no abaste aquest cauteri e veses le cors del malaute tollerable, cauteriza aquel en le mieg loc del cap ayssi cum havem recontat, e cura la plagua entro que sia sanada.	"And if you see that this illness does not improve with this cautery and you see the patient's condition tolerable, then cauterize in the middle of the head as we have described, and treat the wound until it heals."
E si voys, aministra le cauteri le qual havem dit en le capitol de streccio de arceria am cauteri havent dos cotels, e es milhor cauterizacio aquesta e mays conferent.	"And if you wish, administer the cautery that we mentioned in the chapter on ligature of an artery with cautery using two scalpels; this is a better and more certain cauterization."
Capitol .v.	Chapter Five
De cauterisacio de las dolors de aurelhas.	On cauterizing earaches.
Quan en la aurelha ve dolor per freg e es curat am causas lacsativas e am l’autra curacio la qual he dita en la divisio, e no es remauguda la dolor, lahoras igneys le cauteri, e es aquest le qual ha nom puncta, del qual aquesta es la forma:	When there is pain in the ear accompanied by fever and it has been treated with laxatives and other remedies mentioned in the division, but the pain persists, then heat the cautery called "puncta," which has this form:
E aprop puncta aprop la ignicio, e sia menat al enviro de tota la aurelha ayssi cum roda es revolguda, o en le circuit de quascuna essemps si la dolor es en quascuna.	Then apply the puncta to the ignition and move it around the entire ear like a wheel, or around each tympanic membrane if the pain is in one of them.
Alonga te am le cauteri de la razit de la aurelha pauc a pauc pus que aias senhat le loc am tenta.	Slowly move the cautery along the edge of the ear opening little by little, until you sense the location with its tip.
E si le cauteri de detz puntz en tota aurelha, e quays aquela, e aprop cura les locz entro que sian sanatz.	"And if you apply this cautery with ten punctures to the entire ear, and then treat those locations until they are healed."
Capitol .vi.	Chapter Six
De cauterizacio de turtura.	Burning of the throat.
Turtura la qual es curada e am cauterizacio no es sino de las specias las quals veno per flecma, segon que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias.	The tumor that is treated and cured by cautery is not anything other than the species that come from a vein, as we have said in the division of diseases.
Esquiva cauterizacio de la specia que endeve per siccacio o per spasme del nervi.	Avoid cautery of the species that occurs due to dryness or spasm of the nerve
Quan tu curas aquela specia de turtura am jerras e capipurgi e guarguarismes, e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas le malaute am tres cauteris: la i deves la razit de la aurelha, e·l segon un petit dejos le sieu templar, e le ters deves la conjunccio de doas labias.	When you treat that throat condition with herbs and capperwort and guarguarisms, and your treatment does not confirm, then you should cauterize the disease with three cauteries: the first on the edge of the ear, the second a little below the temple, and the third at the junction of the two lips.
E pausa lo tieu cauteri per le contrari de la partida malauta, quar mollificacio no ve sino en la partida que apar sana.	And pause your cautery according to what is opposite the affected part, for softening occurs only in the part that appears healthy
E la forma de cauterisacio es que cauterizas aquel am le cauteri en le dreyt de la extremitat de la aurelha pus sobirana un petit sobre le corn del cap, e en le templar autre, la longuesa del qual sia segon la longitut del dit pous, e depausa la tua ma am cauteri entro que sia comburida la quantitat de la maytat de la specitut de la codena.	And the manner of cautery is that you cauterize it with a cautery on the right at the tip of the ear lobe above a little on the horn of the head, and another one on the temple, its length being according to the length of the finger joint, and then pause your hand with the cautery until the amount of the mass of the tumor is consumed.
E aquesta es la forma del cauteri, e es specia del cutellari, la forma del qual es denant mesa.	And this is the manner of cautery, and it is a species of the cutlery, the form of which is flat.
Mays empero pus subtil es que aquel un pauc ayssi co vesas; e cove que cotel en lu de superflua groceza un pauc.	But yet more subtle than this one sees is that one which you have here; and it is necessary to cut away in place of superfluous roughness.
E aprop cura le loc am aquo que es denant procezit entro que sia sanat.	And then treat the place with water that is before processed until it is healed
Capitol .vii.	Chapter VII
De cauterizacio de apoplextia antiqua.	Of cautery for ancient apoplexy.
Quan apoplextia es antiquada e curas aquela am aquo que havem dit e no confereys la tua medicacio e le malaute no ha febre, lahoras cauteriza aquel am quatre cauteris: sobre totz les corn del sieu cap; e am cauteri e le mieg loc del cap, ayssi cum havem dit; e am cauteri en le coguot.	When apoplexy is ancient and you treat it with the water we have mentioned and your treatment does not help and there is no fever, then cauterize it with four cauteries: on all of its horns of the head; and a cautery in the middle place of the head, as we have said; and a cautery in the throat.
E la manieyra del cauteri es fayta segon que es desus dit.	And the manner of cautery is done according to what has been mentioned above
E ja es cauterizat sobre la boca del estomac; e es mays derier; e aprop sia curat am aquo que procezeys.	And then cauterize it over the mouth of the stomach; and do this last; and then treat it with water that you have processed.
Capitol .viii.	Chapter VIII
De cauterizacio de obblivio fayta per flacma.	Of cautery for oblivation caused by a rash
Cove que sian donatz al malaute en le comensament jerras grans e pilulas le servel mondificantz.	It is necessary to give the patient at the beginning large jars and pills of white hellebore.
E aprop ras le cap tot del malaute e pausa sus le coguot de lu emplaustre de cetre descrit en le tractat dels emplastres.	"Next, shave the head of the patient and place on the cushion of the poultice described in the treatise on poultices."
E pausa aquel alcunas veguadas, quar aquel es manieyra de cauteri.	"And pause from time to time, for this is the manner of cautery."
E fay aquo segon aquel meteys orde le qual ja he dit.	"And do that according to the methodical order which I have already mentioned."
E donc si per aqueles sanat bo es; e sino, lahoras fay a lu tres cauteris en la deriera partida de sieu cap, les quals sian deysendentz de la partida pus sobirana del cap entro a la partida pus dejos del col.	"If it is not healing well like that, then make three cauteries on the last section of his head, which should be decreasing from the most sovereign part of the head towards the neck."
E pausa entre quascun cauteri la grossetut del dit, e aprop cura lo cauteri am aquo que es procedit.	"And pause between each cautery for the thickness of a finger, and then carefully cure the cautery with what has been prepared."
Mays si tu vos addicio e le malaute es aquo tollerant, lahoras fay a lu cauteri en le mieg loc; e si voys major addicio, lahora cauteriza aquel sobre les dos corns.	"But if you see that the patient is tolerating it well, then make the cautery in the middle of the location; and if you want greater effectiveness, then cauterize those on both ears."
Aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat; e sia le cauteri olivar segon la forma denant donat.	"Carefully cure that until it is healed; and let the cauteries be olive-shaped according to the form given above."
Capitol .ix.	Capítol nou.
De cauterisacio de parazili e de mollificacio de tot le cors.	Chapter Nine: Cautery for Paralysis and Softening of the Whole Body
Cove que tu procesiscas en mondificacio del cap am jerras e am aquo que havem dit; e aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap, e am cauteri sobre totz les corns del cap, e am cauteri sobre la deriera partida de lu, e am tres cauteris sobre les spondils del col.	"And when you proceed with the softening of the head using herbs and what has been said; and carefully shave the head of the patient, and then make a cautery in the middle of the head, and cauteries on all the horns of the head, and cauterize the last section of it, and make three cauteries on the cervical vertebrae."
E si es necessari en la malautia de mollificacio del cors de trops aquel e les malautes tollerantz e la malautia es fort, lahoras cauteriza aquel am quatre cauteris sobre les spondils del dos, e dererament am cauteri entro que sia comborit de la codena mot de lu, e aleva la tieua ma.	"And if it is necessary to soften the body in a paralysis where the patients tolerate it and the condition is severe, then cauterize that with four cauteries on the vertebrae of the back, and afterwards make a cautery where the muscle of the nape of the neck is fought against, and raise the patient's hand."
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat, e aquest sia cauteri olivar.	"And carefully cure it until it is healed, and let this be an olive-shaped cautery."
Capitol .x.	Capítol deu.
De cauterisacio de epilemcia.	Chapter Ten: Cautery for Epilepsy
No es cauterizat le epilemtic sino aquella epilemcia es per flecma.	"No cautery is made on the epileptic unless the epilepsy is due to phlegm."
E donc cove que mondifiques le cervel de lu al comensament de lu am yeras e am l’autra curacio la qual havem dicta en la divisio quan le malaute es gran e es tollerant la exceperacio de las medicinas.	"And then you should soften the brain at the beginning of it using herbs and the other treatments which have been mentioned in the division when the patient is large and tolerates the exception of medications."
E si es enfant le qual no sufferte las medicinas, lahoras aministra guarguarissmes e mastiguatoris le servel mondifican, denant aquo per motz dias, am bonifficacio de las viandas.	"And if it is a child who does not tolerate medications, then administer purgatives and mastigators that soften the brain beforehand for many days with proper diet."
E aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop cauteriza aquel am un cauteri en le mieg loc del cap segon la manieyra precedent, e am autre cauteri en le occiput de lu, e sobre quascun corn del cap sieu cauterisa.	"And then carefully shave the head of the patient, and make a cautery in the middle of the head according to the previous manner, and another cautery in the occiput of it, and cauterize each horn of the head."
E si le malaute es fort e es tollerant, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteris les quals he ditz, en havent paraliticament e mollificacio del cors sobre les spondils del col e les spondils del dos.	"And if the patient is severe and tolerates it, then cauterize that with the cauteries which have been mentioned, having paralysis and softening of the body on the cervical vertebrae and the dorsal vertebrae."
E sia cauteri olivar segon qu’es precedit.	"And let it be an olive-shaped cautery according to what has been stated before."
Mays si le malaute es enfant, lahoras pausa cauteri subtil segon aquesta manieyra.	"But if the patient is a child, then pause and make a subtle cautery in this manner:"
Capitol .xi.	Capítol undecim.
De cauterizacio de melencolia.	"Regarding cautery of melancholy."
Quan las causas de melencolia so humiditatz corrompudas e flacma gros, lahoras cauteriza aquel am les cauteris les quals havem ditz en le havent paralisi.	"When the causes of melancholy are corrupted humidity and thick phlegm, then cauterize with those cauteries that we have mentioned previously."
E si la causa de melencolia es superfluitat declinant a melencolia, e le cors del malaute es humit, lahoras da ha beure aquo que mundifica le cervel de lu segon aquo que ha precedut en la divisio.	"And if the cause of melancholy is declining surplus leading to it, and the body of the patient is humid, then let him drink water that cleanses the brain following what has been mentioned in the division."
E aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop fay tortora decentment fayta de li sobre le cercle, e aprop depausa aquela en le mieg loc del cap.	"And then shave the patient's head, and properly make a wreath of laurel leaves for him to wear on his forehead, and then place it in the middle of his head."
E le malaute sia sesent cayrat, e sia tengut de tota partida.	"And let the patient lie on his left side, and let him be held tightly on all parts."
E aprop pausa liniment; et es pus digne de boder antic de ovelhas.	"And then apply a liniment; and afterwards it is fitting to rub with wool grease."
E escalfa aquel sobre le foc per calefaccio temprada per mesura, le qual le dit sufferta quan es mes en lu.	"And warm that on the fire for temperate heating according to measure, which he shall suffer when it is more in him."
E aprop vuo’ aquel en le mieg loc del cap de lu en le cercle, e leysa lu entro que sia enfregidat.	"And then place that in the middle of his head within the crown, and leave it there until it grows cold."
E fay aquo am le malaute en tota semmana una veguada, am le autre regiment de lu bo entro que sia sanat; o si vols, cauteriza aquel fazen petitz puntz segon lo mays de lu, sino que tenguas la ma am un cauteri ayssi ordenat: aquesta es specia de cauteri la qual humecta le cervel am equalitat.	"And do this with the patient once every week until his illness is healed; or if you wish, cauterize him making small punctures according to the extent of the illness, but holding your hand thus ordered with a cautery: this is called 'equal' cautery which moistens the brain evenly."
E aprop pausa aquel coto enbegut en boder o en grays de gualina.	"And then apply that cataplasm wrapped in wool or in flaxseed."
Capitol .xii.	"Chapter Twelve."
De cauterisacio de aygua descendent en le huel.	"Of cauterization of descending water in the groin."
Quan a tu es declarat le comensament de aygua en le huel per les senhals les quals yeu he ditz en la divisio, lahoras comensa e dona en beure al malaute aquo que mondifique le cap de lu, e guarda aquel de totas humiditatz.	"When you have determined the beginning of water descent in the groin by the signs which I have mentioned in the division, then begin and give the patient to drink water that cleanses his head, and guard him from all humidity."
E fay aquel suzar en banh en degu per alcus jorns.	"And keep him warm in bed for several days."
E aprop comanda a lu que raza le sieu cap, e cauteriza aquel am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap; e aprop cauteriza aquel am dos cauteris sobre dos templas si es le comensament de ysement de aygua en dos huels, o de la un latz si es comensamen de l’aygua en un huel.	"And then command him to shave his head, and cauterize it with a cautery in the middle of the head; and also cauterize it with two cauteries on both temples if it is the beginning of descent of water from both groins, or on one side only if it is the beginning of descent on one side."
Incideys am cauteri totas las venas e arcerias las quals so dejos la codena; e sian les cauteris en aquela lonh en la latitut de las templas.	"Cauterize with a cautery all the veins and arteries that are near the shoulder blade; and let the cauteries be in this length at the latitude of the temples."
E guarda te de fluxs de sanc quan es cauterizat; e si veses de lu fluxs de sanc, osta le am alcuna medicina, la qual es a tu possible.	"And guard against fluxes of blood when he is being cauterized; and if you see any flux of blood, stop it with some medicine which is at your disposal."
E yeu vindre am savieza la qual es en extraccio de arcerias e am abscizio de aquelas e cautela de fluxs de sanc.	"And I will come with skill to extract arteries and cut them off and to care for fluxes of blood."
E alcunas vetz es cauterizat en le cervitz dejos dos osses am dos cauteris dererament produzitz.	"Sometimes it is cauterized on the neck near the two bones with two cauteries running downwards."
Capitol .xiii.	"Chapter Thirteen."
De cauterizacio de lacrimas antiquas.	"Of cauterization for old tears."
Quan lacrimas dels huels so antiquas assuduament e per las venas e arterias las quals so en le loc manifest del cap defora e es verificat que aquo es superfluitatz frejas flecmatiquas, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteri le qual havem recontat en le capitol de comensament de aygua cazent en les huels, e am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap e am dos cauteris en la cervitz dejos dos templas, e am dos cauteris en la cervitz dejos dos osses.	"When tears from the eyes are old and abundant, and it is verified that this is due to superfluous phlegmatic humors in the veins and arteries which are at the manifest location of the head outside, then cauterize him with a cautery as we have described in the chapter on the beginning of descending water in the groins, and also with a cautery in the middle of the head and with two cauteries on the neck near the two temples, and with two cauteries on the neck near the two bones."
E si indigeyses de addicio, lahoras cauteriza aquel en tot latz de la coa del huel sobre la extremitat del sobrecilh am petit cauteri.	"And if you need to add something more, then cauterize him on both sides of the cheekbone above the eyebrow with small cauteries."
Capitol .xiiii.	"Chapter Fourteen."
De cauterizacio de fetor de nas.	"Of cauterization for foul breath from the nose."
Quan tu medicas aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no aprofieyta la tua medicacio, lahoras tu aparelha e dona en beure al malaute las cochias per tres noytz; e aprop ras le cap de lu, e cauteriza le am cauteri migier am cauteri olivar.	"When you treat him with what we have mentioned in the division and your treatment does not improve, then prepare and give the patient to drink decoctions of cooked barley for three nights; and then shave his head and cauterize it with a medium cautery and an olive cautery."
E aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri clavelh am dos cauteris sobre les dos sobrecilhs dejos les cabels un petit.	"And also cauterize him with a small cautery and two cauteries on both eyebrows near the hair, a little below them."
E guarda te de la arceria que no incindas aquela.	"Be careful not to burn the artery."
E del cauteri clavilh aquesta es la forma.	"And this is the form of the cautery called 'clavelh':"
Capitol .xv.	"Chapter Fifteen."
De cauteri de mollificacio de palpebras dels huels.	"Concerning the cauterization for the softening of eyelids of eyes."
Quan la palpebra del huel es mollificada per malautia o per humiditat, lahoras cauteriza aquela palpebre1 am un cauteri am aquest cauteri lunar; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	"When an eyelid becomes softened by illness or moisture, cauterize that eyelid with this lunar cautery; and this is its form:"
E si vos, cauteriza aquel sobre les dos sobrecils un petit am dos cauteris en tota partida, e sian elonguatz de las timporas.	"And if you wish to cauterize above the two eyebrows a little with two cauteries on each side, they should be elongated from the temples."
E sia la longitut de quascun cauteri segon la quantitat del sobrecil.	"And the length of each cautery should be according to the quantity of the eyebrow."
E no premas trop la tua ma am le cauteri, mays segon la quantitat que la tersa partida de la palpebre sia adhurida.	"Press not too hard with your hand on the cautery, but rather according to how much of the third division of the eyelid is burned."
Capitol .xvi.	Chapter Sixteen
De cauteri de la palpebre del huel quan les pels so convertitz a las partidas dedintz e punho le huel.	"Concerning cautery of the eyelid when the hairs are converted into parts within and piercing the eye."
Quan les pels del huel son convertitz a las partidas dedintz ayssi que pungo le huel, cauteri en aquels es segon dos manieyras, quar cauteri o es am fer o es am medicina comburent.	"When the hairs of the eye are converted into parts within so that they pierce the eye, cauterize in those places either with fire or with medicated cautery."
Si am cauteri de lu am foc, comanda al malaute denant aquo que leyse les sieus pels ayssi cum aquels les quals les mundan, entro que sian prolonguatz e engualhatz; e si punho aquel deves le lor naysement, lahoras tu strenh les huels de lu am una benda per so que no sia maugut entro que·ls pels sian nascutz.	"If cauterizing with fire, command the patient beforehand that he pluck his hairs like those which they usually pluck, until they are lengthened and hardened; and if it pierces there, then you should stretch the eyelids of it with a bandage so that no harm comes to them until the hairs have grown."
Donc cum siran nascutz e engualhatz, lahoras pausa le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop senha sobre la palpebre dels huels de lu am tenta, am senhal le qual sia segon la figura de fulha de merta, e sia le comensament del senhal prop dels pels.	"And when they have grown long and hardened, then pause the head of the patient in the usual position, and approximate a tent over the eyelid of the eye with fire, shaped like the leaf of a spear, and let the beginning of it be close to the hairs."
E aprop pausa coto enbegut en album de huou o en mucillatge de ptilli sobre le huel.	"And then pause with cotton dipped in alum or in mucus of pigeon over the eye."
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu.	"And then light the cautery which is of this shape."
E aprop cauteriza sobre la figura la qual as senhada, petit a petit, em motas veguadas, entro que sia comburida la superficia de la codena la qual es ayssi cum fuelha de mirta, tota aparent propriament.	"And then cauterize little by little along the figure which is outlined, with small glances, until the surface of the chain which is like the leaf of myrtle is burned."
E senhal de sanetat de la tieua obra es que tu vegus la palpebre de l’huel ja esser contrayta e·ls pels de lu esser elevatz deves la punctura del huel.	"And the sign of the good work is that you see the eyelid of the eye already contracted and its hairs raised from the puncture of the eye."
E donc eleva la tua ma e laysa aquel per tres jorns, e aprop pausa sobre lu coto am boder entro que sia eredicada la scara.	"And then elevate your hand and leave it for three days, and then pause cotton on the border until the scar is healed."
E aprop cura aquela am enguent entro que sia sanat.	"And then dress that with ointment until it is healed."
Mays si retorna per les pels alcuna causa aprop lor naysement e la palpebra es mollificada, lahoras fay autra vetz le cauteri sobre aquel tot ayssi cum avias fayt primieyrament.	"But if the hairs return for some cause after their growth and the eyelid becomes softened, then perform the cautery again over that just as you had done originally."
Mays si les pels so en la palpebra dejos, lahoras cauterisa aquela entro que sia elevada al sieu loc natural e sia engualhat e que les pels no punhan le huelh.	"But if the hairs remain on the eyelid, then cauterize them until they are lifted up to their natural place and hardened, so that they do not pierce the eye."
Mays le cauteri am medicina comburent aquest es que comandes al malaute que leyse les pels entro que sian prolonguatz e engualhatz, e aprop sia fayta de carta de drap la forma de fuelha de mirtra.	"But when cauterizing with medicinal fire, this is what you command the patient: pluck the hairs until they are lengthened and hardened; then make from cloth paper the shape of a myrtle leaf."
E aprop pren de sabo conogut e de caus viva ana unc. i, o quays aquo, e aprop mescle3 aquelas causas be, e fay aquo am festinacio per so que no sia enfregidat; e aprop expandeys de aquo sobre la carta la qual es fayta ayssi cum forma de fulha de mirtra, e pausa aquel sobre la un huel od amdos; e pausa dejos le huel coto enbegut en album de huou, e el cap del malaute sia en le tieu se.	"And then take three ounces of known soap and three ounces of quicklime, mix those causes well, make haste so that it does not cool down; then spread this on the cloth which is made like the shape of a myrtle leaf, and place it over one eye or both eyes. Then place cotton dipped in alum over the eye, and hold the patient's head in position."
E pausa le dit sobre le medicina e prem aquela un petit e no la mauguas entro que lo malaute senta la mordicacio de la medicina, quar mordicacio es en lu ayssi cum de foc.	"And then pause your finger on the medicine and press it gently without moving until the patient feels the bite of the medicine, for the bite is like that of fire."
E donc cum percevera aquo que el atrobo mordicacio, lahoras leyssa la medicina e mau aquela am le tieu dit; donc cum cessa la mordicacio, lahoras remau la medicina he lava le huel am aygua; e lahoras considera si vezes la palpebra ja es levada ayssi cum es lavada deves la costriccio am foc o am incisio, quar lahoras esta be; e si no torna sobre aquela de la medicina sobre le loc en le qual no ha empremut la medicina e no se denigra entro que sia engualhada la tua operacio e sia contrayt le huel.	"And then when the patient perceives that bite, then remove the medicine and move it with your finger; then when the bite ceases, then remove the medicine and wash the eye with water. And then consider if perhaps the eyelid is lifted up like when washed by the constriction with fire or incision; for then it is well done. But if not, return to that of the medicine on the place where it has not adhered, do not denigrate until the operation is hardened and the eye is contracted."
E aprop pausa sobre lu coto am boder entro que sia eradicada la codena de la adhustio, e aprop cura aquel am enguent deafinicon o am autre entro que sia sanat.	"And then pause cotton on the border until the chain of adhesion is eradicated; then dress that with ointment of definicon or with another one until it is healed."
E es necessari a tu, deves la tua operacio que guardes am pervigil diligencia que en le huel no caia re de la medicina, e si la palpebre aprop alscus dias es mollificada e alcuna causa dels pels punh en le huel, lahoras itera la tua medicina sobre aquel loc le qual de la palpebre es mollificat, e propriamen ayssi quo as fayt al comensament, e aprop enaviro lu entro que sia sanat.	"And it is necessary that you, due to your operation, guard with vigilant diligence that no dust of the medicine falls into the eye; and if the eyelid becomes softened during some days and for some cause hairs pierce the eye, then repeat your medicine on that place where the eyelid is softened, just as you did at the beginning; then surround it until it is healed."
E aquesta es la forma de fuelha de mirtra.	"And this is the form of myrtle leaf."
E sapias que les huels dels homes son diversificatz segon la magnitut e la parvitat, e donc segon aquo es fayta la tua contraccio.	"And know that the eyes of men are diversified according to their magnitude and smallness; and therefore your constriction is made accordingly."
E no sira amaguada la via de rectetut ad aquel al qual es studi en aquesta art.	"And do not hide the way of rectitude from those who study this art."
Capitol .xvii.	Chapter XVII.
De cauterizacio de fistula que es en le lacrimal de l’huel.	On cauterization of a fistula that is in the lachrymal duct of the eye.
Quan tu curas fistula am aquo que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas aquela segon aquesta manieyra: comanda al malaute que pause le cap sieu en le tieu se, e tengua le cap de lu alcun ministre entre las tieuas mas en tal manieyra que no sia maugut ni agitat am le sieu cap.	"When treating a fistula as mentioned in the sections on diseases and your treatment does not succeed, then you should cauterize it in this manner: tell the patient to hold their head steady with their hands, and have one of your assistants press their head gently but firmly between their hands."
E aprop pausa coto enfus en album de huou o en mucellage de ptilli sobre le huel de lu.	"And also apply a poultice made of hot water or mustard plasters on the affected area."
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma:	"And next, prepare the cauterization instrument, which is shaped like this:"
le qual sia conquau, ayssi cum es forma de cana o de pena de voltor, de la una extremitat am la qual es fayta lo cauteri.	"This [cautery] should be hollow, like a pipe or the quill of an eagle, with one end through which cauterization is performed."
E si voys, sia penetrant entro a la autra extremitat.	"And if desired, let it be penetrating into the other end as well."
E si vols sia sort ayssi cum tenta.	If you wish it to come out as it was inserted.
Mays empero aquel que es concau es milhor a la tieua obra.	But that which is concave is better for this task.
E aprop prem la fistula si es uberta, e tra de lu sania et exsicca aquela.	"And then press the fistula if it is open, and draw out the fluid and dry that area."
E si no es uberta, lahoras obre aquela e extratz la poyredura de lu.	"And if it's not open, make an incision there and extract the pus from it."
E aprop pausa sobre lu le cauteri le qual sia be ignit, e te am aquel la tieua ma un petit deves le cauteri del huel a la partida del nas, per so que no erre la tua ma o le malaute sia enquietat, e lahoras pausa le cauteri en le grays del huel e corrompas aquel.	"And then press the cautery, which should be well ignited, onto that area, but be careful not to touch the patient's skin too much near the nostrils so as not to cause error or discomfort for them. Then place the cautery on the grey hairs of the beard and burn them."
E donc si al comensament del tieu cauteri perve entro al os, bo es; e sino, lahoras itera le cauteri una veguada o dos, si mestiers era; e layssa aquel ayssi per tres jorns, e aprop pausa sobre aquel coto am boder e enviro lu am enguent exsiccatiu entro que sia sanat.	"And if at the beginning of your cautery it enters into the bone, that's good. And if not, then repeat the cautery once or twice if necessary. Then leave that area alone for three days, and afterwards press on it with a border and around it with a drying ointment until it is healed."
Mays si eran passatz xi dias e no es sanat, lahoras pausa sobre lu medicina aguda corrosiva entro que l’os sia descubert e sia ras segon que conveneys en le sieu capitol.	"But if eleven days have passed and it has not healed, then apply a corrosive medication to it until the bone is exposed and it is scraped according to what is convenient in its chapter."
E es autra manieyra de cauteri de fistula la qual alscus primiers diysero: enten al loc de la fistula e fen aquela e aprop pausa en aquela fissura camaen subtil del qual es la forma de lu: E fon en aquela la quantitat de i unc de plom fundut; e te la tua ma am camaem am bona retencio, e no sia maugut le malaute per so que le plom fundut no pervengua al huel de aquel; e cove que pausas sobre le huel del malaute coto enfus en album de huou o en aygua, quar plom adhureys le loc de la fistula e sana aquela per sanacio meravilhora.	"And here is another method of cauterizing a fistula that some first said: enter into the location of the fistula and make an incision there with a subtle needle whose shape is like this. Then place in that fissure the amount of one inch of melted lead; then place your hand on it with good retention, so that no harm comes to the patient so that the melted lead does not reach the skin of that area; and cover the area of the patient's skin around it wrapped in white album or water, because lead hardens the location of the fistula and heals it by marvelous healing."
E si la fistula es sanada am aquo que havem dit del cauteri e de la curacio, bo es; e sino, lahoras es necessari aministrar trauc del nas e reduzir la fistula al cors del nas segon que vindra en son loc propri.	"And if the fistula is healed with what we have said about cauterization and treatment, that's good. And if not, then it is necessary to administer a traction of the nose and reduce the fistula into the body of the nose according to what will come in its proper place."
Capitol .xviii.	"Chapter XVIII."
De cauterizacio de la fendedura des potz.	"Of cautery for the split of the thighs."
Motas veguadas accideysso fissuras en las labias, e majorment en las labias dels enfantz.	Many times it happens that there are splits in the labia, and more often in the labia of children.
Donc cum tu curas aquelas fissuras am aquo que nos havem dit en las divisios e no aprofieyta la tua cura, lahoras igneys le cauteri petit cutellar segon aquesta forma que s’ensiec:	And when you treat those splits with what we have said in the divisions and your treatment does not improve, then use a small cautery knife according to this form:
E sia la conquavitat de lu segon la subtilitat de cotella.	And its concavity should be like the thinness of a needle.
Aprop pausa aquel init cuytadament en aquelas fissuras entro que·l cauteri pervengua al preon de las fissuras.	Approach gently with that knife and place it in those splits so that the cautery reaches the bottom of the fissures.
E aprop cura aquel am cerotz entro que sia sanat.	Then treat it with cerottum until it is healed.
Capitol .xix.	Chapter XIX
De cauterizacio de fistula en la boca.	"Of cautery for a fistula in the mouth."
Quan en la razit de uvula o en le paladar o en las razitz de las dentz endeve apostema e aprop fa brac, e aprop es rompuda, e aprop es antiquada, e corr brac e es fayta fistula, e aprop tu curas aquela e no aprofieyta a curacio, lahoras cove que tu igniscas cauteri segon la quantitat que sia receubuda en la fistula, e aprop met aquel ignit en le trauc de la fistola, e te la tua ma entro que pervengua le ferr ignit al preon de lu, e al derier de lu fazen aysso una veguada o dos; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que nos havem dit de la curacio entro que sia sanat.	When an apostema occurs on the uvula or palate or around the teeth and it bursts open, becomes inflamed, forms a fistula, and you treat it but your treatment does not improve, then you must heat cautery according to the size received in the fistula. Then place that heated iron into the opening of the fistula and hold your hand so that the hot iron reaches the bottom of it. Repeat this once or twice, and then treat it with what we have said about the cure until it is healed.
E donc si la sania es abscindita e es sanat, bo es; e sino, lahoras es necessari de descubrir le loc e hostar le os corrumput segon que vindra en son capitol.	And if the bone becomes separated and healed, that's good. But if not, then it is necessary to expose the site and remove the decayed bone according to what comes next in its chapter.
Capitol .xx.	Chapter XX
De cauterisacio de las dentz e de mollificacio de las angivas.	"Of cautery for teeth and softening of gum boils."
Quan las angivas son mollificadas per humiditat e las dentz son maugudas, e curas aquelas am medicinas e no confereys, lahoras pausa le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop igneys le cauteri la forma del qual vindra aprop aysso, enayssi que tu pauses la quanula sobre la dent e entromet en aquela le cauteri ignit festinantment, e te la tieua ma un petit entro que·l malaute cente la calor del foc a la razit de la dent esser pervenguda.	When gums are swollen with moisture and teeth are painful, and you treat them with medicines but they don't help, then place the head of the sick person on your lap, heat the cautery which will have this shape:
E aprop leva la tua ma, e aprop itera le cauteri alcunas veguadas segon que vols.	"And then raise your hand, and then apply the cautery several times according to what you wish."
E aprop le malaute huompla la sua boca de aygua de sal e tengua aquela per una hora, e pueys stupa aquela, quar la dent mauguda es fermada e la gengiva mollificada es strenguda e la humiditat corrompuda es exsiccada.	"And then have the patient rinse their mouth with salt water and hold it in for an hour, then spit it out, because the bad tooth is hardened and the inflamed gum is strengthened and the corrupted moisture is dried."
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter XXI
De cauterisacio de dolor de dent.	Of cautery of toothache.
Quan dolor de dent es per fregiditat, o en lu es freg o verm, o no comfereys la curacio am medicina, lahoras cauteri en aquela es segon dos manieyras: o cauteri am boder de vacas, o cauteri am foc.	When toothache is caused by coldness or there's ice or worm inside it, or if the cure does not succeed with medicine, then cauterize that one in two ways: either with a red-hot iron from the fire or with a hot coal.
Cauteri am boder es que tu prenguas boder de vacas e bulhas aquel en culhe de ferr , e aprop pren coto e envolopa le sobre la extremitat de la tenta, e aprop enmergeys aquel am boder bulhit, e pausa aquel sobre la dent dolorosa festinantment entro que sia enfregidat.	To cauterize with a red-hot iron: Take an iron and heat it in the fire, then quickly grasp its end with tongs and touch it to the aching tooth until it becomes hot.
E aprop itera aquela alcunas veguadas entro que la vertut del foc pervengua a la razit de la dentz.	And repeat this several times until the heat of the fire reaches the root of the teeth.
E si voys, submergeys lana o coto en le boder desus dit, e pausa aquel sobre la dent dolent, e pausa sobre aquel ferr ignit entro que·l ferr pervengua al preon de la conquavitat de la dent.	And if you wish, first immerse wool or cotton in the aforementioned hot coal, then place it on the aching tooth and hold the red-hot iron close to it until it reaches the cavity of the tooth.
Mays empero la cauterizacio am foc es que tu atendas a la quannula de eram o de ferr, e sia en le cor de lu alcuna grocesa e la acuitat del foc no pervengua a la boca del malaute.	But be careful when using fire for cautery, so that the coal or iron is not too hot and does not burn the mouth of the patient.
E aprop igneys le cauteri la forma del qual vindra, e pausa aquel sobre la dent e te la tua ma entro que·l cauteri sia enfregidat; e fay aquo alcunas veguadas quar la dolor sira remauguda o en aquel dia o en l’autre dia.	Then shape the coal or iron as desired, place it on the tooth and hold your hand close until it becomes cool. Repeat this several times until the pain ceases, either that same day or the next day.
E cove que per empressio de aquel cauteri que·l malaute umpla la sieua boca de bon boder e tengua aquel per una hora e aprop scupa le; e aquesta es la forma del cauteri.	And it's necessary for the patient to hold their mouth open on that side after this cautery, keeping it closed tightly for an hour, and then spit out the saliva. This is how the cautery should be performed.
E cauteriza am qual que tu voys extremittat segon que a tu es possible.	You may perform the cautery with whichever method you prefer, depending on what you find easiest to do.
E aquesta es la forma de la cannula:	And this is how the cautery should be performed:
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter Twenty-two
De cauterizacio de extrophulos.	On the cautery of hernias.
Quan extrophulos so de flecma e de humors fregas e no so hobedientz a digistio per medicinas e tu voys la digistio de aquelas leugerament, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri conquau la forma del qual es aquesta seguen, havent dos extremitatz hubertas per que yesca le fum deves le cauteri per l’autra extremitat, e pausa aquel ignit sobre aquel apostema una veguada, e autre si indigeyses de aquel, entro que pervengua al preon del apostema.	When hernias are caused by mucus and humors that are not easily digested despite medication, then cauterize them using this method: Take two tubes made of horn or metal, attach them to the cautery, and place it over the swelling. Then place the ignited cautery on the lump once, twice if necessary, until it reaches the center of the swelling.
E si l’apostema es pauca, lahoras pausa le cauteri segon la quantitat del apostema, e aprop leyssa le per tres jorns e pausa sobre lu coto enfus en boder entro que sia remaugut aquo que·l foc ha comburit.	And if the swelling is small, then apply the cautery according to its size, and leave it on for three days. Then remove it and press a cloth soaked in warm water onto the affected area until what was burned by the fire is removed.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent e tentas e draps entro que sia sanat.	And then treat that wound with ointments, bandages, and dressings until it heals.
E la forma de la cannula o deu cauteri a tal es comveyter.	The shape of the cannula or cautery used for this procedure is as follows:
Capitol .xxiii.	**Chapter 23.**
De cauterizacio de rauquiera de votz e de constriccio de ale.	**On the Cauterization of Hemorrhoids and the Binding of the Anus.**
Quan las humiditatz veno sobre le quanal del pulmo, e majorment quan aquo es am fregiditat de compleccio, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia evacuat al comensament am medicinas laxativas, e aprop cauteriza aquel deves la razit del golayro en le loc depremegut.	"When moistures gather on the lung's channel, especially when it's cold, initially treat with laxative medicines and then cauterize the right side of the throat at the depressed area."
E guarda te que no pervenguas am le cauteri al golayro ni no comburas de la codena de lu sino un pauc.	"Be sure not to burn the gullet or harm the trachea with the cautery, but just a little."
E cauteriza aquel am autra cauteri deves la junctura del col en le derier espondil de lu.	"Cauterize it also with another cautery on the joint of the neck at the last cervical vertebra."
E·l cauteri de lu sia clavilh sego la maniera precedent.	"And the cautery should be made with a small one, according to the previous method."
E aprop cura aquel am aquo que es precedit entro que sia sanat.	"Then treat it as described until healed."
Capitol .xxiiii.	"Chapter 24."
De cauterizacio de malautia del pulmo e de tos.	"On cauterizing a lung disease and cough."
Quan tos e malautia de pulmo so de humiditatz fregas e le malaute no ha febre ni tisic e es malautia antiqua, lahoras cauterisa aquel am dos cauteris sobre la furcula en les locz depremegutz leontz e buoytz; e am autra cauteri en le mieg loc del pietz entre dos mamillos; e sia le cauteri clavilh segon la forma precedent.	"When a cough and lung disease are caused by dampness and the illness has no fever or spitting, cauterize it with two cauteries on the furcula in the places of the neck, shoulders, and elbows; and with another cautery in the middle of the chest between the two breasts; and let the cauteries be applied according to the preceding manner."
E si vols, sia la tua cauterizacio punctan am le cauteri que es apelat puncta, la forma del qual precedeys en la ponctacio de dolor de aurelhas.	"And if you wish, your cautery should be punctured with the cautery called a 'punctum,' the form of which is described in the punctuation of earache."
E sian puntz entro cays ad aquels; e aprop cura aquel am aquo meteys que es precedit entro que sia sanat.	"And if it's punctured, dress it with water and apply the remedy that is mentioned beforehand to heal it."
E ya sia le cauteri haventz tres ramps quar cauterizacio es am aquel: am una veguada podes far tres cauteris segon aquesta forma:	"And since cauteries have three branches, caution is necessary when cauterizing. With one cautery you can perform three applications according to this manner:"
Capitol .xxv.	Chapter xxv
De cauterizacio de titillic que es le cap del ajutori.	"Of the cauterization of the titillation, which is the head of the testicle."
Quan le cap del ajutori es dislocat per causa de humiditatz lubricas e no es fermat en la hora del sieu retornament deves la sua dislocacio entro que sia a lu aquo costuma de retornar, e aprop per un petit movement es deslocat ayssi que s’endeve, ayssi cum nos havem testificat, lahoras cove que primieyrament redusiscas la dislocacio, e aprop le malaute sia reversat sobre le sieu dos o sobre le latz sa; e aprop eleva la codena la qual es en la partida dedintz del citillic a las partidas desus am les ditz de la tua ma sinistra, si la junctura es dislocada a las partidas dedintz.	"When the head of the testicle is displaced due to lubricous dampness and does not return at its usual time, you must reduce the displacement so that it returns to its usual position. And quickly with a gentle movement, if it has deviated as we have testified, first reduce the displacement by placing the malady on its own side or on its back; then elevate the cord which is in the partition inside the scrotum upwards onto the above-mentioned parts using your left hand, if the juncture is displaced downward."
E aprop igneys le cauteri havent dos caps; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	"And then heat the cautery that has two heads; this is its shape:"
E aprop cauteriza la codena entro que penetre aquela entro al autre latz; e vindra la figura de cauterizacio lahoras de iv caps cauteris.	"Then cauterize the cord so that it enters one within the other side; and here is the figure of cauterization at this time using four cauteries."
e so aquel subtils segon la quantitat de tenta; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	"And then that delicate part according to the quantity of tent, and this is its shape:"
E alcunas veguadas es ajustat segon aquest comte i per que son les cauteris .viii.	"And sometimes it's adjusted according to this manner, and therefore there are eight cauteries."
E aprop pausa sobre le cauteri porys cuytz am sal, e aprop fay adherir le malaute a trenquilitat, e lo membre no sia maugut per alcun temps entro que sia confortat.	"And then pause upon the cautery for two hours with salt, and make sure that the malady adheres to tranquility, so that the member is not moved by any means until it is consoled."
E si la dislocacio es a las partidas desus e tart es fayt aquo, lahoras cauteriza sobre le muscle am cauteri clavilh o am motz cauteris puntan, quar la junctura es confermada e la humiditat es romauguda e le malaute es sanat.	"And if the displacement is upwards and it does not return, then cauterize on the muscle using a claw-shaped cautery or pointed cauteries because the juncture is confirmed and the dampness is broken and the malady is healed."
Capitol .xxvi.	Chapter xxvi
De cauterizacio del stomac.	"Regarding cautery of the stomach."
Quan veno en l’estomac freg e motas humiditatz entro que aquel extrazo de la sua compleccio e so multiplicatz raumases a lu, e si tu continuas las manieyras de curacio e no confereyso, lahoras cove que le malaute sia sobre le sieu dos ressupinat, e extenda las suas mas e las suas coysas, e aprop cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris: an un cauteri dejos le pietz per la quantitat d’un dit am cauteri clavilh, e am dos cauteris dejos del dos costatz del cauteri, entro que vengua la figura de cauteri triangulada; e elonga entre els que no sian ajustatz que faran poyredura.	"When there is a burning sensation and excessive moisture in the stomach that exceeds its usual condition, causing discomfort, it's time to perform cauterization. Make sure the patient is lying on their back, with their arms and legs extended. Then proceed with three cautery applications: one on the chest area equal to the width of a finger, one triangular cautery below each side of the first cautery; ensure that they are not too close together to prevent scarring."
E si la profunditat del cauteri la quantitat de les dos terses de la grocesa de la codena.	"Make the depth of the cautery equal to two-thirds of the thickness of a goose feather."
E sia la figura del cauteri segon aquesta forma ses addicio, E si vols, cauteriza am gran cauteri en le mieg loc del estomac segon aquesta forma; et aquest sia un cauteri segon la forma de cercle segon aquesta forma:	"And let the shape of the cautery be like this: And if you wish, cauterize with a large cautery in the middle of the stomach according to this form; and this is a cautery according to the form of a circle according to this form:"
E sia cauterizat l’estomac punctan ad aquel que de aquest cauteri es spaventat: e es que tu senhes sobre l’estomac punt segon la quantitat que voles am tenta, e aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri en les puntz; e aprop cura aquel am la curacio qu’es precedita entro que sia sanat.	"And let the stomach be punctured according to that which is feared from this cautery: and you shall make dots on the stomach with a tent, however many you wish, and then cauterize at those points with a cautery; and then treat it with the treatment that has been previously mentioned until it is healed."
Capitol .xxvii.	"Chapter XXVII."
De cauterizacio del fietge fret.	"On cauterizing a fatty liver."
Quan endeve en le fietge dolor per fregiditat o per humiditat o per grossa ventositat entro que de la sieua normal compleccio sia getat per egressio superflua, e es curat le malaute am aquo que havem dit e no comfereys, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sua cervitz, e senhes am tenta tres cauteris segon aquesta forma et aquesta quantitat meteyssa sobre le fietge dejos dels ipocondres, la hon perve le decubit de home.	"When pain occurs in the liver due to coldness or moisture or excessive windiness causing it to deviate from its normal state and overflow excessively, and if the disease is not cured by what has been said above, then let the disease be brought back onto its place on top of the liver, and mark three cauteries according to this form and quantity with a tent over the liver near the hypochondria, where the right side of man lies."
E sia l’espazi le qual es entre quascun cauteri segon la grossetut del dit, e sia le cauteri segon la longitut del cors dreyta.	"And let the space between each cautery be according to the thickness of a finger, and let the cauteries be according to the length of the middle finger."
E no compremas la tua am le cauteri mot.	"Do not press too hard with the cautery."
E si la quantitat de aquo que es adhurit la quantitat de la maytat de la specitut de la codena, e no y sia pus ajustat; e si le malaute stant sobre les pes de lu; e si no es estant, lahoras sia jassent, le qual ja ha extendudas las suas coysas, e eleve les sieus brasses.	"And if the amount of water that is absorbed is equal to the quantity of the maturity of the species of the goose feather, and it is not adjusted; and if the disease persists on the ribs, and if it does not persist, then let him lie down, he who has already spread out his things, and raise his arms."
E es aquesta la forma del cauteri:	"And this is the shape of the cautery:"
E a tu es possible que cauterizes aquestz cauteris am cauteri cutellar, quan es am tu subtilitat e prudencia en l’art.	"And it may be possible for you to cauterize these cauteries with a small cautery, if you have skill and prudence in the art."
E guarda te que trop no procesiscas en la cauterizacio, e sia adhurida la specitut de tota la codena per que sia adhurit tot le cors e pervengua entro als budels, quar la codena aqui es subtil; e sapias aquo.	"But be careful that you do not proceed too quickly with the cautery, and let the species of the goose feather be absorbed throughout its entire length so that the whole body may be affected and come into the vessels, for here the goose feather is subtle; and know this."
Capitol .xxviii.	"Chapter XXVIII."
De perforacio de apostema del fietge am cauteri.	"On perforation of an abscess of the liver with a cautery."
Quan endeve excitura o apostema en le fietge e voles saber si aquel apostema es en le carn del fietge o en la tunica de lu, lahoras si es en la carn del fietge, le malaute atrobo gravitat e dolor ses acuitat.	"When an ulcer or abscess occurs in the liver and you want to know if that abscess is in the flesh of the liver or in its membrane, then if it is in the flesh of the liver, the disease will be heavy and painful but not sharp."
E si es en la tunica del fietge, am la dolor es acuitat gran e vezes que ja afatiguatz les metges la cura de lu.	"And if it is in the membrane of the liver, there will be acute pain with a great intensity that sometimes even tires out the physicians who are treating it."
Donc cove que·l malaute sia enversat sobre la sieua cervit; e aprop senha le loc de l’apostema am tenta; e aprop igneys le cauteri le quel es asemblat a rag, la forma del qual a precedit en l’autra pagina.	"Therefore let the disease be turned towards its neck; and properly mark the location of the abscess with a tent; and properly ignite the cautery which is shaped like a rope, the form of which has been previously mentioned on another page."
E cauteriza am aquel i cauteri entro que tota la codena sia comborida, entro que pervengua al ciphac, entro qu’en yesca sania.	"And cauterize with that cautery until the entire goose feather is consumed, until it reaches the cyst, until in ashes it becomes healthy."
E aprop cura aquel per curacio dels autres apostemas entro que sia sanat.	"Then properly treat him by the usual methods for treating other abscesses until he is healed."
E no cove que de aquesta forma de cauteri use sino aquel del qual le estudi en l’art de medicina es prolonguat, e en las mas del qual motas malautias an conogut; mays aquest am esperiment alcunas veguadas sia ardit sobre aquesta operacio, mays empero leyssa aquela deves nos, e es miels.	"But let not this form of cautery be used except by one who has prolonged his studies in the art of medicine and has known many diseases; although some may have been burned through experimentation on this operation, yet let us leave that to those who are wiser than we are, for it is better so."
Capitol .xxix.	"Chapter XXIX."
De cauterizacio de plauresi.	"On cauterization of the plague."
Diyssero les antics cauteri de las razitz de aristologia a plauresi frega segon aquesta manieyra esser fazedor, e es aquest que tu prenguas de las razitz de aristologia longa secca una razit pun longua que es trobada, e sia de la grossetut del dit.	"The ancients used to cauterize the marks of smallpox in this manner: and it is thus that you should take from the roots of the black helebore a root that is found long and dry, and let it be as thick as a finger."
E aprop submergeys aquela en oli e eysen aquela al foc, e aprop cauteriza per un cauteri en aquel loc le qual es entre la continuacio de la furcula am le col; e am dos cauteris petitz dejos guidazi, un pauc declinans a la partida que es dejus la barba, e am dos cauteris en aquo que es declinant entre la quinta costa e la cizena, declinant un pauc a las partidas detras; e am autre cauteri en le mieg loc del pietz; et am autre sobre l’estomac, et am tres cauteris de las partidas detras; et am un cauteri en aquel loc le qual es entre las dos spallas, e am dos cauteris dels dos latz del pietz, dejos le cauteri le qual es entre doas spallas.	"And then immerse that in oil and heat it in the fire, and then cauterize with a cautery in that place which is between the continuation of the collarbone and the neck; and with two small cauteries diagonally placed, one somewhat inclined towards the right side of the beard, and with two cauteries diagonally placed between the fifth rib and the nipple, inclined somewhat backwards; and with another cautery in the middle of the chest; and with another on the stomach; and with three cauteries on the backside; and with one cautery between the two shoulders; and with two cauteries on both sides of the chest."
E no cove que compremas la tua ma am le cauteri, ans sia en le manifest de la codena en obra.	"But let not your hand be burned by the cautery, but rather hold it at the end of the goose feather in use."
E ja diyssero alscus antics que so alscus dels homes les quals uson de cauteri de ferr semblant a ray e igneysso aquel, e meto aquel en aquel loc le qual es entre las costas, entro que pervenguam am aquel ad aquel apostema e sia foragetada sania, ayssi cum havem dit en l’apostema del fietge.	"And the ancients said that those are the customs of men who use a cautery of iron shaped like this and ignite it, and place it between the ribs until it reaches that abscess and burns out healthily, just as we have said concerning the abscess of the liver."
Mays en aquesta perforacio am cauteri no es ses temor, quar hu mor tantost ho accideys en le loc fistula a la qual no es sanacio.	"But in this perforation with a cautery there is no danger, for whoever dies immediately has it happen in the location of the fistula which does not heal."
Capitol .xxx.	"Chapter XXX."
De la cauterizacio de la melsa.	"Regarding cauterization of the navel."
Quan tu curas la malautia de la melsa am aquo que havem dit de la curacio en la divisio e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cauteri en lu es segon tres manieras, las quals totas son dreyturieras, de las quals la una es que fassas tres cauteris o quatre linhan segon la longitut de la melsa segon la figura dels cauteris del fietge, la figura dels quals ha precedit.	"When you treat the navel disease with what we have said about treatment in division and your treatment does not conform to it, then cauterize it in three ways or four according to the length of the navel according to the figure of liver cauteries, whose shape has been previously mentioned."
E sia entre quascun cauteri la grossetut d’un dit o un pauc mes, e la manieyra del cauteri sia la manieyra la qual havem dita en le cauteri del fietge engualment.	"And let the thickness of each cautery be that of a finger or somewhat more, and the manner of cautery should be as we have described for liver cauteries."
E no compremas la tua ma am le cauteri; e le malaute sia eves sobre lo sieu dos.	"And do not press your hand onto the cautery; and the disease shall come out above its two sides."
E es autra manieyra de cauterizar, so es que tu igniscas le cauteri haventz dos vertimentz, la qual causa havem dita en le capitol de dislocacio del muscle, e elava la codena la qual es en le endreyt de la melsa la hon perve le jazer del malaute sinistre.	"And there is another manner of cauterization, namely: you heat the cautery with two vents [lit. windings], which causes we have mentioned in the chapter on dislocation of the muscle, and lift the cord that is at the navel towards the side where the disease is located."
E sia la tua elevacio am la qual elevas la codena segon la longuesa del cors, per que sian faytz cauteris segon la latitut del cos.	"And let your elevation be such that you lift the cord according to the length of the body, so that cauteries may be made according to the breadth of the body."
E aprop entromet les dos vernimentz, ignitz mot, en aquel entro que am aquels penetres la codena de la autra part.	"And then quickly insert the two vents [lit. windings], glowing hot, into that entrance wherewith you entered the navel from the other side."
E aprop extrayt le cauteri; e donc son faytz quatre cauteris.	"And then extract the cautery; and thus four cauteries are made."
E si voys, cauteriza am cauteri havent tres vernimentz.	If you wish, cauterize with a cautery having three points.
E aprop tu cura le cauteri pus que aia laysat de getar brac per trops jorns, quar mays es comferent que las autras causas precedentz en la curacio.	Moreover, cure the cautery promptly since it has been lying idle for too many days, because its use is more urgent than other causes preceding in the treatment.
Capitol .xxxi.	Chapter XXXXI
De cauterizacio de ydropici.	Of cauterization of hydrocele.
Cauteri no catz en ydropici sino en alcinte3 propriament.	Cauteries are not used in hydrocele but in incision properly.
Quan tu curas le ydropic am las manieyras de curacio las quals havem ditas en la divisio e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que aquel cauterizes am quatre cauteris en le cercuit del embelic e am un cauteri sobre l’estomac, e am autre cauteri sobre le fietge, e am autre cauteri sobre la melsa, e am dos cauteris entre les spondils del dos, e un cauteri en lo dreyt del pietz, e am autre cauteri sobre l’estomac.	When you treat a hydrocele with the methods of treatment that we have mentioned in the division and your treatment does not succeed, then it is necessary to cauterize him with four cauteries around the navel, and one on the stomach, and another on the liver, and another on the spleen, and two cauteries between the vertebrae of the back, and one on the right side of the foot, and another on the stomach.
E la quantitat de la profunditat del cauteri sia propdana a la spicitut de la codena.	And let the quantity of the depth of the cautery be proportional to the thickness of the skin.
E aprop layssa le cauteri ubert per so que gete brac per lonc temps.	Moreover, let the cautery burn deeply enough that it heals slowly over time.
E no evacuas le malaute de curacio aprop le cauteri am aquo que cove per que sian agreguadas a lu doas entencios, e sira festinada a lu am ajutori sanacio.	And do not remove the disease by cautery abruptly with water that it causes the two testicles to adhere together, and thus hinder their natural function.
La forma del cauteri am lo qual es cauterizat lo ventre sia clavilh segon que la forma de aquel es desus precedent, e es aquel am le qual es cauterizat le dos sia olivar segon qu’es precedent a la sua forma.	The shape of the cautery with which the belly is cauterized should be in the form of a club, as it was described above, and that with which the back is cauterized should be olive-shaped, as it was previously described.
Capitol .xxxii.	Chapter XXXII
De cauterizacio de pes e de las coyssas.	Of Cautery for Fevers and Hemorrhoids.
Quan les pes so apostematz en ydropitz e so repletz de aygua sitrina, cove que cauterisas les pes sobre le dos del pe in nocrati aquo que es entre le auricular e le anular, e eleva la tua ma am le cauteri e no torses aquel; e aprop eleva la tua ma, e no retornes aquela de tot, quar l’aygua satrina rezuda.	"When the feet are swollen with dropsy and filled with water, you should cauterize them on the back of the foot near where the ear and little toe meet, lift your hand with the cautery but do not twist it; then raise your hand and do not return that (the cautery) entirely, as brine will remain."
Es le cauteri segon aquesta forma: E aprop fay sobre las doas coyssas dos cauteris, e en quascuna coysa sia feyt cauteri am la extremitat del cauteri cutellar.	"The cauterization should be done in this way: Next, apply two cauteries to both sides of the buttocks and make a cautery on each side with the tip of the knife-like cautery."
E sia le cauteri segon la longitut de la coyssa: i dejos le denolh e l’autre jos le mieg loc de la coyssa; e sobre quascuna coyssa dos cauteris.	"Make the cauterization along the length of the buttock: one below the hipbone and the other below the middle point of the buttock, applying two cauteries on each side."
E layssa la plagua uberta ses curacio per lonc temps per so que alcuna aygua resuda de lu.	"And leave the wound uncovered for some time so that any remaining water may dry up."
E aprop cura le am aquelas causas las quals havem ditas.	"And then treat it with those causes that we have mentioned."
Capitol .xxxiii.	"Chapter XXXIII."
De cauterizacio de cos de ventre.	Burning of the belly's body.
Quan cos de ventre es per freg e per humiditat entro que debelice las vertutz, so es la vertut digestiva e retentiva, las quals so en l’estomac e en les budels, e es curat aquo am las manieyras de curacio e no confereys, e vezes le malaute suffertan cauteri de vertut exhiberant, lahoras cauteriza aquel am gran cauteri sobre le sieu stomac segon que a precedit en la cauterizacio del estomac, am le cauteri del cercle e am quatre cauteris en le cercuit del embelic subtils, am cauteri clavilh subtil; e am cauteri sobre le alcatin sobre alozis gran, o am dos cauteris.	When the belly's body is for rubbing and humidity within that weakens the virtues, so it is virtue digestion and retention, which are in the stomach and intestines, and is treated thus with these methods of treatment without conferring, and sometimes the illness suffers cauterization to exhibit itself; therefore cauterize that with a large cautery on his stomach according to what has been said previously in the cauterization of the stomach, with the cautery of the circle and four cauteries around the navel subtly, with a clavich cautery subtly; and cauterize over the spleen above the liver, or with two cauteries.
E si vezes las humiditatz exhuberants e le malaute aquo tollerant, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre le pentenilh e sobre les budels, e fort leu ajustant dos cauteris sobre l’estomac e prop dels inguonas, quar es curacio perficent de juvament de la qual no erras.	And if the humidities are abundant and the illness thus tolerates it, therefore cauterize that one over the navel and over the intestines, and strongly applying two cauteries on the stomach near the groins, for this is a perfect treatment of great benefit from which you will not err.
Capitol .xxxiv.	Capítulo xxxiv
De cauterizacio de emorroydas antiquas.	**Of the cauterization of old hemorrhoids.**
Quan so en la natura derier emorroydas antiquas o una de humors grossas fregas o de humiditatz corrompudas, e son curadas am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no confereys la tieua curacio, lahoras cauterisa am tres cauteris sobre le pus dejos spondilh del dos petit e petit triangular, e am cauteri desus le ombelic cays per dos ditz.	When the body's final menstruation occurs with thick humors or corrupted moisture, and they are treated as mentioned earlier in this section without success, then cauterize with three cauteries on the left side of the lower back near the triangle formed by the two hip bones, and another cautery above the navel.
E si doptas que l’estomac de lu sia enfregidat e la vianda de lu no sia degerida, e la cara de lu vezes apostemada, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre l’estomac am gran cauteri segon que es precedit; e am un cauteri sobre fietge, e am autre cauteri sobre la melsa de lu am cauteri clavilh, e leyssa le cauteri per alcun temps ubert, e aprop cura lu entro que sia sanat.	If you find that the stomach is chilled and undigested food remains in it, and the face appears pale, then cauterize the area over the stomach with a large cautery as previously mentioned; apply another cautery to the liver, and yet another cautery to the spleen with a pointed cautery, leaving it there for some time until healing occurs. Then carefully treat the interior once it is healed.
Capitol .xxxv.	Chapter XXXV
De cauterizacio de atheyl aprop la abscizio de lor.	Regarding cautery treatment after the incision of hemorrhoids.
Quan tu abscindes atheyl, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri que es asemblat a ray.	"When you cut arteries, then ignite the cautery that resembles a ray."
Aprop entremet aquel ignit en aquel atheyl abscis, e ultima la tieua ma entro que pervengua le cauteri al orifici de la vena de la qual ve la sanc.	"Then insert that ignited cautery into the artery you have cut and push it in until the heat reaches the opening of the vein from which blood flows."
E fay aquo una vetz o doas, quar si achieyl son trops, lahoras cauteriza quascun de lor segon que havem recontat, e aprop cura aquels am aquo que confereys a lor dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	"And do this once or twice, because if there are too many arteries, then cauterize each one separately according to what we have recounted. And then take care of them with this until they are healed."
E si cauterizas am gran cauteri sobre alquatin, es mays derier en juvament.	"And when you cauterize with a large cautery over certain areas, it is more efficient in healing."
Capitol .xxxvi.	"Chapter XXXVI."
De cauterizacio de fistolas que son faytas en la natura derie en las partidas de lu.	"On the cauterization of fistulas that occur naturally in the parts of the skin."
Quan la natura no obeziys a la obra la qual havem recomtada en son loc, e·l pacient es espaventat per aquo, sia sanat am cauteri.	"But if nature does not follow the procedure we have recommended for its location, and the patient is frightened by this, then heal it with cautery."
Donc quan ad alcun ve fistola en la natura derier, e es antiquada, corro sania de lu e humiditatz corrompudas, e donc aquo que es pus digne que cove es que proes aquela am tenta subtil, e aprop conoys la quantitat de la profunditat de lu am la devant dita tenta.	"Therefore, when there is some fistula that occurs naturally and becomes old, corrupted by dryness and corrupt moisture, then it is more fitting to treat it with a thin probe, and thus know the quantity of its depth with the aforementioned probe."
Aprop igneys le cauteri que es semblant a ray.	"And then heat the cautery that resembles a needle."
E aprop met aquel cauteri ignit en aquesta fistula, e segon la quantitat en la qual intrec la tenta.	"And then insert that heated cautery into this fistula, and according to the depth indicated by the probe."
E itera sobre aquela le cauteri entro que sian comburitz aquels cors corrumputz tost una veguada o dos o tres, segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	"Iron the cautery over that area until those corrupted bodies are consumed once or twice or thrice, according to your necessity."
E guarda te de combustio de nervi e de vena; o si fistula va al cors de la vesica o al cors del budel, lahoras guarda te de totz aquels locz; e no fassas aquo sino quan la fistula es en loc carnos e cogitas que no es penetrant.	"And beware of burning nerves and veins; or if the fistula goes into the body of the bladder or the body of the intestine, then beware of all those places; and do not perform this unless the fistula is in a fleshy location and you believe it is not penetrating."
E aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat.	"Then cure the place that has been healed."
E si le loc es sigillat, e so abscindidas de lu las materias, e roman ayssi per lonc temps, lahoras sapias que ja es curat entierament.	"And if the area is sealed and all materials have been cut away from it, and remains thus for a long time, then know that it has healed completely."
E si las materias no so de lu ostadas, lahoras sapias que es penetrant o en le preon de lu os corromput, o cays aquo de aquelas causas de las quals vindra rememoracio en son loc.	"And if the materials are not removed from there, then know that it is penetrating or in the early stage of corruption, or this is due to those causes which will be mentioned later."
Capitol .xxxvii.	"Chapter XXXVII."
De cauterizacio dels ronhos.	"On cautery for eruptions."
Quan en les ronhos endeve dolor per freg o per grossa ventozitat, e per aysso le coyt del malaute es amermat, lahoras cove que cauterizes aquel sobre les ronhos am cauteri sobre quascun ronho am cauteri clavilh del qual precesic la rememoracio.	When redness and pain occur due to heat or thick winds, and the patient's heart is disheartened, then it is necessary to cauterize there with a pointed cautery on each red spot.
E fort leu cauterizam am le segon un petit dejos, per que vindran tres cauteris liniatz, e donc siran mays deriers en juvament.	And leave the second one a little behind so that three straight cauteries are obtained, and then insert more afterwards for completion.
Capitol .xxxviii.	Chapter XXXVI
De cauterizacio de la vesica.	On Cauterizing the Bladder.
Quan accideys en la vesica debelitat e mollificacio per freg e per humiditatz ayssi que·l malaute la urina no retengua, lahoras cauteriza aquel en la partida pus dejos sobre la vesiqua, la hon comensan les pels del pentenilh, e cauteriza am un cauteri en la partida dreyta, e am autre en la senestra de lu.	When debility and softening occur in the bladder due to heat and moisture, so that the patient cannot retain urine, then cauterize there two fingers' breadth above the bladder, where the pubic hairs begin, with one cautery on the right side and another on the left.
E sia la longitut de quascun cauteri segon la cantitat dels not del pous; e cauteriza aquel am cauteri en la partida pus bassa del dos, o am dos cauteris si es necessitat.	And let the length of each cautery be according to the amount of the opening of the bladder; and cauterize there with one cautery at the lowest part of the back, or with two if necessary.
E sia cauteri clavilh segon que es procesit.	And let the cautery be pointed as is customary.
Capitol .xxxix.	Chapter XXXIX
De cauterizacio de la mayra.	On Cauterizing the Womb
Quan veno en la mayra freg e humiditatz, e per aysso es prohibida enpreignacio, e son corrompudas las mestruas de lu, e es tardada la provocacio de lor, e accideys dolor deves le haveniment de lor, lahoras cove que·l loc sia cauterizat am tres cauteris en le circuit del ombelic, ayssi cum havem dit en le cauteri de la vesica; e am cauteri sobre le loc pus dejos del dos, o am dos cauteris, e sia le cauteri clavilh.	When heat and moisture occur in the womb, causing sterility and corruption of menstrual flow, delay in its onset, and pain during menstruation, then it is necessary to cauterize there with three cauteries around the navel, as we have said regarding bladder cautery; and cauterize also on the lowest part of the back with one pointed cautery or two if necessary.
Capitol .xl.	Chapter XL
De cauterizacio de la dislocacio de l’anqua.	"Regarding cautery of dislocation of the ankle."
Quan humiditatz moucozas so efundudas a la partida de la anqua, e so faytas causas del yssiment del sieu loc, e senhal de lu es que la coyssa es prolonguada sobre l’autre quan so comparadas entre lor.	When moist secretions flow from the opening of the ankle, and it is difficult to determine the cause of their discharge or signal of its presence, then one foot is longer than the other when compared side by side.
E le loc de la dislocacio es atrobat en lu quays boyt.	The location of the dislocation is found in the outer side of the foot.
Adonc cove que cauterizas le malaute sobre la partida de la anqua de lu am cauteri a sercle semblant, pus que tu auras senhat am tenta en le cercuit de la partida ayssi cum es revolguda, e per so que la partida caia el mieg loc del cercle.	Therefore, you should cauterize the patient on the opening of their ankle with a circular cautery device, because once you have marked around the opening as it is rotated, the opening will fall in the middle of the circle.
E sia le cauteri del qual precedit la forma en la cauterizacio del estomac.	And let that cautery be of the same form used in cauterizing the stomach.
E si aquest cauteri no es a tu present, lahoras cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris am cauteri olivar gran.	But if this cautery is not available to you at present, then cauterize it with three olive-sized cauteries.
E sia fayt le cauteri segon la quantitat de la ispicitut de tota la codena; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And let the cautery be applied according to the quantity of the inflammation along the entire joint; and afterwards carefully dress it until healed.
Capitol .xli.	"Chapter Forty-one."
De cauterizacio de la vena sciatica.	"Regarding cauterization of the sciatic vein."
Quan dolor ve en la partida de anqua, e so causa de lu freg et humiditatz, le malaute es curat am aquo que havem dit e no confereys, e aquo es antiquat, lahoras cove que tu lacses le malaute de humors grosses am pillulas fetidas o am pillulas artificials o semblantz; e aprop cauteriza aquel.	"When pain arises in the hip joint due to friction and humidity, the patient is cured with what we have said earlier. Therefore, it is necessary that you remove thick humors from the patient using scented pills or pills made artificially or resembling them; and then cauterize it."
E la manieyra del cauteri en aquela es segon dos manieyras: o cauteri am medicinas comburentz, o cauteri am foc.	"The method of cautery in this case is done in two ways: either by cauterizing with burning medications or by cautering with fire."
Sira segon dos manieyras scientas, de las quals es la una que cauterizes aquel sobre la partida de l’ancha de lu am tres cauteris triangulatz segon aquesta forma; e fay am aquels bona profunditat.	"According to two methods known for this procedure, one of which involves cauterizing the hip joint with three triangular cauteries arranged in this manner: and do so with good depth."
E sia le spazi le qual es entre cascun cauteri la quantitat de la grossitut del dit e si le cauteri olivar o gran.	"And let the space between each cautery be equal to the thickness of a finger, and if the cautery is oval or round."
Mays alcunas veguadas sia le cauteri sobre le mieg loc sobre le cap de l’anquan per que son quatre cauteris.	"But sometimes the cauteries should be placed over the middle point on top of the hip joint because there are four cauteries."
E si vols, cauteriza am le cercle del qual es precesida la forma en la cauterizacio de la dislocacio de l’anqua, la i que sia cercle continent e comburey la ispicitut de tota la codena.	"And if you wish, cauterize with the circle whose shape is prescribed in the cautery for dislocation of the hip joint, let it be a continuous and burning circle encompassing the entire joint."
E aquesta es la manieyra de cauteri in ciatiqua quan dolor es adherent al anqua e no es estenduda entro a la coyssa.	"And this is the method of cautery in such cases when pain adheres to the hip joint but does not extend into the joint."
Mays si es estenduda entro a la coyssa, lahoras cauteriza aquel am dos cauteris sobre la coyssa sobre le loc al qual envireys le malaute que es la dolor; e am un cauteri sobre la cavilha per quatre ditz un pauc deves la part cilvestra.	"But if the pain extends into the joint, then cauterize it with two cauteries on the joint over the spot where the pain is felt; and one cautery over the knee for about four fingers below the left side."
E si le cauteri cutellar, e sia la profunditat del cauteri segon la quantitat de la ispicitut de la codena.	"And if using a spoon-shaped cautery, let the depth of the cautery be according to the amount of heat in the joint."
E si le malaute envireys que la dolor es estenduda entro al loc prop les ditz des pes, lahoras cauteriza aquel aqui on envireys am cauteri per tres puntz o quatre o mays si indigeys de aquel.	"And if the pain extends to the spot near the said weights, then cauterize there with cauteries of three points or four or more as necessary."
E si le malaute envireys dolor esser dejos le donolh ves la coyssa, lahoras cauteriza aquel aqui am un cauteri cutellar.	"And if the pain extends to the area behind the knee joint, then cauterize there with a spoon-shaped cautery."
E guarda te en tota cauterizacio que no ultimes am le cauteri en tant que comburas nervi o gran arceria, e que per aquo a tu es sobre le malaute mal noccument o contraccio.	"And take care in all cauteries that you do not burn nerves or large arteries too deeply, for by doing so you may cause greater harm or contraction."
E yeu ja e vist un e autre de aquels les quals cauterizero sobre la cavilha e ultimero en la cauterizacio, e la cama foc inflada entro que la tumor aconseguit lo pe, e foc perforat e corromput tot le pe.	"And I have seen some of those who cauterized over the knee joint too deeply, and the leg became swollen up to the thigh, and it was necessary to make an incision and cleanse all of the flesh."
E aprop accidic fort solucio de ventre, e aprop aquo la mort.	"And especially in such cases fortuously occurs a solution of continuity in the belly, and especially because of that death occurs."
E si la dolor es en dos partidas ensemps cauteriza quascuna segon aquesta manieyra.	"And if the pain is felt on both sides at once, cauterize each side according to this method."
E diysero les savis alcus en la cauterizacio de anqua cauteri del qual aquesta es la manieyra: fay semblant a cercle de ferr del qual le cercuit sia la maytat de un palm; e sia deves le sieu orrifici segon la grossesa de un os de datil o mens un pauc.	"And the wise men have said in cautery of the hip joint that this is the method: it should resemble a circle of iron whose circumference is about the size of one's palm, and its opening should be as thick as a date bone or slightly more."
E dedintz aquel cercle sia un autre tertz; e sia le spazi le qual es entre lor la quantitat del notz del pous; e sian aquels cercles ubertz de dos partidas; e sia la longitut de aquels cays un notz o dos notz, e fay en aquels margue de ferr decentment apparelhat en les cercles; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	"And within that circle there should be another third one; and the space between them should be the thickness of a hazelnut shell; and those circles should be open on both sides; and their length should be about one or two nutshells, and they should have an appropriate edge made of iron for cutting around the circles; and this is its shape:"
Aprop sia ignit en le foc entro que s’enrogesisca e gete scintillas, e aprop sia pausat sobre la partida del anqua, le malaute colcat sobre le latz sa.	"And especially it should be heated in the fire until it glows red and emits sparks; then place it on the part of the hip joint where the pain is felt, with the sufferer lying on their side."
E donc cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris redontz en una veguada.	"And then cauterize that area with three cauteries in one session."
E aprop layssa aquel per tres jorns; aprop emplastre aquel am boder e layssa la plagua uberta per trops dias; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	"And especially leave it alone for three days; and plaster it with border paste and let the wound heal openly for too many days; and treat it with ointment until it is healed."
Diys Albucasis : o, filhs, de aquesta specia de cauteri pauc havem usat per la terror del reguardament de lu, e per aquo que paucs havem trobatz les quals reguardan sobre lu.	"Albucasis says: 'O son, of this kind of cautery we have used little because of the fear of its appearance and because few are found who would endure it.'"
Mays dels bos cauteris a lu qui les sufferta, et atroba am aquel le loc de lu.	"But those who suffer from these cauteries will find relief in that place."
Mays cauteri am medicinas adhurentz es que tu fassas dos cercles haventz armula perforada en la qual deyssen le guaffo de la porta de ferr; sia la longuitut de la paretz en la nauteza de lor sian dos nozes o quays aquels.	"However, cauterizing with medicines adherent is what you should do: make two circles having a narrow perforation in each through which the blade of the iron door key may be inserted; let their length be about two nuts or somewhat more."
E si le spazi le qual es entre quascu la quantitat de la grossitut del dit; e sian ubertz dejos e desus, e sian que contenguan se entre lor segon aquesta forma:	"And if the space between each is as thick as a finger; and they are open on both sides and above, and are arranged between themselves in this manner:"
E aprop pausa sobre la partida de la anqua le malaut jasent sobre le latz sa, e comprem la tua ma sobre la partida de la anqua; e aprop pren de aygua cauda e fon la entre dos cercles, e la qualiditat de aquela sia am le foc petit a petit, e te aquela per la quantitat de una hora, e sufferta le malaute la mordicacio e la adhustio de lu — quar aquel atrobo mordicacio ayssi cum de foc — entro que cesse la mordicacio.	"And especially place it on the part of the hip joint where the pain is felt with the sufferer lying on their side, and press your hand firmly over the part of the hip joint; then take some cold water and pour it between the two circles, and gradually heat that water on a small fire for about an hour until the sufferer feels the biting sensation and adhering heat — for that sensation is like the bite of fire — until the biting sensation ceases."
E aprop eleva la tua ma am le instrument et abstergeys l’aygua cauda de tota la anqua am aygua dousa.	"And especially raise your hand with the instrument and wipe away all of the cold water from around the hip joint with fresh water."
E aprop leyssa aquel per tres jorns e pausa sobre aquel boder entro que sia la negror de la adhustio remauguda, e leyssa aquo per alcus jorns, e correra de lu poyredura; aquest es derier en juvament.	"And especially leave it alone for three days and then place border paste on it until the blackness of the adhering cautery is removed, leaving it like that for a few days more, and then rub some ointment on it; this is the last stage of treatment."
E aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	"And especially treat it with ointment until it is healed."
E si la dolor es extenduda entro la coyssa o la camba, fay a lu estatua en lu que contengua aygua segon que es feyt en la anqua engualment.	"And if the pain extends to the thigh or the buttock, do as was done for the hip joint, containing water as described."
E aquesta es la manieyra de aygua cauda, e yeu ja he scrit aquela en le tractat de la rectificacio de medicinas.	"This is the method of cold water application, which I have already written about in my treatise on the correction of medicines."
Recipe de alcali e de caus no extinta de amdos ana partida una, e trissa les e pausa en una ola nova de la qual la partida dejos sia perforada per un petit trauc, segon la quantitat que intre en lu ray.	"Take some alkali and unslaked lime from both sides of the hip joint, grind them together, and place them in a new bowl whose opening is pierced with a small hole according to the amount that enters into it."
E pausa dejos le fons de la ola autra ola enveyriada, e gete sobre aquel alcali e caus viva de aygua doussa la qual cobra aquels per un dit, e pus que tu compremes aquels am la tieua ma per bona compressio, e leyssa la hola que deyssenda de lu aygua aguda en la partida dejos a la ola enveyriada.	"And place another bowl inverted on top of that bowl, and pour through it some warm water over the alkali and quicklime until they are covered by about one finger's depth; then press them firmly with your hand, and leave the bowl containing the cold water to drain into the inverted bowl below."
E aprop ajusta tota aquela aygua, e geta la sobre autra caus viva e autre alcali renovelatz, quar aquela lahoras sira de mot forta acuitat, la qual es aministrada en motas operacios de medicina e en cauterizacio dels autres membres, quar operacio fa de foc.	"And especially adjust all that water and pour it over some fresh slaked lime and alkali again, because this solution will be very strong and is used in many medical operations and cauterizations of other members."
E so de las medicinas alcunas am las quals es cauterizat ancha, ayssi cum tezizic e mel anacrat e caus am sabo enayssi que sian mesclatz.	"And some medicines are used for cauterizing broad areas, such as those containing turmeric and honey with the addition of vinegar and soap so that they are mixed together."
E Gualia recontet de un home dels antics la operacio e la curacio am la qual es curada dolor de anqua e de vena sciatica, e magnifiquet mot be esser de aquel, e diys que no hac necessitat de autra curacio, e quar es sanat per una veguada ayssi cum recomtec, quar fort leu aquel intrec en banh e eysic ja sa d’aquel.	"And Galen tells of an ancient man who was cured by one session of cauterization for pain in the hip and sciatic nerve, and he greatly praised this treatment saying that no other cure is needed because it brought about healing in one session as told."
Et es que sia pres de certarragi vert, e si no es atrobat vert, sia presa figua recent; e mot sia trissada am un pauc de grays e sia pausat sus la anqua en la qual es la dolor, o en la coyssa, o en la camba, e sia liat.	"And if fresh wormwood is not available, then fresh figs should be taken and ground with a little salt; then they are applied to the hip joint where there is pain, or to the thigh or buttock, and bound on."
E sia layssat per la cantitat de tres horas o per la quantitat que·l malaute centa cedacio de la adhustio.	"And it should be left on for about three hours or until the sufferer feels that the pain is beginning to subside."
E aprop met aquel en banh e donc quan le cors de lu sia enrozat, entromet aquel en le sol, quar la dolor cessa e es sanat.	"And especially put him in a warm bath and when his body is heated, then apply the cautery again, for the pain will cease and he will be healed."
E sapias que no cove que alcu use de cauteri am aquestas medicinas sino aprop la evacuacio del cors.	"Know that these medicines should not be used for cauterizing except where there is evacuation of the body humors."
Mays ja Escorides diysec que quan am fenda de cabra la vena stretica es cauterizada, aprofieyra a lu mo be; e sia le cauteri am lu segon aquesta manieyra: sia presa lana e sia enbeguda en oli antic, e sia pausat entre le pous del pe e entre le fossil.	"But Dioscorides says that when the sciatic nerve is cauterized with hot pitch from a goat's horn, it is done very well; and the cautery should be applied in this manner: take some wool, steep it in old oil, and place it between the anus and the buttock."
E aprop pren fenda de cabra secca e emflasma aquela am foc entro que sia fayta carbo; e aprop pausa lu sobre la lana e leysa la entro que sia estengida.	"Next, take a dry goat's hoof and heat it in the fire until it becomes hot. Then place it on wool or linen that has been spread out."
E aprop itera aquo, e no cessas far aquo entro que·l scintiment de la mordicacio pervengua entro al anqua e repausa la dolor.	"And repeat this until the sensation of the bite reaches the ankle and relieves the pain."
Et aquesta manieyra de cauteri es apelat cauteri de vaquas.	"This method of cautery is called cautery of oxen."
Capitol .xlii.	"Chapter XLII."
De cauterizacio de dolor de dos.	"On the cautery treatment of toothache."
Alcunas veguadas dolor es en le dos per tropas causas, cum per cazement o per percucio o per superflua evacuacio, e per causas ad aquelas semblantz, per infusio de materia frega e humida.	"Sometimes pain in the back arises from various causes, such as by fracture or blow or excessive evacuation, and for reasons similar to these, due to the infiltration of hot and moist matter."
E cauteri no catz sino en aquesta sola specia la qual es fayta per efusio de materia frega.	"Cautery is only used in this single condition which occurs due to the effusion of hot matter."
Donc cove, aprop evacuacio del malaute am pillulas fitidas e am semblant a lor, que sian faytas sobre·l dos en le qual es la dolor tres linhas segon la latitut de lu, pus que senhas am tentha en quascuna linha v cauteris o mays, segon la quantitat que ve de la tolleransa del malaute e de la vertut de lu.	"Therefore, evacuate the illness using pills made from figs and similar substances, which should be applied to the back where the pain is felt. Three lines down from the top of the spine, mark nine points with a pen, cauterizing or burning each point according to the severity of the illness and its strength."
E sia fayta cauterizacio am cauteri de punt.	"And perform cautery using a pointed cautery iron."
E si vols, cauteriza am tres cauteris o am quatre am cauteri clavilh medial segon aquesta forma:	"If you wish, cauterize with three or four cauteries at a time using this middle pronged cautery."
Capitol .xliii.	"Chapter XLIII."
De cauterizacio al comensament de gilbositat.	"Regarding cauterization for the beginning of baldness."
Motas veguadas endeve aquesta malautia als petitz enfantz; e senhal del comensament de lu en les enfantz es que accideys sobre lor estrectura en le ale eves la elevacio e·l movement.	"Frequently, this illness occurs in young children. A sign that it is beginning in children is when they suffer discomfort over the surface of their scalp with redness and swelling."
E atrobas en le derier espondil del dos e dels notz de lu que ja comensa a sobremontar sobre les autres spondils.	"And you will see this on the last vertebra of the back, and on its ribs that have already begun to protrude above the others."
E donc quan tu vezes aquo e voles prohibir, lahoras cauterisa aquel am cauteri que sia cercle segon aquesta forma:	"Therefore, when you see this and wish to prevent it, immediately cauterize therewith a circular cautery according to this shape:"
que prengua le cauteri sobre tota partida del spondilh engualment.	"that takes the form of an equal division across the entire surface of the vertebra."
E si vols, cauteriza en le circuit del spondilh am le cauteri de punt dos linhas o tres.	"And if you wish, cauterize around the circumference of the vertebra with a pointed cautery two or three lines deep."
E sian les puntz propdas entre lor.	"And let the points be close together between them."
E aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat am aquo que havem dit.	"And then cure the place within that has been burned using what we have said."
Mays guarda que cauteri no sia administrat en gelbositat que sia fayta per spasme de nervi.	"But be careful not to administer a cautery for baldness caused by spasm of nerves."
Capitol .xliv.	"Chapter XLIV."
De cauterizacio de podagra e de dolor de juncturas.	"Regarding cauterization for gout and pain in the joints."
Quan dolor de juncturas son faytas per humors fregas les quals so enfundutz a quascun membre del cors, lahoras quan veno dolors en los pes, de costuma dels metges es que aquo apelen podragua propriament.	"When pain in the joints is caused by humors that rub together and are enclosed within each member of the body, it is customary for physicians to call this gout specifically when such pains come on in the feet."
E donc cum es curada podagra de causa frega am manieyra de cura e no so remaugudas las dolors, lahoras las remau cauteri.	"And therefore, when gout caused by friction is cured with medicine but the pain is not removed, then it should be removed with a cautery."
E es que tu cauterizas aquel aprop evacuacio en le circuit de la junctura del pe am motz cauteris.	"For this purpose, you should cauterize around the evacuation near the joint of the foot using several cauteries."
E sia cauteri olivar del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	"And let these cauteries be olive-shaped, which have this form:"
E si es necessitat que puntz sia fayt sobre la fassia del pe, lahoras fay am cauteri de punt.	"If it is necessary to make points on the fascia of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery."
E si las dolors pujan entro als denolhs o a las autras juncturas, e aquo motas vetz s’endeve, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre quascun donolh am tres cauteris o quatre de tota partida am aquest cauteri olivar.	"And if the pains reach into the toes or other joints, and this is often the case, then cauterize thereupon around each toe with three or four cauteries of equal division using an olive-shaped cautery."
E si motz cauteris que aquestz cauteris sian a tu necessaris, lahoras cauteriza aquel e no premas trop la tua ma am le cauteri abans, sia tant solament enviro la specitut de la codena.	"And if many cauteries are needed for this purpose, then cauterize them and do not press too hard with the cautery beforehand, but only around the circumference of the joint."
E si las dolors pugan entro al donolh e·l dos, lahoras aministra le cauteri le qual havem dit en le sieu capitol.	"And if the pains reach into both toes, then administer the cautery which we have described in its chapter."
E si las dolors so en las mas tant solament, e es apelada suagra, lahoras puncta en le circuit dels focils ayssi cum se revolvo, puncta en aquels dos linhas.	"And if the pains are only on one side and it is called sciatica, then make points around the buttocks as they turn, making two lines of them."
E si reman de las dolors en les ditz, lahoras puncta en le cercuit dels focils sobre quascun notz e sobre la pinche de la ma.	"And if the pains remain in these places, then make points around the buttocks on each side and also on the inside of the thigh."
E si las dolors pugan aprop alscus jorns als coydes o als muscles, lahoras cauteriza les quascus de tota part dels ajutoris.	"And if the pains extend near the knees or thighs or muscles, then cauterize all around the joints of these."
E no evacuas le malaute de bon regiment e de recepcio de medicinas, quar si es fayt bon regiment e flacma es evacuada am aquest cauteri sira sanat, Dieus ajudan.	"And do not rely solely on good regimen and receipt of medicines, for even if a good regimen is followed and the disease is evacuated with this cautery alone, God willing it will be cured."
Capitol .xlv.	"Chapter XLv."
De cauterizacio de rompeduras.	"Of cautery of fractures."
Quan endeve rompedura en les angonars e diysendo les budels denant l’atela al genetiu, e aquo es comensan de aprop, lahoras cove que tu mandas al malaute layssar la sua comestio en le sieu dia e que use de causas leniens per so que la fenda deyssenda del sieu ventre.	When there is fracture in the bones or displacement of the intestines before the animal's anus, and when this begins to happen, then you must order the patient to refrain from food on that day and to use gentle laxatives so that the wound may heal more easily.
E aprop segua le malaute entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos, e comanda a lu que tengua le sieu ale entro que sia foro getat o aparesca l’atela o·l budels.	And then place the patient between your hands on their back, and command them to hold their breath while you feel for the anus or the intestines.
E aprop retorna aquel am les tieus ditz e senha am tenta la ruptura sobre le os del pentenilh am senhal la extremitat del qual sia semblant a la maytat de cercle a las subiranas partidas del cors.	And then return with your hands to where you said and try to feel the fracture on the ribs with the tip of your finger, signaling which end is like half of a circle facing upwards.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And then perform the cautery as follows:
entro que sia mot rog e gete cintilhas.	"Until it becomes moist and releases sparks."
E aprop reduzeys le budel o l’atela a la sua conquavitat, e aprop pause la sua ma sobre le loc per so que le budel no yesqua.	"And then gently reduce the intestine or hernia to its cavity, and place your hand over the area to ensure that it does not come out again."
E tu ja has ubert entre las coyssas del malaute e dejos lu as pausat un coyssi, et autre servent sia sus las cambas de lu, e autre sus le pietz de lu, le qual tengua las suas mas.	"And you have already placed yourself between the patient's thighs and placed a cushion under them, with other servants on their legs, and another on their chest, holding their hands."
E aprop pausa le cauteri sobre aquel senhal am la tua ma am cauteri stan dreyt, e te aquel entro que am lu consieguas le os del pentenilh entro al mieg del duiduni; e itera am aquel autra veguada si a tu aquel no has conseguit en la primieyra veguada entro al os.	"And then place the cautery on that spot with your right hand, and bring the intestine towards the opening of the wound, ensuring that you grasp the edge of the opening; repeat this process until you have successfully grasped it."
E observa saviament del ysiment del budel en la hora de la tua cauterizacio, que no comburas aquel budel per so que sobre le malaute no vengua in mort o autre gran malicia.	"And carefully observe the condition of the intestine during cauterization, making sure that you do not burn it so that the patient does not come to harm or suffer great injury."
E sapias que quan tu am le cauteri no atenhas le os, no confereys la tua operacio.	"And know that if you do not grasp [the intestine] with the cautery, your operation is incomplete."
E cove que·l cauteri dels enfants sia subtil segon le gran e la mesura de lor.	"It is necessary that the cautery used for children be thin according to their age and size."
E aprop cura le loc del cauteri per tres dias am boder entro que sia remauguda la scara del foc.	"And then clean the wound from the cautery with warm water three times a day until the scar from the burn has healed."
E aprop cura aquel am les autres enguentz entro que sia sanat.	"And then treat it with other remedies until it is healed."
E le malaute sia jasent sobre le sieu dos per xl dias entro que sia sigillat le loc e la plagua.	"And the patient should remain in bed for forty days until the wound is sealed and the inflammation has subsided."
E cove que pauses le nutriment de lu segon la longitut del temps de la curacio de lu le qual le linesca le ventre de lu, e que le budel no yesca fora deves le esforsament de guerir.	"It is necessary that you adjust the patient's diet according to the duration of their treatment, so that it does not empty the stomach and cause the intestine to protrude due to the effort of healing."
E aprop quan se vol levar aprop xl dias, lahoras aministra liament decentment fayt, e tengua aquel per autres xl jorns.	"And then, when forty days have passed, gradually administer solid food to them, and keep them on this diet for another forty days."
E sia mermat de trebalh e de replecio de vianda e de beure, e de votz vehementz, quar quan usa de aquest regiment de sanacio entiera sira sanat.	"And they should avoid strenuous work, excessive eating and drinking, and loud voices, as these things will hinder the healing of their wound."
E yeu diyre la curacio de las rupturas en las autras partidas del ventre, e so al comensament, e vols que no treguan, lahoras cauterisa la ruptura d’aquel am cauteri redon segon la quantitat de lu, e sia aquo que es exhurit de la codena ayssi cum la tersa partida de lu; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit, e no es ajustat.	"And now I will speak about the treatment of ruptures in other parts of the abdomen, and if they are not too large, you should cauterize the rupture with a round cautery according to its size, so that it is equal to one third of the width of the intestine; and then treat it with water as we have said."
E ja diyssero alcus primiers que ruptura sia cauterizada am cauteri triangular segon aquesta forma, pus que es senhada am tenta:	"And some earlier authors have said that a rupture should be cauterized with a triangular cautery shaped like this: △"
e es pausada linha que eys per la latitut en le latz pus sobira de la ruptura, e autra linha al desus; e depausa la tua ma am un cauteri clavilh, mays le primier cauteri es pus leugier e milhor.	"And a line is placed that runs through the width in the side where it rises from the break, and another line above it; then place your hand with a pointed cautery, but the first cautery should be lighter and better."
Capitol .xlvi.	"Chapter XLVI."
De cauterizacio de torcio.	"Regarding cauterization of a twisted cord."
Quan endeve en alscus membres per cazement o per percussio dolor e persevera aquela dolor per lonc temps e no comfereys al u curacio am medicinas, lahoras cove que cauterizes am cauteri de punt.	"When pain occurs in the upper limbs due to cautery or percussion and persists for a long time without being alleviated by medicinal treatment, it is necessary to cauterize with a pointed cautery."
E sia le cauteri de tot membre segon la magnitut e la parvitat de lu, e vertut e develitat de lu, e locacio de torcio e dolor de lu.	"And let the cautery be of the size of the member according to its magnitude and smallness, and its strength and weakness, and the location of the twist and the pain it causes."
Donc si·s sanat per le primier cauteri, bo es; e sino, lahoras itera sobre lu le cauteri; quar de costuma de aquelas dolors es que sian punctatz de membre ad aquel membre le qual apropinque al u, per que cove que consieguas aquels am cauteri entro que·l malaute sia sanat.	"If it is healed by the first cautery, that is good. And if not, then apply the cautery again; for those pains are often caused by punctures of a member near to where the pain is felt, so it is necessary to reach those with cauteries until the illness is healed."
Capitol .xlvii.	"Chapter XLVI."
De cauterizacio de lepra.	"Regarding cauterization of leprosy."
Les lebros alcunas veguadas am cauteri per mot gran juvament, e magerment si la specia de lepra que es fayta per putrefaccio de flacma e de melencolia.	"Some forms of leprosy are viewed with caution when cauterized because it does not bring much benefit, and even harm if the species of leprosy is caused by putrefaction of phlegm or melancholy."
E donc cum tu vols cauterizar aquel, considera si la lepra es comussan e as aquela curada am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no deysen, ni esta, e temes sobre le malaute que la corrupcio comprehenda tot le cors de lu e tota la compleccio de lu, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre le cap am v cauteris: am un en le mieg loc del cap, e am le segon pus dejos de lu, eves le front a la fi dels cabels; e amdos sobre dos corns; e am un detras, sobre la nuca o servitz.	"And therefore, when you want to cauterize that one, consider whether the leprosy is contagious and affected as we said in the division, and do not do it if it is so. Also fear that the corruption might spread throughout the whole body and affect all its structures. Therefore, cauterize there on the head with five cauteries: one in the middle of the head, and the second below it near the forehead; two on the horns; and one behind on the nape or servants."
E ultima la tua ma am le cauteri un pauc entro que emprema en le os una petita empressio, e de lu sian deslocadas las scorsas, per so que la expiracio de grossas vapors sia alleujada de lu; e cauteriza sobre la melsa segon que es precesit.	"And lastly, press the cautery a little deeper until it makes a small impression on the bone, and remove the scabs from there, so that the expiration of thick vapors is alleviated. And cauterize on the chest as necessary."
E si la lepra es ja expanduda sobre le malaute e apar manifestament, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas aquel am aquels cauteris les quals havem ditz en le cap; e am cauteri sobre la extremitat del nas, e am dos cauteris sobre las doas maysselas, e am dos cauteris sobre dos spondils del col, e am vi cauteris sobre les spondils del dos, e am un gran sobre les spondils prop de la coeta, e un sobre la cotea , e am dos sobre las anquas, e am un sobre quascuna anqua, e am dos sobre les donols e un sobre quascun donolh, e am dos sobre les coydes, e am dos sobre les muscles, e am dos las teneretutz del sieu pietz; e cauteriza aquel sobre totas las juncturas dels ditz de las mas e dels pes, e sobre quascun talon dels sieus pes, e sobre les foscils de las suas mas.	"And if the leprosy has already spread over the whole body and appears manifestly, then you must cauterize that one with those cauteries which we have mentioned for the head; and cauterize on the tip of the nose, and with two cauteries on each cheekbone, and with two cauteries on each shoulder blade, and with six cauteries on the vertebrae of the back, and with one large one on the vertebrae near the buttocks, and one on the buttock itself, and with two on each ankle, and with one on each ankle bone, and with two on each shinbone, and with two on each calf muscle; and cauterize there over all the joints of the said limbs and feet, and on each heel of the feet, and on the hollows of the hands."
E guarda te dels nervis les quals so sobre le talo que no comburas aquels.	"And beware not to burn the nerves which are located above the ankle lest you harm them."
E alcunas veguadas es cauterizat am un cauteri sobre le os del pentenilh e am autre sobre la boca del stomac, e autre sobre le fietge.	"Sometimes it is cauterized with one cautery on the bone of the penis and another on the mouth of the stomach, and another on the liver."
E sapias que quant mays ajustas cauteris, tant es mays juvatiu e mays conferent; e sapias que le malaute no ha en le cauteri dolor, ayssi cum han les sas, per so quar le cors de lu ja es stupefayt.	"And know that the more accurately you apply cauteries, the greater the benefit and advantage. And know that the illness does not feel pain from the cautery, as it does with its own sores, because the body of that one is already stunned."
E cove que les cauteris sian grans o paucs segon les membres e las juncturas segon que es precedit de las specias dels ferramentz.	"And it is necessary for the cauteries to be large or small according to the limbs and joints, as has been prescribed with regard to the species of instruments."
E aprop cura le cauteri am farina de errs coyta am mel e am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	"Furthermore, cure the burn with powdered wheat flour mixed with honey and with other remedies until it is healed."
Capitol .xlviii.	**Capítol XLVIII.**
De cauterizacio de stupor.	**Chapter XLVIII. Cauterization for Stupidity.**
Quan alcun membre es stabozit o adormit e es curat am medicinas, olis e emplastres, e no es sanat, lahoras tu cauteriza aquel membre stabozit am cauteris segon que merita la grandesa del membre o la parvitat de lu.	When a limb is paralyzed or numb and treated with medicines, oils, and plasters, yet it does not heal, then cauterize that paralyzed limb using irons according to its size or smallness.
E sia lo tieu cauteri intrant la ispicitut de la codena un pauc.	And introduce your cautery into the opening of the backbone slightly.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia sanat.	Then treat it with ointment until it heals.
E alscunas veguadas es cauterizada alcuna stupor le qual endeve a las mas e als pes, e als spondils del dos e ves le eysiment dels nervis les quals mavon aquel membre, e es remauguda la stupor.	And sometimes veins are cauterized that cause weakness in the feet and legs, in the spine, and on both sides of the nerves which nourish that limb; and then the weakness disappears.
Mays no prusuma sobre aquo sino aquel que es savi en la anotomia dels membre e de la egressio dels nervis tot le cors moventz.	But do not presume to do this unless one is knowledgeable in the anatomy of limbs and the exit of nerves throughout the body in motion.
Capitol .xlix.	Chapter XLIX
De cauterizacio de albaras que es morfea.	On cauterization of white patches that are disfiguring.
Quan albaras es antiqua e no comfereys a lu alcu dels enguentz de medicina, lahoras tu cauteriza sobre aquela am cauteri preon un pauc segon la quantitat de la specitut de la codena entro que sia remauguda la blancor e la color de lu, e la color de lu sia mudada.	When white patches are old and do not respond to any medicinal ointments, then cauterize over that area with a hot iron slightly according to the quantity of the opening of the backbone so that it may remove the whiteness and change its color.
E aprop cura aquel am farina de errs e de lentilhas am oli rozat e am folhas de arnagrosa, e am sanc de colomba o am sanc de yronda, da cascuna sia una partida e totas sian mescladas, e aprop sia linit un drap e sus le loc sia pausat entro que sia sanat.	And afterwards treat that area with a mixture of powdered earth and lentils with rose oil, and leaves of sage, and dove's blood or hen's blood, giving each one part and mixing them all together, and then apply it with a cloth on which some has been placed, and cover the location so that it may heal.
Capitol .l.	Chapter L
De cauterizacio de cranc.	Cautery of the crab (i.e., treatment for gout).
Quan canser es comensan e vols aquel ostar, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteri de cercle en le circuit de lu ayssi cum es revolgut.	When cancer begins and you want to remove that lump, then cauterize it with a circular cautery in the same way as it is rotated.
E diysero les savis que sia cauterizat am lo derier cauteri en le mieg loc; mays a mi no es vist aquo, quar temi que sia ulcerat, e yeu ja e vist aquo alcunas veguadas.	And the wise ones say that it should be cauterized with the last cautery in the middle of the spot; but I have not seen this done because I fear that it may ulcerate, and I have seen this happen several times.
E es pus dreyturier que sia cauterizat en le circuit de lu am cercle ayssi cum avem dit, o am motz cauteris.	And it is then more appropriate to cauterize around the spot with a circular motion as we have said before, or with many cauteries.
Capitol .li.	Chapter 52
De cauterizacio de adubilati.	On the cautery of adenitis (swelling of the lymph glands).
Quan alcun adubilati es tardat en maturacio, e aysso es per la superfluitat fazen aquela, o per etat del malaute, quar es vielh en decrepitat, de pauc sanc, o per le temps, e tu vols festinar en la maturacio de adubilati; lahoras cauteriza en le circuit de lu am motz cauteris petitz punctan; e aprop leyssa aquela quar ela fastinara en maturacio.	When some adenitis is delayed in ripening, and this happens due to superfluity of that area or due to the condition of the illness, as it is old and decrepit with little blood or because of time, and you want to hasten the ripening of the adenitis; then cauterize around it with many small punctures using cauteries; and approach that area which has delayed in ripening.
Mays si tu vols la perforacio de lu am cauteri, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu: e depausa aquel en le mieg loc de adubilati entro que penetre la codena.	But if you want to make a puncture with the cautery, then heat the cautery of which this is the shape: and afterwards place that in the middle of the adenitis until it penetrates the cord.
E si le cauteri en aquel loc que es pus dejos, per so que le cors del brac sia alleujat; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if the cautery in that area causes too much pain, so that the flesh of the arm is relaxed; then approach and cure it until it is healed.
Capitol .lii.	Chapter 53
De cauterizacio de corrodent.	On the cautery of corroding ulcers
Corrodent es corrupcio ambulant en le membre, la qual corrodeys aquel ayssi cum a foc comedent lenha secca.	Corroding is a wandering corruption in the member which consumes it as dry wood burns.
Donc si vezes aquel corrodent en loc le qual sufferte cauteri am foc, lahoras tu igneys cauteris clavils motz paucs, e grans segon que es convenent en aquel loc en le qual es corrodent.	Therefore if you find that corroding in a place where cautery with fire can be applied, then heat cautery nails, some few and some large according to what is suitable for that area where the corroding is.
E aprop cauteriza aquel de tota partida entro que erradiques tota la corrosio e no romangua alcuna causa de lu.	And approach it cauterizing all around until you have eradicated all corruption and there remains no cause of it left.
E aprop leyssa aquel per tres dias, e pausa sobre les locs cauterizats solpre trissat am oli mesclat entro que las scaras sian totas eradicadas e tota la corrupcio.	And leave that for three days, and apply over the cauterized places only ointment mixed with oil until all scars are eradicated and all corruption is gone.
E aprop cura aquel am enguentz carn engendrantz.	And then cure it with living flesh applied on it.
Mays si aprop tres dias vezes que la carn nasca sana en la qual no es corrupcio, bo es; mays sino, lahoras itera le cauteri sobre aquo que es romas en les locs corrumputz.	But if after three days you find that the flesh is growing healthy without any corruption, then that's good. But if not, then repeat the cautery over what remains in the corrupted places.
E corrodent es medicat alcunas vetz am medicina aguda, quar aquela es meza en loc de cauteri.	And corroding can be treated sometimes with sharp medicine, for it is a halfway measure instead of cautery.
Mays empero cauteri am foc es de pus leugier juvament.	But nevertheless, cautery with fire gives quicker relief.
E yeu ja e dit la curacio de lu am medicina aguda en la divisio, e donc pren aquela quan de lu auras endegencia.	And I have already mentioned the treatment of it by sharp medicine in its division, so take that when you begin to deal with it.
Capitol .liii.	Chapter 54
De cauterizacio de claus e dels autres semblants.	On cautery of chilblains and similar afflictions
Motas veguadas endeve a las partidas dejos del pe malautia que s’apela clau, e es causa grossa, fentrada, la qual ladeys le pe; e cauteri en aquels es segon dos manieyras, so es cauteri am foc e cauteri am aygua cauda.	Many times it happens in the parts of the body called chilblains, which is a thick, deep-seated cause that affects the skin. Cautery can be applied to these in two ways: by fire and by hot water.
Mays cauteri am foc es que igniscas le cauteri concau semblant a pena de voltor, le qual sia feyt de ferr segon la quantitat la qual contengua le clau de tota partida, e sia de subtils marguas.	But cautery with fire is this: heat the cautery like a feather pen made of iron according to the quantity that contains the chilblain entirely, and it should be made of fine edges.
E aprop pausa aquel ignit sobre le clau, e aprop revolveys la tua ma am le cauteri en le circuit del clau entro que·l cauteri pervengua a la profunditat del clau.	And approach that heated cautery upon the chilblain, and then rotate your hand with the cautery around the circumference of the chilblain until it reaches to the depth of it.
E leyssa aquel per tres dias entro que comense getar brac.	Leave it for three days until it begins to discharge water.
E aprop emplastre aquel am malvas salvatges trissadas am sal, e leyssa le emplastre sobre aquel per una nuoyt, quar aquel sira eradicat de las suas razitz.	"Then apply a poultice made of wild mallow leaves chopped with salt, and leave the poultice on that area for one night, as it will draw out its roots."
E aprop cura le loc am enguent de carn generatiu entro que sia sanat.	"And then treat the wound with ointment made from generation flesh until it heals."
E si so no-convertitz, e motas veguadas accideysso en la superficia del cors, majorment en las mas e les pes, lahoras cove que tu aministres en aquels cauteri am aygua, e es que prenguas una quannula de eram o de ferr o de pena de voltor, e pausa aquela sobre le clau; e aprop geta en la quanula de aygua cauda pauca cantitat, e rete la tua ma, e tu revolveys aquela am compressio de la tua ma de tot, e sia enpremut le marge de la canula en la razit del clau, e atrobara la aygua cauda via al preon de la razit del cau; e espera le malaute un pauc la mordicacio de l’aygua cauda per una hora, e aprop remau aquela, quar le clau am las suas razitz sira erredicat.	"And if it is not converted, and blisters sometimes occur on the surface of the body, especially on the hands and feet, then you should administer cauterization with water, using a spoon made of brass, iron or vulture's feather; place it over the boil; take a drop of boiling water in the spoon, keeping your hand still, press the margin of the spoon onto the root of the boil, allowing the boiling water to reach the center of the root; wait for the patient to endure the bite of the boiling water for about an hour, then remove it, as the boil with its roots will be eradicated."
E ayssi fe am aquels la i aprop l’autre entro que venguas sobre totz les quals de lor so en le cors.	"And do this until all of those that are on the body have come out."
E aprop cura aquels pus que las razitz dels claus so erradicadas am aquo dels enguentz les quals la carn ve engenran.	"And then treat those boils from which the roots of the boils have been eradicated with ointments that cause the flesh to grow again."
Capitol .liiii.	Chapter .lxxv.
De cauterizacio de tremor.	Of cauterization for trembling.
Quan endeve ad alcu tremor per freg en le nervi o per febre de causa frega, o per autra causa semblant, lahoras cove que tu cauterises aquel am quatre cauteris o am v sobre les spondils del dos, entre quascun spondilh am un cauteri; e am cauteri en le pietz de lu, e sobre l‘estomac de lu, am cauteri olivar.	When trembling occurs due to friction in the nerves or from a fever caused by heat, or from another similar cause, then you should cauterize it with four cauteries or five on the vertebrae of the back, between each vertebra with one cautery; and apply a cautery on their foot, and on their stomach with an olive cautery.
E la tremor de lu se repausa e festina la sanetat de la malautia frega.	And if the trembling subsides, it will hasten the recovery from the feverish illness.
Capitol .lv.	Chapter .lvi
De cauterizacio de albati accidentz al cors.	About cauterization of accidental injuries to the body
Quan en le cors so espellitz albati, e so pustulas fendas las quals so feytas de materias grossas corruptas; donc cove al comensament cum apareyso, que sia cauterizat sobre tot cap de la fistola am cauteri subtil am fustz de mirt, la extremitat del qual es estenduda am foc; o am razitz de erestologia longua; o am cauteri lentecular.	When the body is speckled with albati (white spots), and there are pustules from which matter is issuing that is thick and corrupt; therefore, at the beginning, it must be cauterized with a subtle cautery made of myrtle wood, the extremity of which has been heated in fire; or with a long erestological rasp; or with a lenticular cautery.
E alscunas veguadas es cauteri ademamil al comensament de la sua expulcio segon aquesta manieyra; e no so cregudas, e es disrumpuda la superfluitat fazens aquels, et sana de aquels.	And similarly, in the case of other boils that appear later, they are cauterized at the beginning of their expulsion according to this manner; and they are not believed, nor are they opened up, but rather the excess is dissipated by doing so, and they heal.
Mays empero cove que aquo sia fayt aprop evacuacio am fleubotomia.	But nevertheless it is necessary that this be done near an evacuation with phlebotomy.
Capitol lvi.	Chapter lvi
De cauterizacio de fluex de sanc accident per incisio de arceria.	About cauterization of accidental flow of blood by incision with an artery knife
Tropas veguadas endeve fluex de arceria que es inciza deves la plagua la qual endeve deforo, o deves la incizio de apostemas o cauteri del membre, e alor semblantz, e es dificil remaura aquel.	There are often cases where an arterial flow appears that is cut through the skin where it has erupted, or from the incision of an apostema or cautery of a member, and then it resembles this, and it is difficult to stop it.
Donc cum accideys ad alcu aquo, lahoras tu·t coyta am la tua ma a l’orrifici de la arceria, e pausa sobre aquel le tieu dit endic estrenh aquel motas veguadas entro que sia ostat le fluex del sanc dejos le tieu dit, e que non yesqua.	Therefore, when this happens to someone, immediately take your hand with the artery knife and press it over that place where you saw the arterial flow issuing; pause there a little while until you see that the flow of blood has ceased from under your finger, so that it does not escape.
E aprop pausa en le foc les cauteris olivars paucs e grantz, per nombre motz, e exsuffla sobre aquels entro que sian mot ignitz.	And immediately afterward heat in fire the olive-shaped cauteries of various sizes, whether few or many; and blow upon them until they are very hot.
E aprop pren de aquels un petit o un gran segon le loc e la plagua en la qual es rompuda la arteria, sobre aquela vena festinantment pus que auras remaugut le tieu dit, e te le cauteri entro que sia abcindit e restreyt aquel sanc.	And then promptly take one of those cauteries that is small or large according to the place and size of the wound in which the artery has burst; apply it there quickly after you have removed your finger, and hold it until it becomes adherent and stops the bleeding.
E si le sanc es expellit de l’orrifici de la arteria quan tu remaues le tieu dit e extringeys le cauteri, lahoras pren la un autre cauteri coytadament dels cauteris les quals en le foc son preparatz, e donc no cesses fer aquo un aprop autre entro que le sanc sia restrengit.	And if the blood is still issuing from the orifice of the artery when you remove your finger and apply the cautery, then immediately take another one that has been prepared in the fire; and continue to do this until the bleeding has stopped.
E guarda te que no comburas le nervi que aqui es, e que vengua sobre le malaute autra malicia.	And be sure not to burn any nearby nerves, and let it come close to the wound but without causing another mischief.
E sapias que quan de l’arteria flueys sanc, lahoras no es possible en aquels restrenge la sanc, e majorment quan l’arteria es gran, si no am una de quatre manieyras: o am cauteri ayssi quo dit havem, o am extraccio quan no es extrayta, quar quan es extrayta las extremitatz de lu miels son comburidas e es restreyt le sanc, o que sia liat am fiel o am liament per fort strectura, o que sian pausadas sobre lu medicinas de las quals la vertut es restringir la sanc; e sian strengudas am pulvinar am costriccio decent.	And know that when blood flows from an artery, it is not possible to stop the bleeding in those cases except by one of four methods: either with cautery as described above, or with extraction if it cannot be extracted (for when it is extracted, the ends of the vessel are burned and the bleeding stops), or else it should be tied with thread or linen by strong traction, or some medicine whose virtue is to stop bleeding should be applied there, and pressed upon with a compress accompanied by constriction.
Mays aquel que aministra restriccio decent de lu am liament e am strictura am draps o per posicio de causas comburentz e de semblantz, no comfereys sino tart.	But those who apply restriction with linen thread and traction with cloths or bandages by positioning cauteries and similar things, do not perform but harm.
Mays si aquo endeve ad alcu e no sia le metge present ni medicina, lahoras obre am pausament del dit indic sobre le orrifici de aquela vena ayssi cum havem dit, e entenda a la gran costreccio de lu entro que le sanc sia ostat de la sobirana partida de la plagua, e sobre la arceria le dit no sia remaugut; e de sobre la arceria sia aspergit am aygua frega de mot gran fregiditat entro que·l sanc sia congilat e engrossat; e mays cossire en que ha de cauteri o de medicina necessitat.	But if this happens to someone and the physician is not present nor any medicine, then one should press with the tip of the finger over the orifice of that vein as described above, and apply great constriction of the area around it so that the blood may be stopped from its source; and remove the finger from the artery, and sprinkle water that has been rubbed much with a very cold handkerchief upon the artery so that the blood may be congealed and thickened; and afterwards see if cautery or medicine is necessary.
Comensa la segonda partida.	Begin the second part.
De incisio e perforacio e ventozas e de fleubotomia e de plaguas e de lor semblants.	Of Incision and Perforation and Excision and of Phlebotomy and of Wounds and Their Like.
Aquestas son paraulas de Albucazis.	These are words of Al-Bukaysi (Albucasis).
Ja havem dit en le primier capitol tota malautia en la qual cauteri am foc es convenient e am medicina comburent, e las occasios e las causas de lu, e les instrumentz en aquels necessaris am las formas dels cauteris; e he ordenatz les capitols de la subiranetat del cap entro als pes.	We have already spoken in the first chapter of all diseases in which cautery with fire is appropriate and with medicine burning, and the occasions and causes for this, and the instruments necessary for them with their forms; and we have arranged the chapters concerning the head down to the feet.
E yeu procesire en aquest capitol per aquela meteysa guisa, per que sia alliujat lo querent aquo, lahoras sobre aquo que aura demandat.	And in this chapter, I will proceed similarly so that what is sought by anyone may be easily understood; therefore regarding whatever question he may ask.
E denant que yeu comense aquo, cove, fils, que aprenguatz que en aquest capitol es per terror aquo que es en le capitol primier de cauterizacio.	But before I begin this, please note that in this chapter about cutting and perforation, you should understand that it is for terror what was said in the first chapter concerning cautery.
E per aquo que cove que sia en lu gran cautela, quar en la operacio la qual es en aquest capitol motas veguadas catz evacuacio la qual es am sanc am le qual esta la vida deves la aspersio de la vena o incisio sobre l’apostema o apercio de exsitura o puracio de la plagua o extraccio de sageta o incizio de peyra e a lor semblantz.	And for this reason, it is necessary that there should be great caution in these operations because many times evacuation takes place with blood, which carries life within itself, such as aspiration of the vein or incision over an aposteme or opening of an abscess or curettage of a wound or extraction of an arrowhead or incision of a stone and their like.
E de totz aquels so acompanhatz temor e tremor e en le mas de lor catz la mort.	And all these are accompanied by fear and trembling, and in many cases death ensues from them.
E yeu amonesti vos que sobre vos no caia aquo en le qual es esitacio, quar alcunas veguadas cazo deves vos manieyras de homes am manieyras motas de malautias.	And I warn you not to fall into something that is doubtful, for sometimes it happens that one must resort to methods that are very dangerous.
E de lor es alcu que s’irays am la sua malautia e es leugiera deves lu la mort, e aysso per la vehemensia de aquo que troba de sa malautia, e per longuesa de la malautia de lu, e am la malautia es paor la qual significa mort.	And among them are some who depart with their disease and it is easy for death to follow upon it; this happens because of the severity of their illness, the duration of it, and fear of that illness which signifies death.
E de aquels es le qual dona a tu son aver e ditta, tu esperant am aquel sanetat, e la sieua malautia es perniciosa.	And among them is he who gives away all his property and possessions in expectation of health but whose disease is fatal.
E donc no cove que tu consentas en aquel que ve a vos del qual es aquesta manieyra; e la vostra cautela sia major que covesitat e la vostra rapacitat; e no presumatz alcuna causa sobre aquo sino aprop sciencia certa la qual virifica aquo deves vos, e al qual perve successio lausabla.	Therefore, do not consent to anyone who comes to you with this manner; let your caution be greater than greed and rapacity. And do not undertake any cause without first having certain scientific knowledge that will verify the matter for you, and towards which successful outcome may be hoped.
E usatz en la curacio de totz vostres malautes de pronosticacio e indicacio de lu al qual es salut convertida, quar en aquel es a vos ajutori sobre adquisicio de fama e de memoria, de lausor e de gloria.	And use prognosis and diagnosis of that which leads to health in the treatment of all your diseases; for therein lies help towards acquiring fame and renown, praise and glory.
O, filhs, Dieus en vos spire le sieu entendement e no oste a vos direccio e proteccio, quar aquo es en la sua ma.	O children, may God inspire you with His understanding and not remove direction and protection from you; for this is in His hand.
E yeu e ordenat aquest capitol distingent per capitols segon que precedit en le capitol de cauteris, de la cura del cap entro als pes, per que sia a vos alleujat aquo que demandatz de aquo e del qual havetz necessitat.	And I have arranged this chapter divided into chapters according to what has been said in the chapter on cautery, from the treatment of the head down to the feet, so that you may easily understand what you ask about and what you need.
Capitol primier.	First Chapter.
De la curacio de aygua la qual es contenguda en le cap dels enfantz.	Of the Treatment of Water in the Head of Children
Sapias que aquesta malautia motas veguadas endeve als enfantz deves le enfantament e quan la noyrissa estrenh le cap del enfant ses livitat.	Know that this disease often happens to children at birth, especially when the midwife squeezes too hard on the head of the child while it is being born.
E alcunas veguadas endeve per causa amaguada la qual no es saubuda.	And sometimes it happens without any apparent cause which cannot be discovered.
Mays yeu no vi aquesta malautia sino en les enfantz; e a totz aquels les quals yeu vi se coytec la mort, e per ayssi es a mi vist layssada obra en aquels.	But I have only seen this disease in children; and all those whom I saw died from it, and therefore it seems to me that it is not an easy task to deal with such cases.
E yeu e vist que un enfant le cap del qual era d’aygua omplit, e·l cap de lu era totjorn ayssi magnificat entro que ceser no podia sobre si meteys per la grandesa del sieu cap, e mays que la humiditat fe aucmentada entro que foc mort.	I have seen an infant whose head was filled with water and his head swelled so much that he could not raise himself because of the greatness of his head; and more than this humidity caused death.
E aquesta humiditat o es agreguada entre la codena e l’os, o es agreguada dejos le os sobre le ciphac.	And this water is collected either between the dura mater (dural membrane) and the bone, or outside the bone on top of the skull.
Quar la operacio en aquel si la humiditat es entre la codena e l’os e le apostema es pauc, lahoras cove que tu fendas en le mieg loc del cap am una fissura en la latitut, e sia la longitut de la fissura cays dos notz entro que corra la humiditat, e aquesta es la forma del spatum:	For if the operation is performed in such a case where the water is between the dura mater and the bone, and the swelling is small, then you should make an incision at the middle of the head with a scalpel horizontally, and let its length be about two fingers so that the water may flow out through it, for this is the form of the spatula:
E donc si la humiditat es mays augmentada e l’apostema es major, lahoras son aqui dos fissuras segon aquesta manieyra:	"If therefore moisture has increased more and the aposteme (abscess) has grown larger, then here are two incisions made in this manner:"
E si la humiditat es dejos le os, senhal de lu es que tu vezes la comissuras del cap ubertas de tota partida e l’aygua es spremuda quan tu compremes aquela am la tieua ma a las partidas dedintz e no es aquo a tu amaguat.	"If the moisture is gone from the eye, this is a sign that you should open up all of the commissures of the mouth widely and squeeze out water when you compress it with your thumb inside the corners and do not hide this."
Cove que tu fendas en le mieg loc del cap am tres fissuras segon aquesta manieyra:	"Therefore, you should make three incisions in the middle of the head in this manner:"
e aprop la inscizio extratz ne tota la humiditat; e aprop strenh las fissuras am draps e plumassols; e aprop enbroca aquo de sobre am vi e oli entro al quint dia, e aprop deslia le liament e cura la plagua am tentas e enguentz, e strenh le cap am equalitat; e mange le malaute am vianda secca de pauca humiditat entro que·l membre sia confortat e sanat.	"and near the incision remove all moisture;
E es autra manieyra de incisio, que consideras hon apar la magnitut del apostema e la colleccio de l’aygua, quar alcunas veguadas es mays en le occipicii, o en la partida denant, o en la destra, o en la sinistra; e donc aten am la incizio on appar le apostema e la replecio de l’aygua, e fen aquo segon que a tu es miels possible.	"And there is another method of incision to consider where the size of the boil appears and how much water it contains, for sometimes they are larger at the back or at the front, on the right side or left side; therefore, make your incision where the boil appears and the collection of water ends, and then proceed according to what seems best to you."
Et observa que no inscindas la arteria e endevengua flueys de sanc e mora le malaute per aquel flux de sanc am evacuacio de humiditat.	"And make sure that you do not cut into the artery, for it will cause a flow of blood and worsen the condition due to this flow of blood with evacuation of moisture."
Capitol .ii.	Chapter II
De inscisio de las arterias las quals so aprop las aurelhas, apeladas hilasseysse.	"And concerning the incision of arteries that are near the ears, called the hilasses."
Capitol segon.	"Chapter according to."
Quan endeveno ad alcu catars o raumas als huelhs o al pietz, e es antiquat aquo, e no confereys en aquo la curacio de las medicinas, lahoras la deriera curacio en aquest es incizio de aquelas dos arterias.	"When an ulcer or wound appears in the eye or on the foot, and this has lasted for a long time, and the cure with medicines does not help, then the last resort in this case is the incision of those two arteries."
E donc cove quan tu vols inscidir aquelas que le malaute raza lo sieu cap, e aprop fregua le loc am drap aspre per so que aparan las arcerias, e aprop sia strengut le col del malaute am alcu drap; e aprop considera on polsa la vena; e les locs de quascuna sobre les locs les quals so aprop las aurelhas depremutz, e tant se occultan sino en alcus homes.	"And therefore, when you wish to cut those arteries that the pain has reached its head, and near the place apply a rough cloth to make the arteries appear, and also strengthen the neck of the patient with some cloth; and consider where the vein pulsates; and in those places above the places that are near the ears below, they hide themselves so much that sometimes it is difficult to find them in certain people."
E aprop senha sobre la arceria am tenta, e aprop inscideys quascuna am le spatum de quascuna partida agut am inscizio pervenient entro al os, e sia aquo per la latitut del cap.	"And then mark the artery with ink and cut each one with a scalpel of each sharp point with an incision entering into the bone, and this should be done across the width of the head."
E si vols, entromet le spatum dejos la arteria e trenqua aquala a las inciden a las partidas desus.	"And if you wish, introduce the scalpel within the artery and cut that one at the incisions made above."
E sia la longitut de la inscizio cays dos ditz ajustatz, quar quan alcuna vena es inscizida le sanc es eyssit am egressio pulsatil, le qual saut deforo per saut frequent.	"And let the length of the incision be as described above, for when a vein is cut, blood issues forth with pulsating exit, which flows freely with frequent flow."
Mays si la arceria no apareys al cintiment, lahoras cove que tu mesures de la aurelha la quantitat del spazi de tres ditz, e aprop senha am tenta, e fen entro al os.	"But if the artery does not appear clearly, then you should measure from the ear the quantity of space of three fingerbreadths, and then mark with ink, and cut into the bone."
E aquo que cove getar del sanc es quantitat de vi unc., e fort leu ne geta de lu mays o mens, e tot aquo es segon la quantitat la qual appareys de la vertut del malaute e de la replecio de la arceria de lu.	"And this is what needs to be removed from the blood: about six drops. And sometimes more or less gets out, and all this depends on the quantity that appears from the power of the disease and from the fullness of the artery itself."
E aprop considera la plagua, e donc si reman sobre le os alcuna causa del ciphac, lahoras inscindys aquo per so que no endevengua apostema caut.	"And also consider the wound, and if there remains on the bone any cause of the scab, then cut that off so that it does not become a cauterizing ulcer."
E aprop strenh la plagua am plumassols e am liamentz de drap de li, e aprop cura aquela am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	"And also strengthen the wound with cotton pads and cloth strips, and then cure that with ointment until it is healed."
Capitol .iii.	"Chapter iii."
De extraccio de las arcerias las quals so en las templas.	"Concerning the extraction of the arteries which are in the temples."
Quan ad alcu accideys emigranea antiqua o catertz agutz, per humiditatz agrimonials e per qualiditat en les lacertz des templas, o sodo antiqua vehement e semblantz ad aquels, e es medicat am las manieyras de curacio de medicina e aquo no comfereys, lahoras nos hem sproatz en aquestas malautias extraccio de las arcerias en les templas, o cauterizacio de aquelas ayssi cum havem mostrat.	"When some ancient migraine or sharp catarrh occurs due to humidity in the temples and their quality, or when it is an ancient vehement pain similar to these, and it is treated with medical remedies but does not improve, then we have found that extraction of the arteries in the temples or cauterization of those as we have shown above are useful for these illnesses."
E la manieyra de la operacio e extracio de aquelas es que·l malaute raza les pels les quals son en les templas; e entenda a la arceria apparent en le templar quar ela es a tu mostrada per le sieu pols, e·s occultada sino en paucs homes per vehemencia de freg.	"And the manner of operation and extraction of these is that when the patient has hair on their temples, you should understand the artery that appears in the temple since it is shown by its pulsation. And it is hidden only in few men due to the thickness of their hair."
E si a tu es occultada, lahoras le col del malaute sia strengut am alcun drap; e aprop fregua le loc am un drap aspre o evapora le loc am aygua cauda entro que aparesca a tu la arceria manifestament.	"And if it is hidden to you, then the patient's head should be strengthened with some cloth. And also rub the place with a rough cloth or evaporate the place with hot water until the artery appears manifestly."
E lahoras tu pren le spatum del qual aquesta es la forma:	"And then take the scalpel of which this is the shape:"
E aprop tu scorja la codena am aquel am facilitat entro que pervenguas a la arceria; e aprop geta en lu onti e extratz aquela a las partidas sobiranas entro que extraguas aquela de la codena e descobras aquela de las tunicas las quals so dejos aquela, de tota partida.	"And then cut the skin with that scalpel with ease until you reach the artery. And then open and extract it at the top part until you extract it from the skin and uncover those tunics which are below it, all along its length."
Mays si la arteria es subtil, lahoras envolveys aquela am la extremitat del oncii, e aprop inscindeys de aquela una partida segon la quantitat per la qual sian alonguadas las extremitatz de lu e sian contraytas, e no endevindra flux de sanc, quar si no so inscididas no pujara le sanc de tot.	"But if the artery is subtle, then wrap its extremity with the tip of a needle and cut it open according to the quantity by which its extremities are extended and contracted. And there will be no flow of blood, for if they are not opened, the blood will not rise up completely."
E aprop evacua del sanc de vi unc. entro a tres.	"And then evacuate six to nine drops of blood from it."
E si la arceria es gran, lahoras cove que tu lies aquela en dos locs am fiel dopble fort de ceda o am cordas a lonc, e no coyte a lu putrefaccio denant la consolidacio de la plagua e endevengua flux de sanc.	"And if the artery is large, then you should tie it in two places with doubled thread of cotton or with long cords. And do not allow it to become putrid before the wound is consolidated, for this causes bleeding."
E aprop incideys la superfluitat la qual es entre dos liamentz; e fay aquo en aquela hora o aprop autra ora.	"And then cut into the excess that lies between two threads. And do so at that time or another appropriate time."
E si vols, cauteriza aquela am cauteri entro al os am cauteri cutellar entro que sian incididas las extramitatz de lu, e stara en loc de aquela meteyssa obra.	"And if you wish, cauterize it with a cautery until the bone or with a small cautery until its extremities are burned. And this will take the place of that operation."
E es milhor obra sino que·l malaute aia febre o es de escalfada compleccio; quar cauteri es de aquelas causas que ajudan a las humiditatz finidoras, e donc es milhor en juvament.	"It is better if the patient has fever or is of hot complexion, for cauteries are among those causes that help to reduce humidity, and therefore it is better in this case."
E cove aprop la extraccio de las arcerias que huomplas le loc de coto antic, e sian pausatz sobre lu polvils decentement fayt, e aprop sia curat am medicinas seccas fazen naysser la carn e am calguas entro que sia sanat.	"And it is necessary after the extraction of the arteries that you sprinkle the place with fine powder and then bandage it decently. And then treat it with dry medicines to make the flesh grow and with compresses until it heals."
E si mentre obres autra veguada endeventa flux de sanc de la arceria, lahora tu te coyta a restrenger aquel sanc, o am cauteri, o que omplas le loc de coto, e strenh la tua ma entro que sia restreyt le sanc.	"And if during the operation there occurs bleeding from the artery again, then stop that blood either with cautery or by pressing the place of the wound with your hand until the blood is stopped."
E si deguna causa de aquelas no es a tu present, lahoras pausa le tieu dit sobre le loc entro que·l sanc sia congilat, e enbroca le loc am aygua de vehement fregiditat entro que la acuitat repausa, e sia strengut segon que cove.	"And if none of those causes is present, then press your thumb on the place until the blood coagulates. And then rinse the place with very cold water until the pain subsides and strengthen it as necessary."
E aquo que es pus leugier en extraccio de arceria es que tu cauterizes la vena am aquest cauteri haventz dos cotels, pus que tu has senhat les dos locs am tenta, e depausa quascus, mot ignitz, entro que pervenguan al os e inscindan la vena en dos locs, per so que sia elonguat aquo que es entre las extremitatz de lu, quar no son consolidadas de tot am aquest cauteri.	"And that which is easier in the extraction of an artery is that you cauterize the vein with this cautery which has two notches. For after you have opened the two places with a probe, each one separately and quickly, until they reach the bone and cut through the vein at both places, so that what lies between its extremities may be elongated, for it will not be completely consolidated by this cautery."
E aquesta es la forma del cauteri:	"This is the form of the cautery:"
E sia la acuitat dels dos cotels esemps.	"And let the sharpness of the two notches be thus:"
Mays empero si so mendres acuitat que dos cotels es milhor, quar si so agudas cum dos cotels propera a quascuna freg, e no enscideysso la carn am velocitat.	"But nevertheless if they are small in sharpness that two notches are better, for if they are too sharp it approaches each vein and does not cut the flesh quickly."
Donc cum en aquels es alcuna grossitut, es tenguda la calor del foc en aquels e la carn es abscindida leugierament.	"Therefore since there is some thickness in them, the heat of the fire is held in them and the flesh is cut easily."
E aquesta obra es milhor en tota obra e pus leugiera.	"And this operation is better than all others and is also easier."
E sia le spazi le qual es entre dos cotels la quantitat de la grossesa del dit.	"And let the space between two notches be equal to the thickness of a finger."
Capitol quart.	Chapter Four
De la cura de cors de lagremas agudas e aciduas dels huels.	Of the treatment of tears of the eyes.
Quan so lagremas aciduas, e es le cors de aquelas venas las quals so sobre le test del cap deforo, e no comfereys en aquo alcuna causa de la curacio de medicina, e vezes la cara del malaute ja enrogesir e sent en le sieu front deambulacio ayssi cum si era deambulacio de formiguas, e·ls huels de aquel so extenuatz, humitz enayssi que ja les pels de lor son conodutz, e las parpelas so scalfadas per la acuitat de las lacrimas, les antics agro mesties en la curacio de aquelas de aquesta operacio, e nompnero aquela curacio am spassa.	When there are acid tears and it is the case of those veins which are on the forehead of the head, and no cause of the cure by medicine can be found, sometimes the face of the patient becomes reddened and they feel as if there were ants walking about in their forehead, and their eyelids become thin, with moisture issuing so that their lashes become stuck together, and the skin is scaled by the sharpness of the tears, the ancients used to use this operation for their cure and did not name it otherwise.
E es que tu comandas al malaute rayre les pels les quals son en le sieu front, e aprop inscideys en le front tres fissuras engualment distans segon la longitut del front.	And then you command the patient to shave the hair which is on their forehead, and next you cut three incisions into the forehead equally distant according to its length.
E si’ la longitut de la fissura cays dos ditz: la una fissura sia engualment distant a la longitut del nas en le mieg loc del front, e la segonda segon la longitut un petit del movement dels lacertz les quals so en le lacrimal, e la tersa del autre part.	And if the length of each incision is two fingers: one incision should be equally distant from the length of the nose in the middle of the forehead, and the second one according to the length of a little less than the movement of the lacrimal glands which are on the eyelid, and the third one from the other side.
E guarda te de la incizio de las arcerias las quals so en dos latz, e elongua la tua ma de la continuacio de amdos las mandibulas.	"Beware of the entrance of the arteries which are on both sides, and extend your hand from the continuation of both jawlines."
E si’ l’espazi de quascuna inscizio la quantitat de tres ditz ajustatz.	"And if the space of each incision is as much as three fingers wide."
E si’ a tu una pessa d’espongua apparelhada o draps seccatz motz am les quals exsiccas le sanc.	"If you have a sponge wrapped in linen or dry cloths with which to wipe away blood."
E aprop entremet le spatum de dos agudas extremitatz, del qual aquesta es la forma de la inscisio de lu:	"And then insert the spatha between two sharp-pointed extremities, of which this is the form of the incision:"
que es de la partida des templas entro a la segonda inscizio.	"which begins at the temple and enters into the second incision."
Exxcorja am aquel tota la codena la qual es entre dos incizios am le ciphac le qual es sobre le os, e aprop fay aquo de la inscizio migera entro a la segonda inscisio.	"Carefully extract with this all the bone that is between two incisions, which lies on top of the cheekbone. Then do likewise from the middle incision into the second incision."
E aprop stratz ne aquest spatum e entromet en la primieyra inscizio autra vetz un autre instrument le qual es apelat cutellar, agut de una part e del autre no agut.	"And then take out this spatha and insert another instrument called a cutellar, sharp on one side and blunt on the other."
E pausa le latz de aquel agut deves la carn annexa deves la codena, e le latz de lu leon dintz le os, e empelley aquel entro que pervengua a la fissura migera, e abscindeys am aquel totz les vaysels que descendo del cap als huels.	"And pause the blade of that on the adjacent flesh near the bone, and the blade of the lion within the bone. Then employ it to reach the middle fissure and cut with it all the vessels that descend from the head to the heels."
Mays que sia continuada la inscizio ad aquo appar de la codena, e aprop fay aquo en la fissura migana entro al autra fissura.	"But continue the incision until you reach the bone. Then do likewise in the middle fissure into the other fissure."
E pus que corr del sanc quantitat engual, exprem les locs de las pessas del sanc congilat.	"And when much blood flows from it, squeeze the places of the blood vessels together."
E aprop pausa en quascuna fissura calgua de coto vielh, e pausa sobre aquels polvils enbegutz en vi e oli e vi agre, e vegas que no endevengua apostema caut.	"And then press in each fissure a cotton ball soaked in wax, oil, and vinegar. See that there is no burning cautery."
E en le tertz dia deslia le liament e aministra gran enfusio de aygua cauda o tebeza, e aprop cura aquo am enguent bazilicon am oli rozat e autres entro que las plaguas sian sanadas.	"And on the third day, untie the ligature and apply a generous rinsing of cold water or decoction. Then dress it with basilicon ointment mixed with rose oil and other suitable substances so that the wounds may be healed."
Capitol .v.	"Chapter Five"
De la cura de lagramas per catartz e als huels descendentz de las partidas dedintz del cap.	"For treating headaches through purging and for tears descending from internal head injuries."
Quan ad alcu veno catartz agutz e continuantz, e vezes les huels del malaute extenuatz petitz, e ja le reguardament de lor es debelitat, e las palpebras ulceradas e de lor cazo les pels, e en le preon del cap es dolor aguda ledent e extrenutacio consequent, lahoras sapias per aquestz accidentz que las materias e catartz no veno sino de motas venas de las partidas dedintz procedent.	"When a vein is opened with care and continuity, sometimes the eyes of the patient become weakened and inflamed, and their sight is impaired. If the eyelids are ulcerated, then hairs grow from them, and there is sharp pain in the forehead followed by severe headache. Then you know that the matter and catarrh do not come from above but from tiny veins proceeding from within."
E la milhor curacio en aquels es aquesta: que comandes al malaute que raza lo sieu front, e aprop inscideys en aquel una fissura al mieg loc del front, un petit per la latitut (e comensa am la fissura del templar senestre entro al dextre templar; e sia inscisio entro al os; e eslongua la tua ma dels lacertz del templas lesquals son maugutz deves la mastigacio), entro que sia le os descubert.	"And the best treatment for these conditions is this: Command the patient to raise their forehead, and then make an incision in the middle of it, about the width of a finger. Begin the incision at the left temple and continue it to the right one; let it be deep enough to reach the bone. Then extend your hand through the opening between the temples (which are usually covered by the muscles used for chewing), until you can feel the bone."
Exsicca tot le sanc am espongua o am drap secc e aprop repleys entre las doas labias de la fissura am coto vielh o am draps de li.	"Dry up all the blood with a sponge or dry cloth, and then fill the incision between the two lips of it with cotton wool or clean cloth."
E aprop estrenh desus am polvils enbegutz en vi e oli per so que no endevengua apostema caut.	"And then sprinkle powders enclosed in wine and oil on top, so that no inflammation may occur."
E quan deslias aquo e veses que l’apostema ja es diminuit, lahoras cove que fregua le os entro que comensa en lu nayser carn, e aprop cura aquel am regiment exsiccatiu le qual fassa neysser la carn, ayssi cum si tu prenes de farina de froment dos partidas e de colofania quatre partidas e mescla o, e de lor sia fayt emplastre e sia aministrat en aquestas plaguas a de la carn nativitat.	"And when this is done and you see that the inflammation has decreased, then you must rub the bone where it begins to become flesh, and afterward treat it with a drying remedy which causes the flesh to be discharged, like if you take two parts of wheat flour and four parts of colophony (resin), mix them together, and make a plaster out of them to apply to these wounds on the raw flesh."
Capitol .vi.	**Chapter VI.**
De la cura de aquo que catz en las aurelhas.	**On the treatment of what falls into the ears.**
Tota causa que catz en las aurelhas es una de quatre specias, quar o es peyra mineral o causa semblant a peyra, ayssi cum ferr e veyre, o es de planta ayssi cum ceze o fava, o es causa fluxtibla ayssi cum aygua e vi agre e a lor semblantz, o alcuna bestia.	All causes that enter the ears are of four kinds: for it is either a mineral stone or a cause similar to stone, such as iron and copper; or it is of plant origin like chickpeas or beans; or it is a fluid cause like water, vinegar and their like; or some animal.
E donc quan peyra catz en l’aurelha o autra causa semblant de aquelas causas que no ajustan ne creysso en l’aurelha, e pausa la aurelha al solelh, e si vezes la peyra, lahoras distilla en aquela alcuna causa de oli violat o sizami, e aprop aministra la extraccio de lu, e fay le stornudar am condizi, e oppila las nars deve le aveniment de stornutacio.	Therefore, when a stone enters the ear or another cause similar to those causes that do not fit nor enter into the ear, and it stops the ear's opening, if sometimes it moves the stone, then it distills in that certain amount of oil violet or sesame, and properly administer its extraction from there, and make it sneeze with conditions, and close the nose because of the arrival of sneezing.
E aprop pausa en le circuit de la aurelha alscunas pessas de drap o lana, e dextendas la aurelha a las partidas desus, quar motas veguadas es foro-getada am aquestas causas.	And properly plug in the ear with some pieces of cloth or wool, and stretch the ear upwards to avoid these causes being forgotten.
E si no n’es getada, lahoras aministra extraccio de lu am le instrument apelat gesti epicicarios subtil del qual aquesta es la forma:	And if it is not gotten rid of, then properly administer its extraction using the instrument called "gutter catheter" of which this is the form:
E si es foro-getada am gesti, bo es; e sino, lahoras aministra la extraccio de lu am onci subtil de pauca duplicacio.	And if it is forgotten with the instrument, that's good. But if not, then properly administer its extraction using a soft hook of little duplication.
E donc si no es foro-getada per aquo, lahoras fay una canula de aram e entromet la extremitat de la canula en le trauc de la aurelha e claus a l’enviro de la canula am cera e am oli mollificada per so que no sia ubert sino la canula.	And therefore if it is not removed by that, then make a tube of silver and insert the extremity of the tube into the opening of the ear and close around the tube with wax and softened oil so that only the tube may be inserted.
E aprop extratz am le tieu vent am fort atraccio, quar tropas veguadas cum aquo que havem recontat.	And properly extract it using a small bellows with strong suction, for often times with this method that we have described.
Mays si no es foro-getada en aquesta manieyra, lahoras pren de halka alumbat o de vecz aparelhat am le qual son preses les ausels una patita quantitat, e pausa aquel en la extremitat de ray, e aprop envolopa sobre aquel coto decentment pausat.	But if it is not removed in this manner, then take some salted alum or sometimes prepared with which birds are caught by taking a small quantity of it, and place it at the end of the ear, and properly wrap that well-placed spot decently.
E aprop entromet aquel en le trauc de la aurelha am facilitat, e aprop excicca la aurelha de la humiditat.	And properly insert it into the opening of the ear with ease, and properly dry out the ear from any moisture.
E donc si no es foro-getada am totas las causas las quals havem recontadas, lahoras tu coyta a talhar aquela denant que endevengua apostema caut o espasme.	And therefore if it is not removed by all the causes that we have described, then you should cut that in front before an abscess or spasm occurs.
E la manieyra de talhar aquela es que tu al comensament sancnes le malaute de la vena sephasica e extratz del sanc segon la mannieyra de la vertut de lu, e aprop fay aquel cezer entre las tuas mas e converteys l’aurelha a las partidas desus, e fen am petita fissura en la razit de la aurelha deves lo greys de lu en le loc be premegut de lu.	And the manner of cutting that is that you first sanctify the vein sepsis and extract the blood according to the method of its virtue, and then make that cut between your thumbs and turn the ear upwards, and finish with a small incision in the root of the ear where the grease of it is pressed.
E sia la fissura de figura lunar entro que pervengua a la peyra, e, la peyra atrobada, osta aquela si podes am instrumentz apropriatz; e aprop cos la fissura en aquela hora am velocitat, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	And let the incision be crescent-shaped so that it reaches to the ear's lobe. And when the lobe is hardened, remove it if possible with appropriate instruments; and then quickly sew up the incision at that time, and care for it until it heals.
E si la causa cazent en la aurelha es un dels gras que creysso e so inflatz, lahoras aministra la curacio e la extraccio de lu; mays si no obezeys a tu ad eyssiment, lahoras tu pren spatum teune subtil segon aquesta forma:	And if the cause of pain in the ear is one of the hairs that grew and became inflamed, then administer its treatment and extraction. But if it does not obey your attempt at examination, then you take a fine, thin spatula according to this form:
e aministra am aquel la abscizio de aquel gra lo qual es cazut en l’aurelha.	And use that spatula to perform the excision of that hair which has fallen into the ear.
E no fassas aquo quan cogitas que aquel ja es humectat per la vapor del aurelha, e pausa aquel en motas pessas, e prop extratz ne aquelas am les oncis o am gesti subtil, o ab inscizio ayssi co dit havem, quar es alleujada la extraccio de lu.	And do not perform this when you think that the hair has already been moistened by the vapor of the ear. Rather, place it in small pieces and then extract them with tweezers or gentle movements, or through excision as mentioned earlier, because the extraction is facilitated by these methods.
Mays en l’aygua la qual es intrada en l’aurelha cove que·l malaute use de sternutacio am condizi al comensament, e omple la sieua aurelha am alcu coto vielh, e jagua sobre aquela aurelha en la qual es l’aygua, e si per aquo es foro-getada, bo es; e sino, lahoras pren tropas peyras teunas e leons segon la longitut del dit, e calfa aquelas en le foc un pauc, e le pacient entrometa una de aquelas en le trauc de la sua aurelha e saute sobre la un pe sieu de aquela partida e percussia am una autra peyra sobre la peyra la qual es dintz la aurelha.	But when water enters the ear, it is necessary that the patient sneeze at the beginning and fill their ear with a little cotton wool. Then place it on that ear in which there is water, and if through this method it is removed, then good. But if not, then take some thin lead pipes and make them red-hot over fire, and the patient inserts one of those into the opening of his ear, pressing one side of it against that part and striking another pipe with a hammer onto the one that is inside the ear.
Donc no cesse aquo am peyra entro que tota l’aygua sia foro-getada.	And do not cease this until all the water has been removed.
E ja l’aygua sira foro-getada enayssi que tu prenguas de papier o de gonc i, e met la una extremetat de lu en l’aurelha e estendas l’autre extremitat am foc entro que sia comburit le may de lu.	And if the water is not thus removed, then you take some paper or cotton, and place one end of it into the ear while extending the other end over fire until most of it is burnt.
E prop met i autre gonc e fay aquo tantas veguadas entro que tota l’aygua sia foro-getada, e stratz aquel am canula ayssi co desus es dit de la peyra extrasadora.	And then place another cotton and do this several times until all the water has been removed. Then remove it with a cannula as described above of the ear extractor.
Mays en la extraccio de bestia intrant en aquela aurelha, si es a petit cos, ayssi piussa e a lu semblant, cura aquel ayssi cum havem dit en la divisio; mays si es de gran cos la qual causa apar al sen del vezement, lahoras aministra la extraccio de lu am gesti e oncis, e la causa de lu es pus leugiera de totas las autras causas que cazo en l’aurelha.	But in the extraction of a beast entering that ear, if it is a small creature such as a flea or its like, cure it in the same way as we have described in the division. But if it is a large creature which causes discomfort to the sense of hearing, then administer its extraction with gentle movements and tweezers. And the cause of this is easier than all other causes that occur in the ear.
Mays en la extraccio de verm engendrat en la aurelha, quan tu curas aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e en le tractat de distillacios e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu reguardes la aurelha al solelh.	But in the extraction of a worm generated in the ear, when you cure it with what we have said in the division and treatise of distillations and yet do not succeed, then you must examine the ear in sunlight.
E donc si apar aqui alcuna causa dels verms, lahoras extratz aquel am gesti o am onci subtils, mays si no apar deguna causa, lahoras pren una canula dejos streyta e desus ampla de la qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And if any cause of worms is seen here, then extract it with gentle movements or with fine tweezers. But if no such cause appears, then take a cannula made of bronze that is narrow at its base and wide at its top, shaped like this:
E entromet la extremitat subtil en la aurelha segon la quantitat la qual suffertar puesca le malaute; e aprop sucgeys am aquela per succio fort, e fay aquo motas veguadas, entro que totz les verms sian foro-gitatz.	And insert the fine end of this cannula into the ear according to what it can bear. Then suck with it strongly and do this many times until all the worms are removed.
Mays si no obezeysso a tu al ayssiment, lahoras tu opila e claus en le circuit de la canula am cera ayssi cum havem dit; lahoras aministre distillacios las quals han ja esproadas les antics en la curacio dels verms, e atrobaras aquo en le tractat de distillacios.	But if it does not obey your examination, then fill and close the circuit of the cannula with wax as we have said. Then administer distillations which are already proven in the treatment of worms, as you will find in the treatise on distillations.
E sia la tua efusio am la qual efundas les olis medicinas en la aurelha am aquest strument del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And this is the shape of the instrument with which you should administer medicinal oils into the ear:
E fay aquela de argent o de eram, dejos streyt, en le qual sia un petit trauc, e am pla desus.	Made of silver or brass, narrow at its base and having a small opening, and flat on top.
E donc sia cum empellent a que es en la conquavitat de la canula de continent aqui on sira necessari.	And let it be shaped in such a way that it fits into the concavity of the cannula where it will be necessary to apply this.
E si vols, pren le ray e envolveys en la extremitat de lu decentment coto, e aprop gieta oli en la concavitat del auziment, o suc de alcuna herba, o aquo que vols de aquestas medicinas en la canula — e aquela es en la aurelha —, e aprop entromet le ray am coto desus e exprem am la tua ma aquel am compressio temprada de lu entro que l’oli sia expellit en la concavitat del auziment e le malaute senta le oli dedintz.	"If you wish, take the wand and wrap it gently around the end of the patient's thigh. Then throw oil into the concave part of the device, or juice from some herb, or any other medicine in the tube - that one is by the ear - and then insert the wand with care above and press it with your hand with gentle pressure so that the oil is expelled into the concave part of the device and the patient feels the oil inside."
E aquo que sia enfundut en la aurelha sia ja scalfat am foc un petit.	"And whatever is poured into the ear should be gently warmed over fire beforehand."
E guarda te que la causa la qual distillaras en l’aurelha no sia trop frega, quar las medicinas de aurelha no suffertan aquo.	"Be sure that the liquid you distill into the ear is not too hot, for medications for the ear do not tolerate heat."
Capitol .vii.	Capítulo VII
De curacio de opilacio de aurelhas.	On the treatment of ear infections.
Alcunas veguadas alcus enfantz yeysso dels ventres de lors mayres no-perforatz, e aquo ja accideys en alcus homes, opilacio en le meat de la aurelha per plagua o per carn nada en aquela; e aquesta opilacio alcunas veguadas es fayta en le preon del trau de la aurelha la qual no consiec le vezement, e alcunas veguadas es en las partidas defora.	It sometimes happens that some children are born from their mothers' wombs without perforations in their ears, and this has also happened to some men. This can cause infection inside the ear due to water or flesh trapped there; sometimes this infection appears at the entrance of the ear canal and does not allow for proper cleaning, and other times it appears on the outer parts of the ear.
E aquela que accideys en le preon de lu, la qual no comprehen le vezement, es en las majors disposicios de dificil sanacio.	And that which happens at the entrance of the ear canal, which cannot be cleaned out easily, is usually the most difficult to treat.
E en aquela en qual consegueys le vezement, cove que tu pauses la aurelha del malaute al solelh e reguarda en aquela.	But in those cases where you can see inside the ear, it is necessary for you to hold the patient's ear up to the sun and observe carefully.
E donc si vezes oppulacio apparent, obre aquela am espatum subtil del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And if an accumulation of pus appears, then open that with a fine spatula, whose shape is like this:
Si’ la extremitat de lu en la qual sia petita la latitut, del qual la una partida sia aguda e l’autra no; e le spatum sia de dos latz leon per so que no fassa lizio al aurelha.	If the extremity where width is desired has one sharp end and the other blunt, and the spatula has two sides Lion-like to prevent injury to the ear.
E donc si la opilacio es per carn nascuda en la aurelha o en le meat de lu, lahoras te aquela am oncis subtils e incidiys aquela vehement facilitat entro que sia ostada tota la carn.	Then if the operation is performed on bare skin of the ear or face, at that time you should use fine sharp scissors and cut through that tissue with great ease until all the skin has been removed.
E si opilacio es en le preon de la aurelha, lahoras pren ray subtil leon e escalfa aquel am foc un pauc, e aprop met aquel en le meat de l’aurelha.	And if the operation is on the front of the ear, then take a thin Lion's claw, heat it in the fire for a moment, and promptly insert it into the flesh of the ear.
E donc si as scentit oppulacio am aquo que le malaute atroba am facilitat, per gravetat de ausir, esforsa la oppressio de lu am facilitat; e guarda te que no plagues les nervis del aurelha.	And therefore if you perform an operation with water where the illness appears easily, for fear of heaviness, relieve the pressure with ease; and be careful not to harm the nerves of the ear.
E aprop pausa en l’aurelha drap de li segon la quantitat del ample del trauc lo qual tu as envolvutz en l’enguent egipciac; e fay aquo per alcus jorns entro que sias segur de la consolidacio de la plagua; o que prenguas qualgua e enfon aquela en ayguaros e pulveriza sobre lu segi trissat e usa de lu; e si vezes la aurelha ja esser apostemada, lahoras cove que tu estraguas la qualgua e permutes aquela am autra qualgua la qual tu envoloparas en cerot que sia fayt am oli rozat, entro que sia le apostema caut cedat; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And then press the ear with cloth according to the amount of width of the bandage you have wrapped in Egyptian ointment. Do this for several days until you are sure that the wound has healed; or if you take wax and insert it into a syringe and sprinkle powder on it, use it instead. And if the ear becomes inflamed, then you must change the wax and replace it with another one wrapped in rose oil cerote until the inflammation is cauterized; and then care for it until it heals.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc, lahoras submergeys esponga o drap en aygua frega e pausa sobre la aurelha, e usa del autra curacio la qual restrengeys le flux del sanc, la qual es dita en le tractat de distillacio.	But if there is bleeding from the ear, then immerse a sponge or cloth in cold water and press it against the ear. Then use another cure that stops the flow of blood, which is described in the treatise on distillation.
Capitol .viii.	Chapter VIII
De cura de athezil le qual endeveno a las palpebras.	Of the treatment of inflammation which occurs in the eyelids.
Athezil les quals endeveno a las paupebras dels huels alcuna veguada so humitz, alscunas veguadas son secs.	"Athazil causes redness in the eyelids of eyes sometimes when it is humid, sometimes it is dry."
Donc cove que tu tenguas aquels am tenhalhas o am onci, e inscindas aquels am espatum de las suas razitz, e aprop pausa sobre les locs segi trissat.	Therefore you must have those tools ready or on hand, and unsheathe them from their sheaths, and pause over the places as described above.
Mays si dolor am flux de sanc veno, lahoras tu cauteriza aquels am cauteri lanticular subtil.	But if there is pain with a flow of blood, then cauterize it with a silver lancet.
E la milhor cauterizacio es aprop las inscizios e tropas veguadas retornam quan reman alcuna causa de sas razitz; e quan so cauterizadas am foc, aquelas razitz son comburidas e no retornan.	And the best cautery is near the incisions and wounds that return when there remains some cause of their opening; and when they are cauterized with fire, those causes are burned and do not return.
Capitol .ix.	Chapter IX
Cura de grandeyssa que veno a las palpebras dels huels.	Treatment for swelling that comes to the eyelids.
Motas veguadas endeve en las palpebras dels huels alcuna causa la qual es asemblada a grandissa en sa fortalicia e duricia, e per so grandissia es apelada.	Many times there appears in the eyelids of eyes some cause which is like hardness and toughness in its nature, and for this reason it is called swelling.
E es agreguacio de humiditat grossa en la palpebra dejos e desus.	And it is an accumulation of thick humidity in the eyelid below and above.
Donc la opperacio en lor es que consideras lahoras si la grandissia es procedent en lu en aquo que apar de la palpebra e es mauguda a tota partida; e la causa de lu es leugiera.	Therefore the operation in such cases is to examine if the swelling is produced inside, in which case it appears from the eyelid and is movable all around; and the cause of this is light.
Donc fen sobre aquela am fissura per la latitut, e aprop escorga aquela de tota partida am facilitat entro que evasesca, e aprop suspen aquela am onci e abscindeys aquela.	Therefore make an incision with a lancet along its length, and carefully examine it all around with facility until it evacuates, and then suspend the edges with a compress and cut off that which is above.
Mays si a tu no es apparelhada la incizio de lu si no pus que penetras la palpebra am inscizio pauc a pauc, lahoras aquo no notz en deguna causa.	But if the incision of it is not apparent without pressing that you penetrate the eyelid little by little, then know this in no cause.
E si la figura es gran, lahoras tu l’ajusta am sutura; e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	And if the figure is large, then adjust it with stitches; and cure it until it is healed.
E si es pauca, a tu no sobrevindra mal per aquela quar l’anguent de lu restaura aquela e encarna.	But if it is small, do not worry about it for that ointment of it restores and heals that.
E si la grandissia es declinant a las partidas dedintz de la palpebra deves la superficia dedintz, lahoras evesa la palpebra e suspen la grandissia am onci, otra que tu indigescas de incizio, e prem aquela de tota part, e si la palpebra per inscizio es alonguada, aquo no notz en deguna causa.	And if the swelling declines towards the inside of the eyelid below, then elevate the eyelid and suspend the swelling with a compress, unless you decide on an incision; otherwise press it all around, and if the eyelid is elongated by the incision, know this in no cause.
E aprop la incizio, lava le huel am aygua salada; e cura le loc am aquo que encarna entro que sia sanat.	And then make the incision, wash the eye with saltwater; and cure the place with something that heals until it is healed.
Capitol .x.	Chapter X.
De la cura axcirnah en la palpebra desus del huel.	On the treatment of a boil on the upper eyelid of the eye
Axcirnath es grays le qual es engendrat en las tunicas de la palpebra desus, e majorment endeve als enfantz, agrava les huels de aquels et accideyso a lor catartz le mayti; e no podon reguardar la claror del solelh per aquo quar lagremas se coytan ad aquels.	A boil is a swelling that occurs in the tissues of the upper eyelid, especially in children, and it causes inflammation of the eyes and often affects their sight because tears are secreted abundantly from them.
E per so tu vezes aquels jaser sobre les lors caras tot temps, e sobre les lors caras dormen; e so a las palpebras de lor dejos les sobrecils humidas, las quals ja ha cuberta imflacio, e iminencia de accernac apparent es en l’uelh; e que quant tu premes le loc am les tieus ditz, tu centes accernac entro aquels.	Therefore those children keep their heads constantly down and also sleep with them down; and therefore the eyelids of theirs below become humid and swollen, which is already covered by inflammation, and the presence of a boil is about to appear in the eye; and when you press the place with your fingers, you feel hardness within it.
E alcuna manieyra de opperacio es en aquel que le malaute pausa le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop pausa drap de li e de lu fay calgua, e fay de lu cercle segon la quantitat la qual contena arthernach de tota partida, e aprop pausa aquel sobre aquela e prem am les tieus ditz de tota per que sia agreguat arcernac en le mieg del cercle, e aprop fen en le mieg de aquela humiditat am spatum inscident am fissura per la latitut, e la fissura no sia major que la fissura que es fayta en flaubotomia.	And one way of operating on this is for the patient to hold his head still with his chin down and wrap a cloth around his neck and make a circle according to the amount it contains boil all around, then place that above it and press with your fingers all around so that pus accumulates in the middle of the circle, then make an incision through the middle of the moisture with a scalpel along its length, but do not let the incision be larger than that made in trephining.
Mays en le preon cove que tu fendas la codena tota entro que pervenguas ad arcernach, quar en las mays desposicios proceseys arcernach per fissura segon la forma de grayseza blanca.	But before you cut the cord all the way through until you reach pus, because in most cases it comes out through a small opening like cheese curds.
Donc extratz aquela am draps los quals tu as envolopatz entre les tieus ditz a las partidas deforo e revolv entre la ma dextra e sinistre entro que sia dispargut.	Therefore extract it with cloths which you have wrapped between your fingers at the outer edges and roll them between your right and left hands until it is all gone.
E guarda te que no ajustes en la fissura per so que am le spatum no pervenguas al huel e ladescas aquel.	And be sure not to insert the scalpel into the incision, lest you damage the eye and harm it.
Mays si no apar a tu arternach en le comensament de la fissura, mays que tu ajustes en la fissura un petit am fecilitat entro que procesisca arternach; e aprop extratz aquela ayssi quo havem dit; e aprop submargeys draps de li en aygua e vi agre e pausa les sobre le loc e estrenh aquels am polvils.	But if pus does not appear at the beginning of the incision, then insert a probe gently into the incision until pus comes out; and then extract it as we have said; and finally rinse with cloths in warm water and wine and apply them to the place and sprinkle them with powders.
E so alcus que trissan sal e pausan aquel en la conquavitat de la fissura per so que aquo que es remas de aquela humiditat.	And some people throw salt into the concave part of the incision in order to absorb what remains of that moisture.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And then cure it until it is healed.
Mays si accideys en le loc apostema caut, lahoras cura aquel am emplastres cedatils entro que sia sanat.	But if an abscess forms after the incision, then cure it with cataplasms of cedar until it is healed.
Capitol .xi.	Chapter XI
De manieyras de tactimi del huel.	On ways to examine the eye
Quan en las palpebras dels huels so natz pels ajustatz dejos les pels naturals e so antiquatz, lahoras aquels noso al huel e fan endevenir manieras de malautias ayssi cum lacrimas assiduas e mollificacio de palpebras e tela entro que aquo sia causa de destruccio del huel que s’apela tactinir del huel, e cura se en quatre manieyras: o per cauteri am foc; o am medicina acuta segon que denant es dit en le capitol de cauteri; o es fayt atactini per inscizio e sutura; o per cannas segon que yeu diyre.	When the eyelids of the eyes are swollen by the growth of hairs and are thickened, then they close over the eye and cause various kinds of diseases such as continuous tears and swelling of the eyelids and skin, which if not treated can lead to destruction of the eye. This is called a tactinim of the eye and it is treated in four ways: either by cautery with fire, or with an acidic medicine as described earlier in the chapter on cautery; or it is treated by incision and suturing; or by means of cannulae as I will describe.
E donc cove que tu pauses le cap del malaute en le tieu se; aprop converteys la palpebra del uelh am la tua ma sinistra, e si es convertida, bo es; e sino, entromet agulha en aquela en la qual sia fiel de la partida pus dejos de la palpebra, e fay penetrar la agulha am fiel desus, e aquo sia — prop del marge de la palpebra en le qual naysso les pels — prop dels pels, e tira le fiel a las partidas desus am la palpebra, e converteys aquela am le ray.	And therefore you should hold the patient's head still with his chin down; then turn the eyelid of the eye with your left hand, and if it turns easily, that is good. But if not, insert a needle into that part of the eyelid where there is pus beneath it, and make the needle penetrate upwards along the line of the eyelash near the edge of the eyelid, then pull the thread out upwards along the eyelid and turn it with the ray.
E aprop fen en la partida dedintz de la palpebra dejos les pels ajustatz am spatum inscidentz del lacrimal major entro al lacrimal mendre; e aprop extratz le fiel e pausa dejos la palpebra polvilhs petitz de coto o de drap, e aprop senha sobre la palpebra am tenta, e sia ayssi cum figura de fuelha de mirt.	And then make an incision into the part inside the eyelid where the lashes are attached with a scalpel along the edge of the larger lacrimal duct into the smaller one. Then extract the thread and place fine cotton or cloth powder on it, and sew the eyelid closed with a needle in such a way that it resembles a myrtle leaf shape.
Mays empero cove que sia la figura segon la quantitat de helevacio de la palpebra, quar aquo ja es diversificat en les homes, quar de aquels es le quals indigeys que sia inscidit de la palpebra gran quantitat segon la quantitat per la qual la palpebra es mollificada.	But however, the shape should be according to the amount of swelling of the eyelid, because this varies among individuals. Therefore for those who require a large incision into the eyelid according to the amount by which it is swollen.
E aprop fen am le spatum sobre las doas linhas las quals has senhadas, e comensa del lacrimal major entro al lacrimal menor.	And then make an incision with the scalpel along the two lines that you have sewn, starting from the larger lacrimal duct and going into the smaller one.
E si’ la tua fissura prop dels pels naturals ayssi cum es la grossetut del rey.	And if your incision is close to the natural lashes, make it as thick as a hair's breadth.
E aprop met le onci en un dels dos angles de la codena, e aprop excoria aquela tota, e aprop ajusta am la scitura las doas labias am gula o fiel de lana subtil, e abstergeys le sanc, e fay adherir aquo que superflueys dels fiels sobre dos sobrecils am alcunas causas enviscans, si voles far aquo, e sino, non cures.	And then place the needle in one of the two corners of the thread, and cut all the way through. Then sew up the two lips with wax or fine linen thread, wipe away the blood, and make what is superfluous from the threads adhere to both eyebrows with some adhesive substance if you wish, otherwise do not bother.
E aprop leyssa la sutura dels fiels entro a tres dias o quatre, e aprop cura aquo.	And then leave the suturing of the threads in place for three or four days, and then cure it.
E si vols, layssa la plagua ses sutura, e cura aquela am aquo que exsicca e constrenh, quar la palpebra es alevada deves la sigillacio de la plagua e la agreguacio de lu; mays sutura es milor E donc aysso diysso les antics de taxanir.	And if you wish, leave the scab without suturing and cure it with something that dries and constricts because the eyelid is raised due to the sealing of the wound and the accumulation of pus. But sewing is better. And this is what the ancients say about treating a tactinim.
Mays empero en lu sia sollicitut sobre le malaute, e es de bona operacio, e no es en lu temor.	But however, if there is swelling above the disease and it is easy to operate on and there is no fear in doing so.
E es autra manieyra en taxmir, e es que senhes sobre la palpebra figura ayssi cum fuelha de mirt, e aprop eleva la palpebra am tres uncis segreguatz e congreguatz segon aquesta forma:	And there is another way to treat a tactinim: sew the eyelid in a shape like a myrtle leaf and then lift the eyelid with three needles separated and gathered together in this way:
Mays si no es possible aquo, tener les uncis, e aquo no es engualhat, lahoras pren una agula en la qual haia fil e met aquela en le mieg de la figura, e entromet le autre fiel prop le lacrimal major, e·l fiel segon prop le lacrimal mendre, e ajusta entre les tieus ditz les fiels am equalitat, e aprop am aquels eleva la tua ma am elevacio engual, eleva tota la codena sobre la qual es senhat ayssi cum havem recomtat.	"However, if this is not possible, hold the eyelids open. If it still does not work, then take a needle with thread and place that in the middle of the eye, insert another thread near the larger tear duct, and adjust the threads evenly between your fingers. Then, with those threads, gently lift your hand upwards, lifting the entire eyelid."
E aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	"Then carefully close the wound's lips using stitches, and heal what needs to be healed."
Mays si accideys apostema deves la tua inscizio o la tua fissura, seda aquel apostema am cerot e a lu semblantz, e am enguentz.	"If an abscess occurs around your incision or fissure, treat it with cerote and similar substances, and cover it gently."
E alcunas veguadas endeve a la palpebra que·ls sieus pels sian convertitz, adonc cove que tu uses en aquela de aquo que havem dit de inscizio; mays sutura en quascus es mays artificial.	"And sometimes, the eyelids' edges can turn inward. Then you must use what was mentioned earlier about incision; but suture it in such a way that it is most natural."
Ataxinir am cannas es segon aquesta forma:	"To sew with a needle and thread, follow this method:"
e es que tu convertas la palpebra e scindas la figura qu’es dedintz segon que he recontat; e aprop per art fay doas cannas o doas astelas subtils de las quals longitut sia segon la longitut de la palpebra e la latitut de lor sia mendra de la latitut del spatum.	"And if you want to turn the eyelid and cut the figure as mentioned earlier, then prepare two needles or two thin threads whose length is equal to the length of the eyelid and whose width is smaller than the width of the spatula."
E tu ja has inscidit en las extremitatz de quascunas partidas, la on tenes les fils.	"And once you have incised both ends of each cut, keep hold of the threads."
Aprop agregua quascuna am subtilitat subre aquo que superflueys de la palpebra del huel, e constres las cannas de quascunas partidas am fort strictura, e layssa aquela per alcus jorns, quar la codena per la strictura morira e sira denegada e se poyrira entro que per si meteyssa cayra.	"Then carefully bring each thread up from below the excess skin of the eyelid and tie both threads together tightly. Leave it like this for a few days, so that the thread dies and falls out by itself, and the wound can heal on its own."
Mays si es tardat, lahoras trenca la am las toroyras, e aprop cura la plagua entro que sia sanat.	"But if it takes too long, then cut the threads with scissors and carefully clean the wound, healing what needs to be healed."
Donc cum es solidada, la palpebra es elevada e les pels no pungo.	"So once it is healed, the eyelid will be elevated and the hairs will not irritate it."
E aquesta es la forma de doas cannas las quals faras segon aquesta forma:	"And this is how you make two needles following this method:"
e haia la quantitat de la longitut e de la latitut ni mays ni mens.	"Make sure the length and width are neither too much nor too little."
Capitol .xii.	"Chapter XII."
De elevacio de pels pungentz en le huel am agula quan le pel es dur.	"Of raising irritating hairs on the eyelid using a needle when the hair is hard"
Quan son pels no-naturals, durs e aspres e pungentz les huels, lahoras la operacio en lu es que tu prenguas agula subtil e pauses en aquela fiel de ceda subtil e leon, e aprop que tu ajustes las extremitatz de lu e nozes quascu en manieyra mot subtil.	When the humors are unnatural, hard and sharp and piercing the flesh, then the operation on it is to take a subtle needle and place it in that thin vein of cedar and lion, and next you adjust its extremities and knot each one very subtly.
E sia la longitut dels fiels de quantitat de una palma.	And let the length of the veins be as much as a palm's breadth.
E aprop tu compon2 autre fiel subtil dejos lu en breu, e nuza las extremitatz de aquel si tu·t vols.	Next you compose another subtle vein below him quickly, and tie its extremities if you wish to.
E aprop pause le malaute le sieu cap en le tieu se, e sia prop del solelh per que la tua obra sia declarada, quar es operacio subtil e menuda.	And next place the patient's head on a cloth napkin, and let it be near the sun so that your work may be declared, because this is subtle and fine operation.
E aprop intromet la agulha en la razit del pel ajustat la qual ha necessitat de engen, e fay aquela penetrar en la palpebra festinantment entro que extraguas aquela desus le pel natural.	Next insert the needle into the hair root that needs to be singed, and make it penetrate swiftly into the eyelid before you extract it above the natural skin.
E aprop tire le pel entro desus e intromet aquel en alixati, e sian les pels un o dos o tres e no mays.	Next pull out the hair from above and insert that into a plaster, and let there be one or two or three hairs and no more than that.
E aprop tira la tua ma am aquel entro que·l pel sia fora-gitat am alixolati en la palpebra am le pel natural.	Next pull your hand away while the hair is being pulled out with the plaster in the eyelid along with the natural skin.
Mays si es atirat alixalati e non es gitat le pel, atiraras alixati a las partidas dejos am le fiel le qual tu has compost am aquela, entro qu’en sia gitat alixalati del trau sobira.	But if it is pulled with the plaster and the hair is not extracted, then pull the plaster to the parts below along with the vein that you have composed with that, until it is extracted from the wound above.
E vegas aquela am la visio del huel, quar lahoras tu gitaras alixati e lo fiel, e grotan quascu e clautz le huel, e laysse le claus per dos dias o tres, entro que·l pel adheresca al sieu loc e nasque sobre aquel bona carn.	Then close it with the vision of the wound, because afterward you will remove the plaster and the vein, and cleanse each one carefully and dress the wound, and let them remain for two or three days until the hair adheres to its place and grows over it good flesh.
E si es mays breu le pel, lahoras tu ajusta un pel lonc dels pels naturals, e es elevat am aquel, o que·l leysses entro que sia alonguat aprop alcu spazi, e lehoras tu eleva aquel.	And if it is too short hair, then attach a long hair from the natural hairs, and lift it with that, or let it remain until it grows some space longer, and afterward you lift it.
Capitol .xiii.	Chapter XIII
De la cura de ehacratir la qual ve en la palpebra desus.	Of the treatment of the inflammation that occurs in the eyelid above
Quan ve en le huel ehacratir, e es contraccio de la palpebra quan es contrayta en sus, o a dextra o a sinistra partida, per mala consolidacio de plagua o de seccio o de cauteri, e es apelada leporina, e aquesta ahercrati o es natural o accidental, e es fayta per consolidacio de plagua o de seccios o de cauteri, o per semblantz a lor malcuratz.	When inflammation occurs in the wound and there is contraction of the eyelid when it contracts above on its right or left side due to poor healing of a wound or section or cautery, and it is called leporina, and this inflammation can be natural or accidental, and it is caused by healing of a wound or section or cautery, or by resembling their poor condition.
May la manieyra de la operacio en lu es que tu fendas aquela consolidacio e que separes las labias de lu, e pauses en lu en aquo que es entre aquelas una meca de drap de li, e ligues aquelas entro que sian sanadas.	The manner of the operation in this case is that you cut that healing and separate the lips of it, and put on it a cloth soaked in warm water, and bind those until they are healed.
E no cove que tu uses de curacio de lu de las causas las quals exsiccan, constrenho; quar si tu fas aquo retorna alixacratir pus mal que nulh temps no foc habantz.	And there is no need for you to use remedies that dry it out or constrict it, because if you do this, inflammation will return worse than before and never heal.
Usa en aquela de causas que mollifico ayssi cum es fenugrec, e embroca am la aygua en la qual son coytz altea e semensa de li, o enguent dyaquilon, le qual sia liquefayt am alcu dels olis, e submergeys en aquel la meca, e cura am aquel.	Use in that causes that soften it, such as fenugreek, and mix it with the water in which altaea and saffron have been cooked and strained from it, or diacylglycerol, which has been liquefied with some of the oils, and submerge the cloth in that, and cure with it.
E lo tesaur de la tua curacio es que tu perforsses am tot engen que no sia consolidat segon la forma que foc al comensament.	And the treasure of your treatment is that you perforate everything that has not healed according to the original form.
E aquesta operacio la qual havem dita, no es sino alcuna rectificacio de ehalixacrati que no retorna la forma del loc segon que foc denant.	And this operation that we have mentioned is simply a correction of inflammation that does not return the form of the place to what it was before.
Capitol .xiiii.	Chapter XIV
De la cura de ehacrati le qual es fayt en la palpebra dejos.	Of the treatment of inflammation that occurs in the lower eyelid
Aquesta alxacrati la qual es fayta en la palpebra dejos, la qual es nompnada vertadierament alxacrati; e es de lu alcuna natural, autra accidental.	This inflammation that occurs in the lower eyelid, which is properly called inflammation; and it can be either natural or accidental.
Mays accidental es fayta per plagua o per scissura o per cauteri o per autres semblantz.	But accidental inflammation is caused by wounding, cutting, cautery, or other similar causes.
E la via de la operacio de lu es que tu prenguas una agula en la qual haga fil doble, e fiques aquela en la carn, e que la fassas passar del lacrimal de senestre entro al lacrimal dextre, entro que·l fil pervengua en las doas extremitatz de la carn.	"To perform the operation on him: Take a needle with a doubled thread, insert it into his flesh, and pass it from the left tear duct to the right, until the thread reaches both ends of the flesh."
E aprop exten la carn a las partidas desus am la agula e cus aquela am la agula, e inscideys am spatum ample.	"Then stretch the flesh at its edges with the needle and sew it up with the needle. Then cut it open with a wide spatula."
E donc si retorne la figura de la palpebre segon que cove, bo es; e sino, pren le ray e pausa aquel en la figura fenduda, e am aquel converteys la palpebra, e fen las doas fissuras en le latz de la palpebra dejos.	"Then return the eyelid to its proper shape if possible. Otherwise, take the needle and sew up that which is torn, and with it turn over the eyelid so that both incisions are on the outer side of the eyelid."
E sian las extremitatz de las doas fissuras de dos angles de la inscizio, la qual has fayta entro que concurren, e sia de lor fayt angle entro que quan se congreguan sia fayta figura de lor.	"And when the ends of both incisions meet at two points of the cut, make sure they form a single point where they converge, so that when they come together they form a neat and sharp angle."
E aquesta figura es letra greca: la landa.	"And this figure is called the Greek letter lambda."
E aprop osta la carn aquela per la quantitat que es le latz de lu agut dejos de lu, aquo que siec la palpebra.	"Then take away that flesh on the side of its sharp edge towards the eyelid, so that it cuts off the eyelid."
E aprop ajusta las partz seperadas e cos aquelas am le fil de lana; e aprop cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit de las medicinas mollificativas e de las calguas entro que sia sanat.	"Then join together the separated parts and sew them with a thread of wool. Then dress it with whatever medicines we have mentioned to make it heal."
E si alxacrati endeve per fissura o sutura o cauteri, lahoras cove que tu fendas am fissura plana sobre les pels de la palpebra segon que es precedit.	"And if you find any scar tissue from a previous incision or suture or cautery, it is necessary to cut open with a flat incision over the skin of the eyelid as has been described."
E aprop separa am la calgua entre doas labias segon que havem dit.	"Then separate with forceps between two lips according to what we have said."
En la suma del sermo de la cura de alxacrati quan es desus o dejos, que corra en lu operacio, segon que es preparat de la forma de alxacrati, e aquela es en forma de motas diversitatz.	"In the summary of the discourse on the treatment of scars whether above or below, it should be run through during the operation according to how the scar is prepared and shaped, which may take various forms."
E le artifexs savi totz temps prepara engen en quascuna manieyra la qual es possibla a lu entro que fassa retornar la figura a la forma natural, o prop de aquela, e aquel malaute segon que a lu conveneys de la operacio e dels strumentz en las majors disposicios.	"And the skilled artist always prepares in every possible way to restore the figure as close as possible to its natural form, according to what is appropriate for the operation and the instruments available, especially when there are better arrangements."
Capitol .xv.	"Chapter XV."
De la adherencia de la palpebra am la conjunctiva o am la cornea.	"Of adhesion of the eyelid to the conjunctiva or cornea."
Quan accideys aquesta consolidacio a motz homes enayssi que sia solidada la palpebra pus desus am le album del huel, e sia prohibida de la facilitat del movement e de las suas obras naturals, donc cove que tu entrometas la extramitat del ray dejos la palpebra, e eleva en sus aquela, o exten aquela am le unci.	"When this adhesion occurs in many people, it is usually due to the eyelid being stuck above with mucus from the eye. It becomes stiff and its natural movements are hindered. Therefore, you should insert the end of a needle beneath the eyelid and lift it up or stretch it out using tweezers."
E aprop tu inscideys la adherencia am spatum subtil, le qual no sia am acuitat de las inscisios, habantz obtus un petit per so que·l malaute no sia inquietat deves la operacio, e remau le spatum que no ledesca le huel am la sua acuitat.	"Then you should cut the adhesion with a fine, blunt spatula that is not sharp-pointed, so as not to cause discomfort during the operation. Make sure the spatula does not scrape the eye with its sharpness."
E sia la tua inscizio quays excorjan aquela adherencia am facilitat entro que sia retornada la palpebra segon la sua forma natural e que sia sanada tota la adherencia.	"And make your incision such that it easily severs the adhesion, so that the eyelid returns to its natural form and all of the adhesion is healed."
E aprop tu met en le huel aygua salada am la qual tu laves; o distilla en lu de zunia dissolvut en l’aygua.	"And then you should put salt water into the eye with which you wash it; or distill in it juniper dissolved in water."
E aprop separa entre la palpebra e l’huel am calgua de li, e pausa sobre le huel lana infuza en album de huou, e aprop le tertz jorn usa de causas consolidativas entro que sia sanat.	"Then separate between the eyelid and the eye with forceps, place a piece of wool soaked in egg white on the eye, and use consolidating ointments on the third day so that it heals."
Capitol .xvi.	"Chapter XVI."
De inscizio de ungla e de eminencia de carn dels lacrimals.	"Of incision of nail and prominence of flesh from the lacrimals."
Sapias que ungla es segon dos manieyras, quar o es nervosa, e es semblant a ciphac dur subtil; o es no-nervosa, semblant a humiditat blanca congilada, la qual quan ferr la toca, o es forsat aquela prendre am onci, es abscindida e le onci no es ficat en lu.	"Know that there are two kinds of nail: one is nervous and resembles hard cartilage; the other is non-nervous and resembles congealed white humor. When you touch it with forceps, if it is forced out, it should be grasped with tweezers, cut off, and the tweezers not inserted into it."
E amdos las specias no comensan sino del lacrimal major entro que va petit a petit que cobre la vista e prohibeys le lum e·l movement de huel.	"And both kinds begin only from the larger lacrimal canal, which gradually covers the eye and blocks its light and movement."
Mays la manieyra del obrar en la inscizio de lu es que·l malaute pause le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop obre les huels de lu, e eleva la palpebra am la tua ma, e aprop colligeys la ungla am onci de pauca duplicacio e exten aquela a las partidas desus.	"But the way to operate for its excision is that the patient should hold their head in place and you should open their eyelids. Then lift up the eyelid with your hand and grasp the nail with tweezers without doubling them back too much, stretching it out upwards."
E aprop pren una agula e entromet en aquela un pel de cavalh o de buou o de vaqua, o de semblantz, o de fiel fort, o duplica la extremitat de la agulha petit a petit e fica aquela en le mieg de la ungla, e penetra aquela am la agulha, e lia am fiel la ungla; e exten aquela a las partidas desus, e excorja am le pel le latz de la ungla lo qual siec la pupilla.	"Then take a needle and insert it into the nail under its skin with horsehair or cowhair or wool from oxen or sheep or strong sinew. Then gradually bend back the tip of the needle and insert it into the middle of the nail, pierce it with the needle, and tie the nail with sinew. Then stretch out the nail upwards and cut off its outer side using the hair, taking care not to touch the pupil."
E ayssi tu sieguas aquela am le pel entro al derier de lu.	"And then follow that same method until you reach the end of it."
E aprop tu inscideys le romanent en la razitz del lacrimal am spatum subtil o am petitas forfexs, e leysa la carn del lacrimal natural per so que per inscizio de aquela no endevengua fluxs de lagremas continuabla.	"And then you should cut off the remainder in the root of the lacrimal canal using a fine spatula or small forceps. Leave the natural flesh of the lacrimal alone so that cutting it does not cause continuous tearing."
E alscunas vetz la ungla am le sol onci estenduda o am fiel, ayssi co havem dit, e aprop sia excurjat am spatum leon del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	"And sometimes the nail can be stretched out with one pair of tweezers or with sinew as we have said. Then it should be cut off using a lion's claw spatula, which has this shape:"
E guarda te que am le spatum no toques la tunica cornea e que avengua en lu ruptura, e que la pupilla sia perforada.	"And take care that with the spatula you do not touch the corneal tunic and cause a rupture there. And also take care not to perforate the pupil."
Aprop la inscizio geta en le huel un pauc de sal trissa o di cief fayt de siniar, e leyssa aquel entro al autre dia; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove entro que sia sanat.	"Then place a little crushed salt or fresh egg yolk from chicken on the eye, leaving it there overnight. Then rinse it with water that is suitable for healing so that it heals."
E si la ungla no es nervoza e no podes metre la agulha, ni es ficada en aquela le onci, lahoras motas veguadas aquesta specia de ungla es curada am medicinas, e es sanada ayssi cum yeu e recomtat en la divisio.	"And if the nail is not nervous and you cannot insert the needle into it or grasp it with tweezers, sometimes this kind of nail can be cured with medications. And thus it is treated as other kinds of nail, as described in the division."
E si tu vols inscindir aquela, lahoras tu obre le huel del malaute e pren spatum subtil leon de freul acuitat segon aquesta forma:	"And if you want to cut it off, then open the eyelid of the patient and take a fine lion's claw spatula with sharp points like this:"
am subtilitat.	"with sharpness."
E si vezes que aquela es rarificada e es confugida e empren en aquela razit, lahoras distilla de la tua ora en le huel de cief fayt de siniar o am cief rog o am sal trissat, e opila le huel entro a l’autre dia.	"And if it becomes softened and congested and enters into its root, then distill from your mouth into the eye fresh egg yolk from chicken or honey or crushed salt. Then close the eyelid overnight."
E aprop itera sobre aquela la operacio entro que sia remaugut tot aquo que es de lu, sino que·l contrari apostema caut sia en le huel, quar lahoras tu leyssa aquela, e cura al comensament la apostema entro que sia sanat.	"And then repeat the operation until everything that belongs to it has been removed. But if an opposite tumor appears on the eye, then leave that alone and treat the tumor at its beginning so that it heals."
E aprop itera la tua operacio sobre aquela am razo entro que sia sanat.	"And then repeat your operation on it with reason until it is healed."
La emenencia de la carn lacrimal, si notz en le huel per gran nocument, sia suspendut am onci; e inscideys aquela de aquela una partida, e no ultimes la inscizio per so que no inscidesqua fluxs de lagremas.	"If a prominence of the lacrimal flesh appears in the eye as a great injury, then grasp it with tweezers and cut off one part of it without cutting all the way through so that you do not cause continuous tearing."
E aprop distilla en le lacrimal cief rog e fayt de siniar entro que sia sanat.	"And then distill honey and fresh egg yolk into the lacrimal until it heals."
Capitol .xvii.	"Chapter XVII."
De inscizio de alguazardenic e de aquo que es nascut de carn ajustada en le huel.	"Of incision of styes and of anything that is born from attached flesh in the eye."
Alcunas veguadas en les huels de alcus es nascuda carn roga, e es sobre-pausada entro que cobre la pupilla, o apropinqua o estrenh sobre las palpebras e fort leu comprem las palpebras a las partidas deforo e es assemblada a roza de balaustra.	"Sometimes in the eyelids of some people flesh is born that is rough and thick, covering the pupil or approaching it and pressing strongly on the eyelids so that they stick together at their edges like a column."
Mays la operacio en lu es que·l malaute pausa le sieu cap en le tieu se; e aprop obre les huels de aquel e colligeys tota aquela carn am oncis convenientz ad aquo, e te aquo am una forcep o am cesti; e aprop inscindiys la carn el comensament entro que tot sia finit am le encisori, e guarda te del huel que no ledescas aquel deves la tua operacio.	"But the operation for this is that the patient should hold their head in place. Then open the eyelids of that person and grasp all of that flesh with suitable tweezers using a cimeter or forceps. Then cut off the beginning of the flesh until everything is finished without cutting into the eye during your operation."
E sia la tua inscizio am la qual inscides aquelas o am espatum le qual nos havem recomtat en la inscizio de la ungla, o am petitas forfexs am las quals es colligit ascebel segon que vindra la forma de lu aprop aquest capitol.	"And let your incision be with whatever you use to cut it off, whether with the spatula that we have recommended in the incision of the nail or with small forceps according to what seems suitable to you according to this chapter."
Donc cum es complida la tua inscizio e es remauguda tota aquela carn, lahoras omple le huel de sal trissa, o destilla en lu polvera roga e semblantz a lu de las medicinas corrossivas, e pausa sobre le huel deforo coto am album de huou entro que sia asegurat de apostema caut.	"Then when your incision is completed and all of that flesh has been removed, then fill the eye with crushed salt or distill into it powdered medicine like a corrosive and press on the eyelid from outside with egg white until there is no doubt about the cauterization."
E si roman alcuna causa de alguardenici e es senhoragat sanc caut, e temes apostema caut, lahoras leyssa le huel e cura aquela apostema am aquo que ceda aquela apostema, e aprop itera sobre aquel am operacio entro que sia sanat, e semblantment fay en la carn ajustada la qual accideys en le huel de aquesta especia.	"If some cause remains for guarding heat and there is no cautery available, and you fear an abscess will form, then leave the wound open and care for that abscess with whatever makes it yield, and soon return to treat it with operation until it is healed, and similarly do in the case of attached flesh that occurs in wounds of this type."
Mays empero tu cove que alienes tota curacio del huel freul per via natural o per via accidental, obran am ferr, e no metas la tua ma en alcuna de aquestas operacios entro que veges que aquel membre sia suffertant aquela operacio.	"But you should not remove all care of the wound by force or accidentally with iron tools, and do not put your hand in any of these operations until you see that the limb has tolerated that operation."
Capitol .xviii.	"Chapter XVIII"
De colleccio de sabel en le huel.	"Of cauterization of the wound."
Sabel so venas rogas las quals son testudas sobre le huel e prohibeysso al vesement la sua operacio, e develican le huel am longitut de dias.	"Cauterize only the veins that are tough and visible on the wound, and forbid their operation until the wound is uncovered for several days."
Donc necessari es al comensament que tu consideres si le huel en le qual es sabel es fort e en lu no es autra malautia que sabel, lahoras tu colligeys aquel sabel.	"Therefore, it is necessary at the beginning that you consider whether the wound in which cauterization takes place is strong and does not have another illness besides cauterization, then you cauterize that wound."
E es que tu comandes al malaute que pause le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop suspen aquelas venas am un onci o am dos segon la tua prudencia; e sia aquel onci de subtil duplicacio segon aquesta forma:	"And you should order the patient to hold his head down toward his feet, and then suspend those veins with one or two ounces according to your discretion; and that ounce should be of fine double-folded silk according to this pattern:"
o so dos oncis gradantment en un cos segon aquesta forma:	"or two ounces graduating in one body according to this pattern:"
E aprop sian colligidas aquelas venas am forses subtils, am subtilitat, e abstergeys le sanc hora aprop hora, entro que vegas aquelas venas esser remaugudas del huel e sian revolgudas.	"And then suspend those veins with fine threads, with subtlety and care, and wipe away the blood hour by hour until you see that those veins are removed from the wound and turned back."
E guarda te que tu no ledes le huel am las extremitatz del spatum; e si’ la tua operacio en le miegjorn denant le solelh, e sias mot ferm en la tua operacio que no inscidas sino aquelas venas.	"And be careful that you do not cut the wound with the edges of the scalpel blade; and if your operation is in the middle of the day before the sun, and you are very firm in your operation, then you should only cauterize those veins."
E quan tu auras complitz, lahoras tu distilla en le huel cief vert o rog per que am sa acuitat corrodesca aquo que es remaugut del sabel.	"And when you have completed the operation, then apply to the wound fresh rue juice or decoction so that with its sharpness it may corrode what has been removed by cauterization."
Mays si aquo no es a tu possible colligeys tot en aquela hora, e lahoras tu emplastra tot am aquo que cede la dolor de lu, e leyssa lu per alcus dias entro que sia sedada la dolor de lu e que sia asegurat de apostema caut.	"But if it is not possible for you to do this all in that hour, then you should plaster everything with what relieves the pain of it, and leave it for a few days until the pain is settled and assured against an aposteme."
E aprop itera sobre lu segon que la mateyssa manieyra entro que sia sanat.	"And then continue to treat it according to the most gentle manner until it is healed."
E aquesta es la forma de las forfexs:	"And this is the form of the cauterizing iron:"
Capitol .xix.	"Chapter XIX."
De reduccio de arizati al nas.	"Of the reduction of a broken nose."
Quan tu curas arisati am cauteri o am medicina aguda comburent segon que es precedida la narracio de lu e no es sanat, lahoras no es engen en lu sino que fendas sobre le apostema deves la maturitat de lu, e que extraguas tota la humiditat la qual es en lu e·l poyre entro que sia descubert le os.	When you treat burns with cautery or sharp medicine that does not follow the usual course of treatment and fails to heal, then do not attempt to enter the patient's body. Instead, open up the abscess when it is ripe, and extract all the moisture within it until the bone is exposed.
E donc cum es descubert le os e vezes en lu corrupcio o negror, lahoras tu ratz lu am un sturment del qual aquesta es la forma:	And once the bone has been exposed and you see corruption or blackness in it, then remove it with an instrument shaped like this:
E es nompnat de aspre cap, e sia feyt de fer indi, e sia le cap redon ayssi cum asir le qual sia fayt punctat per punctacio de lima o aliskalfati per punctacio subtil (ayssi cum es en la forma seguent).	And it is named "sharp head," and made of iron. Its head is round like this, with many points for fine puncturing by means of a file or aliscale.
E pausa aquel sobre le loc corrumput del os, e aprop revolveys aquel entre les tieus ditz, e prem la tua ma petit a petit entro que sapias que aquela corropcio es rasa.	And press that against the corrupted part of the bone, and then twist it between your fingers, gradually pressing harder until you know that the corruption has been scraped away.
E aquo sia fayt alcunas veguadas, e aprop restaura le loc am causas exsiccativas e stipticas.	And once this has been done several times, then restore the area with drying and astringent treatments.
Donc si·l loc es consolidat e es en lu nascuda bona carn e es abscindit le cors de la sania e roman per xl dias, e no es renovat e no es apostemat e no accideys en lu accident, lahoras tu sapias que es sanat.	Therefore, if the area is consolidated and new healthy skin has formed, and the wound has separated from the sound flesh and remains for forty days without being renewed or becoming inflamed or suffering any setback, then you will know that it has healed.
E sino, lahoras no es en lu engen sino reduzir la fissura a la forma del nas, e segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu descuebras de segon os am ferr o am medicina acuta, e cum sira descubert le os, lahoras tu pren tribo segon aquesta forma:	But if not, then it is necessary to reduce the wound to the shape of a nose, and do so in this way: first expose the bone using iron or sharp medicine, and once the bone has been exposed, then take a trocar made in this shape:
Sia la extramitat de lu ferr triangulada, e·l fust de lu sia prim extenuat entro a la extremitat ayssi cum vezes assi.	The outer part of the iron should be triangular, and the shaft thin and tapering to a point at its extremity like this:
E aprop pausa aquel sobre le os, e sia aquel prop del lacrimal; e alongua la tua ma un pauc del huel, e aprop revol la tua ma am le tribo entro que penetre tot le os, e aquel sente le malaute per asso que atroba vent yssir per so quan te la sua ma.	Place that one over the bone, and let it be near the tear duct; extend your hand a little towards the heel, then rotate your hand with the trial in such way that it penetrates all the bone, and the patient feels the pain as much air escapes through there when you move your hand.
Donc lahoras restaura le loc am medicinas stipticas exsiccantz ayssi cum t’e eyssenhat.	Then, restore the place with medicinal remedies that are drying and astringent like those you have here.
Donc cum nays la carn e·l loc es endurazit, lahoras la materia la qual effundia a las partidas deforo retorna al nas, donc aquo es pus leugier sobre le malaute.	Once the flesh has been cut and the place has hardened, then the material that had flowed out returns to its place; therefore, it is easier for the pain to be relieved.
Capitol .xx.	Chapter XX.
De reduccio de la eminencia del huel.	Regarding the reduction of the prominence of the heel.
Quan le huel emineys am la sua totalitat e no accideys en le vezement nocument ni diminuacio, lahoras cove que laxas le malaute, e aprop que·l segues, e aprop que pausas ventozas en le cervitz ses scarificacio e succa per bona succaccio; e aprop pausa sobre le huel liniment le qual sia fayt de acatra e aloe e enses e sarcocolla, e aprop strenh le emplaustre sobre le huel am motz polvils.	When the heel is entirely prominent and no deformity or diminution has occurred, then you should loosen the pain, follow it up closely, and pause often on the Achilles tendon without scarification and suck well; place a liniment made of acacia, aloe, iris, and tragacanth on the heel, and apply the plaster with plenty of powder.
E la manieyra dels polvils es que prenguas draps de li leons motz, e quascun drap sia duplicat en quatre plecs; e fay de aquels motz.	And the manner of preparing the powders is that you take cloths of linseed meal, each cloth folded into four layers; and make them with those meals.
E aprop pausa aquels la un sobre le autre segon la quantitat de la qual ha le huel necessitat.	And place one cloth on top of the other according to the amount necessary for the heel.
E aprop strenh sobre aquels am drap dur am fort strictura; e itera las ventosas am succio ses scarificacio; e aprop osta las ventosas e leyssa le huel streyt le dia e la nueyt.	Strengthen with rough cloth with strong constraint; repeat the cupping glasses with suction without scarification; then remove them, leaving the wound tight day and night.
Mays si entretant le liguament es mollificat, lahoras cove que sia mot streyt.	If in the meantime the ligament softens, it is necessary that it be very tight.
E aprop osta le liament aprop le dia e la nueyt ayssi cum havem dit.	And remove the ligaments again during the day and night as we have said.
E si vezes le huel ja esser redusit, bo es, e sino, lahoras itera le emplastre am les polvils e la strictura e las ventosas entro que sia sanat.	And if sometimes the wound is already reduced, that's good; otherwise, then repeat the plaster with powders and constraint and cupping glasses until it is healed.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter XXI
De la inscizio de la eminencia de la tunica uvea.	Of the incision of the prominence of the tunic of the eye
Quan endeve disrupcio en la tunica uvea, e aprop es eminent e procezeys fora las palpebras ayssi cum un gra de rasim, e es orrazada la forma de home per aquo, e vols aquo inscidir, lahoras la operacio en lu es ayssi cum havem recomtat, que tu entrometas la agula en la razitz de la uvea de la partida dejos en la partida desus, e aprop met la agula autra en la qual sia fil doble de la part del lacrimal, e fay aquela penetrar e leyssa la primieyra agula segon la sua disposicio; e aprop inscideys le loc del fiel doble e leva am aquel la partida de la uvea en le circuit de la agula, e strenh aquela mot.	When there is a rupture in the tunic of the eye and it is prominent and protruding outside the eyelids like a grain of mustard seed, if you want to incise that prominence, then proceed as follows: introduce the needle into the edge of the eye at its lower part and bring it out above; then insert another needle on the side towards the lacrimal gland and let this one penetrate first while allowing the first needle to follow its course; finally, incise where the double thread is located and lift up the edge of the tunic with that thread, pulling it tight.
E aprop extratz la agula e pausa sobre le huel lana infusa en album de huou e leyssa entro que cayha le fil am la uva.	And then remove the needle and place a bandage soaked in egg white on the wound, allowing the thread to remain inside with the eye.
E aprop cura le huel am aquo que conforte aquel entro que la plagua sia sanada.	And then dress the wound with what will comfort it until the inflammation is healed.
E alcunas veguadas aduna de tota partida am cercle de drap entro le huel ajuste eminencia gran, e aprop sia perforat am le spatum subtil que vengua al preon del huel, e corra la humiditat albuginea, e descen le huel e intra tantost.	And sometimes it happens that the whole prominence is gathered together with a cloth circle around the wound, and then it is punctured with a fine spatula that comes to the front of the wound, allowing the whitish humor to flow out, and then the wound closes quickly.
E aprop strenh entro que sia sanat.	And then compress until it is healed.
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter XXII
De curacio de alconati.	Of the treatment of corneal ulcers
Aquesta malautia que es apelada alconati no es sino sania la qual es ajustada en le huel semblant a aygua dessendent e no es aquela.	This condition called corneal ulceration is nothing more than a moist humor that appears on the eye like descending water, but it is not so.
Mays la manieyra del obrar en ela es que fasses le malaute sezer sobre la sela aparelada e dreyta, e aprop pren le cap sieu en las tuas mas de doas partz e mau aquel entro que veias la sania pervenir a las partidas dejos, e aprop sia siccada e no descenda, e sia ostat le lum, e·l malaute veia las causas ayssi cum vezia.	The method of treating it is to place the patient on a prepared seat and then take your hand in both of yours and press the eye until you see the humor rise towards the lower part; then dry it up so that it does not flow down again, and keep the eye shaded from light, and the patient will see well as before.
E si no descendra en jos, sapias que es aygua.	And if it does not flow downwards, know that it is water.
Mays si no es preparat le descendement a la sania am aquo que havem dit, lahoras fay le malaute sezer entre las tuas mas e aprop pren spatum subtil e fen am aquel sobre le pannicol cernent un petit deves la continuacio de la conjunctiva am la tunica cornea en la corona (entro al loc vuet), entro que sia fora-getada la sania.	But if the descent of the humor is not prepared with what has been said, then press the eye between your hands and take a fine spatula and stick it into that place where the panicle surrounds a little above the continuity of the conjunctiva with the tunic cornea at the top (where it wants to), until the humor is expelled.
Donc cum es fora-getada, lahoras tu distilla en le huel aygua cauda en la qual has mesclat mel o aygua en la qual ja has bulit fenugrec e mel.	And then when it is expelled, immediately distill into the eye a drop of water in which you have mixed honey or a decoction of fenugreek and honey.
E aprop sia curat am las autras causas entro que sia sanat.	And then treat it with other causes until it is healed.
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter XXII
De la curacio de la aygua descendent del huel.	"The treatment of descending water from the womb."
Ja havem dit las specias de la aygua en la divisio e qual conveneys a perforar am sermo declarant, lahoras aquel segon la sanetat.	"We have already discussed the types of urine and their division, as well as which one is appropriate to collect, clearly stating it according to health."
Lahoras cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute entre las tuas mas sobre un cayrat e lia le sieu huel sa, lu mot stringent.	Now you must hold the patient firmly between your hands over a cushion and tie their head so that they cannot move.
E aprop pausa prop de la palpebra del sieu huel la tua ma senestra, si le huel en le qual es l’aygua es le huel senestra; o am la tua ma dreyta, si le huel es le dextre.	And accordingly place your left hand close to the eyelid of their left eye if the water is in the left eye; or place your right hand there if it is in the right eye.
E aprop am la tua ma dextra pren almagda, si le huel es senestre; o am la tua ma senestra, si le huel es de dreyt.	And accordingly with your right hand take a cotton pad if the wound is on the left side; or with your left hand if it is on the right side.
E aprop pausa la extremitat de almagda prop de la corona per la grossesa del ray en le album del huel de part del mendre lacrimal, e aprop enpelleys almagda am vertut e revol la tua ma am aquel.	And accordingly bring the tip of the cotton pad close to the corner of the eye towards the thinner side of the lacrimal bone, and gently press it down with your hand on that point.
E aprop penetre en le album del huel e sentas que almagda ja es pervenguda a causa vueda.	And accordingly penetrate into the eye socket until you feel that the cotton pad has reached the back of the wound cavity.
E cove que sia la masura del cami de almagda al preon la mesura del spazi le qual es de la pupilla entro a la fi de la negror, e es la corona del huel; quar tu veyras am aquel pupilla am la visio de l’huel per la clartat de la tunica cornea.	And make sure that the length of the cotton pad reaches from the front to the back of the eye socket cavity so that it touches the pupil at the end of the blackness, i.e. at the corner of the eye; because you will see the pupil clearly with the vision of the eye through the clarity of the cornea.
E aprop pausa almagda entro al loc en le qual es l’aygua, e aprop tu la atira en jos una veguada aprop autra, e donc si la aygua descen tantost, lahoras vetz le malaute aquo sobre le qual huebre la sua vista tantost, e almagda en le sieu huel.	And accordingly press the cotton pad into the location where the water is present; and then pull it down a few times quickly, and usually the water will descend immediately. Therefore, if the eye pain decreases immediately afterwards, this indicates that the eye has been cured of its ailment and the cotton pad has absorbed the water from within the eye socket cavity.
E aprop repausa se un pauc; donc si la aygua es descenduda, lahoras tu depausa aquela autre veguada abantz que almagda ne sia getada.	And accordingly pause for a moment; and if the water has descended, then carefully pull out that other cotton pad making sure not to push it back in again.
E donc quan es sicada e no descen, lahoras tu extrat almagda am facilitat, e revol am aquel la tua ma pauc a pauc, e aprop dissolveys en l’aygua un petit de sal clara de gemma e am aquela lava le huel dedintz; e aprop pausa fora le huel coto o stopa o lana infusa en oli rozat e album de huou e ligua am aquo le huel sa.	And therefore, if the water does not descend, then carefully remove the cotton pad with ease, and gently wipe around that area with your hand little by little; and dissolve a small amount of rock salt in some water and wash the inside of the eye with it; and afterwards close the eye with a cotton wool soaked in rose oil or chamomile oil and bandage it on top.
Mays nos e aquels que so de nostre temps pause sobre aquel comi trissat am album de huou.	However, those of our time pause here upon this matter treated with albumen of egg white.
E si no obezeys a tu almagda al intrament de l’huel per la sua duricia — quar es alcu dels homes del qual le huel es dur mot —, lahoras cove que prenguas le spatum le qual es nompnat alberid del qual aquesta es la forma:	And if the cotton pad does not penetrate into the eye due to its hardness -- for some men have very hard eyes -- then you should take the curette called "alberid" which has this shape:
E donc perfora am aquel aquela conjunctura, e no ultimes la tua ma en le trauc, e no es si no que fassas via ad almagda loc subtil.	And therefore, pierce with that curette into the conjunctiva, and do not push your hand too far in; otherwise if you cannot reach it with your fingers, make a small opening to allow the cotton pad to enter more subtly.
E aprop entromet almagda segon que havem dit.	And then insert the cotton pad as we have described.
E deves le compliment de la tua obra, sia preparat al malaute dormitori descentment fayt en le qual dorma sobre le sieu dos en mayson tenebrosa, e sia prohibit de totz movementz .	You must complete your work, ensuring that the patient's resting place is prepared, a dark house made where they can sleep on their back, and all movements are prohibited.
E pausa en la natura de lu aquo per que sia linida la sua natura, e no maugua le sieu cap a la partida dreyta ni senestra de tot.	Pause in the nature of water to clarify its nature, do not move your head towards the right or left side while doing so.
E sia le liament segon la sua disposicio entro al tertz dia.	And let it be placed according to its disposition within the third day.
E aprop deslia aquel en aquela maysso tenebrosa e exproha la freol vista, e fay li vezer alcunas causas, e aprop retorna le liament entro al dia .vii.	Leave him alone in that dark house and expose him to the clear light, then show him certain reasons, and return the thread on the seventh day.
E no cove que fassas aquo en la hora de las curacios o tantost aprop la infusio.	Do not do this during the time of healing or immediately after the infusion.
Habantz cove que tu alienes aquo per so quar la aygua puega leugierament per gran e vehement de reguardament.	You must do this carefully, ensuring that water flows gently rather than violently through the tube.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras cove que deslias le huel denant le vii dia, e rectifica aquel am aquo que ceda apostema.	But if an abscess occurs, it is necessary to drain the wound on the seventh day and correct the treatment with water that will reduce the abscess.
Lahoras tu absol la vista de lu e pausa sobre la cara de lu oral per le qual sia regit le vezement de lu dejos lu per alcus dias, lu existent en la mayszo tenebrosa.	Now you cover his eyes and pause over his mouth so that his breathing can be regulated, letting him rest in the dark house for a few days.
E aprop sia gitat de aquela mayzo gradantment e conversa8 en las suas causas.	Then gradually remove him from that dark place and discuss with him the reasons behind it.
E sapias que in alchatea no es excusat le discipol de visio alcunas veguadas, e lahoras tu sias ardit sobre la operacio.	Remember that in alchemy, the apprentice is sometimes deprived of sight for a few moments, and at times you will need to be daring regarding the operation.
E ja es pervengut a nos de alcu de aquels les quals so al Artach , e alcu disse que fayt foc en al Ayrac magdaam perforat am le qual es succada la aygua.	And now we have reached the stage of those who are called alchemists, among whom one said that fire should be made in Al-Ayrakh, pierced with a hole through which water is sucked.
Mays empero yeu non e vist degu en la nostra terra le qual haia perfeyt aquo, ni e aquo legit en alcu dels libres dels antics; e es possible que aquo sia novel.	But until now, nothing like this has been seen in our land, nor is it written in any of the books of the ancients. Perhaps this is a new invention.
E aquestas so las formas de las specias de magdaan per que sia sobre aquelas aquel le qual ignora aquelas:	And these are some of the forms of magnification used to accomplish that which eludes the ignorant:
E sian faytas de eram o de ferr propriament, e sian las extramitatz de lor am aquesta subtilitat triangulada, la extremitat aguda ayssi cum aquela es la forma.	These are made of iron or steel, properly tempered, and their extremities are cut in this triangular subtlety with the point being as sharp as this form.
Capitol .xxiv.	Chapter XXIV.
De la curacio de carn nada en le nas.	On the treatment of flesh removed from the nose.
Quan en le nas so nascudas carns diversas ajustadas de las quals es alcuna causa la qual es assemblada a scorpio de motz pes, o a polip peys; e aquesta malautia es apelada polipus quar es a semblansa de aquel peys representat.	When flesh grows in the nose, causing blockages or polyps due to excessive mucus or other causes, this condition is called polyposis, resembling that sea creature.
E de lu es carn cancrosa, lapadea, de fusca color; e de lu es que es carn leon no de color fusca.	And the flesh is cancerous, pale, and of dark color; but in some cases it is lion's flesh, not of dark color.
Donc en aquela que es en aquestas carns leon no fraudulenta ni cancroza, cove que fassas le malaute sezer entre las tuas mas e posat al solelh, e huebre las nars de lu, e picoys le tieu onci en aquelas carns.	So in cases where it is not fraudulent or cancerous lion's flesh, you should squeeze the lump between your hands and expose it to the sun, open his nostrils, and pierce the tumor with a needle.
E aprop extrat aquela a las partidas deforo, e aprop inscindeys aquo que has comprehendut de aquelas am spatum agut subtil de la una partida entro que sapias que tota la carn ja es ostada; que si roman de lu deguna causa de la qual la abscisio es possibla, lahoras tu ratz aquo am la un dels estrumentz subtils am facilitat entro que de lu romangua denguna causa.	Then carefully extract it from the nostrils and precisely cut that which you have grasped with a sharp, subtle spatula from one side until you know that all the flesh has been removed; but if any cause remains why excision is possible, then remove it with one of the delicate instruments easily without leaving any cause behind.
Mays si senhoreja am sanc o accida apostema caut, lahoras tu pausa a lu aquo que cove; o es dels apostemas malignes, lahoras tu coyta e cauteriza aquel entro que sia abscindit sanc e sian ostadas las cavas totas.	But if there is hemorrhage or an abscess has formed, then pause and do what is necessary; or if it is one of the malignant kinds, then cut it out and cauterize the wound until bleeding stops and all cavities are exposed.
E aprop sia getatz en le nas aprop la inscizio vi agre e aygua o vi.	Then sprinkle powdered myrrh and water or wine into the nostrils after the incision has been made.
Mays si le nas es ubert e de lu procezeys humiditat entro al palat, lahoras sapias que ja es sanat.	But if the nose is open and there is no longer moisture entering the palate, then you will know that it is healed.
Mays si la humiditat no penetra segon que cove, lahoras tu sapias que dedintz lu es carn nada en los pus sobiras osses de las nars als quals non es pervengut abscizio.	But if moisture does not enter as it should, then you will know that flesh has grown in the furrows of the nasal bones where excision has not been performed.
Donc lahoras cove que entromitas fiel de li al qual sia alcuna grosseza, e nuza en lu motz nuzes, e pausa entre quascun nutz la quantitat del dit o mens, e engene le malaute e entromet una extremitat del fiel en le nars am lo ray o am autra causa la qual es a lu possibla.	Therefore you should insert fleabane into it where there is thickness and squeeze it with many nuts, pausing between each one the length of your finger or more, and generate heat around it, inserting one end of the fleabane into the nostril with fire or another cause that is possible for you.
E pus que aquo aura fayt, que atire le sieu odorament entro que pervengua a las canals de las nars, e sia eyssit sobre le sieu golayro, quar tropas veguadas le semblant ad aquesta accio fan les enfantz a las scolas, e es leugiera causa ad aquel que ho vol far.	And after this has been done, let him throw his scent into the air until it reaches the canals of the nostrils and let him exhale onto his cloak, as children often do at school, for it is an easy task to accomplish.
E aprop pausa las dos extramitatz del fiel, una extremitat que iesca sobre le nas et l’autra que romangua en le nas, e aprop aministra serratura de carn am les nuzes que so en le fiel, e fay aquo entro que sapias que las carn ja so am les nuzes del fiel.	And then pause the two extremities of the fleabane, one outside the nose and the other inside it, and carefully apply pressure with your nuts where there is flesh around the fleabane, doing this until you know that the flesh has been crushed between the nuts of the fleabane.
E aprop extratz le fiel, e pausa en le nas aprop la abstraccio del sanc una calgua , e fay aquo per tres dias o mays entro que l’enguent corrodo tot aquo que es romas de las carns.	And then remove the fleabane and pause for one day to abstain from blood, doing this for three days or more until the corrosive salve has destroyed all that remains of the flesh.
E aprop en la fi de la causa, pausa en le nas una canula de plom per alscus jorns entro que sia sanat.	And at the end of treatment, pause in the nose a lead canula for several days until it is healed.
Mays si endigeys de curacio que exsique, usa de aquela.	But if you want a drying cure, use this one.
E aquesta es la forma del instrument a capipurge fazedor am le qual son distillatz olis e medicinas en le nars:	And this is the form of the instrument called "capipurge," with which oils and medicines are distilled into the nostrils:
E fay aquo de argent o de eram, la qual sia semblant a una petita lampesa uberta, ayssi cum petita conqua, e le meat semblantment.	And make it of silver or brass, resembling a small open lamp like a small cone, with its mouth likewise shaped.
E si vols, fay una canula clausa ayssi cum cana, e la cancula del estrument a capipurge fazedor e sia plana, descuberta; a la qual sia manubre en lo derier de lu, am le qual tenguas aquela quan escaufas en lu oli o aquo que tu vols dels sucs e de las causas suctiblas.	And if you wish, make a closed canula like a pipe, and the opening of the instrument for making capipurge should be flat and uncovered; have a handle at the end of it with which you hold it when you pour oil or any other substance that you want from the juices and subtle causes.
E aquestz capipurgi es precios: recipe de enforbi de castor, de balayra blanc, de giengiebre, e piletre de safra, de pebre lonc, de escafragia, de epetum de spic ana unc. vi cumfizeys am suc de bleda e de caul, e sian faytas pillulas, e sia destemprada una pillula am aygua tebeza, e sia gitat en las nars del malaute jasent envers.	And this capipurge is precious: take from each of the following - beaver, white balm, ginger, saffron, long pepper, iris root, epithymum (or spikenard), and six ounces of wine; infuse with juice of beet and celery, make pills, and administer one pill dissolved in hot water to the sick person until they are cured.
Capitol .xxv.	Chapter XXV
De theyls natz en las extramitatz del nas.	Of tumors that grow on the outer parts of the nose
Motas veguadas es nat theyl en las extramitatz del nas, e es magnificat e omentat en alscus dias entro en que mot es leg le reguardament de lu.	Many times a tumor grows on the outer parts of the nose, and it is magnified and augmented in several days until it becomes a great burden to behold.
E per aquo cove que tu inscidas aquel en le comensament de la apparissio de lu, e erediques tot aquel.	And therefore you should cut it at the beginning of its appearance and remove all of it.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc o cauteri o medicina comburent la qual estia en loc de lu.	Then pause there with fire or cautery or some burning medicine which is applied to that place.
Mays si es tardada la sua inscizio entro que sia magnificat, lahoras considera si es lapificat, dur, de fusca color e de pauc sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel am ferr quar es apostema crancos; quar motas veguadas ad aquel que inscideys aquesta apostema endeve per lu granda malicia sobre aquel le qual aquel havia.	If its incision is delayed until it becomes magnificent, then consider if it is hardened, hard, of dark color and with little sensation, then do not touch that with iron for it is a cancerous ulcer; for many times those who incise this ulcer end up doing great harm to the one they had intended to help.
E si le apostema es de leon tocament e no es de fosca color, e vezes que inscizio es possibla en tot aquel, lahoras evacua le malaute e inscideys aquel senes temor, e cura le loc am aquo que exsique e costrenh entro que sia sanat.	And if the ulcer is of lion-like touch and not dark in color, and sometimes incision is possible throughout that area, then evacuate the patient and incise without fear, and dress the wound with something that dries and constrains until it heals.
Capitol .xxvi.	Chapter XXVI
De sutura del nas e de las labias e de la aurelha quan la continuitat es dissolvuda per plagua o per semblantz.	On the suturing of the nose, lips, and ear when continuity has been lost due to plague or injury.
Sapias que quan accideys solucio de continuitat en una de aquestas cartillages, pauc confereys en aquela operacio sino en alcus homes.	Know that when such a solution of continuity occurs in one of these cartilages, little confidence should be placed in that operation by certain men.
Donc cove, quan endeve ad alcu alcuna causa de aquelas, que consideres si es plagua fresca am le sieu sanc, e lahoras tu ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	Therefore, when it happens to someone that there is some cause of these, consider if it is fresh plague with its blood, and then you should approximate the two lips of the wound with sutures, and afterwards dress it so that it heals.
E si las labias de solucio de continuitat so ja separadas, e quascuna es fayta sana, lahoras cove que tu excorjes quascuna partida de la sua codena apparent entro que n’iesca sanc.	And if the lips of the solution of continuity are already separated and each is healthy, then you should cut off each part of its apparent connection until there comes out no blood.
E aprop ajusta las doas labias am sutura e strenh aquelas, e sobre aquelas pulveriza sanc de drago e enses trissat, e pausa sobre la polvera una pessa de emplaustra diafinicon, o de alcu autre dels emplastres consolidatius, e leyssa aquel liat per dos jorns o per tres, e aprop deslia aquel e permuta aquel emplaustre e leyssa aquel entro que·ls fiels per si sian abscinditz, e aprop cura am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And then approximate the two lips with sutures and strengthen them, and over those sprinkle dragon's blood powder and a little incense, and place on top of it a piece of plaster made from diachylon or some other consolidative plaster, leaving it like that for two days or three, then remove it and change the plaster, allowing the wound to heal by itself. Afterwards dress it with ointment until it is healed.
Mays la manieyra de la sutura es que tu agregues la solucio de continuitat o am agulhas ayssi cum havem recomtat en la sutura del ventre, o agregua la solucio de continuitat am fiel ayssi cum a tu e fayt saber.	But the manner of suturing is that you approximate the solution of continuity either with needles as we have recommended in the suturing of the belly, or with thread as you know how to do.
Capitol .xxvii.	Chapter XXVII
De extraccio de aquela causas que veno en las doas labias en las partidas dedintz.	Of the extraction of those causes that appear between the two lips in wounds.
Motas veguadas endeve a motz homes en las partidas dedintz de las suas labias alcus apostemas durs semblantz a gras de errs, e alscunas de lors son mendres e alcunas son majors.	Frequently it happens to many men that in the wounds of their lips there appear hard abscesses resembling boils of ears, some small and others larger.
Donc cove que tu convertas las labias e fendas quascuna de aquelas duricias de tota part, e aprop la abscizio umpliscas le loc de sagi trissat entro que·l sanc sia restrengut, e aprop sia lavat am vi agre e sia curat le loc am aquo que es stipticitat, entro que sia sanat.	It is necessary to convert each of those hardnesses by turning the lips and splitting them open with a sharp tool, then fill the space with sage steeped in wine until blood clots, wash it with vinegar, then dress the wound with an astringent so that it heals.
Capitol .xxviii.	Chapter XXVIII
De inscizio de la carn ajustada en las gengivas.	Of the incision of attached skin on the gums.
Granre de veguadas nays sobre la gengiva carn ajustada la qual les antics apelero albulus, adonc cove que tu suspendas aquela am onci o que tenguas aquela am las forfecs e inscidas aquela deves la sua razit, e leyssas la sania correr o le sanc.	If a granuloma appears on the attached gum, which they used to call an albulus, you should suspend it with tweezers or hold it with your fingers and incise it in its entirety, allowing the pus to flow out and the blood to coagulate.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc sagi trissat o autra polveras stipticas o excicativas.	And then apply sage steeped in wine or other astringent powders or ointments to the wound.
E si aquela carn retorna, lahoras inscideys aquela segundariament, e cauterisa aquela, quar aprop le cauteri no retornara.	And if that skin returns again, you should incise it once more and cauterize it with a hot iron, for then it will not return.
Capitol .xxix.	Chapter XXIX
De razo de dentz am ferr.	"Due to iron teeth."
Quan en la superficia de las dentz de las partidas dedintz e de las de foro e entre las gingivas so ajustadas escorsas aspras, legas, e alcunas veguadas son de nigradas e son faytas citrinas o vertz entro que a la gingiva ve per aquo corrupcio e son faytas las dentz legas.	"If on the surface of the teeth between the interdental spaces and those in front, as well as between the gums, rough, sharp, and sometimes blackish scales appear, with green or yellowish-yellow color seen through the gum, this is a sign of decay and the teeth are loose."
E donc cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute entre las tuas mas e pausar le cap de lu en le tieu se, e ratz las dents en las quals apareysso aquelas escorsas e causas semblantz arena entro que de lor no romangua deguna causa, e aquo fay de la negror e de la citrinitat e de las autras entro que sian mondificadas.	"And therefore you should seize the patient between your hands and place their head in a cloth tie, and scrape the teeth on which those scales appear and cause similar sand-like grains to appear without causing any damage, and this is due to the blackness and yellowness and other discolorations."
Donc si es ostat aquo que es en aquelas del comensament de la razio, bo es; e sino, lahoras tu itera la razio sobre aquelas al autra dia e al segon e al tertz entro que vengua al derier stament en aquo que tu vols.	"So if this is the end of that which was at the beginning of the reason, well then. And otherwise, you should repeat the reason on those another day and again on the third day until it comes to the final statement in that which you want."
E sapias que las dentz han necessitat de motz rezoris de diversas formas e de motas figuras segon que es preparat a la tua operacio.	"And know that teeth require various types of tools with different shapes and forms according to what is prepared for your operation."
E per so quar le razori am le qual la dent es raza de la partida dedintz es autre del razori am le qual es ras entre las dentz segon autras formas, e aquestas formas de razoris sian deves tu preparadas las quals veyras tantost:	"And therefore take the tool with which you scrape the tooth from its interior and know that it is different from the tool with which you scrape between teeth according to other forms. And these forms of tools should be prepared by you, as you will see soon."
Capitol .xxx.	"Chapter XXX."
D’eradicacio de dentz.	"Tooth extraction."
Cove que tu cures la dent de la sua dolor am tot engen e tardes en tota eradicacio de lu, quar no es denguna causa que suplisqua la veguada de lu quan es eradicada, quar es sustancia sublima entro que es excusacio en la eradicacio de lu.	"The cause of toothache and its pain is due to the harmful humour that corrupts it. When this humour is eradicated, there is no reason why the toothache should persist, for it is a subtle substance that causes pain during eradication."
Mays cove quan le malaute es forsat aquela dent eradicar, que fermament deves tu sia certificat quala es la dent dolent, quar motas veguadas la dolor descep le malaute e cuga que sia en dent sana, e tu eradicas aquela e aprop la dolor no cessa entro que la dent malauta e dolent sia eradicada, quar nos ja havem vist aquo per operacio dels barbies.	"Therefore, when a patient comes to have a tooth extracted, you must be firmly assured which is the aching tooth. For often the pain seems to come from another place and you extract one while the pain continues until the diseased tooth has been removed."
Donc cum deves tu es sertificat qual es la dent dolent, e que o sabes be, lahoras cove que tu scarifiques en le circuit de la dent am spatum en le qual sia alcuna vertut, entro que sia dissolvut de la dent de la gingiva de tota partida, e aprop mau aquel am les tieus ditz, o am forfexs subtils al comensament petit a petit entro que aquela concucesquas.	"So when you are certain which tooth is aching, then you should scrape around it with a spatula having some virtue until it has dissolved from the gum completely. Then remove it with your fingers or fine forceps gradually until it comes loose."
E aprop alogua en lu fortz tenalhas grans per bona loquacio o estuptura fort, e pausa le cap del malaute entre les tieus denolhs que be le tengues que no·s maugua, e aprop tratz la dent segon rectitut en manieyra que no trenques aquela, ni al malaute major dolor no dones.	"Then take large forceps for good grasp or strong pressure and hold the head of the patient between your thumbs so that he does not move it. Then extract the tooth straightly so that you neither break it nor cause greater pain."
E donc si no es foro-getat, lahoras pren un de aquels instrumentz, e met aquel dejos lu de tota part am facilitat e esforsa la remocio de lu ayssi que es feyt al comensament.	"And if it has not come out yet, then take one of those instruments and place it on the outside of the root with ease and force to facilitate removal as was done at the beginning."
Mays si la dent es trauquada o corrosa, lahoras cove que tu comples de drap aquel trauc e estrenguas aquel am la extremitat de ray subtil per so que no sia trinquada en la hora de la tua constriccio sobre aquela am tenalas.	"But if the tooth is decayed or rotten, then you must fill that decay with wax and strengthen it with a thin wire at its extremity so that it does not break when you grasp it with forceps."
E cove que tu obres exquesitament am scarificacio en le circuit de tota part de la gingiva e guarda mot la tua fortaleza que no trenques aquela e romangua partida de lu, e retorne sobre le malaute per la malicia que sia majo que la primieyra dolor de lu.	"And you must work carefully with your scalpel around the entire gum and guard your strength so that you do not break it nor cause it to separate from its root. Then return to the patient because sometimes the second pain is greater than the first."
E guarda te que no fassas aquo que fan alscus ignorantz barbiers en lor fistinacio e audacia sobre la eradicacio de lor, ses que no aministran aquo que nos havem recomtat; quar motas veguadas fan venir sobre les homes malautias grans las quals son pus dificils que sian trinquadas, e las razitz de lor remaugudas totas, o alcunas de aquelas, o que extrayguas aquela am alcus osses de la mandigula ayssi cum motas veguadas havem testificat.	"And beware of doing what many ignorant barbers do in their haste and audacity to extract teeth without administering what we have recommended. For often they cause great illnesses upon men which are harder to treat than the tooth itself, and sometimes they leave behind roots or pieces of them, or even extract a tooth with some bones from the jawbone as we have often witnessed."
E aprop la eradicacio de lu sia lavada la boca am vi caut o vi agre am sal.	"And when extracting it, wash the mouth with hot vinegar or vinegar and salt."
E si endeve fluxs de sanc per aysso, ayssi cum motas veguadas endeve, lahoras trissa alcuna quantitat de zegi e aspergeys sobre la plagua, e si no confereys aquel zegi, cauteriza.	"And if there are flows of blood from this, as often happens, then take some quantity of sage and sprinkle it on the wound. If the bleeding does not stop, cauterize it."
La forma de las forceps e tenalas subtils am las quals es mauguda la dent al comensament sia de longua extramitat, de breu manubre e gros, per so que no sian doblatz quan am aquels deves obrar.	"The form of the forceps and fine tweezers with which you should grasp the tooth at the beginning should be long in their extremities, short in handle, and thick so that they do not bend when working with them."
E sian ayssi cum vezes de gros manubre entro que quan estrenhas am aquelas no sian dobladas, sian breus extramitatz.	"And they should be like tongs with a thick handle within which, when you squeeze them, they are not bent. Their extremities should be short."
E sian faytas de ferr de India descentment faytas de dreytas extramitatz, e en las extramitatz de aquelas sian dentz de las quals las unas intron en las autras e estrenhan per constriccio descent fort, e alscunas veguadas las extramitatz de aquelas sian la forma del bec d’un auzel le qual ha nom ciconia, so es guanta, e son de fort constriccio.	"And they should be made of Indian steel, straight in their extremities. In the extremities of these there should be teeth which interlock with each other and squeeze by descending force. Sometimes the extremities of these are shaped like the beak of a bird called 'ciconia,' that is to say, they are narrow and have great constricting power."
Capitol .xxxi.	Chapter XXXXI
De erradicacio de dentz e d‘estraccio dels osses de las mandibulas trincadas.	Of the Extraction of Teeth and Removal of Jaw Bones That Are Impacted.
Quan deves la eradicacio de dent le qual es trinquat roman alcuna causa, lahoras cove que tu pauses sobre le loc coto am boder per un jorn o per dos entro que·l loc sia mollificat; e aprop entromet algesti o tenalhas las extramitatz de las quals so asembladas al bec de un auzel apelat ciconia o guanta, la forma de las forceps:	When extraction of a tooth that is tightly fixed requires some cause,
Las extramitatz de lor sian faytas dedintz ayssi cum lima o alfagi.	"The extensions of their limbs are made like lime or scissor cuts."
E si no obediys a tu a eyssiment am aquestas forceps o tenalas, lahoras cove que tu caves sobre la razit e descrobas tota la carn e entrometas le instrument le qual ha nom atali, so es palanca petita del qual la forma es aquesta:	"And if you do not obey this order with these forceps or tongs, then you must cut the skin and expose all the flesh, and insert this tool called 'atal', which is a small lever shaped like this:"
E sia de breu extremitat grossa un petit, e no sia enbegut per so que no sia trinquat.	"And its short end should be thick and not bent so that it is not broken."
Donc si per aquo la razit es foro-getada, bo es; e sino, ajuda te am aquestz autres instrument dels quals aquestas son las formas: la forma del primier instrument es de triangulada extramitat en la qual sia alcuna grossesa:	"So if by this the skin is opened, it's good. But if not, help yourself with these other tools whose shapes are as follows: the shape of the first tool is triangular at the end, which should have some thickness:"
La forma del segon instrument es que sia de triangulada e de pus subtil extremitat.	"The shape of the second tool is that it should be triangular and have a very fine tip."
E ja so ajudatz am aquest instrument havent dos ramps del qual aquesta es la forma aprop la seguent:	"And then you are helped by this tool, which has two branches shaped like this:"
e am autres instrumentz les quals precidero en rasura de dentz; quar juvament es fayt am aquest instrument le qual es asemblat a onci gran, e aquesta es la forma:	"and with other tools that are sharp like teeth. For help is done with this tool which resembles a large eye, and its shape is this:"
de la triangulada extremitat torta o curta, la qual sia alcuna grossesa, e no sia enbegut per so que no sia trinquat.	"of the twisted or short triangular tip, which should have some thickness and not be bent so that it is not broken."
E otra sapias que·ls instrumentz de las dentz motz so e semblantment les autres instruments.	"And you should know that tools with moving teeth are similar to other instruments."
Mays le artifexs savi e subtil en l’art, atroba per si mateys segon aquo que a lu significa la operacio e las malautias diversas; quar son de las malautias a las quals les antics no diysero ni pausero propri instrument, per las formas de diversas specias.	"But the wise and subtle craftsman finds for himself according to what the operation means to him and the various illnesses. For there are illnesses for which the ancients did not give or set down proper instruments due to the diverse shapes of the species."
Mays si es trinquat l’os de la mandibula o dels autres osses de la boca, o si poyreys, lahoras sia pes curat sobre aquel en son loc am aquo que es a lu convenient dels instrumentz e de las forceps las quals havem dit en la extraccio de las razitz de las dentz, e ajuda te am gesti del qual aquesta es la forma:	"But if the bone of the mandible or other bones of the mouth is broken or dislocated, then it should be carefully handled with whatever instrument seems convenient to him for gripping and extracting the roots of teeth, as we have said before. And help yourself with this gesture whose shape is this:"
E sia en lu alcuna grosseza petit a petit, e sia instringida o tenguda am la boca per que no evasesca o fuga entro que l’os de tot sia foro-getat; e aprop restaura le loc am medicinas convenientz ad aquo.	"And little by little it should have some thickness and be squeezed or held with the mouth so that it does not escape or flee until the bone is completely reset. And then restore the location with appropriate medicines."
Mays si en l’os es petita poyredura, lahoras ratz aquel de aquela poyredura e de la sua negror, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	"But if there is a small dislocation in the bone, then remove that dislocation and its darkness, and cure it until it is healed."
Capitol .xxxii.	"Chapter XXXII."
De la cura de las dentz eminentz sobre las autras.	"Of the treatment of prominent teeth above the others."
Quan las dentz so eminentz no segon lor cors natural per aquelas la forma es laga, e majorment quan endeve a las femnas, e majorment a las piuselas venerablas; donc cove que tu consideras: si dent es nada aprop autra dent, e no es possibla sarradura ni linament de lu, lahoras radica aquela; mays que no sia annexa am autra dent, lahoras tu inscideys aquela am aquest instrument del qual aquesta es la forma; e es semblant a morr de porc, e sia feyt de ferr de India de extramitat mot aguda.	"When teeth are prominent beyond their natural shape, especially in women and even more so in venerable elderly women. Therefore you should consider: if the tooth is next to another tooth and it cannot be corrected with medication or a splint, then extract that tooth; but if it is not attached to another tooth, then cut that one with this instrument whose shape is like this: it resembles a pig's snout and should be made of Indian steel with a very sharp tip."
E sia la tua inscizio am la qual inscideyses aquela en trops dias per la duricia de la dent, e que no sia comauguda autra de las dentz.	"And your incision should be made over three days so that it does not cut into other teeth due to the hardness of the tooth."
E si es dent eminent expausat a limadura, lahoras lima aquel am lima de ferr de India del qual aquesta es la forma:	"And if a prominent tooth is extracted by grinding, then grind it with an Indian steel file whose shape is like this:"
E sia tot de ferr de India e·l margua eysament; e sia de motz menutz puntz ayssi cum lima am la qual son faytas agulhas, am la qual la dent sia limada pauc a pauc en motz dias am fecilitat, per so que no sia autra dent comauguda e caga.	"And it should be made of Indian steel and very sharp-edged. And its ends should be made with many small points like the teeth of a comb, with which the tooth is ground little by little over several days with ease, so that other teeth are not cut or damaged."
E aprop lineys aquela en la fi, e ratz aquela am alscus razoris.	"And finally polish it off and remove it with tweezers."
E si es dent del qual una partida es trinquada e lideys la lengua, lahoras cove que tu limescas aquel entro que l’aspretat de aquela fraccio sia ostada e engualhada, e sia aplenada per so que la lengua no ledesca ni la paraula no corrumpa.	"And if it is a tooth from which one part is broken and it hurts the tongue, then you should grind that edge until its sharpness is smoothed out and flattened so that the tongue does not hurt or speech is not impaired."
Capitol .xxxiii.	"Chapter XXXIII."
De restauracio de dentz maugudas am fiel de aur o de argent.	"Of restoring broken teeth with gold or silver foil."
Quan accideys a las dentz devant concussio e remossio per percussio o per cazament, e le malaute no pot strenher sobre aquo que manga, e tu has curat aquel am medicinas stipticas, e no ha valgut la tua curacio, lahoras per so que no cagan es engen en aquelas que sian strengudas am fiel de aur e no de argent, quar argent se fa vert e aprop se poyreys aprop alscus dias, mays aur nul temps no es mudat.	"When teeth are broken by concussion and removal due to impact or falling, and the patient cannot eat because of it, and you have treated them with astringent medicines but your treatment has not been effective, then for those that are held together with gold foil and not silver foil, since silver tarnishes quickly and may corrode within a few days, but gold never changes."
E sia le fiel en tal subtilitat e grocesa segon la quantitat que puesca entrar entre las dentz; e la forma de la reccio es que prenguas le fiel e pren lo doble de lu entre doas dentz sanas, e aprop que cresques am doas tortuositatz del fiel entre doas maugudas, o si’ una o motas, entro que pervengua la tela a la dent sana del autra partida.	"And the foil should be so subtle and thin according to the amount that can fit between the teeth. And the method of attachment is this: take the foil and take twice as much between two healthy teeth, and then curve it with two twists of the foil between the broken ones, or more if there are many, until the foil reaches the other half of the tooth."
E aprop itera le teyssiment entro a la partida de la qual comenciest, e strenh la tua ma am facilitat e savieza entro que no sia mauguda.	"And then repeat the wrapping until you reach the beginning of the broken part. Do this with your hand with ease and skill so that it is not further broken."
E sia la tua striccio am la qual strenhas le fiel deves las razitz de las dentz que no evasesca.	"And your tying should be done between the roots of the teeth so that it does not slip out."
E aprop inscindeys las extramitatz del fiel superfluens am las forceps o tosoyras, e agregua aquelas en quascun loc am gesti, e converteys aquelas e las occulta entre la dent sana e la dent mauguda, per so que no fassa lesio a la lengua.	"And then cut off the excess ends of the foil with forceps or scissors, and press them together in each place with gesture. And turn them over and hide them between the healthy tooth and the broken one so that they do not cause injury to the tongue."
E aprop leyssa aquela ayssi streyta cum roman.	"And leave it like this for three days."
Mays si es desliada o rumpuda, strenh aquela o aquelas am autra fiel en tal manieyra en tot son temps.	"But if it becomes loosened or broken, then fasten it again with more foil in the same manner at all times."
E aquesta es la forma de las dentz e la figura de la rectacio de doas dentz sanas e de doas maugudas, ayssi cum vezes aquestas liadas:	"And this is the form of the teeth and the figure of the correction of two healthy teeth and two broken ones, as shown in these drawings:"
E quan se fa que retorno una dent o doas aprop le cazement de quascuna en lors locs, e sian recrescutz ayssi cum havem recomtat, e que remauguan.	"And when it happens that one or two teeth return to their places after falling, and have been restored as we have recommended, but they become loose again."
E no fa aquo sino bo artifexs e savi.	"This is done only by skilled and knowledgeable artisans."
E alcunas veguadas es aptat alcuna causa dels osses de vaca, e es fayt de lor ayssi cum forma de dent, e es pausada en loc en le qual defayl la dent, e es strengit ayssi cum havem dit, e reman e serveys am aquel per lonc temps.	"And sometimes it is appropriate to use bone from cattle for this purpose. It should be fashioned in the shape of teeth and placed in the location where the tooth is missing, and fastened as we have said, and it remains and serves for a long time."
Capitol .xxxiv.	"Chapter XXXIV."
De inscizio del liament le qual ve en la lengua e prohibeys loquela.	"Of cutting the frenulum that comes on the tongue and inhibits speech."
Aquest liguament le qual ve dejos la lengua alcunas veguadas o es natural am le qual hom nays, o accidental e accideys per plagua la qual ja es consolidada.	"This ligament which lies beneath the tongue sometimes is natural to some people or occurs accidentally and happens due to a hardened plaque."
E la operacio en lu es que huobres la boca del malaute, le sieu cap existent en le tieu se; e eleva la sieua lengua, e aprop inscideys aquel liament nervos segon la latitut entro que sia solvuda la lengua de la sua recencio.	"The operation consists of opening the patient's mouth while his head is tilted back. Then raise his tongue and cut that nerve ligament according to its width until the tongue is freed from its attachment."
Mays si en aquela es alcuna duricia o denodacio, e aquo es stat per consolidacio de plagua, lahoras tu gieta unci e scindeys aquel per la latitut entro que aias inscindit le liament e sia dissolvuda la nodacio.	"But if there is hardness or toughness in that ligament and this has occurred due to hardened plaque, then take an iron nail and cut it lengthwise until you have incised the ligament and dissolved the toughness."
E guarda te que no sia fayta fissura en le preon de la carn e que scindas aqui arceria e vengua flux de sanc.	"And be careful not to make a wound in the front of the flesh, and cut here carefully so that there is no blood flow."
E aprop sia lavat le vestigi de la inscisio am ayguaros o am vi agre o am aygua frega; e aprop pausa dejos la lengua licini; so es meca la qual tengua le malaute dejos la lengua en quascuna nuoyt per so que no sia consolidat autra veguada.	"And then rinse the incision site with warm water or vinegar or hot water, and then place a piece of linen beneath the tongue. This is the method that should be used to hold the patient's tongue in place each night so that it does not become hardened again."
Mays si accideys flux de sanc, pausa sobre le loc vetriol trissat; mays si le sanc ventz, lahoras cauteriza le loc am cauteri lantiginos le qual conveneys ad aquo.	"But if there is bleeding, place a wet piece of gauze on the site. But if it continues to bleed, then cauterize the site with a silver nitrate stick which should be used for this purpose."
E aprop aquel cura am las autras causas entro que sia sanat.	"And then treat it according to the other causes until it is healed."
Capitol .xxxv.	"Chapter XXXV."
De extraccio de ranula dejos la lengua.	"Of removing a ranula from beneath the tongue."
Alcunas veguadas accideys dejos la lengua apostema asemblant a nomla petita prohibent la lengua de la sua operacio natural; e fort leu es magnificada entro que huempla la boca.	"Sometimes it happens that under the tongue there is an accumulation resembling a small boil which prevents the tongue from moving naturally, and when it grows large, it fills up the mouth."
E la operacio en lu es que huebras la boca del malaute sesent devant le solel e considera le apostema.	"The operation consists of opening the patient's mouth while he is facing the sun and examining the accumulation."
E si tu le vezes de fusca color o de negra, dur, al qual le malaute no atroba sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel quar es cranc.	"If you find it to be of ash-gray or blackish hue, hard, when the patient lacks sensation, then do not touch that part as it is gangrenous."
E si es declinat a blancor, en le qual es humiditat, lahoras tu met le onci en lu, e inscideys aquel am spatum subtil, e inscindeys le de tota partida; e si sanc te ventz en la hora de la tua operacio, lahoras tu pausa desus zegi trissat, so es vetriol, entro que sia restreyt le sanc.	"If it is declinated towards whiteness and humidity, then insert the onion into it, and cut that thin skin, cutting it completely; if blood comes out at the time of your operation, then stop quickly, using vinegar as astringent, so that the blood may be restrained."
E aprop retorna a la obra tua entro que lo haias trayt am compliment de lu, entro que sia lavat am vi agre e sal; e cura aquel am l’autra curacio ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	"And finally, return to your work until you have completed it, ensuring that the wound is washed with vinegar and salt; then apply the other cure with water until it heals."
Capitol .xxxvi.	"Chapter XXXVI."
De extraccio de apostema de doas aurelhas e de aquel que es nada en le golayro e de las autras apostemas.	"Of the extraction of an abscess from both ears and that which is located in the navel, and of other abscesses."
Quan endeveno en le golayro godat, so son glandulas las quals son asembladas algodat, las quals accideysso deforas e son nompnadas doas aurelhas, las quals quan tu las curas am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no es sanat, lahoras tu considera si le apostema es dur, de fusca color, de pauc sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel am ferr.	"When a swelling occurs in the navel area, these are glands which accumulate at times, and when they occur externally, they are called 'ears,' which when cured with water as we have said in the division and it is not healed, then consider whether the abscess is hard, ash-gray in color, with little sensation, then do not touch that part with iron."
E si es de roga color e la razic es grossa, lahoras no toques aquela am ferr per le flux del sanc; abantz layssa aquel entro sia madurat, e lahoras o tu trauqueras aquel, o sira romput per si.	"And if it is red in color and the root is large, then do not touch that part with iron because of the flow of blood. Let it remain until it ripens, and then you will remove it yourself or it will break open by itself."
E si es de blanqua color, radon, e la razit de lu es subtil, lahoras aquel es que cove esser inscidit.	"And if it is white in color, hard, and its root is thin, then that one should be incised."
E la operacio en lu es que consideras, denant la tua operacio, si ja ha repausat le apostema de lu caut am repaus complit o si es deminuit am alcuna deminucio; e lahoras fay sezer le malaute denant le soleyl, e·l cap de lu sia en le tieu se, e huebre la boca de lu, e le servidor prenent entre las suas mas prema la lengua de lu dejos am instrument mot noble del qual aquesta es la forma:	"And the operation on it is that you consider whether the abscess has already rested and been filled with matter or if it has decreased somewhat. Then do the cutting before sunrise, with the head of the patient lying down and his mouth open, and let the surgeon take between his hands and press the tongue of the patient gently with a very fine instrument, which is shaped thus:"
E sia fayt de argent o de aram, e sia subtil cum cotel.	"And it should be made of silver or bronze and should be thin like a scalpel."
Donc cum tu premes am aquel la lengua e es mostrat a tu la apostema, e catz sobre aquel le tieu vezement, lahoras pren onci e fica aquel en l’amenla, e tira aquel a las partidas defora tant quant podes.	"Then when you press on the tongue with that instrument and the abscess is revealed to you, cut on it lightly at first, then grasp it with forceps and put it in the pan of water, and pull it outward as much as possible."
Otra aquo que tiras alcuna causa de las tunicas, e aprop incideys aquela am instrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	"After that, if you tear any skin, then immediately cut on it with this instrument which is shaped thus:"
e es asemblat a forceps, empero las extramitatz de lu son corvadas, ayssi que l’orrifici de quascuna de aquelas es en le endreyt del autra, mot agudas, le qual sia de ferr indi enbegut.	"And it resembles forceps, but its ends are curved so that the tip of each is directed towards the other, very sharp, made of iron with a copper coating."
Mays si aquest instrument no es a tu present, lahoras inscideys aquel am spatum del qual aquesta es la forma de lu: E sia agut de la una part, no agut del autra part.	"But if this instrument is not available to you, then cut with a scalpel which has the following shape: it should be sharp on one side and not sharp on the other."
E pus que has inscidit una mella, inscideys l’autra segon aquesta meteyssa manieyra de inscizio, e aprop la inscizio le malaute guarguarise de aygua frega	"And after you have cut one abscess, then cut the other according to this same manner of cutting, and immediately wash out the wound with warm water."
Mays si endeve flux de sanc, guarguarise aygua de decoccio de scorsa de milgrana o de fuelha de mirtra e semblantz ad aquel de las causas stiptiquas entro que·l flux del sanc sia restreyt, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	"But if there is a flow of blood, wash it with water decocted from marjoram leaves or myrtle leaves and similar remedies for stopping bleeding until the flow of blood ceases, and then dress the wound until it heals."
E alcunas veguadas naysso en le guolayro autras apostemas otra aquelas doas aurelhas, e inscideys aquelas segon que yeu e dit en la inscizio de doas mellas engualment.	"And sometimes other abscesses appear around those two ear openings, and cut them according to what I have said regarding the incision of two equal abscesses."
E yeu ja fu medicat una femna de apostema le qual era nat en le golayro de lu, le qual apostema tendia a color fusca, de pauc sentiment, le qual ja havia claus le golayro de lu, e la femna respirava am meat streyt, e ja havia prohibit a lu comestio e beure de aygua, e ja era pervenguda a la mort si mays agues stat per un dia o per dos.	"And I had previously treated a woman who had an abscess which had appeared in her groin area, which was dark in color and without sensation, having closed the opening of it, and she was breathing with great difficulty and had been prohibited from eating and drinking water, and if there had not been some intervention on that day or the next, she would have died."
E l’apostema ja tant havia pugat que havia mezes dos ramps entro que eyssiro per dos traucs.	"And the abscess had grown so much that it had broken through two places and issued forth through two tracks."
Donc yeu me cuytegui fisturalment e fiquegui en un de lor onci, e tiregui aquel, e atirada es de lu gran porcio, e aprop yeu incidigui aquela de on comprendegui del autre trau, e aprop yeu obrigui la boca de lu, e compremegui la sua lengua, e aprop yeu fiquegui le onci en aquela apostema.	"So I treated her surgically and remained at one of those places, and drew that out, but it was such a large piece that it could not be entirely removed. Then I cut into the place where I understood the other track to be, and immediately opened her mouth, pressed her tongue, and placed forceps on that abscess."
E aprop yeu abscizi gran partida de lu, e no corria de lu sino un pauc de sanc.	"And then you cut away a large part of it, and there was only a little blood flowing from it."
Donc absolut es le guolayro de aquela femna, e comensec tantost beure aygua, e aprop presec vianda, donc yeu no cessegui inscidir de aquela apostema motas vetz per lonc temps, e succesia apostema en loc de aquel, le qual inscizia entro que es prolonguat aquel.	"Therefore the woman's groin was completely healed, and she began drinking water immediately, then took food. And I continued cutting that abscess many times over a long period, but another abscess kept appearing in its place, which cut into the same track."
Donc yeu engen agui e cauterizegui le guolayro de lu, donc astec de addicio; e aprop yeu perambulegui e no saubi que fec Dieus de aquela aprop mi.	"So I went away and cauterized her groin with a hot iron, so that there would be no further addition of it. And then I wandered around and did not know what God had done for her on my account."
Capitol .xxxvii.	"Chapter XXXVII."
De inscizio de huvela quan es apostemada.	"Of the incision of the uvula when it is abscessed."
Quan catarr deysen a la huvula, e es apostemada e es longa, lahoras ela es nompnada perpendicular; e si es en la partida dejos grossa e redonda, e lahoras ela es apelada buba.	"When catarr descends to the uvula and it becomes abscessed and elongated, then it is called 'penduncle'; but if it is thick and round at its base, then it is called 'bubble'."
Mays quan es curada am aquo que havem dit en la divisio, e no comfereys la tua curacio, e eyssament ja vezes que apostema caut ja es ostat de lu e es subtil, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquela que es agreguadas redonda; e si es ad aquela longitut, e es sanguina, de fusca color o de negre, e no es a lu centiment, lahoras cove que tu temtes la inscizio de lu, quar en aquela es temor sobre le malaute.	"But when it is cured with what we have said in the division and its cure does not confer, sometimes it happens that an abscess which has already cauterized remains there and is subtle. Then you should cut into the one that is attached roundly; and if it is of that length, and is bleeding, of dark color or black, and without sensation, then you should be cautious about cutting it, for there is fear concerning its illness."
E quan tu vezes aquela segon la manieyra que yeu he dita de la sua blancor e longuesa, que tu fassas sezer le malaute e premas la lengua de lu am instrument del qual procesic la sua forma e aprop fica le onci en la nuva, e tira aquela en jos e inscideys aquela am un de dos instrumentz les quals e ditz en la inscizio de dos mellas.	"And when you find it according to the manner that I have described regarding its whiteness and length, then make an incision into the illness and press its tongue with this instrument whose shape is thus: and then place forceps on the new one, pull that downwards, and cut into it with one of these instruments which are mentioned in the incision of two abscesses."
E cove que no inscidas aquela sino aquo que es ajustat sobre le terme natural ses addicio, quar si tu inscides de lu mays, lediyras le sieu parlar.	"And you should not cut into it any more than what is appropriate to its natural term without addition, for if you cut into it more, you will harm its speech."
E aprop la inscizio, usa de aquo le qual havem recomtat en la inscizio de dos mellas, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	"And during the incision, use what we have recommended in the incision of two abscesses, and dress it until it heals."
Mays si era le malaute espaventat per la inscizio de lu, cove que use de engen en la cauterizacio de lu ses temor, e la manieyra del cauteri en lu no es sino am aygua aguda, e es que tu pauses le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop prem la lengua de lu am le instrument le qual havem dit, e aprop pren de l’aygua la qual havem dita en le capitol de cauterizacio, e comfeys am aquela caus viva, e pausa aquela no spessa ni subtil, e de aquela omple la concavitat de l’estrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	"But if the illness is frightened by its incision, then you should use a hot iron in its cauterization without fear, and the manner of cauterizing it is not other than with sharp water. And this is how you do it: take the head of the illness in your left hand, press its tongue with the instrument which we have mentioned, take some of the water which we have mentioned in the chapter on cauterization, convey it with that live cause, and pause it on neither thick nor subtle [skin], and with that fill up the concavity of this instrument whose shape is thus:"
Sia la extramitat de lu conquavitat en la qual sia pausada la medicina ayssi cum la conquavitat de culher de ray, e pausa le strument am la medicina sobre la vula, e·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu latz per so que corro saliva o musellage de la boca de aquel per la intrinscequa medicina, per so que no deyssenda de aquela deguna causa sobre le golayro de lu e que ledesca aquel.	"The exterior of that concavity in which the medicine is placed should be like the concavity of a spoon's back, and place the instrument with the medicine on the uvula, so that the illness may turn towards its own side so that no saliva or mucus from the mouth descends through the concave medicine onto the groin area."
E aprop te la tua ma am la medicina, e exprem aquela sobre la uvula per l’espazi de miega hora entro que vegas aquela esser denegrada e sedada per la mordicacio de la medicina.	"And then place your hand on the medicine and press it on the uvula for half an hour until you see that it has become blackened and softened by the biting of the medicine."
E si vols, prengues coto e envolopes aquel sobre la extremitat del ray, e submergeys le coto en la medicina, e entrometas le ray am le coto en una canula de sobre entro que·l coto adheresca en aquela canula, e fay aquo tantas vetz entro que consiegues aquo que vols de la cauterizacio de la uva, e aprop leyssa aquela quar ela se seccara e cayra aprop tres dias o quatre.	"And if you wish, take cotton and wrap it around the extremity of the ray, immerse the cotton in the medicine, insert the ray with the cotton into a cannula made from over until the cotton adheres to that cannula. Do this several times until you achieve what you desire regarding cauterization of the uvula, then leave it alone for three or four days."
E si indigeysses que iteras la medicina, itera aquela, e aprop la cauterizacio abstergeys en le circuit de la uva am coto enbegut en boder, e mondifica am aquel aquo que es en le circuit de lu de la medicina, e sia lavat am aygua frega, e sia curat deforo am embrocacio, e dedintz am guarguarismes entro que sia sanat.	If you need to repeat the medicine, do so, and then cleanse the cauterization around the vein with a hot iron wrapped in wool, modify the area of the medicine with that water, wash it with warm water, and dress it outside with an ointment, and afterwards with bandages until it is healed.
E aquesta especia de curacio es pus salva que inscizio e pus long de temor.	This type of treatment was considered successful for many years due to fear.
Alcunas veguadas es curada la uvuola am aquo que es pus subtil que cauteri e inscizio, quar es curat am subfumigacio en aquesta manieyra: recipe calament, ysop, origua, ruda, scicados arabic, camamilla, broyda e semblant ad aquels de las erbas, e ajusta totas aquelas causas, o alcunas de lor, en una ola, e sian submergidas am vi agre, e bulhan; e la ola sia be lutada am lut decentment, e sia en le mieg loc de la ola un trauc, sobre le qual sia pausat un instrument conquau de aram segon aquesta manieyra; sia fayt de argent o de aram.	Sometimes the uvula is cured with a substance so subtle that it cauterizes and incises, because it heals by means of fumigation in this manner: take calamentum, hyssop, origanum, ruta, scicados arabici, camomilla, bruyera and similar herbs of these kinds, and adjust all or some of them in a vessel, and let them soak in sour wine and boil; and the vessel should be well sealed with clay, and placed in the middle of the vessel is a tripod over which is placed a perforated funnel made of silver or brass.
E sia entromesa la extremitat en la boca del malaute entro que la vapor poge a la uvula sobre la quanula, entro que la uvula sia mot ofuscada.	And the extremity should be inserted into the mouth of the patient until the steam reaches the uvula, so that it can soften and loosen it.
E aprop itera sobre aquela motas veguadas entro qu’es secca, e guarda te que no fassas aquesta curacio al comesament de l’aveniment de apostemas, quar trop ajustaria en le apostema, e no cove que tu fassas aquo, sino deves la declaracio de apostema de lu caut.	And repeat this treatment several times until it is dry, but be careful not to do this at the onset of an inflammation, as it would irritate the inflammation too much. Instead, you should declare the inflammation with the cauterization.
Mays si no es a tu present aquest instrument, lahoras pren una cana e compon en la extramitat de lu un clos de huou, per so que la boca del malaute sia comborida, quar le closc del huou prohibeys la vapor comburir la boca.	But if this instrument is not at your disposal, then you should take a reed and fit its extremity with a close of wool, so that the mouth of the patient can be covered. Because the close of wool prevents the steam from burning the mouth.
E aquesta curacio es bona am salut.	And this treatment is good for health.
Capitol .xxxviii.	Chapter .xxxviii
De extraccio d’espinas e de aquo que adhereys en le golayro e de las autras causas.	Of the extraction of splinters and of that which adheres in the throat, and of other causes.
Motas veguadas adhereys en le guolayro o spina de peys o alcuna autra causa.	Many times adhesions are seen in the groin or spine of the foot or some other cause.
Adonc cove que tu extraguas aquo que de aquels es apparent, sobre le qual catz la vista, pus que tu premes la lengua am instrument denant solelh, per so que a tu sia declarat aquo que es en la guola.	Therefore, you must extract that which is apparent from among those [adhesions], over which the sight falls, because when you press the tongue with an instrument before the sun, it will be declared to you what is in the groin.
E aquo que no apar e es a tu occultat en le guolayro, cove que tu fassas vomir le malaute denant que la vianda sia degerida en l’estomac, quar fort leu la causa annexsa le golayro sira foro-getada per vomit; o que deglusia le malaute una pessa de nap o de razit de laytuga o un boci de pa sec; o prengua una pessa de sponga marina sequa leon, e lia aquela fortment am fiel, e aprop le malaute transglussia aquela, quar cum perve al loc en le qual so spinas e es extrahuda, lahoras so foro-getatz.	And that which is not apparent and is hidden in the groin, you must make the patient vomit before the food has digested in the stomach, because it easily removes the cause attached to the groin if forgotten by vomiting; or else let the patient swallow a piece of bread dipped in oil or lettuce juice or a mouthful of dry bread; or take a piece of sea sponge soaked in lion's bile and tie that strongly with fennel, and make the patient swallow it, because when it reaches the place where its spines are extracted, they will be forgotten.
E mays pren una anguila e be am fiel liada, e sia dedintz mesa e soptament sia extrayta; o pren un porr e soptament le metas e soptament l’en tratz.	And more: take an eel and tie it with fennel and let it be inside the patient, and suddenly extract it; or else take a sieve and suddenly place it [on the groin], and suddenly remove it.
Mays si no so foro-getatz am aquelas causas las quals havem ditas, lahoras husa de un instrument de plom segon aquesta forma:	Moreover, if those causes which we have mentioned are not forgotten from there, then use an instrument of lead in this way:
E sia pus gros que ray un petit, e en la extramitat de lu sia conquavitat la qual tu entrometas en la sua guola am facilitat.	And let it be bigger than a small pea, and at its end have a concavity which you can easily insert into the groin.
E el aga le sieu cap elevat en sus, e guarda te que·l tocament del sieu os de la gola, per so que endevengua a lu cos e am aquela que enpellesca le os o la spina, o que aquel le metge am la sua ma.	"The physician shall raise the patient's head upwards and ensure that no contact is made between the patient's mouth and throat, lest it lead to coughing or spitting out of bones or spine, or that which the physician touches with his hand."
Mays empero que·l malaute aquel entrometa es miels, per la sua sciencia del loc de la causa annexa e enpellisca en jos, e tira la sua ma am le instrument en sus, tot aquo segon la quantitat la qual es a lu preparada entro que sia foro-getada.	However, if the patient happens to swallow it better, then through his knowledge of the location and cause of the obstruction, he should make him cough downwards and pull out his hand along with the instrument upwards, all according to the quantity that was previously prepared so that none is forgotten.
Capitol .xxxix.	Chapter XXXIX
De extraccio de sancguisugua annexsa al golayro.	Of removing blood clots from the throat.
Quan es medicada sanguisugua am aquo que havem dit en la divisio de la curacio am medicinas e no comfereys, considera lahoras en le guolayro del malaute al solelh, pus que tu aias compremuda la lengua de lu am instrument le qual a tu havem recomtat.	When bloodsucking has been treated with what we have said in the division on cure with medicines and it does not help, then consider the hours of the day when the throat of the patient is towards the sun, because you should have prepared the tongue of it with the instrument that we have mentioned.
Donc si tu vezes la sancguisugua, extratz aquela am onci petit o am gesti subtils decentment.	Therefore, if you find a blood clot, remove it gently with tweezers or with skillful movements using your fingers.
E si no es a tu possible estrayre am aquel, lahoras pren una canula concava e entromet aquela en lo guolayro del malaute, e aprop pausa en la concavitat de la canula un ferr ignit, e fay aquo tantas vetz (entro que la sancguisugua sia morta e se osta del guolayro) e abstengua se le malaute tot lo jorn de aygua.	And if it is not possible for you to remove it in that way, then take a concave cannula and insert it into the throat of the patient, and place within the concavity of the cannula an iron wire heated red hot, and do this several times (until the blood clot dies and leaves the throat), and afterwards withhold from the patient water all day.
E aprop prengua una veyria plena de aygua frega, e obra la boca de lu en aquela, e lava la boca am aquela; e no trasglucia de aquela alcuna causa e maugua l’aygua una hora aprop autra am la sua ma, quar la sancguisugua tantost cum sent l’aygua catz.	And then take a bladder full of warm water, and place the mouth of it over his mouth, and wash his mouth with that; and do not let any cause him to swallow, for blood clots hate water.
Mays si no es foro-getada am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras subfumigua le malaute am cimetz o am assafetida per le instrument le qual havem recomtat en la sufumiguacio de uvula.	But if it is forgotten what we have mentioned, then fumigate the patient with incense or asafetida through the instrument which we have mentioned in the fumigation of the uvula.
Fay aquo, so en quar cayra.	Do this until it passes.
E es un’autra manieyra de operacio en sufumiguacio de aquela, es que tu prenguas una ola en la qual sian carbos ignitz e la ola sia cuberta am una cobertora en le mieg de la qual sia un trauc, e sia compausat en aquel trauc la extremitat del instrument; e aprop dega desus la subfumigacio; e pause le malaute la sua boca en la extremitat de la canula, e claugua la sua boca per que la subfumiguacio no sia foro-getada entro que sapias que la subfumigacio es pervenguda a la sancguisugua, quar la sancguisugua tantost cayra.	And another method of operation in fumigation of it is that you take an earthenware pot in which there are burning coals and the pot is covered with a lid in the middle of which there is a tube, and the extremity of the instrument is placed in that tube; and then give the fumigation from above; and place the patient's mouth at the extremity of the cannula, and close his mouth so that the fumigation does not escape until you know that the fumigation has reached the blood clot, for the blood clot will soon fall.
E si no catz, lahoras tu itera la subfumiguacio motas vetz, e abstengua le malaute de beure, e mange causas saladas e alhs, e no begua aygua, e ayssi necessari es que am aquest regiment sia fora-getada.	And if it does not fall, then repeat the fumigation many times, and withhold from the patient water to drink, and let him eat salty foods and hot ones, and do not let him drink water, and this regimen must be observed for a few days.
E aquesta es la forma del instrument am le qual es trayta sancguisugua del guolayro quan es vista; e es semblant a forceps ayssi cum vezes, sino quar es en lu alcuna curvitat:	And this is the form of the instrument with which blood is removed from the throat when it is seen; and it resembles forceps thus much, except that it has some curvature:
le qual sia mesa al guolayro, e la extremitat de lu es semblant a bec de ciconia, que es guanta, en la qual es aspretat de lima, per so quar, quan comprem alcuna causa, aquela no leyssa.	which is placed in the throat, and its extremity resembles the beak of an ibis, which is blunt, so that when it takes hold of something, it does not let go.
Capitol .xl.	Chapter XL.
En le qual es la suma del sermo en apercio de apostemas e en seccio de lor.	In this chapter is the summary of what has been said about incisions and punctures of abscesses and their openings.
Les apostemas so motas specias, de motas manieyras, segon que ve rememoracio de lor, de quascuna en aquest libre.	Abscesses are many species, of many kinds, according to the memory of them in this book.
E so diversas en perforacio e seccio de lor per doas manieyras, de las quals la una es per la specia de apostemas en si meteys; e per aquo que comprem de las humiditatz.	And they are diverse in incision and puncture of them by two methods, one of which is for the species of internal abscesses, and by that which we understand about humidity.
E la segonda manieyra es prop les locs en les quals accideys del cos, quar le apostema accident en le cap es autra de la apostema accident en le cul; e le apostema en le loc carnos accident es autra del apostema accident en junctura; e a quascun de lor es son juguament per operacio.	And the second method is for those places where accidents of the body occur, for an abscess that occurs in the head is different from one that occurs in the buttocks; and an abscess that occurs in a fleshy place is different from one that occurs at a joint; and each has its own treatment by operation.
E mays de apostemas so alcunas las quals cove que no sian perforadas sino aprop maturacio de la sania en aquels o compliment de lor.	And moreover, there are abscesses which should not be punctured until maturity of the skin in those or completion of them.
So autras apostemas les quals cove que sian traucatz quan son cruzes, e no son maturatz segon lor compliment, ayssi cum apostemas que son propdas a las juncturas, quar apostema quan ve prop junctura, lo esser de lu es prolonguat entro que·s poyreys aquo que es en le circuit de lu, e fort leu son corromputz les liamentz o les nervis de aquela junctura, per que es fayta causa de contraccio de aquel membre; o es apostema prop de membre principal, e si tu tardas la perforacio de lu entro sia madurat nosira al membre principal; o es prop le cul, donc perfora aque no-madurat; e no cove que·l perforas cru, de no-complida degestio, sino aquel que es prop del cul, per so que no poyresca le preon de lu e sia elonguat a las partidas dedintz del cul, e sia fayta fistula, o que sia fayt en le terme de lu que no sia sanat.	Some abscesses must be opened when they are crossed, and not mature according to their completion, such as abscesses that are near joints, for an abscess when it is near a joint its being is prolonged until one puts pressure on what is in the circuit of it, and often its ligaments or nerves are corrupted by it, causing contraction of that limb; or it is an abscess near a main limb, and if you delay opening it until it is matured, it will harm the main limb; or it is near the buttocks, therefore open it immature so that you do not tear the skin of it nor elongate it to the parts inside the buttocks, and make a fistula or one which cannot be healed in its term.
Mays cove que tu sapias la hora de la perforacio de la apostema, e aysso es quan es maturat.	But you should know the time of opening an abscess, and that is when it is matured.
E sapias que es madurat quan es la cedacio de la dolor e la cessacio de la febre, e aprop la diminucio de la rogor e de la pulsacio, e la acuitat del cap del apostema, e les autres senhals.	And know that it is mature when there is relaxation of pain and cessation of fever, and before the decrease of heat and pulsation, and sharpness of the head of the abscess, and other signs.
E quar cove que sapias la perforacio cazer en le loc pus dejos del apostema e de pus venient de curacio de la eminencia.	And know that you should open it where there is more pus, near the abscess, and where pus comes from curing the elevation.
E perforacio tostemps sia per le lonc de la carn o del cors, si las apostemas son en las partidas de las mas o dels pes, e en loc dels lacertz, de las cordas dels nervis, de las arcerias; e, al derier, en totz locs enguals en les quals no es reflecio; quar en aquels que so reflectitz, usa de perforacio segon aquel membre.	And opening is always done along the length of the flesh or body if abscesses are in the parts of the breast or thighs and the joints, ligaments, nerves, arteries; and finally in all other places where reflection does not occur.
Mays quan le apostema es en loc carnos, lahoras miels es que leysses la perforacio de lu entro que sia confermada la digestio de lu segon compliment, ayssi quo havem dit; quar si tu perforas aquel denant aquo, es prolonguat le cors del poyre de lu e de mota sordicia, e fort leu las labias de lu so enduradas e la profunditat de lu.	But when the abscess is in a fleshy place, it is better to leave opening it until digestion of it is confirmed according to its completion, as we have said; for if you open it beforehand, the body of the pus will be prolonged and much dirt will accumulate, and often the lips of it will become hardened and the depth of it.
Mays alcus apostemas so perforatz segon la latitut de la carn o del cos deves la necessitat, o segon aquo del qual lo membre indigeys.	But some abscesses are opened across the width of the flesh or body according to necessity, or according to what that limb needs.
E cove que administres petita perforacio , e·n les apostemas grans gran perforacio e ampla o motas seccios segon la diversitat de la grandesa dels apostemas.	And you should make small openings, and in large abscesses make a large opening or many incisions according to the diversity of their size.
E autras so dels apostemas en les quals cove que la codena sia conquavada e sia encidida, quan es fayta ayssi quo pan e fayta es en terme que ja stigua, ayssi cum aquel que accideys en trops de dubelec e de bubos.	And there are some abscesses in which the chain should be curved and cut when it is done thus as with bread, and when it is done it sticks until it is healed, such as those that occur in swellings of the glands and buboes.
E de aquels so que so insciditz am seccio havent tres angles; e de aquels es en le qual es inscidit ayssi cum figura de fuelha de mirtra, ayssi cum las apostemas dels angonars.	And among those are ones that are incised with three angles; and among them are ones which are incised like the figure of a mitre leaf, such as those of hernias.
E de lor so en les quals es administrada seccio redonda e seccio lunar, e semblantz ad aquels.	And among them are those in which round incision and crescentic incision are administered, resembling these.
Mays aquel al qual no es cap ayssi cum son apostemas leons superficials, cove que tu perforas aquel am perforacio superficial, o plana tant solament.	But that one to which it is not suited like those abscesses on the surface should be opened with a superficial opening or flat one only.
E cove quant le apostema es gros e ya ha colligit mota sania, que perfores aquel e no te coytes que extraguas tot le poyre en aquela hora; habantz extratz de aquel una partida, e aprop opila le apostema entro al autre dia, e aprop extratz una partida major, e aprop fa aquo motas veguadas segon graduacio entro que sia foro-getat.	And when the abscess is large and has collected much pus, you should open it but do not try to remove all the pus at that time; having removed some of it, pack the abscess again the next day and gradually remove more each time until it is completely drained.
E majorment si·l malaute es de freol vertut, o femna prens, o enfant petit, o viel en decrepitut, quar l’esperit animal motas vetz es resolvut am la egressio de la sania, e fort leu mor le malaute, e tu operte les.	And especially if the patient is a child with vertigo, or a pregnant woman, or a small infant, or an elderly person in decrepitude, because often the vital spirit is weakened by the exit of pus and death occurs. Therefore be cautious!
Don guarda aquest capitol am gran cautela, e aprop la tua perforacio en la qual perforas aquestz apostemas, cove que abstergescas las plagues e consideras donc si la plagua del apostema es pauca, o es una seccio plana, lahoras tu aministra las qualguas de li o de coto antic; e si le apostema es gran, e las fissuras de la perforacio son motas, lahoras cove que tu pauses meca en quascun trauc entro que pervenguan ensemps.	Therefore be careful with this chapter and also the opening you make when opening these abscesses. Be sure to cleanse the edges of the wound and consider whether the edge of the abscess is small or has a flat section, then apply the appropriate dressing according to that. If the abscess is large and the incisions are many, then pause between each pull until they drain together.
E si en le apostema es abscindit una partida de la codena o has concavada aquela en le circuit, lahoras cove que tu la complescas de coto viel o de fil fayt de drap de li, ayssi cum quan has traytz pans o razizos, ses humiditat; e strenh aquel entro al tertz dia; e aprop proceseys aquel e cura le am aquo que cove dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	"When an abscess bursts, releasing part of the chain or having its concavity opened in the area, then you should fill it with lint thread or cloth thread, just as when you pull out bread loaves or roots, without moisture; and strengthen that on the third day; and then proceed and treat it until it heals."
Mays si accideys flux de sanc en la hora de la operacio tua, lahoras tu aministra aygua frega e vi agre en les quals mules un drap de li, e pausa aquel sobre le loc del fluxs del sanc motas veguadas.	"If blood flow occurs during the operation, then you should administer water and vinegar mixed on a cloth of linen, and place it on the location of the bleeding several times."
Mays si persevera le fluxs del sanc, lahoras cove que tu aministres regiment e curacio e polveras las quals he recomtadas en motz locs de aquest nostre libre e de divisio.	"If the bleeding persists, then you should administer treatment and care, and powders that have been recommended in many places of this book and division."
Mays si es en temps de hivern, e·l loc de la apostema es loc de motz nervis, lahoras cove que tu enfundas pulvils en vi e oli caut, e pauses aquels sobre les locs.	"But if it is wintertime, and the location of the abscess is a place with many nerves, then you should mix powders in hot vinegar and oil, and place them on those locations."
E si es en estiu, e les locs son carnoses, lahoras cove que tu pauses pulvils enbeguts am aygua e oli o am vi e oli, e tot aquo sia freg entro que sia le ters dia, ayssi cum havem dit, e lahoras cove que tu deslies le apostema e abstergescas aquel e aministres en la curacio de lu aquo que a lu conveneys entro que sia sanat.	"And if it is summertime, and the locations are fleshy, then you should place powders mixed with water and oil or vinegar and oil, and all of that should be done within three days, as we have said, and then you should release the abscess and cleanse it, and administer to its care whatever is appropriate until it heals."
E aysso es aquo que es necessari de la cognicio de la curacio de apostemas universalment, mays segon la via de distinccio ja he dit de tot apostema en qual manieyra es via de la cura de lu per capitols singularment.	"And this is what is necessary regarding the knowledge of the treatment of abscesses generally, but according to the way of distinction, I have already spoken about each abscess in particular manner through chapters singularly."
Capitol .xli.	"Chapter XLII."
De seccio de apostemas les quals veno en la codena del cap.	"Of Incision of Abscesses that occur on the Neck."
En la codena del cap petitz apostemas, e so de specias de nodes les quals conteno tunicas que so a lor factz ; e las specias de lor so motas.	"On the neck of the child, there are small abscesses and types of knots that contain tunics which are made from them; and the types of them are many."
E de lor son pingas, e de aquelas so que conteno humiditat semblant a lima.	"And among them are pimples, and those that contain moisture similar to lime."
E de aquelas so las quals conteno humiditat semblant a pols, et asemblantz a lor; e de aquelas so que son lapideas, durs.	"And among them are those that contain moisture similar to powder, and they resemble each other; and among them are those that are rocky and hard."
E en la seccio de totz, e en la extraccio de aquels no es temor, cum deves la exteccio de aquels no fa contrariat arceria.	"And in the section of all of them, and in their extraction, there is no fear, for their extraction does not cause any pain."
E la operacio en seccio de aquels es que tu esproes aquels am instrument la forma del qual ve aprop aysso, le qual es apelat entromes, entro que sapias que contengua.	"And the operation in sectioning them is that you spread them apart with an instrument whose shape is shown approximately here, which is called 'entromes,' until you know what they contain."
Quar si aquo que conte es humiditat, lahoras scindeys aquel am seccio segon la longitut per seccio superficial segon aquesta forma:	"But if what it contains is moisture, then you should cut it open with a section along its length through a superficial section according to this form:"
E comensa en la seccio de la linha de .B. entro a la linha de .G. Donc cum la humiditat es evacuada, lahoras tu excoria aquela pel que conte aquela humiditat, e no leysses de aquela alcuna causa de tot, quar tropas veguadas retorna, si roman de aquela alcuna causa.	"And begin the section at line B to line G. Then, when the moisture is evacuated, you should scrape that out which contains that moisture, and do not leave any cause of it, for otherwise viewed abscesses return if something remains."
E aprop submergeys coto en enguent egipciach, si es present, e sino, en aygua e sal; e umpleys am aquel la plagua e layssa aquel entro ad autra dia, quar am aquo corrodeys tot so que es romas de aquela pellicula.	"And then immerse it in Egyptian pitch, if available, and otherwise in water and salt; and fill it with that and leave it until the next day, for with this you will corrode all that remains of that skin."
E aprop itera sobre aquel coto am enguent egipciach segondament e tersament si indigeyses de lu, entro que·t comfides que no y haia romas alcuna causa de aquela pellicula; lahoras cura la plagua am enguent entro que sia sanada.	"And then iterate over that wound with Egyptian pitch a second and third time if necessary until you are confident that there is no remaining cause of that skin; then dress the wound with ointment until it heals."
E si apostema conte nodi gras, lahoras tu inscideys aquel segon aquesta forma:	"And if an abscess contains fatty knots, then you should incise it according to this form:"
am seccio havent forma de crotz, e geta oncis entre doas labias de la seccio e scorsa aquel de tota partida, e esforsa la tua vertut en extraccio de la tunica la qual conte aquel.	"with a section having the shape of a cross, and make an incision between both lips of the section and scrape it all out, and use your strength in extracting the tunic which contains it."
Mays si a tu arceria fa contrarieta, lahoras fay aquo que yeu t’e recontat primieyrament.	"But if there is any pain to you, then do what I told you first."
E semblantment fay en le apostema lapificat de seccio e de curacio segon que a tu havem dit; e seccio sobre apostema lapificat es pus leugiera, quar es de pauc sanc e de pauca humiditat.	"And similarly do with the stony abscess in sectioning and treating it according to what we have said; for sectioning a stony abscess is easier because it contains little blood and moisture."
E alcunas vetz so alcus de aquestz apostemas les quals so en le cap en alcus homes am los quals de tot no es humiditat; la qual causa es quar yeu inscindigui sobre un apostema en le cap de una femna vielha e atrobegui le apostema ayssi cum peyra sorda, aspra, blanqua, la qual no podia esser trinquada, e si a alcu fos am aquela percussit, plaguera aquel.	"And sometimes there are some of these abscesses which are in the head in some men with whom there is no moisture at all; and this cause is that once someone incised an abscess on the head of an old woman and found it to be like a deaf stone, rough and white, which could not be broken open. And if anyone were struck by that, he would have been injured."
Mays en les autres apostemas accidentz en le cap otra aquest no es aquest capitol, ayssi cum les apostemas que veno als caps dels enfantz e deves las razitz de las aurelhas, mays la seccio de aquestz totz sia seccio superficial.	"But in other accidental abscesses in the head except for this one, it is not like that. Thus, the section of these all should be a superficial section."
E pausa la perforacio de aquels de la partida pus bassa de lor per so que sia alleujat le cos de la sania a las partidas pus bassas.	"And pause the perforation of those whose bottom part is low because it may alleviate the body from the lower parts."
E aprop cura aquelas am aquo que conveneys ad aquel de curacio.	"And then treat them with whatever is appropriate for their treatment."
Capitol .xlii.	"Chapter XLII."
De seccio de scrophulas las quals accideyso en le col.	"On the section of scrofula that occurs in the neck."
Motas veguadas endeveno aquestas apostemas en le colh e en las aysselhas e en les angonars; e alcunas veguadas accideyso en las autras partidas del cos.	"Many times these abscesses occur in the collar, in the armpits, and in the groins; and sometimes they occur in other parts of the body."
E so aquelas que accideysso en le colh, e so motas que so engendradas entre lor, e tota scrofula de aquelas es dintz la sua tunica propria, e ayssi cum en les nodis e apostema del cap, ayssi cum havem recomtat.	"And those that occur in the collar are many and are generated between them, and all scrofula of these is inside its own tunic, just like in the knots and abscesses of the head, as we have said."
E las specias de aquestas scrophulas son motas, quar de aquelas so alcunas lapideas, e de aquelas so que conteno humiditatz, e de aquelas so malignas las quals no obeseysso a curacio.	"And the species of these scrofula are many because among them there are some stony ones, and some contain moisture, and some are malignant which do not obey treatment."
Donc en aquela la qual tu vezes de bona disposicio en le Tocament, de la qual la color de aquo que es manifest es propda a la color de la codena, e es mauguda a tota partida, e no es annexsa am le nervi del colh, ni am las venas, ni am la arceria, e no es preonda, cove que tu inscidiscas aquela am siccio superficial de la partida desus a la partida dejos del cos de la linha de .G. entro la linha de .B., e scorja aquela de tota partida, e exten dos labias de la codena am onci, o am motz oncis si has necessitat de aquels, ayssi cum havem dit en las apostemas del cap, e extratz aquela petit a petit.	"Therefore in that one which you find to be of good disposition in the touch, whose color is close to the color of bone, and is soft all over, not annexed to the nerve of the neck or the veins or the artery, and not prominent, it is necessary for you to incise it with a superficial section from above to below on the body from line G to line B. Then scrape it out entirely, and extend the lips of the bone with forceps, or with several forceps if you need them, as we have said in the abscesses of the head, and extract it little by little."
E es mays cautela que no sia inscidida la vena o nervi.	"And be especially careful not to incise any veins or nerves."
E sia le spatum no mot agut, que no ajuste a tu la tua ma am inscizio, o que enquiete le malaute, e que inscidas aquo que no es necessari inscidir; quar si inscideysses vena o arceria e prohibeys tu de la tua operacio, lahoras pausa en la plagua vetriol trissat o autras polveras las quals ostan fluxs de sanc, e estrenh la plagua, e layssa aquel entro que·s repausa la acuitat de la apostema e sia mollificada la plagua e comense esser poyrida.	"And do not use a sharp spatula, for it may cause your hand to slip during the incision or worsen the disease. And do not incise anything that does not need to be incised; because if you were to incise a vein or an artery and hinder yourself from your operation, then pause with a vetriol plaster or other powders which stop bleeding, and apply it, and leave it until the sharpness of the abscess has paused and the wound has softened and begins to heal."
Quan le sanc es abscindit.	"When blood is cut off."
Donc retorna a la tua operacio entro que l’aias complida.	"So return to your operation once it is completed."
E aprop inquireys am le tieu dit indic si es romas alcuna causa de las autras petitas scrophulas, donc inscideys aquelas e munda aquelas.	"And then inquire with the little finger whether there are any other small scrofula remaining. Then incise those and clean them."
E si es en la razit de la scrophula gran vena, cove lahoras que no inscidas aquela scrophula de la sua razitz.	"If it is near a large vein, then do not incise that scrofula from its root."
Abantz cove que lies aquela am fiel doblat fort e que leysses aquela entro que caia per si ses nocument.	"Then apply the wound with doubled bandage strongly and leave it until it falls off on its own without harm."
E aprop omple la plagua de coto vielh le qual tu has ja submirgit en enguent egipciac, e aprop cura aquel.	"And then fill the wound with old cotton which you have already subjected to Egyptian pitch, and treat it."
E si inscides aquela scrophula tota, lahoras cove que tu ajustes las doas labias de la plagua e cuzas2 tantost pus que no y ha romasa deguna superfluitat.	"If you incise that scrofula entirely, then it is necessary for you to approximate the two lips of the wound and dress it soon after so that there remains no excess."
Mays si tu vezes que haia romasa superfluitat per la grandeza de la scrofula, cove que tu entendas a inscidir la razit de aquela, e astrayra aquela e aministra sutura e aquo que es dit.	"But if you see that there remains excess because of the size of the scrofula, then it is necessary for you to intend to incise the root of that, and draw it out and apply stitches and whatever else is said."
E aquela de las scrophulas que conteno humiditatz, perfora aquela am perforacio superficial aqui la on appar a tu le loc de maturacio de lu, e pausa perforacio de aquo que siec le pus bas del cos, ayssi cum havem dit.	"And those of the scrofulas that contain moisture, perforate them with a superficial perforation where you see their point of maturation, and pause the perforation until the pus has come out from inside the body, as we have said."
E aprop aministra perforacio, calguas am enguent e semblantz ad aquels, per so que corroda aquo que es romas de la corropcio.	Approach administering perforation, using hot water and cloths similar to those used for cautery.
E aprop quan tu vezes la plagua ja esser mundada, lahoras tu cura aquela am enguent de carn generatiu entro que sia sanada.	And when the wound is cleansed, then you should cure it with warm water of carnation flowers until it is healed.
Capitol .xliii.	Capítulo XLIII
De seccio del pilhot del apostema accident dintz le guolayro.	Of the incision of the point of an accidental aposteme within the scrotum.
Diyssero les antics aquesta seccio en le epilhot, e no vist alcu hom en nostra terra que aquela aia fayta.	It was said by the ancients that this section is made in the epiglottis; yet we have not seen anyone in our land who has done it.
E aquesta es la inscriptura del sermo de aquels.	And this is the inscription of the sermon of those people
Mays en les homes haventz esquinencia, cove que sia esquivada la extraccio del epilhot, cum per aquo no sia fayt juvament per so quar totas las venas e las majors del malaute so aqui.	But in men who have a squinting eye, it is advisable to avoid the extraction of the epiglottis since by this there is not made any improvement and all the veins and the major blood vessels are here.
Mays en aquels que han apostemas cautz en la boca o guolayro o dos aurelhas, quan la malautia no es en la cana, cove husar de la seccio de epilhot a fugir la perdicio la qual es fayta per perfocacio.	But in those who have apostemes cauterized in the mouth or scrotum or ears, when the illness is not on the skin, it is advisable to avoid section of the epiglottis to escape the damage that is done by perforation.
Donc cove quan volem aquo, que inscidam le epilhot dejos tres cercles dels cercles del epilhot, o quatre am petita seccio per la latitut en aquel que es entre dos cercles per quantitat, que la seccio sia en ciphac, no en la cartillage, e aquest loc es convenent a seccio, quar es privat de carn e les vayselhs de sanc de lu son luhen.	Therefore when we want this, we should incise the epiglottis at three circles of the rings of the epiglottis, or four with a small section across its width in that which is between two rings by quantity, so that the incision is made in cartilage and not in the cartilage itself; and this place is convenient for section because it is devoid of flesh and the vessels of blood are far from it.
E si le metge es pauruc, cove lahoras que extenda la codena del golayro am onci, e aprop fenda la codena entro que pervengua a la canal, mays evite les vaysels de sanc si vetz de aquelas alcuna causa.	And if the doctor is fearful, he should beforehand extend the cord of the scrotum with a hook, and carefully cut the cord within until it reaches the canal, but avoid the vessels of blood if any are visible.
E aprop inscida li ciplach segon que havem recomtat; e es significat sobre la seccio de la canal per le flacma le qual es de aquela eyssit am aquo que es de lu disromput e per la abscizio de la votz.	And then incise the cartilage as we have recommended; and it is indicated by the swelling above the section of the canal, which is of that fluid and of what comes out from its disruption and by the absence of voice.
E layssa la plagua uberta per alcun temps.	Leave the wound open for some time.
Donc cum la hora es remauguda en la qual perforacio es temuda, agregua doas labias de la codena de la plagua, e cus aquela sola ses la cartillage.	Therefore when the hour has passed in which perforation is feared, approximate two lips of the edge of the wound and leave that alone be the cartilage.
E aprop administra medicinas que fan naysser la carn entro que sia sanat.	And then apply medicines that cause flesh to grow within so that it may heal.
E diyssec Albucasis que la summa del sermo le qual havem recomtat, exposicio no es sino que veias que alcus de aquetz apostemas ja han opilat lo guolayro del malaute, e le malaute es vengut entro a mort, e le ale de lu es entresecat, e alcus van a inscidir le epiglos per so que respire le malaute sobre le loc de la plagua per alcuna respiracio, e sia salvat de mort.	"Albucasis said that the summary of our discourse is this: Some of these ulcers have already closed the throat of the patient, and the patient has come into death; the breath of the patient has been cut off, and some go to incise the epiglottis so that the patient may breathe on the place of the ulcer by some respiration, and thus be saved from death."
E per aquo comandero layssar la plagua uberta entro que sia consumida la malicia de la malautia; e es la malicia de lu per tres dias; e donc lahoras comandero cosi la plagua, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	"You should thus let the ulcer heal inside until the evil of the illness is consumed. The evil lasts for three days. Then you should dress it thus, and care for it until it heals."
E aquo que yeu he vist per mi meteys, es que una sirventa pres un cotel e mesec le en le sieu golayro e inscidic am aquel una partida de la cana del pulmo, e yeu fu apelat a la curacio de lu, e atrobegui la mugen ayssi cum es mugit del moridos, e descubrigui la plagua e atrobegui le sanc le qual era yssit de la plagua petit.	"I saw that a servant took a knife and put it in her throat and cut out a part of the lung's bronchus. I was called to cure her, and I found her moaning like one dead. I uncovered the ulcer and drew out the blood which was flowing from the ulcer."
Donc yeu fo confessat que aquela no havia inscidit vena ni guidegi, e le vent yssia de la plagua, e curegui aquela entro que foc sanada.	"Therefore I was forced to confess that she had not cut any vein nor artery, and the wind issued from the ulcer. And I cured her thus until she was healed."
E no accidic a la sirventa si no rauquiera en la votz, e aprop alcus dias retornec ad miloracio de las suas dispozicios.	"And it did not happen to the servant that any air came out of her throat. And after some days she returned to her usual state of health."
E ara dic yeu que en la seccio del epilhot no ha temor.	"Now you say that there is no danger in cutting into the epiglottis."
Capitol .xliv.	Chapter 44.
De seccio sobre apostema le qual accideys en le golayro defora, e es apelat hernia del golayro.	Of an incision for an aposteme that happens outside of the throat, which is called a thyregocele (thyroid goitre).
Aquest apostema nompnat hernia del golayro es apostema gran segon la color del cors, e es mot en las femnas.	This aposteme named thyroid goiter is a large aposteme according to the color of the body, and it is common in women.
E es segon dos manieyras, quar o es natural o accidental.	And it happens in two ways: either naturally or accidentally.
E en le natural no es engen de curar.	"It is not Nature's way to heal."
E l’accidental es segon dos manieyras del qual la un es semblant a nodes grasses, e l’autra manieyra es semblant apostema le qual es fayt per nodacio de arteria, e en aquel es temor.	"And accidents occur in two ways: the first is similar to solid tumors, and the second is similar to an abscess that occurs due to the rupture of an artery; this one is dangerous."
E no cove que·s fassa presumpcio a lu cum ferr sino en aquel que es petit.	"Only in that case should one act presumptuously with iron."
E tu proha aquel e investigua aquel am le dit, e si atrobas lu semblant a nodi gras, e no es suspendut am alcuna de las venas, lahoras tu inscideys aquel ayssi cum les nodes, e extratz aquel am aquo que conte lu de la pel e bursiclam; e sino, lahoras es perscrutat tot le sieu esser, e aprop cura le loc am aquo que cove de curacio entro que sia sanat.	"And then examine it carefully and see if it resembles a solid tumor, and if not suspended on any of the veins, then cut into it like a node and remove whatever is inside with water and scissors. And otherwise, carefully investigate its entire being, and promptly treat the wound with what is needed for healing until it heals."
Capitol .xlv.	Chapter XLVI
De seccio de las specias de nodes.	"On the section of the various types of tumors."
Dels nodes so motas specias e yeu ja he dit totas las specias de lor en la divisio.	Of the many species of joints, I have already mentioned all their kinds in the division.
E cove que yeu recomte assi la diferencia entre node e exitura cum fassa dubitacio.	And since you ask thus for the difference between joint and outlet with doubt
Donc yeu dic que am exitura es caliditat e febre e dolors vehementz entro que es sedada la ebullicio de la superfluitat; e es complida putrefaccio que lahora cessa la febre, la dolor e la calor.	Therefore you say that in outlet there is heat and fever and violent pain within when the boiling of the excess fluid stops; and it is full putrefaction which then ceases the fever, the pain, and the heat.
Mays am node no es caliditat ni febre ni dolor, e conte aquel ciphac leon le qual es al u sac propri.	But in joint there is neither heat nor fever nor pain, and it contains that thick fluid which is in the proper bladder.
E es segon la color del cors, e le comensament de lu es cum un ceze e es fayt ayssi cum vace, sia major o minor, e son segon dos specias, quar o so grassas e conteno humiditat, e las colors de la humiditat son motas, segon que yeu diyssi en la divisio.	And it is according to the color of the body, and its beginning is like a haze and it becomes thus like emptiness, whether greater or lesser, and there are two species, for some are thick and contain moisture, and the colors of the moisture are many, as you said in the division.
Donc cove, quan pervenas a la curacio de node, que exprohes aquel e inquiras aquel al comensament am sturment le qual es apelat intromes, segon que vindra la sua forma en le capitol le qual es aprop aquest.	Therefore, when you reach the cure of joint, that you remove it and investigate it at its beginning with an instrument which is called "intromes," according to what its form will come in the chapter which is appropriate for this.
E es manieyra de inquisicio de apostemas e de totz nodes, e es que tu prenguas aquest sturment e entromet aquel en le loc pus humit le qual atrobas en le apostema, e tu revolveras les tieus ditz am aquel petit a petit entro que sapias que·l sturment ja ha penetrat la codena.	And it is the manner of investigation of boils and of all joints, and it is that you take this instrument and insert it into the most humid place which you find in the boil, and you turn your fingers with that little by little until you know that the instrument has pierced the skin.
E aprop ultima la tua ma segon la mesura de la grandeza del apostema, e aprop extratz le entromes e considera aquo que es yssit en le vestigi de lu.	And then lastly, according to the measure of the size of the boil, extract the intromes and consider what is issued in the tract of it.
E si es fora-getada la humiditat corrent, de qualque color sia, lahoras tu le inscideys am seccio superficial segon que he dit en les autres apostemas.	And if running moisture has been forgotten, whatever its color may be, then you should incise it with a superficial section according to what I have said in the case of other boils.
E si del vestigi de l’intromes no hieys humiditat, lahoras sapias que es gras.	And if from the tract of the intromes there is no moisture, then know that it is thick (grassa).
E secca sobre lu am seccio havent forma de crotz segon aquesta forma:	If it is dry above it with a section having the form of a cross in this manner:
ayssi cum t’e ensenhat, e suspen aquel am oncis, e excorja la codena de tota part am facilitat, e guarda la pel o sac, si podes, sobre aquel e extraguas aquela sania am le node.	Thus as you have shown, suspend that with hooks and tear out the chain from all parts with ease, and guard the skin or bag, if possible, over it and draw out that fluid.
Mays si es romput en la operacio, no es possible extrayre aquela sana, e motas veguadas endeve aquo, e lahoras tu la extratz a pessas entro que de lu no romangua denguna causa.	But if it breaks during the operation, it is not possible to draw out that fluid. Many times there remains some inside and then you draw it out piece by piece without any cause for concern.
Quar si de lu roman denguna causa, pauc o trop, le node retorne segon le mays.	For if there remains any cause, little or much, the knot will return according to its nature.
E si tu vezes que de lu roman alcuna part petita, lahoras comple la plagua de alcunas polveras corrosivas agudas e strenh la plagua, e pausa sobre aquela que sede apostema caut, e cura aquel del autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And if some small part remains, then fill the wound with some sharp corrosive powders and strengthen it, and press on that which seems to be an abscess, and cure it with the other treatment until it is healed.
E si es node gran, lahoras tu cus las doas labias de lu e cura aquel am aquo que encarna.	And if the knot is large, then cut both lips of it and heal it with that which enters into it.
Mays si vena pulsatil es a lu contraria, o no-pulsatil, lahoras tu coyta e huemple le loc de zegi trissat que es vetriol e leyssa aquel streyt per dos dias o per tres entro que·s poyresca la plagua e que repause la ebullicio del sanc; e aprop retorna a inscindir aquo que es romas del node.	But if there is no pulsating vein on it, or not pulsating, then cut and cauterize the place where it was with three-forked cautery that is vitriol, and leave that open for two or three days until the wound closes and the ebullition of blood returns; and again return to excising what remains of the knot.
Capitol .xlvi.	Capitol XLVI
De las formas del sturmentz necessaris en seccio e perforacio.	Chapter XLVI
De aquels so las formas dels intromesas, e so de tres specias, que de aquels es alcu gran, e de lor es migier, e de lor es petit.	"Of those are the forms of intestines, and they are of three species: some are large, others medium-sized, and still others small."
La forma de intromes gran es aquesta:	"The large intestine is shaped like this:"
La forma de intromes migier es aquesta:	"The medium-sized intestine is shaped like this:"
La forma de intromes petit es aquesta:	"The small intestine is shaped like this:"
Sian faytz de ferr, de alfulud, de extremitatz cayradas decentment, per so que festino le intrament en les apostemas.	"Let there be fingers of iron, almond-shaped, with rounded tips, to facilitate the insertion of the intestines into the openings."
E aquestas so las formas dels experientz, e son nompnatz albered, e un de aquels es apelat berid.	"And these are the shapes of experiments, and they are named Albered, and one of them is called Berid."
E so de tres especias, quar de lor es gran, migier e pauc.	"And they are of three species: some are large, others medium-sized, and still others few in number."
La forma de experient gran, forma de lu:	"The shape of the large experiment is that of a lion:"
La forma de experient migier, forma de lu:	"The shape of the medium-sized experiment is that of an eagle:"
La forma de experient pauc, forma de lu:	"The shape of the few experiments is that of a lynx:"
Conveneysso que sian per aquels apostemas e exituras e fistulas e bubos per so que entre aquelas so dels osses e de autras causas.	"It is convenient that they be for those openings, outlets and fistulas and boils, since between these are some of the bones and other causes."
E so faytz redontz, grosses, leons, ayssi cum grans agulhas am las quals son cosidas las selhas, e son faytas de eram citri, o de eram o de ferr, o de argent, E las milhors so quan so faytas de eram citri.	"And these are redondas, thick, like lions, such as large needles with which the sutures are sewn, and they are made of gold, or of silver, or of iron, or of silver. And the best ones are those made of gold."
E son faytz les experient de plum negre, les quals se acordan que per aquels sian ubertas las fistulas en la conquavitat de las quals so reflexios, que sian reflectidas am la sua levitat am aquelas refleccios.	"And these experiments are made of black feathers, which are arranged so that through them the fistulas are opened in whose concavity reflections are reflected, and they are reflected with their own light on those reflections."
E so de tres specias, quar alcus de lor so loncs, e dels autres migiers, e dels autres breus, segon la quantitat del ample de la fistula e de la strictura de lu.	"And they are of three species: some are long, others medium-sized, and still others short, according to the quantity of the width of the fistula and the strictness of its opening."
Forma del experient gran de plom:	"The shape of the large lead experiment:"
Forma del experient migier de plom:	"The shape of the medium-sized lead experiment:"
Forma del experient petit de plom:	"The shape of the small lead experiment:"
Las formas dels oncis so de motas specias, quar de aquels so alcus simples, als quals es una curvitat solament, e so de tres specias: grans, paucs e migiers.	"The shapes of the hooks are of many species, for some are simple, with only one curvature, and they are of three species: large, few, and medium-sized."
E de lor so uncis orps, e so de tres specias.	"And there are also curved hooks, which are of three species:"
E de aquels so uncis haventz doas curvaturas, e so de tres specias.	"Among those hooks with two curvatures, there are three species."
E de lor so haventz tres curvaturas, e so de tres specias.	"And among those that have three curvatures, there are three species."
E totz aquetz so necessaris en lor loc.	"And all these are necessary in their place."
Forma de unci simple gran, forma de lu:	"The shape of a large simple hook, its form is like this:"
Forma de unci simple migier:	"The shape of a medium-sized simple hook:"
Forma de unci simple pauc, forma de lu:	"The shape of a small simple hook, its form is like this:"
Forma de unci orp gran:	"The shape of a large curved hook:"
Forma de unci orp migier, forma de lu:	"The shape of a medium-sized curved hook, its form is like this:"
Forma de unci orp pauc, forma de lu:	"The shape of a small curved hook, its form is like this:"
Forma de unci gran havent dos curvaturas:	"The shape of a large hook with two curvatures:"
Forma de unci migier havent dos curvatas:	"The shape of a medium-sized hook with two curvatures:"
Forma de unci pauc havent dos curvaturas:	"The shape of a small hook with two curvatures:"
Forma de unci gran havent tres curvaturas:	"The shape of a large hook with three curvatures:"
Forma de unci migier havent tres curvaturas:	"The shape of a medium-sized hook with three curvatures:"
Forma de unci pauc havent tres curvaturas:	"The shape of a small hook with three curvatures:"
E aquestas so las formas dels scalpels am les quals son seccatz e scorjatz les nodes e le apostemas, e so de tres specias, quar de aquels es gran, migier, e pauc.	"And these are the shapes of the scalpels with which the nodes and tumors are cut and scraped, and they are of three species: large, medium-sized, and small."
Forma de scapel gran:	"The shape of a large scalpel:"
Forma del scapel migier:	"The shape of the medium-sized scalpel:"
Forma de scapel pauc:	"The shape of a small scalpel:"
Las extramitatz de aquels am les quals es fayta seccio so agudas e las autres extramitatz so no-agudas, e no so pausadas en tal manieyra, sino per que sia fayt juvament en la excorjacio dels nodes la temor de inscizio de vena o de nervi, e per aquels sia sanat le malaute e atrobe tranquilitat un petit per la adustio la qual atroba deves la excoriacio del apostema.	"The extremities of those with which sections are made are sharp and the others are not sharp, not pausadas in such a way that they may be used judiciously in the excision of nodes to avoid injury to veins or nerves, so that the illness may be cured and tranquility obtained through the healing that follows the scraping of tumors."
E aquestas son las formas de almagidas, e so de tres specias: gran, migier e pauc, ayssi cum veyras.	"And these are the shapes of forceps, which are of three species: large, medium-sized and small, as you can see."
La forma de magda gran:	"The shape of large forceps:"
Forma de magda migier:	"Form of medium-sized forceps:"
Forma de magda pauc:	"Shape of small forceps:"
Sian faytas de eram e so semblantz de ray am le qual e fayt alcofol.	"They are made of iron and resemble the shape of a rod with which alcohol is distilled."
E es en la extramitat lada punctada am spatum occultada e en aquela corr a las partidas dedintz e defora, quan tu vols, ayssi cum veses.	"And they have one end punched with a spatula hidden inside and the other end open, so that you can easily insert them into or withdraw them from an area as desired."
Las formas de spatimis, les quals so amaguatz entre los ditz deves la perforacio dels apostemas e no les percebo les malautes, e so de tres specias: gran, migier e pauc.	"The shapes of spatulas, which are hidden among the ones mentioned earlier for the perforation of tumors and do not cause injury, are of three species: large, medium-sized, and small."
E aquestas so las formas de aquels:	"And these are the shapes of those:"
Las formas de ventozas am las quals es abscindit le flux del sanc, e so de tres specias; gran, migiera e pauca; las formas de lu:	"The forms of syringes with which blood flow is absorbed, and they are of three species: large, medium-sized and small; their forms are as follows:"
Sian faytas de eram citri, redondas am alcuna longitut , e sian subtils.	"They are made of citrus iron, round with some length, and are subtle."
E cove que sian aquestas specias de ventosas deves tu grans, migieras e paucas, per so que per aquelas abscindas flux de sanc am velocitat en necessitat, e lahoras quan a tu primieyrament no es medicina.	"And it is necessary that these species of syringes be large, medium-sized and small, so that with those you can absorb blood flow quickly in case of necessity, and also when there is no medical assistance at first."
Enpero no uses de aquelas ad abscidir sanc en tot loc del cors, e non uses sino en locs carnoses, ayssi cum en les lacertis de las cambas e de las coyssas, e en les lacertz dels brasses, e de las mamillas e del ventre e dels engonars, e semblantz a lor dels lacertz carnoses humitz.	"But do not use them to absorb blood in all parts of the body, only in fleshy areas, such as the armpits and groin, the arms and breasts, the abdomen and thighs, and similar moist fleshy areas."
E alcunas veguadas son faytz de aquels strumentz autres petitz semblantz scorsas de fisacs segon aquesta forma; per les quals lo sanc es abscindit quan es fayt per fleubotomia, o deves inscizio de vena o de arceria.	"And sometimes these instruments are made into small ones similar to scissors of forceps according to this shape; with which blood is absorbed when it is done by phlebotomy or injury to a vein or artery."
E alcunas veguadas son faytas redondas segon aquesta forma:	"And sometimes they are made round according to this shape:"
Capitol .xlvii.	"Chapter xlvii."
De la cura de las mamillas dels homes las quals so asembladas de femnas.	"Of the care of the breasts of men, which are similar to those of women."
Alcunas veguadas so infladas las mamillas de alcus homes deves le compliment del dormir cum comensan esser pellutz, e aprop so infladas las mamillas, e so asembladas las mamillas de las femnas, e romano apostemosas, lejas.	"Some men's breasts sometimes become swollen after sleeping, and as they swell, women's breasts also swell similarly."
E ad aquel que avoreys aquo, cove que inscidisca aquelas am seccio lunar segon aquesta forma, de la linha de .B. entro a la linha de .G., e aprop excorja la groceza tota, e aprop uempla la plagua de medicament encarnatiu, e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am cosidura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	"And upon that one who has this, it is necessary to make an incision on those breasts according to this shape, from line BG, and remove all the thickness, then fill the wound with a poultice of healing medicine, then sew up both lips of the wound, and heal it until it is healed."
Mays si la mamilla declina a las partidas dejos e es mollificada per la sua magnitut ayssi cum endeve a las femnas, lahoras sia fendut en dos latz sieus pus sobiras, am dos seccios semblantz a figura lunar, de las quals quascuna sia contenguda en l’autra deves la fi de quascuna, entro que sia que la linha major contengua la menor segon aquesta forma de la linha de .B. e la linha de .G. E aprop excorja la codena la qual es entre dos labias de la plagua, e osta la pingueza, e aministra aquo que havem dit de la sutura e de las polveras aquo que es necessari en la curacio entro que sia sanat.	"However, if the nipple leans towards the sides and is enlarged due to its size like in women, then it should be split into two parts from above with two incisions resembling a crescent moon shape, each contained within the other at their ends, so that the larger line contains the smaller one according to this shape of line BG and line G. And then remove the excess skin between both lips of the wound, drain the pus, and administer what has been said about suturing and powders as necessary in the healing process until it is healed."
E si tu non conpleysses la inscizio de aquo que cove inscidir per la inquietut del malaute, e per flux de sanc, lahoras cove que huemplas la plagua de coto submergit en enguent corrosiu e layssa aquel entro que aquo corroda que es romas de la grayssa, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	"And if you do not make the necessary incision due to the disturbance of the disease and blood flow, then it is necessary to fill the wound with a poultice of boiled corrosive ointment and leave it until that which has been corroded breaks away from its thickness, then heal it until it is healed."
Capitol .xlviii.	Chapter XLVIII
De perforacio de apostemas que veno dejos le titillic.	"Regarding the perforation of boils that come out on the testicles."
Aquetz apostemas que veno dejos le titillic so de las specias de scrophulas, durs, las quals conte una pel que es sac.	"These are boils that appear on the skin due to conditions such as scrofula, hard ones that contain pus which can be squeezed out."
E de aquelas so alcunas que conteno humiditatz; e aquelas que conteno humiditatz cove que sian inscididas am seccio lunar segon aquesta figura: de la linha de .G. a la linha de .B. E cum es tot evacuat aquo que es en le apostema de la sania, lahoras tu le comple de coto viel e leysa le entro al autra dia.	"And among those that contain moisture; those that contain moisture should be incised with a crescent-shaped cut according to this figure: from line G to line B. And when all the fluid inside the boil has been evacuated, then fill it with cotton wool and leave it for another day."
E aprop le coto sia ostat e sia curat am enguent convenient ad aquo, entro que sia sanat.	"And also make sure that the cotton is removed and treated with appropriate ointment until it is healed."
E si le apostema de las specias dels nodes es, e de las scrophulas, lahoras tu scindeys sobre aquel ayssi cum havem dit en la seccio sobre las scrophulas engualment.	"And if the boil is of the type called nodes or scrofula, then cut into it as we have described in the section on scrofula and apply a dressing."
May si la plagua es extenduda en aysso que yesca poyredura, lahoras administra en lu cauteri segon que en aquo havem denant dit.	"And if the boil has spread so much that it is purulent, then apply cautery as we have described earlier."
Capitol .xlix.	"Chapter XLIX."
De seccio de apostemas que accideysso per arceria o per vena.	"Regarding the cutting of boils that occur by force or through a vein."
Quan arceria es rompuda, e la codena es consolidada la qual es sobre aquela, lahoras motas veguadas accideys apostema E les senhals per les quals es conoguda que imflamacio e apostema sian per la arteria o per vena: quar quan apostema es per arceria es lonc agreguat en le preon del cors; e que quan inpelleysses le apostema am les tieus ditz, sentes en lu quays sia stridor.	"When the artery is broken and the vein above it is constricted, many times a boil occurs. The signs by which inflammation and boil are known to be from the artery or vein: for when a boil is from an artery, it is elongated in front of the chest; and when you press the boil with your fingers, you feel stridor (i.e., noise) in it."
E aquel que es per vena es redon al manifest del cors.	"And that which is due to a vein appears round on the body's surface."
E seccio sobre aquest apostema es error, e majorment en aquel que es dejos las aysselhas, e en les angonars, e en le col, e en motz locs del cors; e es mot gran, donc cove que la sua curacio am ferr sia esquivada, e aquel que es en las extramitatz, o al cap, cove que sia evitat.	"And cutting into this boil is an error, especially in those located near the armpits, on the angles of the eyes and mouth, on the neck, and many other parts of the body. And if it is large, its treatment with iron should be avoided; and if it is on the extremities or the head, it should be avoided."
Mays sobre aquel que es de lor per imflacio de l’orrifici de la arceria, scindeys en la codena seccio en le lonc; e aprop huebre la seccio am uncis e aprop la arceria, e deliura de las tunicas entro que sia descuberta.	"But concerning that which is due to inflammation of the artery's orifice, it should be cut along its length; and appropriate incisions are made with forceps around the artery, exposing its sheaths."
E aprop met sobre aquel agulha e fay aquela penetrar entro al autre latz, e estrenh la arceria am fiel doble en dos locs, — la qual causa yeu a tu eyssenhegui en extraccio de doas arcerias les quals so en les templars.	"And in this case an appropriate needle is used to penetrate the other side; and with doubled thread, the artery should be ligated at two points, which causes blood flow to be restored from two arteries that are located on the temples."
E aprop punh le loc le qual es entre dos liamentz am spatum entro que yesca le sanc tot que es en lu, e sia dissolvut le apostema.	"And accordingly, pierce the location between the two ligatures with a spatula so that all blood is expressed from it, and thus the boil will be resolved."
E aprop administra curacio en la qual es engendrat poyre entro que caian les liamentz; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz convenientz ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	"And accordingly, administer treatment that generates pus within which the ligatures fall; and appropriately treat with convenient ointments so that it may be healed."
E si es apostema per seccio de vena, lahoras cove que tu tenguas am la tua ma aquo que es a tu possible del apostema am la codena, e aprop intromet la agulha dejos le loc le qual tu has tengut dejos la tua ma, e fay aquela penetrar; e sia en aquela fil doble entro que tu extraguas aquel del autre latz, e aprop ligua le apostema am bo liament segon que yeu he dit a tu en le liament de uva4 de doas partz am doas extremitatz del fil.	"And if it is a boil due to the section of a vein, then you should take hold of whatever possible part of the vein near the boil with your hand; and accordingly introduce the needle from below the location that you have held in your hand, and make it penetrate; and with doubled thread, extract that which is on the other side, and appropriately ligate the boil with good ligature according to what I have told you in the section about the grapevine, dividing it into two parts with two extremities of the thread."
Mays si temes que extraguam le fil, lahoras entromet le fiel am aquela agula dejos tot le apostema deves la inscizio de la agulha primieyra, e strenh les tieus fiels en quatre locs.	"But if you fear that the thread may be extracted, then insert the doubled thread with that needle from below the boil near the initial incision of the needle, and tighten your threads in four locations."
Aprop secca le apostema en le mieg loc de lu entro que quan es yssit aquo que es en lu, lahoras tu inscideys la superfluitat de la codena, e layssa aquo que de lu es liat.	"And accordingly, dry out the boil in its middle part until what is inside it has exited; then incise the surplus of the vein and leave whatever of it is tied."
E aprop pausa sobre lu pulvil le qual has submergit en vi e oli, e aprop administra la curacio la qual es fayta am calguas e enguentz entro que sia sanat.	"And accordingly, press on it with powder that you have moistened in wine and oil; and appropriately administer treatment with compresses and ointments until it is healed."
Capitol l del apostema le qual accideys per torcio de nervis.	"Chapter on the boil which occurs due to a twist of nerves."
Ayssi cum accideys apostema en arceria e en vena, e semblantment accideys apostema en les nervis quan accideys en lor percussio o accideys per trebal superfluable, e per semblantz.	"Similarly as boils occur in arteries and veins, likewise boils occur in nerves when they are subjected to percussion or when there is excessive labor; for similar reasons."
E es fayt le mays de lu en les locs dels adjutoris o del talo, o en tot loc en le qual so maugudas las juncturas.	"And most often it occurs in the locations of the elbows or knees, or in any location where joints are moved excessively."
E es apostema greu, e es asemblat a la color del autre cors, e es en las majors de lu disposicios ses de lor e quan es streyt am vehementia, sent en lu le malaute semblant stupor.	"And it is a severe boil that resembles the color of other skin, and is in large areas where there are no openings; when it is pressed with violence, it causes pain like numbness."
E no es apostema agreguat en le preon del cors, e per so es dejos la codena, e el es maugut a tota partida e no va a las partidas denant ni detras.	"And it is not aggregated in the front of the body; rather, it is on the side of the vein, and it moves to all parts but does not move towards the front or back."
Donc aquo de aquels que es en las juncturas no cove que sia envasit am ferr, quar fort leu endevenguera contracio.	"Therefore, those that are in joints should not be bandaged with iron, for it would cause great contraction."
Mays aquel que es en le cap o en le front fen la codena am spatum.	"But that which is on the head or forehead should be opened with a spatula."
Mays si es apostema pauc, lahoras te aquel am les forfecs e abscindeys aquel de razitz.	"But if it is a small boil, then squeeze it with your fingers and excise it with scissors."
E si es gran, lahoras tu le suspen am unci, e excorja aquel, e aprop osta aquel; e ajusta la plagua am sutura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	"And if it is large, then suspend it with forceps, excise and remove it; then adjust the wound with stitches and treat it until it heals."
Capitol .li.	"Chapter LI."
De seccio de apostema le qual accideys de cheil que accideys al ventre.	"Chapter on the section of boil that occurs due to injury of the abdomen."
Endeveno ad alcus homes motas veguadas en les ventres de aquels e en las autras partidas del cors de aquels theils les quals son apelatz funguals per similitut de aquels am funges, dels quals la razitz es subtil e·l cap de aquel es gros; e ja las labias de aquels so conversas, e es de aquels que es petit, e es de aquels que es mot magnificat.	"Among these men, some have seen boils in the bellies of those and in other parts of their bodies that are called fungous due to their similarity with fungi; the root of which is subtle and the head is large. And sometimes the lips of those become inverted, both those that are small and those that are greatly enlarged."
E yeu ja e vist un, e en le ventre de lu eran dos theils les quals eran mays a funges semblantz, e no era diferencia entre aquels blancs, de menuda razitz.	"And I have seen one such boil in the belly of someone who had two parts resembling fungi; there was no difference between those parts, being small and white."
E ja las labias de aquels eran enversadas e se fendian, e humiditat corria de aquel tot temps.	"And sometimes the lips of these were inverted and split open, and moisture ran from them at all times."
Donc yeu inscidegui aquels e atrobegui en la un en pes quays xviii unc. e l’autre quays vi unc.	"So I incised those and removed from one of them eighteen ounces, and from the other six ounces."
E la operacio en la inscizio de lor es que consideres lahoras si·l malaute es humit, e la color de atheil es blanca, humit, de subtil razitz; lahoras tu le inscideys am spatum lat, e sian en la presencia tua cauteris en le foc, quar motas veguadas deves la seccio de lu es expellit mot sanc; e si te ventz le sanc, cauteriza aquel.	"And the operation in incising them is that you should consider whether the pain is humid, and if the color of the boil is white, humid, with a subtle root; then open it with a wide spatula, and have cauteries ready before you because many times much blood is expelled during the sectioning. And if blood comes out, cauterize it."
E si vezes le malaute pauruc e temeros, guarda te de inscizio am ferr; mays lahoras pren fiel de plom recent fayt, e strenh am aquel atheil, la manieyra del qual es aquela que havem dita; e leyssa aquel per dos dias.	"And if the pain is fearful and terrifying, beware of incising with iron. Rather, take fresh lead wire made from tin, and tie it around that boil in the manner we have described, and leave it for two days."
E aprop ajusta en la strictura del fil de plom; donc, no cesses strenher le plom granre devetz en theil, entro que sia abscindit e cayha per se ses trebalh.	"And appropriately adjust the tightening of the lead wire. Therefore, do not stop tying on until it is excised and falls off by itself without any effort."
Mays si theil es de grossa razitz, lahoras en la inscizio de lu es alcuna causa de temor e de paor, e majorment en aquel que es en le ventre.	"But if the boil has a thick root, then there is some cause for fear and anxiety in incising it, especially those that are on the belly."
Mays possibla es que tu inscindas la maytat de lu , e aprop cauteriza aquel per que no retorne.	"But it is possible to incise most of it, and appropriately cauterize it so that it does not return."
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanada la plagua.	"And appropriately treat it until the wound has healed."
E guarda te que tu no presumas inscidir theil le qual es de fusca color, de pauc sentiment, de leg reguardament, quar aquel es absi cancros.	"And beware that you do not presume to incise a boil that is of dark color, with little sensation, and carefully examined; for such is cancerous."
E yeu vindre am rememoracio de cranc aprop aysso.	"And I come now with memory to what was said before about cancer."
Capitol .lii.	"Chapter LI
De curacio de eminencia del umbilic.	"Chapter on the treatment of prominence of the navel."
Eminencia del umbilic es fayta per motas causas; o per fissuras del ciphac le qual es sobre le ventre, e yeys de lu la tela o budel segon que endeve en las autras rupturas; o per sanc le qual flueys de vena o de arceria segon que es denant dit, o per ventositat coarctada en lu.	"Prominence of the navel occurs due to many causes: either from fissures in the skin above the belly, or from tissue or bowel protruding through other ruptures; or from blood flowing from a vein or artery, as mentioned before; or from obstructed wind in it."
Mays si es per fissura del ciphac e per yssiment de la tela, lahoras la color del apostema es semblant a la color del cors; e es leon ses dolor, e aprop appar de divers situament.	"But if it is due to a fissure in the skin and protrusion of tissue, then the boil will have a similar color to that of the skin; it will be painless and appear in various locations."
E si es per egressio del budel, lahoras le situament de aquel am lu de aquo que havem recontat, de mays vehement diversitat, e cum tu premes aquel am les tieus ditz es occultat, e aprop retorna; e fort leu es am lu so, e es magnificat mot deves le introt de banh e vehement trebalh.	"But if it is due to protrusion of bowel, then the location of that boil will be as we have described earlier, with great variation and diversity. And when you press it with your fingers, it disappears but quickly returns. And there will be much pain and difficulty with washing and effort."
Mays si per humiditat, lahoras es leon e no es occultat quan premes am la tua ma, ni es constrengut, ni es cregut.	"But if it is due to moisture, then it will be painless and not disappear when pressed by your hand. It will not become hard or enlarged."
E si es per sanc, lahoras am aquestz senhals apareys le apostema a negror declinant.	"And if it is due to blood, then the boil will appear with these signs becoming dark in color."
Mays si es per carn nada, lahoras es apostema greu, gros e dur, e es ficat segon una quantitat.	"But if it is due to prolapsed flesh, then it will be a severe boil that is large and hard, depending on the quantity of tissue protruding."
Mays si es per ventositat, lahoras le tocament de lu es leon.	"But if it is due to wind, then touching it will cause no pain."
E la operacio en lu es que consideras lahoras si la eminencia de l’umbilic es per sanc de arceria, o de vena, o per ventositat; lahoras cove que sias prohibit de la curacio de lu, quar en aquela es temor e paor ayssi cum t’e ensenhat en le capitol en le qual he dit les apostemas per arceria e per vena.	"First, examine whether the navel's prominence is due to blood vessel or vein swelling, or windiness. If so, refrain from treating him, for in that case there is fear and dread, as taught in the chapter where it says 'abscesses by blood vessel and vein.'"
E si la eminencia del umbilic es per le budel o per la tela, lahoras cove que comandes al malaute que tengua le ale sieu, e sia stant extendut; e aprop senha am tenta en le circuit de tot le umbilic, e aprop comanda a lu que stia envers entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos, e aprop circunda am spatum lat en le circuit del umbilic sobre le loc le qual has senhat am la tenta; e aprop exten la maytat del apostema a las partidas desus am unci gran; e aprop lia en le circuit am fiel fort o am ceda e la manieyra del liar decent.	"If the navel's prominence is due to bowel or tissue, you should then have the patient hold their breath while standing upright and extended. Next, examine all around the umbilical area with your finger, then command them to bend forward between their thighs over their two knees; then circumscribe the umbilical area with a broad spatula where your finger has indicated. Then extend the swelling of the abscess upwards using forceps, and finally ligate it firmly but gently in a proper manner."
E aprop huebre le mieg del apostema extendut sobre le liament e intromet le dit tieu en aquel indic e quereys le budel; e si tu l’as atrobat ni guardat per le liament, lahoras tu extratz alxorati e impelleys le budel a las partidas dedintz del ventre.	"Then cut through the middle of the extended abscess down to the ligament and insert your finger into that opening while seeking the bowel. If you find it and keep it firm with your fingers, then carefully extract it and push it back inside the abdomen."
E si has atrobada la tela, lahoras pren aquel am unci; e inscideys las superfluitatz de lu.	"And if you have found tissue instead of bowel, then grasp it with forceps, and cut away its excesses."
Mays si es contraria a tu arceria o vena, lahoras circunda aquel mot, e aprop retorna a la tua operacio; e pren dos agulhas e met en aquelas dos fiels fortz e entromet dos agulhas en le circuit le qual has feyt entorn le apostema en manieyra de crotz, las quals fassas penetrar; e aprop strenh le apostema en quatre partidas sobre las agulhas.	"But if it is a vein or artery that you encounter, then encircle it with a ligature and return to your operation. Take two needles, tie strong thread onto them, insert the needles into the previously made incision around the abscess in such a way as to form a cross, penetrate them; then pull the abscess in four directions over the needles."
E si tu vols, osta las agulhas e leyssa le loc entro que poyresca la carn extenduda e caia per si; o inscideys aquel quan es subtiliat e se poyreys, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	"And if you wish, remove the needles and allow the skin to heal by itself. Or else cut away the excess when it has healed over, and then care for it with water until it is completely healed."
E si la eminencia del ombilic es de carn nada en lu o per humiditat, lahoras cove que tu conquaves le apostema ayssi cum havem dit e estraguas le sanc o la humiditat, la qual atrobas en lu, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove e que consolide le loc.	"And if the prominence of the navel is due to fat or moisture, then you should cut away the abscess as we have described and drain out any blood or moisture that you find there. Then treat it with water and ensure that the area is healed."
Capitol .liii.	Chapter Liii
De curacio de cranc.	"On treating a carbuncle."
Ja havem dit, en la divisio, de specia de cranc e en qual manieyra es via a la curacio de lu am medicinas, e que es squivador en lu la curacio am ferr per so que no sia ulcerat; e havem dit cranc engendrat en la mayra e cautela de la curacio de lu.	"We have already spoken, in the division on the type of carbuncle and how it is treated with medicines, that using iron to treat it should be avoided as it can cause ulceration. We have also mentioned that a carbuncle can occur due to improper care during treatment."
E diyssero les antics que alcunas veguadas cranc es en loc on es possibla la eradicacio de lu, ayssi cum de cran le qual es en las mamillas o en la coyssa e a lor semblantz dels membres allocat a estrayre tot aquel, e majorment quan es comensant petit.	"And the ancients said that sometimes carbuncles can occur in places where it is possible to eradicate them completely, such as those on the breasts or buttocks, and especially when they are small at the beginning."
Mays quan es antiquat e es gra, no cove que te propries a lu, quar yeu non pogui sanar de aquel alcu ni no he vist autre, ni que sia pervengut ad aquo.	"But when it is advanced and large, do not attempt to treat it yourself, for you will not be able to heal such an ulcer nor have I seen another case, nor has it been recorded."
E la operacio en lu es quan es allocat ayssi cum havem dit, es que tu precedescas e laysses le malaute e purgues de colera negra alcunas veguadas, e aprop sagna aquel, si es atrobada replecio manifesta.	"And the operation for treating it is when it is located as we have described, which is to first let the inflammation subside and purge with black hellebore several times, then incise it if there is a noticeable swelling."
E aprop prepara le malaute am preparacio en le qual sia locat am operacio, e aprop prohiceys en le trauc uncis les quals cove ad aquel; e aprop concava de tota part am la codena sego bona perexcrutacio entro que no romangua alcuna causa de las razitz de lu.	"And then prepare the inflammation with a preparation suitable for the location of the operation. Then excise the base of the carbuncle using forceps that are suitable for it, and scrape away all the surrounding tissue with great care to ensure that there is no remaining cause of the infection."
E layssa correr le sanc, e no abscidas aquel leugierament, e exprem les locs, e abstergeys le sanc gros tot am la tua ma o am instrument am le qual es a tu possible dels instruments.	"And let the blood flow freely, do not remove it too hastily, express the area, and absorb all the thick blood with your hand or an instrument that is at your disposal."
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat de sanc gros inscizio de vena o de arceria, lahoras cauterisa aquela entro que·l flux del sanc sia cessat, e aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	"But if you find it difficult to deal with the thick blood, then make an incision into a vein or artery nearby in order to reduce the flow of blood. Then cauterize that area until the bleeding stops, and treat it with the other methods until it is healed."
Capitol .liv.	Chapter Liv
De curacio de ydropici.	"On the treatment of dropsy."
Nos ja havem recomtat, en la divisio, de las specias de ydropici de l’aygua, e les senhals de quascuna especia, de la curacio de lu am medicinas.	"We have already described, in the division (of diseases), the species of dropsy due to water and their signs, and their treatment with medicines."
E aquela la qual es curada am ferr no es sino la specia de althitas sola, e no es aproximat am ferr a la specia de timpanistres ni a la especia de yposarcha, quar aquo es mortal.	"And that which is cured with iron is only the species of ascites alone, and it is not approached with iron to the species of tympany nor to the species of hydrops archi, for this is mortal."
E quan tu ja has medicat aquesta especia de ydropici timpanistre am medicinas e no comfereys la tua medicacio, lahoras considera, quar si al malaute ja es conseguida debelitat, o es am aquel autra malautia otra ydropici, ayssi cum si es en lu tos o cos de ventre e semblant ad aquels, lahoras guarda te que no le mediques am ferr, quar temor es sobre aquo.	"And when you have treated this species of tympanitic dropsy with medicines and it does not improve, then consider whether the patient has already attained debility, or if there is another dropsy present, as in cases of coughing or abdominal distention and similar ones. Then be careful not to treat them with iron, for there is fear concerning this."
Mays si tu vezes le malaute de vertut exuberant, e am lu no es autra malautia sino ydropici tant solament, e no enfant ni vielh, lahoras la manieyra de la operacio de lu es que tu eleves le malaute entre las tuas mas, e le ministre aprop lu exprema le ventre de lu am la sua ma, enpellen la aygua a la partida dejos del pentenilh, e aprop pren spatum spinos segon aquesta forma:	"But if the disease is one of excess of natural heat, and there is no other disease present but dropsy alone, not infancy or old age, then the method of operation is as follows: you should elevate the patient between your thighs, and the assistant should press the abdomen with his hand, expressing water from it near the navel, and then take a sharp-pointed spatula in this manner:"
sia de dos partz agudas lonc, de aguda extremitat ayssi cum spatum; mays empero sia en lu alcuna brevitat petit a petit, per so que en la operacio am aquel no passes entro al budel, e que ledas aquel.	"It should be double-pointed and long, with a sharp extremity like a spatula; but nevertheless it should have some shortness little by little, so that in the operation you do not pass into the bowels, and thus harm him."
E aprop considera si la generacio de ydropici es de part dels budels, quar lahoras cove que tu am la seccio te alonhes del ombelic per la quantitat de tres ditz a las partidas dejos, en le dreyt de lu sobre le pentenilh.	"And then consider if the dropsy is due to an obstruction of the bowels, for in that case you should make your incision at a distance from the navel by three fingerbreadths on the right side above the pubic hair."
Mays si la generacio de hydropici es per malautia del fietge, lahoras la tua seccio sia sinistra del ombilic per tres ditz.	"But if the dropsy is due to a disease of the liver, then your incision should be on the left side of the navel by three fingerbreadths."
E si la generacio de lu es per la melsa, lahoras la tua seccio sia en le las dreyt.	"And if the cause of the dropsy is the spleen, then your incision should be on the left side."
E no cove que la tua seccio sia sobre le costat sobre le qual vol jaser le malaute per que no corron las superfluitatz ad aquel loc freul.	"Make sure your section (operation) is on the side where you want to place the patient, so that excess fluids do not flow to that area."
E aprop perfora am le instrument tota la codena, e aprop entromet en aquela seccio, e eleva la tua ma am le spatum entre la codena e·l siphac, e tu excorja aquel; e si’ la quantitat de una ungla o enviro.	"Then carefully pierce with the instrument all along the canal, and when you reach that section, raise your hand with the spoon between the canal and the spermatic cord, and remove that; if the amount is about the size of a nail or less."
E aprop perforo le ciphac entro que pervengua le spatum al loc vuoyt, e es loc de l’aygua.	"And then pierce the spermatic cord until you reach the desired location, which is where water flows in."
E aprop extratz aquel e entromet un instrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	"Then remove that and insert an instrument with the following shape:"
e es semblant a canula de argent subtil; es fayt de argent o de eram o de lato leon, al qual en la partida pus bassa de lu es un petit trauc, e en les costatz de lu so tres traucs: dos de una partida e un del autra partida; e fayta es la extremitat de lu insciza segon la manieyra de pluma, ayssi cum vezes:	"And it resembles a thin silver cannula; it is made of silver or iron or laton lion, at the lower part of which there is a small hole, and on its sides there are three holes: two on one side and one on the other side; and its tip is cut obliquely like a pen feather."
E en la extramitat de lu pus sobirana es armilla, quar quan le instrument perve al aygua, lahoras aquela tantost deysen sobre le instrument, donc evacua de l’aygua en la ora miega quantitat, quar si tu evacuas de aquela mes que no cove en la hora, fort leu mor le malaute per resolucio del sieu spirit animal, o accideys a lu cincopi que es appropinquada la mort.	"And at the upper end of it there is a ring, because when the instrument reaches the water, that moment it begins to suck on the instrument, hence it evacuates water in equal quantity at the same time; for if you evacuate more than necessary at that moment, it will quickly cause death by resolving its animal spirit, or approach death."
Mays evacua de aquela segon la quantitat de la vertut de lu e segon que significan a tu las disposicios del malaute de la vertut del pols de lu e de la bontat de lu.	"But evacuate according to the quantity of the virtue of the instrument, and according to what you understand about the conditions of the illness, the virtue of its pulse, and its quality."
E aprop extrats le instrument, e rete l’aygua la qual causa es quar tantost es retenguda per la codena la qual rete le trauc que es sobre le ciphac del qual e recomtat a tu que perfores aquel segon aquela manieyra.	"And then remove the instrument, and retain the water that is held by the spermatic cord which holds the hole through which you pierced it according to this manner."
E aprop itera le instrument al autra dia si vezes le malaute tollerant aquo, e extratz de la aygua petita quantitat, e fay aquo per alcus jorns sobre temor, e guarda te de error entro que no romangua de l’aygua sino pauc.	"And then repeat the operation on another day if the illness tolerates it, and remove a small quantity of water, and do this for several days with fear that you should not leave too much water."
Mays si tu temes sobre le malaute, e leyssas de l’aygua gran quantitat, lahoras cura aquel am sepultura en arena cauda, e mota suzor en banh, e al solelh espere per lonc temps; e cura aquel am medicinas dessicativas entro que sia sanat.	"But if you are afraid of the illness and leave too much water, then treat it with a grave sepulture in dry sand, and much sweat in baths, and expose it to sunlight for a long time; and treat it with drying medicines until it is healed."
E cauteriza sobre le stomac, e la melsa e·l fitge aprop la extraccio de l’aygua, segon que yeu he recontat en aquo que es precedit.	"And cauterize the stomach, and the mesentery near the extraction of the water, according to what I have described previously."
Capitol .lv.	"Chapter 50."
De la curacio dels enfants les quals so natz les locs de la urina no-perforatz.	"On the treatment of children born with non-perforated urinary orifices."
Alcunas veguadas alcun dels enfantz es eyssi del ventre de la sua mayre e·l cap de la sua mixtio no es perforat (o es trauc streyt o no es en son loc).	"Sometimes some children are born from their mother's womb with the head of the penis not pierced (or the hole is too narrow or not in its proper place)."
Donc cove coytar am perforacio de lu tantost que es nascut am spatum mot subtil segon aquesta forma:	"Therefore, it is necessary to perform a perforation of the patient immediately after birth if they are born with a subtle defect according to this form."
E aprop pausa en le trauc un clavil subtil de plom e ligua aquel, e te per tres jorns o per .iiii.tre.	"And then pause in the tract a thin leaden awl and attach it, and leave it there for three days or four."
E quant vol urinar sia remaugut e hurine; e aprop retorne aquel.	"And when they want to urinate let them be moved away and pee; and then return that (the awl)."
E si tu no pauses le plom, ja es possible que la urina la qual va sobre le loc, no leysa aquest claure.	"If you do not pause the lead, it is possible that the urine which falls upon the place will not allow this to close."
Mays aquel del qual le trauc es streyt sia medicat am clavil de Plom, ayssi cum havem dit, per trops dias entro que sia amplificat.	"But that of whom the tract is removed should be medicated with leaden awl as we have said, for too many days until it is widened."
Mays aquels en les quals es le trauc no en son loc, so leditz, la qual causa es quar de aquels, aquel que es nat e·l trau es deves la fi del cap de la vergua per que no pot urinar a las partidas dedintz, entro que eleva la vergua am la sua ma a las partidas desus; e no es a lu generacio, per so quar le sperma no pot pervenir a la mayre segon rectitut, e es malautia mot laga.	"But those in whom the tract is not in its place are called 'strangury', which causes that of those who are born and from whom it is removed, that one should be placed at the end of the head of the penis so that they cannot urinate downward, but rather raise the penis with their hand upward; and this is not due to generation, for then semen could not reach the mother according to rectitude, and it is a very harmful disease."
E la manieyra de la operacio en lu es que·l malaute sia envessat sobre le sieu dos, e aprop exten le cap de la vergua de lu am la tua ma sinistra am vehement extraccio, e inscideys le cap del cap de la vergua del loc del perpucii am spatum agut, ayssi cum es inscizio de pluma, o que tu ne razas alcuna partida, per so que·l mieg de lu vengua semblant al cap de la vergua e que le trauc caia en le mieg loc segon que cove.	"And the manner of the operation in him is that the patient should be placed on his back, and then stretch the head of the penis with your left hand with violent traction, and incise the head of the penis at the opening of the urethra with a sharp spatula, like cutting a feather, but do not cut any part too much, for then the middle of the urethra will resemble the head of the penis and the tract will fall into its proper place."
E guarda te que en la tua operacio de flux de sanc, quar motas vetz accideys aquo; e pausa te a lu am aquo que abscindeys le sanc, e cura la plagua entro que si’ sanada.	"And beware in your operation for flux of blood, because many times this occurs; and pause with this that you cut the blood vessels, and cure the wound until it is healed."
Capitol .lvi.	"Chapter LVI"
De albater le qual accideys en le prepucii en le cap de la vergua e de corropcio e negror e adherencia del prepucii del cap de la vergua.	"Chapter 56: About the whitening which occurs in the foreskin at the head of the penis, and about roughness, blackness, adhesion of the foreskin to the head of the penis."
Motas veguadas accideys aquest albater en la vergua e es eminencia de carn laga.	"Very often this whitening occurs in the penis, which is a prominence of flesh there."
E de aquela una es maligna e autra es no-maligna.	"And among these one is malignant and another is not malignant."
No-maligna, cove que suspendas am unci subtil e abscindas aquela entro que aquela mondes tota; e aprop pausa sobre aquela coto submirgit en enguent egipciac; e aprop aquel, cura le am enguent diafinicon entro que sia sanat.	"Not malignant: it is necessary that you suspend with a subtle hook and cut away that until all of it has been removed; and then pause upon it until it is slightly covered with Egyptian oil; and again, cure it with soft oil until it is healed."
E si albater es maligna, de lega color, lahoras cove que tu aministres cauteri aprop la inscizio de lu e la razio de lu.	"But if the whitening is malignant, of blackish color, then you should administer cautery properly to the incision and to the root of it."
Mays si albater es en le prepuci del cap de la vergua no-circumcis, e la una partida de albater es dedintz le prepucii e l’autra partida es defora, lahoras cove que tu ostes albater le qual es dedintz al comensament entro que es consolidat; e lahora tu cura aquel deforo, quar quan tu curas aquel ensemps le prepuci, no es asegurat que no sia trinquat.	"But if the whitening is on the foreskin of the uncircumcised head of the penis, and one part of the whitening is inside the foreskin and another part is outside, then you should remove the whitening which is inside at the beginning until it has consolidated; and then you should cure that which is outside, for if you cure both together with the foreskin, it may be pinched."
E ja eysamen accideys en les genetius e en le prepuci negror e corruccio, adonc cove que tu conquavas tot aquo que ja es denigrat e que ja se vol corrompre o que ja es corrumput; e aprop lineys sobre aquel aprop aquo am mel, le qual es contusit am farina de scorsa de milgrana e de errs trissatz e crivellatz.	"And also it happens in the genitals and foreskin blackness and roughness, then you should scrape away all that which has already been darkened and is about to rot or has already rotted; and then line it with this: mix honey with ground barley flour, powdered frankincense, and strained wormwood."
E aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sana.	"And again cure it with the other cure until it is healed."
Mays si endeve flux de sanc, lahoras aministra cauteri lunar segon aquesta forma:	"But if there is a flux of blood, then apply cautery with the moon according to this form:"
quar cauteri juvatiu es a dos disposicios ensemps, so es a flux de sanc e a la plagua quan es corrumpuda.	"for cautery is in two positions at once: it is for flux of blood and for the wound when it is corrupted."
E si le cap de la vergua es corrodut e es destruit tot en la hora, lahoras cove que tu intrometas en lo meat del prepucii una canula de plom per so que le malaute urina per aquela.	"And if the head of the penis is corrupted and completely destroyed at once, then you should insert a lead cannula into the flesh of the foreskin so that the urine may flow through it."
En la adherencia del prepucii am le cap de la vergua (et aquesta adherencia no accideys sino en aquel del qual le prepucii es sa, e sobre lu no es exhigida circumcizio; e quan accideys adherencia per plagua o per apostema) cove que excorjas am spatum obtus entro que sia dissolvut le liament e sia deliurat le cap de la vergua de tota partida.	"In the adhesion of the foreskin to the head of the penis (and this adhesion does not occur except in that one for whom the foreskin is too tight, and circumcision is not required on it; and when adhesion occurs because of a wound or an abscess) you should excoriate with a blunt spatula until the adhesions are dissolved and the head of the penis is freed from all parts."
E si es dificil desirnir aquelas exquisidament, lahoras cove que tu excorjes am spatum alcuna causa del cap de la vergua e del prepucii, e aysso es quar le prepucii, quan es subtil, fort leu es perforat per la sua subtilitat leugierament.	"And if it is difficult to separate those very carefully, then you should excoriate with a spatula slightly from the head of the penis and foreskin, for this reason: because the foreskin, when it is fine, can be lightly pierced by its own fineness."
E aprop separa entre·l prepucii e·l cap de la vergua am dra7 de li subtil, le qual ja es mulhat en l’aygua frega per que no adherescan autra veguada.	"And then separate between the foreskin and the head of the penis with a thread of fine linen, which has already been softened in warm water so that they will not adhere again."
E aprop sia curat am vi stiptic entro que sia consolidat.	"And then let it be cured with sternutatory wine until it is consolidated."
Capitol .lvii.	"Chapter LVI."
De mundificacio dels enfants e de la curacio de aquo que accideys ad aquels de circumcisio.	"Of the purification of infants and of the cure for what happens to them at circumcision."
Circumcisio no es solucio de continuitat ayssi cum las autras plaguas: mays empero cum sia de la nostra operacio e de nostra voluntat, e lus de aquela sia propriament en les enfants, es necessari que asignem en aquela milhor operacio e via pus leugiera perdusent a salut.	Circumcision is not a solution for continuity like other diseases: but since it is our operation and within our control, especially in children, we must assign the best operation and path to preserve health more easily.
Donc dic que les antics no diyssero circumcisio en alcu dels lors libres, quar no n’usan en las suas leys, e no es sino quar havem aquisit per speriment, la qual causa es que yeu he atrobat la major partida dels artifexs e dels barbies usar circumcisir e mundificacio am novacula e am torores; e usan de liament am fiel e de inscizio am la ungla.	Therefore it is said that the ancients did not mention circumcision in all of their books because they did not use it in their laws. However, since we have acquired this practice through experience, I have found that most artisans and barbers use circumcision with a knife and clamps; and they use lime plaster and nail scissors for the incision.
E yeu ja he prohadas totas aquestas manieras e no atrobegui milhor mondificacio am forfexs, am liament am fiel que en mondificacio cum la ungla, quar motas vetz efugeys la codena pus desus, quar la codena del prepucii a dos tunicas, e roman la tonica pus dejos, e fort leu es forsat ad autra inscizio e dolor sicura.	And I have already tested all these methods and did not find better circumcision with forceps, lime plaster that uses the nail scissors for incision. For many times it escapes the frenulum upwards, because the frenulum of the foreskin has two layers, and the inner layer remains below; and it is very easy to cause another incision and certain pain.
E am mundificacio le qual es fayta per alphecati, e es digital, del qual usan les sabatiers, no es segurada la inscizio de la extremitat del membre viril, quar fort leu intra en le trau de lu.	And in circumcision which is done by the method of the Greeks and is done digitally, used by the barbers, the incision of the glans penis is not secure; for it often slips into the groove of it.
Mays en la operacio am ungla, fort leu obazeys ferr e corromp la tua operacio.	However, in the operation with a nail, you often cause injury and spoil your work.
E la codena del enfant es breu per natura, e motas veguadas nays en tal manieyra que no ha necessitat de mondificacio, e yeu he vist aquel.	"And the child's spine is short by nature, and often seen in this manner, requiring no modification, indeed I have seen such."
Mays de la mondificacio que·s fa am forfexs e liamentz am fiel, la bontat, experiment descrobic a mi, quar las forfexs so de proporcional inscizio, per aquo quar la acuitat que es desus es ayssi cum la acuitat que es dejos; e donc cum tu premes la tua ma so proporcionadas dos acuitatz, e inscideysso segon una comperacio en un temps; e es fayta compressio del fiel am figura contenent la codena de la vergua de tota partida, am le qual no catz error de tot.	"However, the modification that is done with forceps and ligaments with felt, has been proven to me by experience because the forceps are of proportional incision. Therefore, the sharpness above is equal to the sharpness below; thus when you press your hand proportionately on both sharp points, you cut in one direction according to a comparison at once. And it makes compression of the felt with a figure containing the spine of the whole part, without any error throughout."
E la manieyra de la operacio primeyra es que tu fassas estar le enfant majorment si es de aquels que entendo un petit, que no fassas sino que tu lies le fiel en la sua vergua tant solament, e que leysses aquel entro al autra dia.	"And the manner of the first operation is that you should make the child lie on its back more if it is one of those who understands a little, so that you do not do anything else but lay the felt on its spine only, and leave it like that for another day."
E aprop fay aquel alegrar en tota aquela manieyra que es a tu possibla de aquo que recep la sua intelligencia.	"And therefore you should gladden in every possible way that is within your power to receive his understanding."
E aprop fa aquel estar entre las tuas mas estatuir preparadament, e no sia ges cezent; e occulta las forfexs en la tua ma o dejos le tieu pe, que l’enfant no veia aquelas ni degun autre dels instruments.	"And therefore you should make him stay among your closest ones, properly prepared, and not afraid at all. And hide the forceps in your hand or behind your head so that the child does not see them nor anyone else of the instruments."
E aprop entremet la tua ma a la vergua de lu e suffla en la codena, e tira aquela entro que sia eyssit le cap de la vergua, e aprop mondifica aquel de aquo que es agregat en ela de sordicia.	"And therefore put your hand on the spine of the child and blow on the cord, and pull that out which has come out, that is, the head of the spine, and also clean it from whatever dirt has accumulated in it."
E aprop lia le loc signat am fiel dobla, e aprop ligua pus bas de aquel un petit le segon liament, e aprop te am le dit pous e endic tieu le loc del liament dejos am bona retencio, e inscideys entre dos liaments.	"And therefore place the designated spot with doubled felt and then tie below that a little bit the second ligament, and then take it with the said pouch and put behind the knot of the ligament gently, and incise between two ligaments."
E aprop eleva la codena sus leugierament e estratz le cap de la vergua; e aprop leyssa le sanc corre petit e petit, quar es milhor ; e pausa polvera desus e sobre la polvera pausa drap en le qual es spandut mugol de huou coyt en ayguaros concosit am oli rozat recent bo; e layssa aquel sobre aquel entro al autra dia; e cura aquel am curacio entro que sia sanat.	"And therefore elevate the cord gently and extract the head of the spine, and let the blood flow little by little, for it is better, and dust on top and then put a cloth on which has been poured melted wax mixed with rose oil recently boiled. And leave that on him overnight; and care for him until he is healed."
La forma de las forfexs a mondificacio, aquesta es la forma:	"The form of the forceps for cleaning is this:"
Sian las unas extramitatz no-talhantz e las autras sian talhant, que non sia yssit le ram del clau, e sia la longitut de las doas acuitatz ayssi cum la longitut de dos manubres engualment.	"Let the outer edges be not-toothed and cutting, and let the other be toothed, that there may not come out the branch of the key, and let the length of both points be thus as the length of two handles opened."
Mays la error en mundificacio es quar fort leu efugeys la codena intrinseca tota, o partida de lu deves la inscizio.	"But the mistake in cleaning is when you pull too hard and escape the inner cord entirely or broken from where it should be cut."
Donc cove que tu extendas aquela de la tua hora am la tua ungla denant la apostemacio del loc e que inscidas aquela segon equalitat.	"Therefore, you must stretch that with your fingernail before the inflammation of the spot and incise it evenly."
E si no la podes tenir am la tua ungla, lahoras extratz aquela am unci e inscideys aquela.	"If you cannot hold it with your nail, then extract it with wax and incise it."
Mays si son passatz tres dias, e roman aquo que es imflat dejos la vergua apostemat, lahoras tu leyssa aquo entro que sia cedat le apostema caut, e excorja aquel am fecilitat, e inscidex aquel segon que a tu es preparat.	"However, if three days have passed and the swelling from the aposteme has decreased, then leave it alone until the aposteme is completely cured. Remove that with ease, and cut it according to your preparation."
E guarda te del cap de la vergua, quar no nosera a lu aquo.	"And beware of the head of the penis, for it will not be affected by this treatment."
E donc cura aquel am aquo que la plagua consolida de las polveras las quals havem recomtadas en le tractat de las polveras.	"Then treat it with that which solidifies the wound from the powders that we have recommended in the treatise on powders."
E si es inscidit de la codena sobre mesura, e obezeys a las partidas desus, aquo no notz a lu.	"If it is cut properly and you follow the instructions above, there will be nothing more to do for it."
E mays cura aquel am aquo que havem dit entro que sia sanat.	"And also treat it with that which we have mentioned until it is healed."
Capitol .lviii.	"Chapter LVIII."
De curacio de urina retenguda en la vesiqua.	"On the treatment of retained urine in the bladder."
Retencio de urina en la vesica es fayta per oppulacio fayta per peyra o per sanc congilat, o per poyre o per carnada, e semblantz ad aquels de aquo que havem dit de las manieyras de curacio en la divisio.	"Retention of urine in the bladder occurs due to a blockage caused by a stone or congealed blood, or by a prolapse or stricture, and it is treated similarly to those conditions that we have mentioned regarding the methods of treatment in the division [of urology]."
E si no es dissolvuda la urina, e veses retencio de lu esser per peyra le qual ja es en le col de la vesica, lahoras cove que le malaute sia encorbat sobre les sieus denolhs.	"And if the urine is not dissolved and retention of it occurs due to a stone that has already entered the neck of the bladder, then the illness should be bent over onto its own knees."
E aprop conponeys les pes de aquel sobre le sieu dos e extendas le sieu ventre de la partida pus desus del sieu dos, e le malaute estrengua le sieu ale tant quant es a lu possible.	"And properly place weights on that part over its own back and stretch out the abdomen from above the sacrum of the back as much as possible."
Donc lahoras le col de la vesica es costreyt ha espulsio de la peyra a las partidas detras, per que la urina es absolta.	"Then the neck of the bladder will be constricted and expulsion of the stone will occur at the parts behind it, so that urine may be released."
E si no es dissolvuda am aquo que havem dit he vehement es fayta la causa sobre le malaute, lahoras cove que aministres extraccio de lu am instrument le qual es apelat siringua, del qual aquesta es la forma: Sia de argent e sia subtil leon conquau, ayssi cum canula de pena de ausel am subtilitat de ray lonc en similitut d’un palm e mig, al qual sia cana subtil en le cap de lu.	"And if it is not dissolved despite what we have mentioned and the cause of the illness is very severe, then you should perform extraction with an instrument called a syringe, which has this form: It should be made of silver and polished like a reed quill, similar to a goose feather quill with subtlety equal to one and a half spans, at the end of which there should be a thin tube in its head."
E la manieyra del eyssiment de la urina per aquel es que prenguas le fiel doblat e lies en la extramitat de lu lana o coto per bona liadura; e entrometas las extramitatz del fiel en la partida dejos de la ciringua, e inscideys am las forfexs si superflueys alcuna causa de la lana, mays intromet la en la canula am vehemencia E aprop enongeys la ciringua am boder e am album de huou.	"And the method of removing urine with this is as follows: Take a bent feather and attach it firmly to the end of the thread or cotton; insert the end of the feather into the hole of the syringe, and if there are any excess threads from the cotton, cut them with scissors. Then insert the thread into the tube with force and properly fill the syringe with warm water."
E fay cezer le malaute sobre la selha, e embroca la vesiqua de lu e la vergua am olis umitz, e oli de oliva e ayguaros.	"And make the patient lie on their back, insert the syringe into the bladder and anoint it with olive oil mixed with wax."
E aprop entromet la ciringua am facilitat entro que pervengua a la razit de la vergua; e aprop dobla la vergua desus a la partida del embelic; e aprop empelleys la ciringua dintz aquela; e aprop empelleys aquela entro que pervengua a la vesica, e aquela centa le malaute esser pervenguda a la causa vuoda, e no es fayt asso segon aquest orde, sino le meat en le qual va a tortuositat.	"And then insert the syringe gently until it reaches the root of the penis; properly bend the penis upwards at the point of the navel; then press on the syringe strongly with that and push it in until it enters the bladder. Then center it so that the patient feels relieved from the cause being empty, but do not follow this order if there is any tortuousness present."
E aprop exten le fiel am la lana petit a petit, quar la urina siec la lana.	"And then slowly extend the feather with the thread bit by bit because urine clings to the thread."
Aprop extratz aquela e fay per curacio urina, e usa ciringua, no cesses fer aquo e usa ciringua entro que sia evacuada la vesica e le malaute atrobe alleviacio.	"And then remove that and perform curettage of urine, using a syringe continuously until the bladder is emptied and the patient feels relieved."
Capitol .lix.	**Chapter 99.**
De qualitat de clisterizacio de la vezica am clampcedra e am semblantz instrumentz les quals sian acordants ad aquo.	**On the quality of clystering the bladder with a catheter and similar instruments that are suitable for this purpose.**
Quan accideys en la vesica ulceracio o apostema, o sanc congilat en aquela, o es coartat poyredura, e vols en aquela destillar ayguas e medicinas, lahoras sia fayt am instrument le qual es apelat clampcedra, e aquesta es la forma de lu:	"When an ulceration or abscess occurs in the bladder, or blood collects there and you wish to draw out water and medications from it, then use an instrument called a catheter, which is shaped as follows:"
sino que en la extramitat de lu es sorda, so es clausa.	"but its outer end is closed off, so it is sealed."
Et en aquela so tres traucs: dos de la una partida , ayssi quo vezes.	"And in that there are three holes: two from one side, like this."
En le comensament es loc concau, en le qual es aquo que es enpellit, e sia segon quantitat que oppile aquel, ses addicio, entro que quan alcuna causa es ab aquel tirada de las humiditatz, sia atirada, e quan es expellida, am aquo sia atirada, e quan es expellit lonc, segon que fa clampcedra am la qual es phicat naphta en las batalhas de mar.	"At the beginning it is concave inside, which is called the bulb, and let it be according to the quantity of that which enters into it, without any addition; so that when any cause draws from those moistures, they may also draw with it, and when it is expelled, with that it may draw also, as a catheter does when pouring pitch on naval battles."
Donc cum tu vols prohicir humiditatz en la vesica, entromet la extremitat de clapcedra en la humiditat, e atira am aquel aquo que es empellit a las partidas desus, quar la humiditat es atirada en la conquavitat de clapcedra.	"So when you wish to expel moistures from the bladder, insert the end of the catheter into the moisture and draw with it that which is expelled through those holes above, for the moisture will be drawn into the concavity of the catheter."
E aprop entromet la extramitat de clapcedra en la vergua segon que havem recomtat en la ciringua; e aprop empelleys la humiditat am aquo que empelleys, quar aquela humiditat perve a la vesica tantost, e le malaute cent aquela.	"And properly insert the end of the catheter into the urethra as we have described in the previous chapter, and then expel the moisture with that which you expel, for that moisture will quickly go to the bladder, relieving the illness."
Forma del cristeri subtil am le qual la vesica es cristerizada, e es aquela la forma:	"The form of the thin catheter used to evacuate the bladder is as follows:"
E sia fayta de argent o de lato, de la qual le cap pus aut sia semblant a petita pluma, e dejos lu cana dedintz liament.	"And let it be made of silver or lead, of which the tip ought to resemble a small feather, and from there on let it be hollow."
E aprop pren vesica de moto, e pausa en aquela la humiditat que vols cristirizar en la vesica, e aprop lia aquela entre dos am fort liguatura am fiel doble, e escalfa aquela humiditat sobre le foc.	"And take a bladder from a dead animal and place in it the moisture which you wish to evacuate into the bladder, then tie it tightly between two strong threads with double knots, and heat that moisture over the fire."
E aprop entromet la extremitat del cristeri en la vergua.	"And then insert the end of the catheter into the urethra."
E aprop estrenh la tua ma sobre la vesica am la humiditat am strectura descent entro que·l malaute centa que aquela humiditat ja es pervenguda a la vesica.	"Then stretch your hand over the bladder with moisture, straightening the descent within that patient so that that moisture has reached the bladder."
Mays si a tu no es present vesica, lahoras tu pren una pessa de parguames e fay de aquel cercle; e perfora aquel de tota la sua retonditat; e aprop entromet fiel fort en aquels traucs, ayssi quo so revolgut; e aprop agregua le cercle ayssi quo es agreguat alsofatur, pus que tu pausas en aquel aquo que tu vols de las humiditatz, e olis e ayguas.	"If you do not have the bladder present, then take a piece of parchment and make a circle; and pierce that through its entire thickness; and then insert some felt strongly into those folds so that it is well-rolled in there; and then add water to that so that it is added as above mentioned, since you pause in that place that you want regarding the moistures and waters."
E aprop tu lia aquel en le instrument e fay am aquel ayssi cum has fayt am la vesica, e exprescio am la tua ma entro que la humiditat pervengua a la vesica.	"And then you take that (i.e., the filled instrument) and place it like you did with the bladder, expressing moisture into your hand so that it reaches the bladder."
Capitol .lx.	Chapter 60.
De extraccio de peyra.	Of stone extraction
Nos ja havem dit en la divisio las specias de peyra e curacio de lu am medicinas, e la diferencia entre peyra engendrada en los ronhos e peyra engendrada en la vesica, e les senhals de aquela.	"We have already spoken in the division of the species of stone and cure with medicine regarding the difference between stones generated in the kidneys and those generated in the bladder, and their signs."
E havem dit la peyra en la qual catz operacio am ma, e seccio.	"And we have said about the stone where incision is performed using hand or cutting."
E la peyra engendrada en la vesica propriament es aquela que es ficada en la vesica.	"And the stone generated in the bladder itself is that which remains in the bladder."
E yeu so narrant aquel am exposicio manifesta e abreviacio.	"And we shall now relate this with manifest exposition and abbreviation."
Donc dic que peyra engendrada en la vesica majorment ve als enfantz; e dels senhals de lu es que la urina que es eyssida de la vesica es semblant a aygua en la sua subtilitat, e apar en aquela arena; e le malaute fregua la sua vergua, e motas veguadas pen, e aprop es dressada; e am aquo yeys foro le cul en motz de aquels.	"So it is said that stone generated in the bladder mostly affects children; and among its signs are: the urine that comes out of the bladder resembles water in its subtlety, and appears cloudy; the pain afflicts the urethra, often prevents urination, and sometimes causes blood to appear at the end of the penis; and with this there is great straining of the anus."
E es laugiera la sanacio dels enfants de aquela entro que han conseguitz xiiii ans; e es dificil curacio en les viels.	"And it would be easier to heal children suffering from this condition if they have reached fourteen years of age, but difficult cure in old people."
Mays en les joves es migiera per aquo quar es entre aquels.	"But with young ones it is midway between the two."
E de aquel del qual la peyra es major e la curacio es pus leugiera; E si es pauca, es contraria ad aquela.	"And in that case where the stone is large and cure more difficult, but if it is small, it is favorable for that condition."
Donc cum pervenem a la curacio de aquela, cove al comensament de aquela que mondifiquem le malaute am cristeri le qual extragua tota la fenda la qual es en les sieus budels; quar aquela fenda alcunas veguadas prohibeys la envencio de la peyra deves la inquisicio de lu.	"So when we come to the treatment of this condition, at the beginning it is necessary to relieve the pain with a catheter which extracts all the sediment that is in its channels; for sometimes this channel prevents the extraction of the stone during investigation."
E aprop sia pres le malaute am les sieus pes e sia contosit e maugut enjos per so que la peyra descenda al preon de la vesica, o que saute de loc aut alcunas veguadas.	"And then let the patient be seized by his feet and suspended head downwards, so that the stone may descend to the neck of the bladder or fall out."
E aprop fay aquel cezer entre las tuas mas preparat, e las mas de lu sian dejos las coysas de lu, per so que la vesica tota sia fayta declinant a las partidas dejos.	"And then let that person be placed between two well-prepared assistants, and let their most useful things be at hand, so that the bladder may be completely emptied by inclining it towards its parts."
E aprop perquier aquela e tota aquela deforo.	"And then seek that out and extract all of it."
Donc si sentes la peyra en l’espazi, lahoras tu te coyta tantost am seccio sobre lu.	"So if you feel the stone in the space, immediately cut thereupon with incision."
E si no catz de tot dejos le tieu tocament, lahoras cove que tu untes am oli le tieu dit indic de la ma sinistra, si malaute es enfant, o le dit miga si es jove complit, e entrometas aquel en le sieu cul.	"And if you cannot reach it all with your touch, then it is necessary to anoint the index finger of the left hand with oil, if the patient is a child, or the middle finger if he is a grown-up, and insert that into his anus."
E perquier de la peyra entro que stia dejos le tieu dit.	"And seek out the stone which remains there by your finger."
E converteys aquela petit a petit entro al col de la vesica.	"And gradually turn it towards the neck of the bladder."
E aprop prem sobre aquel am lo tieu dit, e expelleys aquel a las partidas defora ves le loc del qual vos la seccio.	"And then press upon it with your finger and expel it through the opening made without injury to the parts outside."
E comanda al ministra que prema la vesica am la sua ma; e comanda a un autra ministra que am la sua ma dextra extenda les genetius a las partidas desus, e am la sua autra ma remaugua la codena la qual es dejos les genetius, en partida del loc en le qual se fa la seccio.	"And command the minister to press the bladder with his hand; and command another minister that with his right hand he should spread the labia majora apart, and with his other hand he should retract the cord which is behind them, towards the part where the incision is made."
E aprop entromet espatum be inscident del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	"And then introduce a spatula of this form:"
e scindeys en lu aquo que es entre·l cul e·ls genetius, no en le mieg loc, abantz al latz de la coyssa sinistra; e sia la seccio sobre aquela peyra e·l tieu dit sia en le cul, e sia fayta seccio transversa, per que la seccio defora sia ampla e dedintz streyta segon la quantitat que egrecio de la peyra sia a lu possibla, e no major, quar fort leu comprem le tieu dit le qual es en le cul la peyra deves la seccio, e es foro-getada ses defacultat.	"And then incise with it between the anus and the labia majora, not in the middle part, but towards the left side; let the incision be over the stone and your finger be inside the anus; let the incision be transverse so that it is wide outside and narrow within according to the quantity of the stone which can be extracted therewith, nor more, for otherwise you will compress your finger with the stone during the operation and cause difficulty."
E sapias que de la peyra es alcuna a la qual so angle e margers, per que le eyssiment de lu es fayt deficil per aquo.	"And know that there are some stones which have angles and edges, for which their extraction is difficult on account of this."
E de aquela aquo es leon semblant a glan, e es redonda, e es fayt de lu leugier eyssiment.	"And of those stones, the one resembling a pine nut is round and its extraction is easy."
Donc si es aquela al qual so angles e marger, ajusta en la fissura.	"So if it has angles or edges, adapt the forceps to the fissure."
E si no es ayssi foro-getada, lahoras cove que tu engenes sobre aquel, o que strenguas sobre aquel am gesti decentment, la extremitat del qual sia ayssi cum lima am le qual strenguas sobre la peyra, e no evasesca de lu; o que entrometas dejos lu instrument subtil de curvada extremitat.	"And if it is not easily extracted, then you must press upon it gently but firmly with the forceps, or use a suitable instrument resembling a chisel to press upon the stone, taking care not to lose sight of it; or else introduce a delicate curved instrument into it."
Mays si tu no podes sobre aquel, lahoras tu amplifica le trauc un petit, e si tu veus flux de sanc, abscindeys en strenh aquel am vitriol trissat.	"But if you cannot reach it, then widen the tract a little and if you see blood flow, cut through it strongly with spirit of nitre."
Mays si la peyra es mays de una, lahoras al comensament tu impelleys la ma a la boca de la vesica, e aprop inscideys sobre lu; e aprop impelleys un petit aprop aquo; e semblantment fay si son motas mays de doas.	"But if there are several stones, then at the beginning press your hand on the mouth of the bladder and make an incision upon it; then press a little around that place; and do likewise if there are more than two grains."
E si es peyra mot gran, lahoras ignorancia es que tu inscidas aquel am gran seccio, quar accideys al malaute una de doas causas: o que mora o que endevengua a lu destillacio de urina continuabla, per aquo quar le loc no es de tot consolidat.	"And if the stone is very large, then it is ignorance to incise it with a large opening, for one of two causes occurs in the patient: either retention or continued distillation of urine, which makes that place not completely solid."
Mays aministra expulcio de lu entro que sia fora-getada, o engenia en la fractura de lu am las forfexs entro que extragua aquela en pessas.	"But administer evacuation of the stone from within after it has been extracted, or press upon its fracture with forceps so as to extract it in pieces."
Donc cum tu auras cumplit la tua opperacio, lahoras omple la plagua de enses de aloe e de sanc de drago, e strenh aquel.	"So when you have completed your operation, then fill the cavity with powder of aloes and dragon's blood, and press upon it strongly."
E pausa sobre aquel drap enfus en oli e vi, o en oli rozat e aygua frega, per so que apostema caut sia cedat.	"And lay upon that a linen cloth dipped in oil and wine, or in olive oil mixed with water, so that a cauterizing aposteme may be formed."
E aprop resupina le malaute sobre le sieu col, e no deslias le liament entro al tertz dia.	"And then let the patient lie on his back and do not remove the ligature until the third day."
E cum aquel auras desliat, embroca le loc am aygua e mot oli, e aprop cura aquel am enguent diafinicon e am enguent diabazilicon entro que sia sanat.	"And when that has been untied, wash the place with water and much oil, and then cure it with a fine ointment and with diabazolicon until it is healed."
Mays si en la plagua accideys apostema caut, adhust e corrosiu, e de aquel semblantz ayssi cum si le sanc es en la vesica congelat, e per lu es la hurina prohibida (e aquo es conogut per la egressio del sanc am urina), a donc entromet lo tieu dit en la plagua e extratz aquel sanc, quar si roman provoca la vesica a corropcio de la vesica e de lu putrefaccio.	"But if an aposteme occurs in the cavity which is hard and corrosive, and similar to that which would be produced by frozen blood being in the bladder, for which urination is forbidden (and this is known by the discharge of blood with urine), then introduce your finger into the cavity and extract that blood, for if it remains it will provoke inflammation of the bladder and its corruption."
E aprop lava la plagua am vi agre, aygua e sal, e am opposicio a tota specia, am aquo que conveneys a lu de la curacio entro que sia sanat.	"And then wash the cavity with sour wine, water, and salt, and apply remedies opposed to all kinds of inflammation, according as is convenient for the cure until it is healed."
E cove en las horas de tota la curacio que tu lies amdos las coyssas e ajustes las medicinas las quals so pausadas sobre le loc.	"And it is necessary during all the time of the cure that you keep both labia majora separated and apply the medicines which are placed upon the part."
E si la peyra es petita e es en le meat de la vergua, e es ficat en lu, e eyssement de urina es prohibit, lahoras cura aquel am aquo que yeu recomti denant que pervenguas a seccio, quar tropas veguadas per aquesta curacio yest acusat de seccio; e ja yeu e esproat aquo, e es que tu prenguas un perforador de ferr alfelut, del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	"And if the stone is small and is in the middle of the glans penis and adheres to it, so that its extraction by incision is forbidden, then cure it with what I have recommended before you come to an incision, for many cases seen through this cure are accused of incision; and now I explain this to you, and it is that you take a pointed probe made of iron, of which this is the form:"
de triangulada extramitat, agut, ficat en fust.	"of triangular shape, pointed, set in wood."
E aprop pren fiel, e lia am aquel la vergua dejos la peyra per so que no retorne a la vesica.	"And then take a feather and tie it around the glans penis behind the stone so that it may not return to the bladder."
E aprop entromet le ferr en la vergua, perforant am fecilitat entro que·l perforador vengua ad aquela peyra.	"And then introduce the iron into the glans penis, perforating easily until the probe reaches that stone."
E revolveys le perforador am la tua ma en aquela peyra petit a petit, e tu perforsa la perforacio de lu entro que fassas aquel del autra part penetrar; quar la urina tantost es absolta.	"Revolve the borer with your hand in that little stone, bit by bit, and you shall penetrate its perforation so that urine may be released."
E aprop prem la tua ma sobre aquo que es romas de la peyra de la partida deforo de la vergua, quar aquela es trinquada, e es foro-getada am la urina, e le malaute es sanat.	"And then press your hand on what is broken of the stone of the departed from the urethra, because that is crushed and forgotten with urine, and the patient is healed."
Mays si aquesta curacio no es a tu aparelhada per alcuna causa la qual prohibeys de aquela, lahoras lia un fiel dejos la peyra, e autra fiel desus la peyra.	"But if this cure does not suit you for any reason that prevents it, then insert a splint below the stone and another one above it."
E aprop encideys sobre la peyra en aquela vergua entre doas liaduras.	"And then strike the stone in that urethra between two ligatures."
E aprop extratz aquela.	"And then remove it."
E aprop deslia le liament e mondifica le sanc congilat, le qual es fayt en la plagua.	"And then untie the ligature and cleanse the congealed blood, which is formed in the wound."
E no es necessari liament de fiel dejos la peyra, sino per que no retorne a la vesica, e l’autre liament desus sino, quar quan es desliat le fiel aprop la egrecio de la peyra, la codena retorna a son loc e cobra la plagua.	"And it is not necessary to use a splint below the stone except to prevent it from returning to the bladder, and the other splint above for when it is untied near the exit of the stone, the cord returns to its place and closes the wound."
E per aquo es a tu necessari quan lias le fiel desus, que tu eleves la codena a las partidas desus, o que retorne deves le tieu compliment, e cobra la plagua ayssi co havem dit.	"And for that reason, it is necessary when you remove the splint above to elevate the cord towards the parts above, or else it will return and cover the wound as we have said."
Capitol .lxi.	"Chapter LXI"
De extraccio de peyra de las femnas.	"Of removing stones from women."
Peyra en las femnas pauc es engendrada.	"Stones are rarely formed in women."
Mays si ve peyra ad alcuna de aquelas, lahoras dificil es la curacio de lu, e es prohibida per tropas manieyras.	If a stone appears in any of those places, then its cure is difficult, and it is forbidden by many methods.
La una de lor es quar la femna fort leu es verges.	One of them is when the woman strongly desires sex.
E la segonda es quar tu no trobas femna be scient que descroba si meteyssa al metge quan es casta, o es de las femnas haventz maritz.	And the second one is if you cannot find a good woman who knows how to tell whether or not she has been with another man when she is a virgin, or if she is married.
La tersa es quar tu no hatrobas femna be sabent aquesta art, majorment la operacio am ma.	The third one is if you cannot find a good woman who knows this art, especially the operation of giving birth by cesarean section.
E la quarta es que·l loc de la seccio sobre peyra en las femnas es longinc del loc de la peyra, per que indigeys de seccio preonda, e en aquela es temor.	And the fourth one is that the location of the incision for a stone in women is far from the location of the stone itself, so it requires careful sectioning, and there is danger involved.
Mays si necessitat provoca a tu ad aquo, lahoras cove que tu prenguas una femna metga be scient, e pauc es atrobada.	But if necessity requires you to do this, then you should take a skilled midwife who has little experience.
Mays si tu es privat de aquela, lahoras cerca metga quast e subtil, o presenta una femna matrona be esenhada en le feyt de las femnas, o femna que en aquesta art ennueys partida del art.	But if you are deprived of that, then seek a clever and subtle physician, or present yourself to an experienced female midwife who is skilled in the affairs of women, or a woman who has some knowledge of this art.
Donc fay aquela present, e comanda a lu que fassa tot aquo que tu li mandaras, de la enquisicio sobre la peyra al comensament; la qual causa es que reguarde si la femna es verges, lahoras cove que meta lo sieu dit en le cul de lu e quiera la peyra.	So have that one presented, and command her to do everything that you will order her to do regarding the examination at the beginning; which is why she should check if the woman is a virgin, and then insert her finger into the woman's anus to feel for the stone.
Donc si atroba aquela, coarte aquela dejos le sieu dit, e lahoras comanda a lu que inscida sobre aquela.	Then if she finds it, have her withdraw her finger, and then command her to make the incision on that location.
Mays si no es verge, lahoras comanda a la matrona que entrometa lo sieu dit en le conh de la malauta e enquiera sobre la peyra, pus que pausa la sua ma sinistra sobre la vesica, e comprem aquela am bona comprecio.	But if she is not a virgin, then command the midwife to insert her finger into the woman's vagina and examine for the stone, since she will place her left hand on the bladder, and press on it with good pressure.
Donc si atroba aquela, lahoras cove que gradantment maugua aquela de l’orrifici de la vesica a las partidas dejos am somman de la sua vertut entro que pervengua am aquel a la razit de la coyssa.	Then if she finds it, then gradually move the edge of the scalpel from the opening of the bladder to the sides with great care and skill until you reach the root of the matter.
E aprop inscida sobre aquela apposicio de la maytat del conh deves la razit de la coyssa de qualque part sia a lu parada e cent la peyra en aquela partida, e·l dit de lu no sia remaugut de la peyra coartan dejos lu.	And then make the incision on that location of the opening of the vagina, wherever it may be stopped and where the stone is found there, and her finger should not be removed from the stone until she has removed it.
E la seccio sia pauca al comensament; e aprop entrometa lo ray sobre aquela seccio, e si sent la peyra, lahoras ajuste en seccio segon la quantitat la qual sap que la peyra sira getada de aquela.	And let the section be small at the beginning; and then insert the forceps into that section, and if you feel the stone, then adjust the size of the section according to the quantity which she knows that the stone will be taken out of that.
E sapias que las specias de peyra son motas: quar de aquelas es pauca e gran, e leon e aspra, e longua e redonda, e havent ramps.	And know that there are many kinds of stones: some are small and large, sharp and smooth, long and round, and have no branches.
Donc tu sapias quantas specias so de lu per aquo que tu signifiques sobre aquo que vols.	So you should know how many kinds there are by what you indicate about what you want to say.
E si tu veus flux de sanc, ajusta en le loc vetriol trissat e te aquela per una hora entro que sia abscindit le sanc, e aprop retorna a la tua operacio entro que la peyra sia fora-getada.	And if you see flow of blood, then adjust the location with vinegar-soaked lint and let it sit for an hour until the blood is absorbed, and then return to your operation until the stone is removed.
E fay que prepares am tu dels instrumentz les quals e ditz en la extraccio de peyra en les homes, per so que sias ajudat per aquels en la tua operacio.	And have ready with you the instruments which are mentioned in the extraction of stones in men, so that you may be helped by them during your operation.
E si tu veus flux de sanc, e sabes que la expulcio del sanc es de la arceria que es insciza, lahoras tu pausa polvera sobre le loc e estrenh aquel am pulvils e strictura descent, e no iteras aquo; e layssa la peyra e no extraguas aquela, quar fort leu morira la malauta.	And if you see flow of blood and know that the expulsion of blood is from the artery that has been incised, then place powder on the location and compress it with lint and a tight bandage, and do not repeat this; leave the stone alone and do not remove it, for it will cause great harm to the patient.
E aprop cura la plagua.	And then dress the wound.
Donc cum es cedada la acuitat del sanc aprop alcus jorns, e·l loc se poyreys, lahoras tu retorna a la tua operacio entro que la peyra sia fora-getada.	So when the sharpness of the blood has ceased after a few days and the location has healed, then return to your operation until the stone is removed.
Capitol lxii.	Chapter LXII
De seccio sobre ernia acoza.	Of Incision for Inguinal Hernia
Hernia ayguoza no es sino agregacio de humiditat en le ciphac blanc lo qual es dejos la codena dels genetius contenent le huou, e es nompnat ciphac.	Inguinal hernia is nothing but an aggregation of moisture in the white membrane which lies outside the spermatic cord containing the testicle, and it is called a processus vaginalis.
E alcunas veguadas es en le propri pannicol le qual a lu preparec natura en la partida del huou, entro que sia cuyat que ja es autre huou; e es la codena del genetiu entre le ciphac blanc le qual havem dit, e no es aquo sino tart.	And sometimes it is in the proper parietal wall which nature has prepared for the reception of the testicle, but it is already another testicle; and it is the spermatic cord between the white membrane which we have mentioned, and it is nothing but fat.
E la generacio de aquest hernia es per debelitat la qual accideys als genetius, per que ad aquels es efundunda aquesta materia, e alcunas vetz accideys per percuscio fayta sobre les genetius.	The cause of this hernia is weakness that occurs in the testicles, so that through them this matter escapes and sometimes it happens due to a violent blow on the testicles.
E aquesta humiditat es havent motas colors, quar la color de lu o es declinant a citrina o a sanguinent, o rog, o es negra feculenta, o es ayguosa blanqua, e es aquo que es mays.	This moisture has many colors, for its color is declining to yellow or sanguineous red, or brown, or it is blackish-white, or clear watery-white, and this is what is most common.
E les senhals per les quals es saubut on es aquesta agreguacio de aygua so aquestz: quar si es en le ciphac blanc le qual havem dit, lahoras le apostema es redon declinant un pauc a longitut ayssi cum figura de huou, e appar le genetiu, quar la humiditat conte aquel de tota part.	And the signs by which it is known where this aggregation of water is located are these: for if it is in the white membrane that we have mentioned, then the swelling will be round and slightly elongated like a figure of an egg, and the testicle appears because the moisture contains it on all sides.
E si la humiditat es en le propri pannicol, lahoras le apostema es redon am partida del huou e per aysso hom estima que es autre huou.	And if the moisture is in the proper parietal wall, then the swelling will be round with a depression of the testicle and because of this one might estimate that it is another testicle.
E si la humiditat es entre la codena dels genetius e·l ciphac blanc, lahoras catz dejos le centiment.	And if the moisture is between the spermatic cord and the white membrane, then the contents will be felt separately.
E cum tu vols la cognicio de la color de la humiditat, lahoras tu esproa la color de la humiditat en le apostema am entromes cayrat del qual la forma es precedida; e segon aquo que es eyssit en le vestigi del entromes, jutga de aquo que es dedintz lu.	And when you want to know the color of the moisture, then press on the swelling with an instrument whose shape is appropriate for this purpose. And according to what comes out in the trace of the instrument, judge what is inside it.
Donc quan nos vinem a la curacio de lu am ferr, lahoras cove que comandem al malaute que sia fleubotomat si aquo es a tu possibla, e vezes le cos de lu ple.	Therefore, when we come to the treatment of it with iron, then it is necessary that we command the patient to be flaccid if possible, and empty his body.
E aprop sia resupinat sobre le sieu dos sobre alcuna causa un pauc auta, e pausa dejos lu motz draps.	And then let him lie on his back slightly higher than his head and put many cloths under him.
E aprop setz tu sobre la part sinistra de lu, e comanda al ministra que segua a la dextra de lu, le qual extenda la sua vergua a hun de dos latz a la codena dels genetius e a la partida del mirac del ventre.	And then sit on the left side of him and command the minister to be at his right side. Let him extend his arm two palms wide at the spermatic cord and the opening of the abdominal wall.
E aprop pren spatum lat e scindeys la codena dels genetius del mieg loc per la longitut entro prop le pentenilh.	And then take a broad-bladed knife and incise the spermatic cord in the middle as far as possible towards the penis.
E sia fayta la seccio segon rectetut engualment distant de la linha que deveseys la pel dels genetius, entro que pervengua al ciphac blanc comprehendent.	And let the incision be made according to the rule with equal distance from the line that should divide the skin of the testicles until it reaches the white membrane containing.
E excorja aquel, e observa, e guarda te per aysso que tu no inscidas aquel; e la tua excoriacio am la qual aquel excorjas per partida jassia que sia suspenduda am le huou mays e subtilment escruta am la excoriacio segon la quantitat a tu possibla.	And strip that, observe it, and guard yourself for this so that you do not incise it. And your stripping with which you strip it should be done gently so that it is suspended with the testicle more finely and carefully explore it according to its quantity as much as possible.
E aprop perfora le ciphac ple de aygua am perforacio ampla, e extratz tota l’aygua.	And then perforate the water-filled membrane with a broad perforation, and remove all the water.
E aprop separa entre doas labias de la seccio am uncis, e exten le ciphac a las partidas desus; e no toques la codena les genetius comprehendent, e inscideys le ciphac en aquela manieyra que es a tu possible.	And then separate between two lips of the incision with forceps and extend the membrane at its sides. Do not touch the spermatic cord containing the testicle, and incise the membrane in that manner which is possible for you.
E inscideys aquel am la sua totalitat o en pessas, e majorment le sieu latz subtil, quar si tu no perscrutas exquisidament la inscizio de lu, no es fayta segurtat que la aygua no retorne.	Incise that completely or in pieces and especially its finer sides, for if you do not carefully scrutinize the incision of it, it is not certain that the water will not return.
Mays si le huou procezeys de aquela defora de la sua codena en la ora de la tua operacio, lahoras quan tu auras complida la seccio del ciphac, retorna dedintz aquel, e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la codena dels genetius am sutura, e aprop cura aquel ayssi cum las autras plagua, entro que sia sanat.	But if the testicle appears outside its cord during your operation, then when you have completed the incision of the membrane, return it inside that and then join together the two lips of the spermatic cord with suturing. And then dress it like other wounds until it is healed.
E si atrobas le huou corromput per autra malautia, lahoras cove que tu lies les vayssels les quals so sore le suspensori, e extrat le huou, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit.	And if you find the testicle corrupted by another disease, then it is necessary that you ligate its vessels which are on top of the suspender and remove it. And then dress it with what we have said.
Mays si l’aygua es agreguada en doas partidas esemps, lahoras sapias que doas son las ernias; donc inscideys aquela partida segon que has feyt en l’autra engualment; e si es a tu vist que sia una opera, lahoras tu la fay.	But if water accumulates in two places at the same time, know that there are two hernias. Therefore, incise that part according to what you have done in the other one equally. And if it appears to be an operation, then perform it.
E aprop tu abstergiys le sanc, e entramet en las seccios lana submersa en oli o en oli rozat; e pausa deforo autra lana la qual tu as submersa en vi e oli, e expandeys aquela sobre dos genetius e·l mirac del ventre; e pausa desobre draps doblatz e pulvils, e lia aquels desobre am liament le qual es segon aquesta forma:	"And then you shall clean the blood, and insert into the sections wool immersed in oil or rosemary-infused oil; and place over another wool which you have immersed in wine and oil, and spread it over both knees and the navel of the belly; and place over folded cloths and powders, and bind those over with linen, which is prepared thus:"
e aprop sian preses dos draps e sian humplitz de lana carmenada segon aquesta semblansa; e sian faytas las extremitatz am les quals es premut de coto o de lana humida, e sian agreguatz am strectura en le braguier de las braguas, e la una de las extremitatz prengua del cul entro al dos, e la segonda prengua a la partida del pantenilh, e dos extramitatz sobre dos coyssas dejos e dos extramitatz autras sobre dos angonars, e tota extrictura sia ajustada en le braguier de las braguas.	"And then take two cloths and fill them with wool curled in this manner; and make the ends of them with which they are tied with cotton or wet wool, and attach them with a strap to the waistband of the breeches, and one end should take hold of the buttocks between the two, and the second end should take hold at the opening of the panties, and two other ends over both sides of the thighs and two other ends over the ankles, and all the strapping should be adjusted in the waistband of the breeches."
E alcunas veguadas aquesta hernia es medicada artificialment am cauteri en loc de seccio am ferr; e es que tu prenguas cauteri cutellar subtil e que inscidas am aquel la codena dels ginitius, e es ignit segon que havem recomtat entro que sia descubert le ciphac blanc contenent la aygua, e lahoras tu pren cauteri segon aquesta forma:	"And sometimes this hernia is treated artificially with cautery instead of incision with iron; and you should take a sharp cautery knife and with it burn the ring of the groin, igniting it in such a way that the white skin containing the water appears, and then you shall take cautery according to this manner:"
e es asemblat a letra greca.	"And it is shaped like the Greek letter gamma."
E aprop perfora am aquel ciphac, e es ignit entro que tota la humiditat sia fora-gitada.	"And then pierce with that cautery through that skin, and burn until all the fluid has been expelled."
E aprop exten le ciphac am uncis, e excorja am uncis, e excorja am cauteri subtil ignit; e inscideys aquel segon que es a tu possible entro que eradiques tot lu; e guarda te del huou que·l foc no·l toque.	"And then stretch the skin with forceps and remove it with forceps and burn it with a sharp cautery that has been ignited; and cut into it as much as you can without touching the wound with fire."
E sapias que aquesta operacio es pus salva e pus longinqua de flux de sanc, e milhor que operacio am seccio.	"And know that this operation is safer and less prone to bleeding than an incision."
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat apostema caut en la hora de seccio o en hora de cauteri, o flux de sanc, lahoras cove que tu cures qual contrarietat fa a tu per aquo, am curacio la qual conveneys a lu segon que es dit.	"But if you encounter any difficulty with aposteme or bleeding during the time of incision or cautery, or excessive bleeding, then you should take care to treat that difficulty according to what is appropriate for it, as has been said."
Mays si le malaute es pauruc, e no spera la segonda operacio per la sua horribilitat, lahoras administra perforacio segon que yeu recomti aquo; e es quan es certificat deves tu, per aquo que havem dit de las significacios, que aquela hernia es ayguosa.	"But if the patient is afraid and does not endure a second operation because of its horror, then you should perform perforation according to what has been recommended for that; and this is when you are certain, by means of what has been said about symptoms, that that hernia is hydrocele."
Lahoras cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute sobre alcuna cezelha elevada, aprop perfora le apostema en la partida pus bassa de lu am spatum lat, e pausa la perforacio segon la longitut del cos.	"Then you should make the patient sit on some raised cushion, and then puncture the aposteme at its lowest part with a wide spatula, and continue the puncture according to the length of the body."
E sia la apercio ampla entro que corro tota l‘aygua.	"And let the opening be wide enough that all the water may run out."
E aprop pausa sobre le loc coto e lia aquel e layssa aquel, per so que corro le romanent de l’aygua.	"And then press on the location closed and tie it up and leave it alone, so that the remaining water may drain out."
E aprop cura aquel entro que la plagua sia sanada.	"And then treat it until the wound is healed."
Mays si contrarietat es a la egrecio de l’aygua en aquela hora tu perforas aquela: e aquo no es fayt sino per aquo quar le pannicol blanc en le orrifici de la plagua fa contrarietat e prohibeys le eyssiment de l’aygua, lahoras cove que tu metas en la plagua pena o instrument am la qual es extrayta l’aygua dels ydropitz, la forma del qual es precedida; o ajusta en la opprecio de la plagua un petit.	"But if there is difficulty in the escape of water at that time, then puncture it again: and this happens only because the white fat around the wound causes obstruction and prevents the exit of water. Therefore, you should insert into the wound a probe or instrument with which the water from hydroceles is extracted, the form of which is described elsewhere; or adjust a small tube in the opening of the wound."
E sapias que l’aygua retorna, e es agueguada aprop vi meses o enaviro aquels; e cum es agreguada, lahoras sia perforat segon aquela meteyssa manieyra, quar le malaute ayssi passara les sieus dias.	"And know that the water returns and becomes accumulated after about six months or thereabouts. And when it is accumulated, then it should be punctured again in the same manner, for the patient will thus pass his days."
Capitol .lxiii.	"Chapter LXIII."
De seccio sobre hernia carnosa e la curacio de lu.	"Of incision into a fatty hernia and its treatment."
Sapias que en la seccio sobre aquesta hernia es temor perdusent a pernicia en las majors disposicios; per que a mi es vista la dimissio de lu e esser salvat per aquela milhor.	"Know that in the incision into this hernia, great danger is feared for the patient; therefore, it is better to dismiss it and save him by that means."
E yeu so rememorant la operacio en aquela e las specias dels apostemas.	"And I am thus reminding you of the operation on this type of hernia and the varieties of apostemes."
Donc, dic que l‘apostemas natz en les cos dels quals les genetius so conponutz e es fayt aquo per motas causas: o per superfluitat aguda agra, la qual es efundida als genetius, o per percuscio.	"Therefore, it is said that apostemes are born in the bodies of those whose knees are composed and this occurs for many causes: either by acute, bitter superfluity which has been discharged into the joints or by contusion."
E es la color de la apostema segon la color del cos, e no es atrobat en lu dolor, e es apostema greu.	"The color of the aposteme follows the color of the body, and it is not accompanied by pain. It is a severe aposteme."
E fort leu es apostema lapificada, del qual la color es fosca, e no es centiment a lu.	"A hardened aposteme is called 'lapified', its color is dark, and it is insensitive to touch."
E alcunas veguadas es fayt per nodacio de las arcerias, e per imflacio de aquelas ayssi quo ja es perceubut la rememoracio de lu, o per imflacio de venas.	"Sometimes this occurs due to the obstruction of arteries and veins, or due to inflammation of those same vessels as soon as they are perceived to be remembered, or due to inflammation of veins."
Mays aquo que es per imflacio de arcerias es conogut per la dispercio de la apostema quan compremas aquela am les tieus ditz; e no cove que aquel toques.	"But that which occurs by inflammation of arteries is known by the dispersion of the aposteme when you press it with your fingers, without needing to touch it."
Mays aquel que es fayt per imflacio de vena no es dispergut de lu alcuna causa deves la compressio am les ditz.	"But that which occurs by inflammation of a vein does not disperse due to compression with the fingers."
E ja es possible que sobre aquesta specia sia fayta seccio e sobre les autres carns; e es que tu inscida la codena dels genetius, e aprop esten le huou a las partidas desus, e extratz aquel del ciphac blanc, e deliura le suspensori dels vaysels, e ligua les, e inscideys le suspensori pus que tu deliuras aquel de tota partida de las partidas del huou.	"It is possible that on this type of aposteme an incision may be made and on other flesh as well. You should incise the sheath of the tendons and approach the bone at its joints, then extract the white matter and free the suspenders of the vessels, tie them off, and cut away those suspenders which you have freed from all connection with the joint."
Donc si l’huou ja es am aquelas carnadas consolida, lahoras cove que tu extraguas le huou e inscidas aquel.	"Therefore, if the bone is already consolidated within those tissues, then it is necessary to extract the bone and incise that region."
E si es adherencia entro alcuna causa del ciphac, o entre aquo que es entre les bayssels, lahoras cove que tu deliures tota aquela adherencia e inscidas aquela per inscizio redonda.	"And if there is adhesion within the bone due to some cause of the matter, or between what is between the vessels, then it is necessary to free all that adhesion and make a round incision."
Mays si es nativitat de carn en le loc de la adherencia la qual es detras, lahoras cove que tu inscidas tot aquo que es de lu, e extraguas le huou ayssi cum havem dit.	"But if there is nativity of flesh in the place where that adhesion is located which is behind it, then it is necessary to incise all that is of it, and extract the bone as we have said."
Donc cum es complida la tua operacio, lahoras omple la plagua de lana imfuza en oli rozat e vi; e aprop cura aquela am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	"Therefore, once your operation is complete, then fill the wound with wool soaked in olive oil and wine, and afterwards treat it with another cure until it is healed."
Capitol .lxiv.	Chapter LXIV
De la curacio de hernia que es de vitz.	On the treatment of hernias that are from below.
Vit es apostema envolut per alcuna envolucio semblant a broto am mollificacio dels testiculs, e es fayt dificil movement exercitiu e deambulacio sobre le malaute.	"Below is an aposteme wrapped by some wrapping similar to a bud with softening of the testicles. It is difficult to make movements and walk about due to this illness."
E en la curacio de aquesta malautia es per temor per aquo del qual es precedida rememoracio.	"And in treating this illness, it is done by fear that which preceded its memory."
Empero cove que diguam opperacio en aquela segon que fero les primiers.	"However, we must say operation on it according to what was first said."
E dic que cove que fassas sezer le malaute sobre una cezelha elevada; e aprop enpelleys le suspensori dels testiculs a las partidas dejos; e aprop te la codena dels genetius am les tieus ditz am les baysels que so probdas a la vergua; e tengua aquels autre ministre que tu, e extenda aquels am extencio vehement.	"And I say that you should seize the illness on an elevated cushion; and then strip the suspenders of the testicles at their attachments; and then take hold of the sheath of the tendons with your fingers on those vessels which are close to the groin, and have another assistant who you extend them with great tension."
E aprop inscideys am spatum lat agut per seccio traversa en le dreyt dels vaysels entro que sian les vayssels descubertz.	"And then incise with a sharp, broad spathion through a transverse section on the right side of the vessels until the vessels are exposed."
E aprop excorja de tota partida ayssi quo a tu havem dit en extraccio de arceria las quals so en las templas.	"And then strip away all attachments just as we have said to you regarding extraction of hernias which are in the temples."
E aprop fica en aquelas un’agulha en la qual sia fiel doble, e lia aquel en le primier del locs en les quals accideys vit, e lia aquel autra veguada en le derier de lor.	"And then place a needle with double thread in it into that first place where you made the incision, and tie it there once; and tie it again in the last of those places."
E aprop inscideys aquels en le mieg loc per seccio dreyta segon la longuesa del cos, e extratz aquo que es agreguat de las humiditatz fetulentas e corruptas.	"And then incise them in the middle place through a straight section along the length of the body, and extract what has been accumulated from the fetid and corrupted humors."
E aprop cura la plagua am curacio de las autras plaguas en las quals vols sania esser engendrada per so que caian les vaysels les quals noyreysso un de dos genetius, quar no es mal per aquo.	"And then treat the wound with treatment of other wounds in which you wish healing to be generated because those vessels which you did not tie off one or both tendons will fall."
Mays si accideys vit a totz les bayssels, lahoras cove que·ls testicols sian extragutz o que les testicols per aquo se cequo am les vayssels, per que sia privat de tot nutriment per la inscizio dels vayssels, e que sian estaborits, o que cequo per so que no sia juvament am aquels.	"But if you make a hernia on all the vessels, then it is necessary that the testicles are extracted or that they are tied off with the vessels because those testicles will be deprived of all nourishment by the incision of the vessels. And they should be cauterized so that there is no injury from them."
Capitol .lxv.	Chapter LXV.
De la cura de hernia entestinal.	"Regarding the treatment of intestinal hernia."
Le adveniment de aquesta hernia es per seccio que endeve en le ciphac extendut sobre le ventre de part dels angunars del mirac del ventre, per que deysendo les budels de aquela ruptura ad alcu dels budels.	"The occurrence of this hernia is due to a separation in the diaphragm that extends over the abdomen on both sides of the naval, allowing some loops of intestine from that rupture to descend into it."
E aquesta ruptura es o del ciphac o de excencio de lu, e accideysso aquestas doas specias per motas causas: o percussio, o per sautz, o per clamor, o per elevacio de alcuna causa greu, o per semblantz.	"And this rupture is either of the diaphragm itself or of its opening; and such cases occur for many reasons: either from a blow, fall, coughing, sneezing, or from some heavy lifting or strain."
E·l senhal de aquo, quan es per extencio del ciphac, es que accideys pauc a pauc en lonc temps, e no accideys soptament, e es apostema engual entro ves le preon per so quar le ciphac comprem le budel.	"And the sign of this, when it is due to an enlargement of the diaphragm, is that it occurs gradually over a long period of time and not suddenly; and it appears as a swelling within the abdomen because the diaphragm compresses the bowel."
E le senhal de lu es quan es per seccio del ciphac, quar al comensament fa accidir dolor vehement sobtament; e es apostema divers aparent dejos la codena propdana aparent, e aquo es per eyssiment del budel, e·l cos de lu a las partidas deforo del ciphac.	"And the sign of it is when it is due to a separation of the diaphragm because at the beginning there occurs sudden violent pain; and it appears as a swelling different from that near the groin on the right side, which is due to the escape of the bowel, with its contents forced out through the opening in the diaphragm."
E alcunas veguadas es fora-getat am le budel la tela, e es apelada aquesta hernia entestinal zirbal.	"And sometimes a portion of the mesentery or fatty tissue adheres to the intestines and is pulled along when they protrude through the opening, and this type of hernia is called an 'incarcerated' hernia."
E alcunas veguadas es fayta am ventositat, e alcunas veguadas corr en le budel fenda, e aqui es retenguda, e es am aquo gran pernitia3 del malaute, e alcunas veguadas fa endevenir dolor malvada e majorment quan es premut.	"And sometimes it is accompanied by windiness; other times it runs in the bowel furrow, becomes retained there, and this causes great danger to the patient. Sometimes it also causes very severe pain, especially when it is pressed."
E en la curacio de las especias de aquesta malautia am ferr es temor, per que cove que sia esquivat le cazament en aquela.	"And in the cure of these cases by means of iron, caution must be exercised lest an exacerbation occur at that time."
E la manieyra de la operacio de aquela es que comandes al malaute que redugua le budel am la sua ma a las partidas dedintz de la sua conquavitat si obezeys al sieu retornament, e aprop sia envessat sobre le sieu col entre las tuas mas, e eleva las cambas de lu.	"And the manner of operating upon this is that you order the patient to try and reduce the bowel with his own hand within the cavity if it will obey its return; and then quickly place your hands on either side of his costal arch and elevate his chest."
E aprop sten la codena la qual siec la codena dels testicols a las partidas desus, e inscideys la codena dels testicols tota per le lonc; e aprop fiqua en doas labias de la seccio uncis segon que indigeysses a hubrir la seccio am aquels.	"And then draw up the groin where the inguinal canal lies, and incise the entire inguinal canal lengthwise; and then insert two forceps into the lips of the incision according to what you may need to open it with them."
E si’ la seccio segon la quantitat que a tu sia possible que de aquela le huou sia foro-getat.	"And if, according to your judgment, the opening should be sufficient that the bowel may slip out."
E aprop excorja aquela ciphaqueth les quals so dejos la codena dels testicols, entro que sia descubert le ciphac blanc dur de quascuna partida.	"And then carefully dissect away those tissues which lie near the inguinal canal on either side until the white, firm aponeurosis of the external oblique muscle is exposed at each end."
Lahoras tu entromet le tieu dit en aquo que siec le testicol, en aquo que es entre ciphac blanc, le qual es dejos la codena del huou, e entre le ciphac segon, e absolve am aquel’adherencia que es en la partida detras del huou.	"Then you insert your finger into that which lies the testicle, which is between the white aponeurosis, which is near the bowel loop, and between the second aponeurosis, and separate any adhesion which may be present behind the bowel."
E aprop mau am la ma la codena dels testicols a las partidas deforo, e am aysso exten le ciphac blanc en sus am la ma sinestra, e eleva le huou am le ciphac a la partida de la seccio; e comanda al ministre que extenda le huou ensus e tu dissolveys la adherencia que es detras am solucio complida.	"And then draw up the inguinal canal with your hand on either side, and at the same time extend the white aponeurosis upwards with your left hand, elevate the bowel with the aponeurosis to the level of the incision; and order the assistant to hold the bowel extended above while you dissolve any adhesion that may be present behind with saline solution."
E cerqua am les tieus ditz que lay no sia alcuna causa del budel envelopat en le ciphac blanc dur.	"And then carefully examine if there is no cause for the bowel being entrapped within the firm white aponeurosis."
Mays si tu atrobas de lu alcuna causa, lahoras tu enpelleys aquel al ventre dejos.	"But if you find any cause for it, then gently replace that into the abdomen on that side."
E aprop tu pren una agulha en la qual sia fiel gros fayt de x fiels, e entromet aquel deves le derier del ciphac, le qual es jos la codena dels testicols, la qual siec seccio; e aprop inscideys las extremitatz las quals emineysso del fiel entro que sian quatre fiels, e aprop compausa alcus de lor sobre alcuna figura en manieyra de crotz; e lia am aquel le ciphac del qual havem dit que es dejos la codena dels testicols am fort liament de dos partz.	"And then take a needle with a large thread attached to it, and insert that behind the last fold of the aponeurosis which lies below the inguinal canal, namely the incision; and then cut off the ends of the threads which emerge from the needle so that there are four threads remaining. Then tie some of them together in the form of a cross; and then tie the aponeurosis which we have said lies near the inguinal canal with strong ligature in two places."
E aprop envolveys las extremitatz dels fiels e lia aquelas am liament vehement entro que alcu dels vayssels que noyrrisso aquels no puscan trametre alcuna causa per so que de aqui no accida apostema caut.	"And then tie off the ends of the threads and tie them with firm ligature so that none of the vessels which nourish those parts may be able to cause any inflammation by reason of this."
E pausa autra veguada liament segon foro le primier liament, lonh de lu mens tres ditz; e aprop aquestz dos liaments layssa del ciphac le qual es dejos la codena dels testicols la quantitat de la grandeza del dit, e inscideys tot le romanent segon redondeza, e osta de lu le huou.	"And then make another ligature close to the first one at a distance of about three fingers; and then these two ligatures will leave from the aponeurosis which lies near the inguinal canal the quantity of the thickness of a finger; and then cut off all that remains according to its roundness, and remove it from the bowel."
E aprop inscideys en la partida dejos de la codena dels testicols per seccio de la qual corra sanc e sania ayssi cum havem recomtat en aquo que havem dit.	"And then make an incision in that part near the inguinal canal through which blood and serum may flow as we have previously recommended."
E aprop aministra lana submersa en oli, e pausa en la plagua; e aministra le liament le qual havem recomtat (e alcunas veguadas le ciphac blanc es cauterizat, le qual havem dit aprop la inscizio de lu temen de flux de sanc, quar motas veguadas accideys aquels) e leyssa le liament entro que per si caia.	"And then apply lanolin soaked in oil and place it on the wound; and apply the ligature which we have recommended (and sometimes cauterize the white aponeurosis which we have mentioned near the opening of the blood vessels, because many times this occurs); and leave the ligature so that it may fall by itself."
Mays si le cazement de lu es tardat, lahoras de aygua cauda sia embrocat, e pausa sobre aquel entro que caia segon que havem dit.	"But if the wound is delayed in healing, then boiled water should be applied to it, and place it on that so that it may fall as we have said."
E aprop cura la plagua am l’autra curacio de las plaguas entro que sia sanat.	"And then treat the wound with other methods of treating wounds until it is healed."
Capitol .lxvi.	Chapter LXVI
De hernia ventosa.	**On Ventous Hernia.**
En aquesta hernia no e vist alcu que sia estat ardit sus la curacio de lu am ferr.	In this hernia, there has been nothing burned during its cure by iron.
E les primiers diyssero que es fayta ayssi cum havem recomtat en la hernia que es am vi; la qual es que tu lies les vayssels aprop la seccio sobre aquela am fecilitat de lu; e aprop secca en le mieg loc en enviro le apostema am aquo que obro aquel, entro que caian les vayssels.	And the first ones said that it is done thus as we have recounted in the hernia which is with wine; its method is that you lie the vessels near the section over that with facility of it; and approach dry in the midst place around the aposteme with water that works that, until the vessels fall.
E cura la plagua segon que havem dit entro que sia sanada.	And cure the plague according to what we have said until it is healed.
Capitol .lxvii.	Here's a guess:
De la disropcio que es fayta en les anguonars.	"Regarding the injury inflicted upon the angels."
Alcunas veguadas endeve ruptura en les angonars ayssi cum havem dit, e emineys le loc.	"And sometimes there is a rupture in the intestines, as we have said before, and it should be examined."
E no deyssen als genetius alcuna causa dels budels al genetius; e si deyssen, aquo es pauc; e retorna s’en en totas horas.	"Don't tell the riders about any causes of colic in horses; if you do, it is little; and it returns at all times."
Mays si es prolonguat le temps am aquo, es ajustada fissura en le ciphac entro que deysenda le budel en le ciphac; e accideys aquo per la extencio del ciphac le qual es en le angonars ayssi cum havem dit, la qual causa es quar le ciphac es estendut, e aprop es mollificat e·l loc es apostemat e emineys.	"If the time is prolonged by this [the colic], an appropriate incision must be made into the colon where the intestine enters it; and this occurs because of the dilation of the colon which is in the groin area as we have said, the cause being that the colon has extended, and nearby areas become softened and the location becomes inflamed and swollen."
E la cura de lu es am cauteri ayssi quo es precedida la narracio de lu.	"And its treatment is by cautery, as described above."
E alcunas veguadas es curada am ferr segon aquesta manieyra: e es que·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu dos entre las tuas mas, e aprop secca le loc de la ruptura dels apostemas emineys am seccio per la latitut segon la quantitat de tres ditz.	"And sometimes it is treated with iron according to this manner: the sick person lies on their back between two blankets, and then the location of the swollen and inflamed carbuncles is dried by a lateral section made according to their size."
E aprop strenh le ciphac blanc que es jos la codena entro que sia descubert.	"And then strengthen the white colon that is below the backbone so that it is uncovered."
E aprop pren le ray e pausa aquel sobre le loc eminent del ciphac, e prem aquel al preon del ventre.	And then take the wand and place it on the prominent part of the hip, and press it firmly against the front of the abdomen.
E aprop cus le dos locs eminentz sobre la extremitat del ray del ciphac, e ajusta am la sutura un de aquels am l’autre.	And then choose two prominent points on the end of the wand placed over the hip bone and adjust them close to each other with one next to the other.
E aprop extratz la extremitat del ray, e no inscidas del ciphac de tot, ni no extenda le huou, ni autra causa ayssi cum yeu te fi saber en la curacio de hernia entestinal.	And then extract the end of the wand, ensuring that none of the intestines remain inside the inguinal canal, neither stretched out nor otherwise distorted, as you should know from your knowledge of intestinal hernia treatment.
E aprop cura aquela am la curacio de las plaguas, e cum inscideyses les fiels, mundifica aquela e restaura la plagua entro que sia consolidada; quar le ciphac es contrayt e no es ajustada la eminencia de ruptura.	And then cure it with the treatment for hernias, and after opening the skin, cleanse it and restore the hernia until it is consolidated; because the inguinal canal contracts and does not adjust to the prominence of rupture.
E cauteri es milhor en aquest loc, quar es pus propda a salut.	And cautery is better at this location, as it is closer to safety.
Capitol .lxviii.	Capitolum lxviii.
De mollificacio de la codena dels testiculs.	On the Softening of the Spermatic Cord
Motas veguadas la codena dels testiculs en alcus homes es mollificada per aysso quar las carns que so entre aquela son mollificadas, e es fedat le reguardament de lu.	Many times, the spermatic cord in some men is softened due to this fact that the tissues between it are softened, and it is noticeable to observe it.
Adonc necessari es ad aquel que es preguat en la curacio de lu que fassa jazer le malaute segon le sieu dos, e enscida tota la codena la qual es mollificada sobre la codena natural; e aprop que ajuste doas labias am la sutura.	Therefore, it is necessary for someone who is treated for this to make the patient lie down according to his condition, and cut all of the softened spermatic cord over the natural one; then approximate the lips with a suture.
E si vols, cus en le comensament la superfluitat de la codena mollificada am tres cozeduras o quatre e am ferma sutura.	And if you wish, at the beginning cut off the excess of the softened spermatic cord with three or four stitches and firmly suture it.
E aprop inscideys entre las suturas; e aprop cura per curacio de las autras plaguas entro que sia sanat e caian les fiels.	And then incise between the sutures; and then treat with treatment for other hernias until it is healed, and the testicles fall back into place.
Capitol .lxix.	Capitolum lxix.
De castracio.	On Castration
Sapias que castratio en nostre ley es excomengada, mays per causa es legut a mi que·m remembre de lu en aquest libre; e no es necessaria la rememoracio de lu sino per doas manieyras, de las quals es la una per so que aquo sia en la sciensa del metge quan es enterroguat de aquela, que sapia la curacio de lu al qual accideys; e l’autra manieyra es que nos motas vetz havem necessitat de castracio de autras bestias per les juvamentz nostres per aquelas, ayssi cum de motos, e de bocs, e de porcs, e de semblantz a las bestias.	Know that castration is condemned in our law, but for the sake of learning I remember it here in this book; and it is not necessary to remember it except for two methods, one of which is so that it may be within the knowledge of the physician when he is questioned about it, so that he knows how to treat it if it occurs; and the other method is because we often have need of castration of other beasts for our purposes, such as with many horses, and oxen, and pigs, and similar animals.
E donc dic que castracio es fayta en dos manieyras: o per atrissio, o per fissura a seccio.	And therefore I say that castration is done in two ways: either by crushing or by cutting with an incision.
Mays en aquela que es fayta per atrissio, la via de la opera es que nos fassam cezer la bestia en aygua cauda entro que·ls genetius de lu sian mollificatz e sian linhitz e que pendan.	"When injury occurs from a fall, the procedure is to first plunge the beast into boiling water until its joints are softened and then let them hang."
E aprop pren aquels am la tua ma entro que sian resols e no apparescan dejos le tocament.	"And then take those with your hand carefully, so they do not slip away from the touch."
Mays en castracio fayta per fissura e seccio, cove que tu tenguas la bestia e premas la codena dels testicols de lu am la ma senestra.	"When castration is done through incision and section, you should hold the beast and press its testicular cord with your left hand."
E aprop lia le suspensori, e inscideys sobre quascun huou am una seccio entro que dos huous proceseysso.	"And then ligate the suspensory ligament, and make an incision on each side between two testicles."
E aprop inscideys aquels pus que auras quascu excorjat.	"Then cut those that you want to remove."
E no leysses sobre aquels del ciphac alcuna causa, sino le ciphac subtil le qual es sobre les vazes.	"And do not leave any of the skin around it [the testicle], but peel off the skin carefully which is on top of the vessels."
E aquesta manieyra de castracio es milhor la qual es fayta per atrissio, quar atrissio fort leu layssa alcuna causa dels testicols per que la bestia desira coyt.	"And this method of castration is better when done by crushing, because strong crushing leaves no trace of the testicles so that the beast desires copulation."
E aprop cura la plagua entro que sia sanada.	"And then treat the wound until it heals."
Capitol .lxx.	Chapter LXX.
De la cura de hermafrodozia.	"On Hermaphrodism."
Hermafrodozia en les homes es segon dos manieyras: la una es quar o appar en aquo que siec l’espazi en la codena de testiculs, en aquel que es entre dos testiculs figura quar cunh de femna en la qual so pels.	"Hermaphrodism in males occurs in two ways: one is when it appears as something like a sheath in the space between the testicular cord, and that which is between two testicles resembles a female vulva with skin around its opening."
E alcunas veguadas de aquel corr urina le qual es en la codena dels testiculs.	"And sometimes urine comes out of that which is on the cord of the testicles."
Mays en las femnas es una specia: e es que·l conh de la femna sobre le pentenilh es ayssi cum dos testiculs de home un pauc de tot yminiheys a la partida deforo ayssi cum le perpucii de home e dos testicols.	"But in females, it is one species: namely that the vulva of the female over the pubis appears like two male testicles, somewhat resembling the opening of the foreskin as with the male penis and two testicles."
E la curacio es de tres specias: de dos dels homes e de una specia de las femnas.	"And its treatment is of three kinds: two in males and one kind in females."
E es que cove que tu inscidas aquelas carns ajustadas entro que efuga la emprecio de aquela, e aprop que cures aquelas am curacio de las autras plaguas.	"And it is necessary to cut away that flesh attached so that the emission of that which escapes may be stopped, and then treat it with the cure for other wounds."
E en la segonda specia dels homes de la qual yeys urina la qual es en la codena dels testiculs, no es curacio ni opperacio en lu.	"And in the second kind in males where urine flows from the cord of the testicles, there is neither cure nor operation in it."
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter XXI.
De lentinge e de carn eminent per causas de las femnas.	"On Lentigo and Raised Flesh Caused by Women."
Lentige fort leu es ajustada sobre causas naturals entro que es etressat e es fayt leg le reguardament; e alcunas veguadas es magnificada en alcunas femnas en tant entro que es spandit ayssi cum en les homes e perve entro al coito.	"Freckles are naturally attached and appear in the skin of those who have been rubbed, and are made worse by carelessness; some women have them greatly increased so that they spread like those in men, even to copulation."
Adonc cove que tu tenguas la superfluitat de lentinge am la tua ma o am unci e inscidas.	"Then you should remove the excess of freckles with your hand or with an ointment and scrape them off."
E no ultimes en inscizio, majorment en le preon de la razit, per so que no endevengua flux de sanc.	"And do not end in incision, especially on the forehead, lest there be a flow of blood."
E aprop cura aquela am curacio de las plaguas entro que sia sanada.	"And then treat it with the cure for wounds until it is healed."
Mays carn nascuda es carn que nays en le horrifici de la mayre entro que umple aquel, e fort leu es eyssit a las partidas deforo segon semblansa de coa (e per aquo alscus primiers appelero aquo “malautia caudada”); donc cove que nos inscidam ayssi cum inscidem lentinge, e curem aquela entro que sia sanada.	"But raised flesh is flesh that grows in the horror of the mother's womb until it fills that space, and it often appears at the opening of the foreskin like a tail (and for this reason some people first called it "tail sickness"); therefore we should scrape it away just as we do with freckles, and treat it until it is healed."
Capitol .lxxii.	Chapter LXXII.
De curacio de alratica.	"On the Cure of Herpes Zoster."
Alratica es que le conh de la femna no sia perforat, o sia le trauc petit.	"Herpes zoster is when the vulva of the female is not pierced, or has a small opening."
E es o natural o accidental.	"And it is either natural or accidental."
Accidental es per malautia la qual ha precedit, e aquela es fayta o per carn nada ajustada o per ciphac subtil o espes.	"Accidental ones are due to previous illness, and they are made up of flesh that has grown too much, or from skin tags, or from thick or thin membranes."
E es fayt o en le preon de la mayre, o en les costatz de lu, o en le pus sobira de lu, o en le pus bas de lu, e prohibeys de cuoyt e de enprenguacio e de enfantament, e fort leu prohibeys las mestruas.	"And they are found either on the forehead of the mother, or on her ribs, or on her belly above or below, and they prevent copulation and pregnancy and childbirth, and often prevent menstruation."
E la cognicio de aquela es fayta per reguardament de la metrona, si la oppilacio es apparent, propdana; mays si no es apparent, lahoras tu cerqua aquela am les tieus ditz o am le ray.	"And its recognition is made by the careful examination of the vulva, if the opening is obvious; but if it is not obvious, you should examine it with your fingers or with a speculum."
Mays si oppilacio es per ciphac subtil, e es propda a las doas labias, lahoras tu coyta e disromp aquela.	"But if the opening is due to a thin membrane, and it is between the two labia, then cut it and tear it apart."
E es que pauses sobre las doas labias pulvils, e aprop pausa les tieus ditz indicz de amdoas las mas encemps.	"And if it appears over both of the labia majora, then put your fingers on both sides of them as shown above."
E la femna sia sobre le sieu dos, las sieuas coyssas extendudas, e aprop exten las doas labias am forsa entro que aquel ciphac subtil sia romput e la oppilacio sia uberta.	"And the woman should be on her back with her thighs spread apart, and then spread both labia with force so that this thin membrane is broken and the opening is made wider."
E aprop pren lana e enbeu le4 en oli e pausa aquela sobre·l loc, e jagua am home le dia per so que·l loc inscis no sia consolidat.	"And then take wool dipped in oil and place it on that spot, and leave it there for a day so that the wound does not become stuck together."
Mays si le ciphac es gros e espes, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquel am spatum lat o am fuelha de mirta.	"But if the membrane is thick and coarse, then you should cut it with a broad blade or with myrtle leaves."
Mays si la oppilacio es per carnada, lahoras suspen aquela am unci, e inscideys aquela.	"But if the opening is due to flesh that has grown too much, then suspend it with an ointment and scrape it away."
E sian am tu las medicinas que fan cessar flux de sanc ses mordicacio, ayssi cum ahacatia, e sanc de drago, e enses, ajustat am album de huou.	"And use the medicines that stop bleeding without being bitten, such as aloe, dragon's blood, and frankincense mixed with album graecum."
E aprop aministra una canulha de plom ampla per so que la plagua no sia consolidada leugierament.	"And then administer a wide leaden cannula to prevent the wound from healing too quickly."
E tengua aquela per alcus jorns e aministra calgua de li sec.	"And keep it like that for several days and apply hot water compresses."
E aprop sia curada am l’autra curacio de consolidacio entro que sia sanada.	"And then treat it with the other cure for consolidation until it is healed."
E alcunas vetz accideys en la mayre nativitat de autres carns, e lahoras cove que inscidas segon aquesta manieyra.	"And sometimes it happens that other fleshes are born from the mother's birth canal, and then you should cut them according to this method."
Mays si aysso es per apostema crancos, a l’apostema crancos le qual es en la mayre no sia fayta contrarietat am ferr en deguna manieyra.	"But if it is due to a hard abscess, then do not use iron in any way on the hard abscess that is in the mother's birth canal."
Capitol .lxxiii.	Chapter LXXIII.
De la cura de emorroydas e de tayl e de botor roja que accideysso en le conh de las femnas.	"On the treatment of hemorrhoids, tailbone pain, and redness that occurs in the area around women's genitals."
Emorroydas so apprecio dels orificis de motas venas entro que de aquelas corro mot sanc continuadament; e cum so antiquadas emorroydas e son fayts theyls.	"Hemorrhoids are caused by many veins that continuously receive too much blood, and when they become old and stretched out, they create pain."
E ja yeu he dit en la divisio las specias de aquelas e les senhals de aquelas, e diyre ayssi aquelas que recebo curacio e aquelas que no recebo curacio.	"I have already mentioned the types of hemorrhoids and their characteristics earlier, and I will now say which ones require treatment and which ones do not."
Donc dic que emorroydas e theyls quan so en le preon de la mayre e no apparo al sentiment, lahoras en aquelas no sia fayta curacio am ferr.	"Therefore, I say that hemorrhoids and piles that are in the front of the anus but do not protrude and cannot be felt do not require treatment with iron."
Mays aquelas las quals so en le orrifici de la mayre sobre las quals catz sentiment, so aquelas que so curadas.	"However, those that are at the opening of the anus and can be felt are the ones that need to be treated."
E cove que tu metas la femna en mayso frega e aprop exten atheyl am les forfexs, o am drap aspre, e inscideys aquelas am las razitz.	"It is necessary that you insert the woman's finger into her anus and gently extend it with forceps or rough cloth, and incise those with scissors."
E aprop pulveriza sobre aquelas deves le fluxs del sanc de una de las polveras insciscivas ses mordicacio, ayssi cum acassia e semblant ad aquels.	"And gently sprinkle powder made from the flowers of the oak tree or similar on those wounds to stop the bleeding."
E aprop enpellesca les sieus pes per una hora, e aprop pausa aquela en aygua freja.	"And then have her sit quietly for an hour, and afterwards apply hot water compresses."
E si persevera le fluxs del sanc, lahoras fay aquela sezer en decoccio de sumat e de scorsas de milgranas e de gualas e de semblantz.	"And if the bleeding persists, then make her drink a decoction of sumac, oak bark, pomegranate rind, and similar."
E aprop pren farina de ordi e comfiys aquela am miel e vi agre e fay emplastre am aquo sobre le dos de lu.	"And also take barley flour mixed with honey, vinegar, and warm water and make a poultice to apply on the area."
E si le sanc es abscindit, bo es; e sino, fay adherir am dos ventozas, e a las mamilhas ses escarificatio.	"And if the bleeding is stopped, that's good. But if not, then attach two cupping glasses and perform scarification on the breasts."
E aprop pren lana e submergeys aquela am suc de coliandre o am suc de arnagloza o am suc de guarravier am vi pentit e fay adherir al loc; e aprop cura le loc am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	"And also take wool and soak it in juice of coriander or juice of rue or juice of wall germander with white wine, then apply it to the area and cover it with a warm cloth until healed."
Mays athyl rog le qual es de aspre reguardament, cove que tu inscidas aquo que a tu appar de aquel segon que he dit en theyl engualment.	"But if you are treating someone who is difficult to please, then do whatever seems appropriate to you based on what I have said."
E cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	"And heal it until it is healed."
Capitol .lxxiv.	Chapter LXXIV
De perforacio de eyssedura accident en la mayre.	About accidental perforation of the bladder during childbirth.
Motas specias de apostemas accideysso en la mayre, ayssi cum cranc e apostema lapident e ulceracios e adhubelat e erpetromens e fistulas emorroyas e raguarrias e thyl e autres apostemas.	Many kinds of apostumes can happen accidentally in childbirth, such as hard tumors and stone-like apostumes and ulcers and adhesions and hernias and fistulas and hemorrhages and tears and other apostumes.
E yeu ja he dit aquestas malautias e las specias de aquelas e les senhals de aquelas, e las curacios de lor en la divisio.	"And I have already spoken about these illnesses and their types and symptoms and treatments in the division."
E cove que yeu digua en aquest tractat de apostema caut le qual ve en la mayre quan es dels apostemas que collegeysso sania, e si vols saber en qual manieyra se fa la opperacio de lu am ferr.	"But I must explain in this treatise how to cauterize an apostume that appears in the bladder when it is of those that heal, and if you want to know how the operation is done with iron."
Adonc cove que tu consideres si la dolor de la apostema en le sieu comensament es aguda am percussio e flecma e febre, e vezes aquel enrogezir e si catz sobre aquel le sentiment, lahoras no·t coytes am perforacio de lu, e cura aquel am aquo que ajuda sobre la maturacio entro que cesse la acuitat dels accidentz.	"Therefore, you should consider whether the pain of the apostume at its beginning is acute with percussion and chills and fever, and if it tends to swell and if pressure on it causes discomfort, then do not cut into it, and treat it with something that promotes maturation until the sharpness of the accident ceases."
E lahoras cove que tu fassas cezer la femna sobre una cezelha que aia doas cezelhas; e recline sobre le sieu dos e ajusta les sieus pes a la partida pus dejos del ventre, e las sieus coyssas sian expandudas, e pausa les sieus brasses dejos les sieus denols, e lia quascus am liament ad aquo convenient.	"But then you should make the woman lie on her back on a pillow that has two pillows; and recline her on her back and adjust her feet so they are higher than her hips, and let her thighs be spread apart, and pause her arms by her sides, and tie each one with a suitable ligature."
E aprop la matrona segua del latz dreyt e aministre le instrument am le qual es ubert le orrifici de la mayre, la forma del qual vindra en aquelas causas que·s faran aprop.	"And then the midwife should stand on the right side and administer the instrument with which the opening of the bladder is widened, the shape of which will be described in the relevant cases."
E cove quan vols ministrar aquest instrument que tu fiques am lo ray le preon de la mayre de la femna, e aquo que del instrument es intrat en la mayre no sia mays que·l preon de la mayre e leda le malaute.	"And when you want to administer this instrument, you should stand at the entrance of the woman's vagina and make sure that only the tip of the instrument enters the bladder and not more than what is necessary for the illness."
Mays si l’estrument es major que·l preon de la mayre, lahoras cove que tu pauses pulvils sobre la textura del preon de la mayre per sso que sia prohibit l’intrament de tot instrument en le preon de la mayre.	"But if the instrument is larger than the opening of the bladder, then you should place pledgets on the tissue around the opening of the bladder to prevent any instrument from entering it."
E cove que tu pauses le vertitge que corr en le strument del latz pus desus e que le ministre tengua le strument e revolva le vertitge entro que sia ubert le orrifici de la mayre.	"And you should place the tip of a probe on the left side above and make sure that the person administering the instrument holds it and rotates the tip until the opening of the bladder is widened."
E cum appar la excitura, e es tocada am la ma e es leon e molh, lahoras cove que tu secces aquela deves le cap de lu am spatum lat.	"And when the excretion appears and it is touched with the hand and it is clear and thin, then you should dry it with a linen cloth using the tip of the spatula."
E cum la sania es evacuada, lahoras cove que tu pauses en la plagua una meca submersa en oli rozat o oli vert en le qual sia alcuna stiptisitat; e pausa la calca7 en la seccio en le preon de la mayre.	"And when the healing is evacuated, then you should place in the wound a wick soaked in rose oil or green oil in which there is some astringency and place it at the section of the opening of the bladder."
E pause deforo la mayre e sobre le pentenilh lana munda submersa en aygua en la qual sian bulidas malvas.	"And then cover the bladder and put clean wool moistened with water in which mallows have been boiled on top."
E aprop sia curada aprop dos dias am enguent le qual conveneys ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	"And after two days, it should be dressed again with an ointment that is suitable for promoting maturation until it is healed."
E alcunas veguadas es lavada la mayre e la plagua enayssi que es cristerisat am aygua e mel, e aprop am aygua en la qual es bulhida razit de liri o de aristologia longua, e aprop retorna al enguent.	"And sometimes the bladder and the wound are washed in such a way that they are christened with water and honey, and sometimes with water in which red rose leaves or long-stalked aristolochia have been boiled, and then the ointment is reapplied."
E si la plagua es dedintz en la mayre ameguada, lahoras cove que tu sias prohibit de la curacio de lu am ferr, habantz cura aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio.	"If the wound becomes inflamed inside the bladder, then you should be prohibited from cauterizing it with iron, but rather treat it with what we have said in the division."
Capitol .lxxv.	"Chapter 75"
A ensenhar las matronas en qual manieyre les enbrios bius sian medicatz quan yeysso segon figura no-natural.	"To teach midwives how to treat twisted births that are not in a natural position."
Necessaria causa es que la matrona conogua en le comensament la figura del enfantament natural per senhals de lu, e es que quan tu vezas la femna expremar a las partidas dejos e desira odorar le ayre, e sobre aquo es enleujada per aquo que sobre ela es del part, e festina le eyssiment del enbrio, lahoras sapias que aquest part es segon figura natural, e es l’eyssiment de lu sobre le sieu cap, e la segondina am aquel o suspensa o pendent del ombelic.	"It is necessary for the midwife to know at the beginning the signs of a natural birth so that when she sees the woman pushing at the entrance and desiring to smell the air, and upon that she is relieved by what is above her from the birth, and hastens the exit of the child, then she knows that this birth is in a natural position, and the second one comes out on its back with its face down or suspended or hanging by the umbilical cord."
Donc cum tu vezes aquels senhals, lahoras cove que·l ventre de lu sia compremut per so que l’embrio deysenda leugerament quar quan deyssen sobre le sieu cap, deysen a lu la segondina, e es mondada de aquelas superfluitatz am bona mondificacio.	"So when you see these signs, then the belly of the child should be compressed so that the embryo comes out gently when it is on its back, and then the second one comes out on its back with its face down or suspended or hanging by the umbilical cord, and it should be cleansed of those superfluities with good cleansing."
Mays aquel que es otra aquest part es no-natural e no-lausable, quar quan le enbrio es eyssit sobre sos pes e·l cos de lu es eyssit devant le cap de lu e·ls pes de lu, e la ma de lu una, o al pe de lu i, o es eyssit le cap de lu e la ma de lu, o al ventre de lu, e fort leu es convertit sobre le sieu col, e semblant de las figuras de lu no-lausablas.	"But any other position of this birth is unnatural and undesirable because when the child comes out on its feet with its body coming out in front of its head with its feet facing downward, or one hand or a foot comes out first, or it comes out head down with one arm, or its abdomen comes out first, then it turns its face upwards, and these are the figures of an unnatural birth."
Don necessaria causa es a la matrona que sia savia e subtil en totas aquelas causas, e que·s guarde de error e de decepcio.	"Therefore it is necessary for the midwife to be wise and subtle in all those cases and to guard against errors and deception."
E yeu so mostrant tota figura de aquelas, e qual engen es en aquelas per so que sia significat per aquo e sia stat sobre aquo.	"And here I will show all of these figures and what position is indicated by each one and how it should be corrected."
Quan le feyt es eyssit sobre le sieu cap per egrecio natural, e aquel es vehement sobre la femna e es fayt a lu part dificil, e vezes la vertut de lu ja debelitada, lahoras fay aquela sezer , o que las femnas tenguan lu, e evapora le conh de lu am fenugrec coyt e am olis humitz.	"When the head comes out first in a natural way and it is stuck against the woman and its exit becomes difficult, and she sees her strength waning, then you should have someone support her or hold her, and evaporate her breath with ground fenugreek and warm oils."
E aprop entrometa la metrona entre les sieus ditz espatum petit e fenda am aquel la segondina, o secce aquela am la sua ungla entro que corro aquo que es en ela de humiditat.	"And then the midwife should insert a little spatula between her thighs and use it to bring out the second one or dry it with her nail until what is inside of it has been dried."
E preme le ventre de la femna entro que deyssenda le fet.	"And press on the woman's belly until the child comes out."
Mays si no deyssen, lahoras cove que la femna sia cristirizada de mucellage de ptilli e mucellage de fenugrec am cizami.	"But if it does not come out, then the woman should be anointed with a poultice of egg white and fenugreek with honey."
E aprop comanda a lu, aprop le cristeri, que sia compremuda e fay aquela stornudar am condisi; e te la boca de lu e·l nas de lu per huna hora, quar le fet sira foro-getat tantost.	"Then order him to squeeze his chest and make him sneeze with caution; and hold his mouth and nose for an hour, because the breath will soon be forgotten."
E si las doas mas del fet so foro-getadas al comensament, lahoras cove que tu redusiscas aquelas am fecilitat petit a petit.	"If both of the patient's hands are forgotten at the beginning [of the operation], then you should gradually reduce them with ease little by little."
Mays si no obezeys al intrament, lahoras pausa la femna sobre una cezelha e leva les pes de lu sus, e aprop concuceys la cezelha sobre la terra; e la femna sia tenguda que no caia deves la concussio.	"But if the patient does not obey during the operation, then place a woman on top of him and hold down his legs tightly, and carefully tilt the bed towards the ground so that the woman may not fall due to the shaking."
E si las mas no son dedintz tornadas e morr le fet, lahoras inscideys aquelas e extratz le romament del fet o lia le cors a la ma de lu am drap e extratz aquel am equalitat, quar aquel sira foro-getat.	"And if the hands are not returned quickly and the patient dies, then cut them open and remove the remains of the fetus or tie the body to his hand with cloth and pull it out gently, because it will soon be forgotten."
De eyssiment del embrio sobre les sieus pes.	"Of the extraction of the embryo over its own weight."
Quan le fet yeys sobre les sieus pes, lahoras cove que tu impelliscas aquels en sus, e aprop convertas le fet petit, e aprop que engualhes aquel, e aprop que prenguas un pe de lu e extendas aquels petit a petit.	"When the fetus is over its own weight, then you should push it upwards gently, and carefully turn the fetus upside down, and wrap it in a cloth, and gradually pull one of its legs out."
Mays cum son eyssit entro a las coyssas, lahoras tu comanda a lu que se exprema, e fay aquela extornudar am condizi, quar sira foro-getat si Deus lo vol.	"But when it is extracted inside the thighs, then you should tell him to cough and make him sneeze with caution, because if God wills, he may soon forget."
E si no es foro-getat am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras tu retorna le fet petit a petit entro que pauses aquel segon figura natural, quar aquel sira lahoras foro-getat am leugier eyssiment.	"And if it is not forgotten with what we have mentioned, then you should gradually return the fetus inside until it falls down according to its natural figure, because it will soon be forgotten with a gentle extraction."
E si es prohibit am tot aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras pren de musellage de altea e de goma dissolvuda, e percuteys tot en le mortier per bona percussio, e aprop linieys am aquo le conh de la femna, el pus bas del ventre de lu.	"And if it is prohibited with all that we have mentioned, then take some powdered aloe and dissolved gum, grind them well in a mortar, and line the woman's womb with it using a brush, starting from her lower belly."
E aprop fay aquela cezer en aygua tebeza, entro que consegua les ypocondias.	"And also make her drink a decoction of black cumin, until she obtains relief from her hypochondria."
E cum vezes que las partidas dejos de lu so lenificadas, lahoras fay a lu subfumiguacio de mirta e sub-pausa aquela a lu.	"And when the openings of it are softened, then make him inhalation of myrtle steam and cover him with blankets."
E quan te la sub-fumiguacio per una hora, lahoras tu la fay sezer sobre una cezelha, e aprop fay aquela stornudar e extrenh la boca de lu, e levas de aquela, e prem la partida pus bassa del ventre de lu am leugiera compressio, quar le fet sira tantost foro-getat.	"And when he has received the steam inhalation for an hour, then make him lie on a bolster and make him sneeze, and extract the mouth of it gently, lift it up and press the lower opening of his belly gently with your hand, because the fetus will soon be forgotten."
Eyssiment del fet sobre les sieus denols e las suas mas.	"Extraction of the fetus over its own dens and its blood."
Quan le fet eyssira segon aquesta forma, lahoras tu engenies en entrometen las suas mas petit a petit; e aprop la femna stia evessada sobre le sieu col, e les pes de lu pengo en jos, e aquelas sia jasent sobre le lieyt, e complegua las suas mas.	When the woman lies in this way, then gradually introduce your hands between her thighs; and also have the woman raise herself onto her elbows, lower her legs downwards, and let those parts rest upon the bed, closing her thighs.
E aprop prem sobre le ventre de lu petit a petit, e aprop extratz aquo que es dejos les pes de lu de las aurelhas entro que sia preparada en la partida pus dejos.	Press gently on the woman's belly little by little, and then gradually extract that which is left beneath her buttocks from behind when it is ready to be expelled at the opening.
E si le fet no es fora-getat, lahoras pren les pes de lu e mau aquels am movement vehement, e aprop prem aquo que es sobre les ypocondres petit a petit entro que le fet puege a las partidas desus.	If the child does not come out, then grasp her buttocks with both hands and pull them vigorously while pressing gently on her hypogastrium until the child passes through the opening above.
E aprop entrometa las suas mas e engualhe le fet petit a petit, e comanda a la femna que se exprema entro que le fet sia foro-getat.	Then insert your hands again and wrap the baby gently little by little, and tell the woman to push until the child is completely out.
Eyssiment del fet latutidinalment pendent una de las suas mas.	The lateral extraction of the baby while keeping one of your hands in place.
Sia engeniat en reduccio de la ma de lu, mays si no podes aquela reduzir, lahoras eleva la femna e fe aquela anar.	If the head does not reduce easily with your hand, then raise the woman's buttocks and help that part come out.
E si anar no pot, lahoras fay la jazer sobre le lieyt, e concuteys las coyssas de lu am concussio vehement, e aprop aministra liamentz les quals yeu e recomtatz de mucillages.	If it still cannot come out, then have her lie down on the bed, strike the baby's buttocks forcefully with your fist, and then administer warm liquids or remedies made from mucilaginous plants.
E si es vengut le enfantament, lahoras fay aquela sezer sobre cezelha, e aprop studia sobre la reduccio de la ma, e enguala le fet segon figura natural, e fay stornudar la femna e comanda a lu que comprema a si entro que sia foro-getat.	If the child has been born, then have the mother lie down on her back, and carefully examine the reduction of the hand. Then wrap the baby according to its natural shape, make the woman sneeze, and tell her to push until it is completely out.
Eyssiment del fet sobre·l col expandudas las suas mas e la fassia de lu es al dos de la sua mayre.	Extraction of the baby with both hands by grasping the shoulders and turning them towards the mother's back.
Cove que la matrona tengua la ma del fet e aprop revolva aquel petit a petit, e eque aquel am facilitat.	The midwife should hold the baby's head with one hand and gently turn it little by little, helping it to come out more easily.
E cum es e quant so es engualhat, e lahoras pausa sobre le conh de lu aquo que havem recomtat de oli e de mucellages.	When the head is out and as much of the baby's body has been born as possible, then pause briefly to apply the oil and mucilage mixture that we have recommended.
E aprop comandas a lu que·s maugua petit a petit, e quan auras feyt aquo, lahoras fay aquela cezer sobre una cezelha e comanda li que sia inclinada sobre le latz dreyt, e aprop comanda a lu que sia compremuda; e fay aquela stornudar am condizi.	Then command her to push gently little by little. When you have done this, then have her lie down on one hip and tell her to lean over towards the right side, and command her to bear down; make her sneeze conditionally.
Exitus foetus praeparati super latus.	Preparation for the exit of the fetus onto its side.
Quan deyssen a horrifici de la mayre segon aquesta manieyra, considera, e lahoras tu inscideys la segondina am la tua ungla entro que sia evacuada de la humiditat.	If you find that the mother is horrified by this method, then consider another method, and then carefully insert your nail into the second opening to remove any excess moisture.
E si le fet es suspendut sobre la cara e·l col de lu, lahoras tu inscideys aquela del embelic, per so que no sia retengut e mora.	If the baby is suspended by its face and neck, then insert your finger into the amniotic sac to release it and prevent suffocation.
E aprop empelleys le fet a las partidas dedintz entro que pauses aquel segon que cove, e manda a la femna que comprema a si alcunas veguadas, e el sira fora-getat am eyssiment leugier, si Dieus o vol.	Then gently push the baby out through the birth canal as necessary, pausing when it is appropriate to do so. Command the woman to bear down several times, and with God's help, the baby will be born easily.
Exitus geminorum aut foetuum multorum.	The exit of twins or multiple fetuses.
Sapias que gemels motas veguadas so natz, e alcunas vetz naysso tres o quatre , mays aquo es estranh e tart s’endeve; mays v so causas foro natura, e no vivo.	Know that many twins are born, and sometimes three or four, but this is rare and unusual. There are several causes for this, but it is not something that occurs frequently in life.
E conte aquelas, ja sia que sian montiplicatz, una segondina, e son seperatz per ciphac, distingen aquels enter le liguament en l’ombilic de cascun de aquels E alcunas veguadas so foro-getatz ayssi cum es un fet per eyssiment natural leugier, e so eysitz alcunas veguadas per eyssiment no-lausabla ayssi cum havem recomtat.	If there are multiple fetuses or twins joined together by their membranes, then separate them carefully. Each one has its own umbilical cord and amniotic sac. Sometimes they can be born naturally like any other baby, but sometimes they may need assistance in being born, as we have discussed.
E si son dificils alcus de lor deves le enfantament e perveno ad aquo que havem dit de las figuras no-naturals, lahoras tu cura aquels ayssi cum havem recontat.	If some of them are difficult to deliver and come to what we have said about unnatural positions, then care for them as we have discussed.
E si’ la matrona subtil e fassa aquo que fa am facilitat e subtilitat, e am tarditat, e sia ingeniat segon tota figura segon que es a lu preparat de l’engen amenant a salut.	And if the midwife is skilled and does what she does with ease and skillfulness, and with patience, and acts according to her knowledge as prepared by God for bringing about health.
Rememoratio eius quod formatur in matrice ex embrionibus et Abortiuntur.	Memorandum: What forms in the womb from embryos and aborts
Alcunas veguadas son formatz en la mayre un, e dos, e tres, e quatre, e v, e vi, e vii, e mays x, e ja es deves mi verificat que una femna abortem ne getet vi, e una autra x totz formatz, la qual causa fo fayta per mensuracio dels glorios savis.	Sometimes there are formed in the womb one, two, three, four, five, six, seven, and even more than ten fetuses. It has been verified that a woman aborted six at once, and another bore ten all at once. The cause of this was due to measurement by learned physicians.
E tot aysso cove que sia en la sciencia de la matrona quar fort leu ad aquela parve semblant de aquo, e donc opause se ad aquo am so que cove.	And it is important that the midwife knows how to deal with this situation well, and therefore she should pause if necessary according to what is appropriate.
Capitol .lxxvi.	Chapter 76
De extraccio del fet quan es mort.	Of delivering a dead baby
Quan tu curas le fet mort am aquo que havem dit en la divisio de la medicacio e no es defora eyssit, e tu yest forsat usar de opperacio am ma, lahoras cove que consideras si la femna es de sana vertut e no es am alcu dels accidentz per les quals sobre ela es temuda perdicio.	When you are caring for a dead baby as we have discussed in the division on treatment and it has not yet been born, and you wish to use an operation with your hand, then you should consider whether the woman is of good health and does not have any of the conditions that could cause harm.
Lahoras cove que la femna sia envessada sobre le lieyt sobre le sieu dos, e sia le cap de lu enclinat enjos e las coyssas de lu sian elevadas.	Then it is necessary for the woman to be placed on her left side with her head lowered and her hips elevated.
E·l ministre tengua aquela de doas partz o sia liada en le lieyt per so que·l cos de lu no se extenda deves la extraccio del fet.	And the assistant should hold the woman from both sides or lie next to her on the bed, so that her body does not extend during the extraction of the baby.
E aprop tu humecta la boca de la mayre de lu am olis humitz e am mucellage de altea e de fenugrec e de semensa de li.	Then you should moisten the mouth of the womb with olive oil mixed with mucilage of marsh mallow and fenugreek seeds.
E aprop unte la matrona la sua ma am aquels olis e mucellages, e aprop entrometa la sua ma am fecilitat en la mayre, e aprop cerque am la ma loc en le qual fique les uncis en le fet.	And then the midwife should anoint her hand with those oils and mucilages, and gently insert it into the womb. Then she should search for where the fingers can grasp the baby's ankles
E locs convenient en aquo: adonc tu considera si le fet es preparat que deysenda sobre le sieu cap, e lahoras tu fique les uncis en les huels de lu, o en le col, o en la boca, o en le palat, o dejos la barba, o en la furcula de lu, o en les locs propdas de las costas, o dejos les ypocondres.	The suitable places to grasp the baby are: therefore, consider if the baby is positioned head down. If so, grasp its heels or neck or mouth or palate or beard or wishbone or near the ribs or hypochondria.
Mays si le deysendiment es sobre les pes de lu, lahoras en le pentenilh, o en le mieg de las costas.	But if the baby is positioned feet down, then grasp it by the penis or the middle of its back
E cove que tengua le unci am la ma dreyta, e pausa la curvitat de lu en aquel loc le qual es entre les ditz de la ma senestra, e entrometa la ma am facilitat e fique le unci en alcu de aquels locs les quals havem ditz, entro que pervengua a la causa boyda.	It is necessary to grasp the baby with your right hand and pause its curvature in that spot between your left fingers. Then gently insert your left hand and place your fingers on one of those locations we have mentioned until you reach the baby's body.
E aprop pause e fique en la apposicio de lu un autre unci, o le tertz si es necessitat, per so que sia atraccio engual, e no sia extencio segon la sua rectetut tant solament.	Then pause and grasp with another finger or the third if necessary, so that there is equal traction and not just pulling along its natural curvature.
Ans sia maugut a tota partida, per so que l’eyssiment de lu sia alleujat ayssi cum es fayt en dent deves la eradicacio de lu.	It should be done gently in every delivery, so that the baby's emergence is eased just as it happens when removing a tooth.
E cove en lu aquo que es entre lor que la extencio sia mollificada; e si alcuna partida de lu es retenguda, lahoras cove que la matrona unte alcus sieus ditz am oli e entrometa aquels espertament e revolva am aquels aquo que es retengut.	And it is important that the extraction be done gently between them. If any part of the baby becomes stuck, then the midwife should anoint her fingers with oil and carefully insert them and twist those parts that are stuck
Donc si la partida del fet es fora-getada, lahoras les uncis sian permudatz entra loc le qual sia pus aut; e fay aysso entro que tot le fet sia fora-getat.	Therefore, if the delivery of the baby is difficult, then change your grasp to another place that may be easier. Do this until the entire baby has been delivered.
Mays si la ma es eyssida denant l’autra, e no es possible reduzir aquela per la coartacio de lu, lahoras cove que drap sia envolopat sobre aquela; e aprop extratz aquela entro que tota sia fora-getada, e inscideys aquela o en la junctura de la ma o en le coyde.	But if one hand is extended before the other and it is not possible to reduce that by its curvature, then a cloth should be wrapped around it. Then extract that until everything has been delivered, and cut it either at the junction of the fingers or at the joint.
E ayssi cove que fassas en l’autra ma e en les dos pes.	And do the same with the other hand and both feet
Mays si le cap del fet es gran, o accideys a lu coartacio en le eyssiment, o es en le cap de lu aygua ajustada, lahoras cove que entrometa entre les ditz espatum spinos e fenda le cap e extragua la aygua, o que discroba aquel am un instrument le qual es nompnat “alundat”, la forma del qual vindra am las formas dels autres instruments en le capitol le qual es aprop aquest.	But if the baby's head is large or its curvature becomes injured during delivery, or there is water in the fontanelle, then insert a pair of forceps between the fingers and tear the skin to facilitate extraction of the fluid or use an instrument called "alundat" whose shape will be shown with the other instruments in the next chapter.
E semblantment fassa si·l fet es de gran cap per natura: e lahoras cove que inscida aquel am algematu, o que prengua aquel am alunda ayssi cum havem dit; e aprop extra les osses am les forceps.	Similarly, if the baby has a large head by nature, then cut it with scissors or use an "alundat" as mentioned earlier to facilitate extraction of the bones using forceps
E si le cap es eyssit e es coartat deves la furcula, lahoras sia fendut entro que la humiditat la qual es en le pietz sia efunduda.	If the head has exited and is compressed beneath the collarbone, then it should be cut so that the humidity in the chest may escape.
Mays si no es complicat, ni obezeys a eyssiment, lahoras tu inscideys le cap tantost segon que a tu sira possible.	If it is not complicated or difficult, without making any incisions, then you should cut the head as soon as you can.
E si le dejos del ventre es apostemat o es en lu ydropici, lahoras cove que tu perfores aquel entro que corro la humiditat que es en lu.	If the patient's abdomen is inflamed or they are suffering from dropsy, then it is necessary for you to pierce there so that the fluid may flow out.
Mays si le fet es sobre les sieus pes, lahoras la atraccio de lu es leugiera e la direccio de lu a la boca de la mayre es leugiera.	But if the fetus is lying on its back, then its attraction will be light and its direction towards the mouth of the womb will be easy.
Mays si es coartat deves le ventre e·l pietz, lahoras cove que tu extraguas aquel am drap le qual auras envolopat sobre la tua ma, e que fendes le ventre e·l pietz entro que corra aquo que es en aquels.	But if it is compressed beneath the abdomen and the chest, then you should remove it with cloth that you will have wrapped around your hand, and cut the abdomen and chest so that water may flow out of them.
Mays si les autres membres so ostatz e torna le cap, lahoras la metrona entrometa la ma senestra; mays si la boca de la mayre es huberta, lahoras intrometa la ma en le preon de layre, e cerque am aquela le cap, e atira aquel am les ditz entro a la boca de la mayre, e aprop entrometa en lu un unci, o dos uncis, e atire lu am aquels.	But if the other limbs are out and the head is turned back, then insert your left hand; but if the mouth of the womb is covered, then insert your hand into the uterus, encircle the head with it, pull it down towards the mouth of the womb, and then insert a hook or two hooks and pull it down with them.
E si la boca de la mayre es coartada per apostema caut le qual accideys a l’u, lahoras cove que no sia trebelhat sobre lu; abantz cove lahoras aministrar efusio de causas humidas grassas.	And if the mouth of the womb is obstructed by an ulcerous inflammation that has occurred in it, then you should not be careless about this. In such cases, it may be necessary to administer an evacuation for excess fatty humidities.
E aministre emplastres; e segua le pacient en ayguas que mollifican e humectan.	And apply poultices; and follow the patient with moistening and softening waters.
E si le fet es sobre le sieu costat, lahoras si possible es, sia agulat: e sia aministrat aquo que havem dit en le fet viu.	And if the fetus is lying on its side, then if it is possible, turn it: and administer what has been said for a live fetus.
E si aquo no es possible, lahoras sia inscidit en pessas, e sia extrayt.	And if that is not possible, then cut through the ribs and extract it.
E cove que non layssas alcuna causa dedintz de la segondina.	You should not leave any cause inside the secondine.
E cum tu auras complida tota la tua opperacio, lahoras aministra aquo que havem dit de la curacio en les apostemas cautz les quals accideysso de la mayre.	And when you have completed all of your operation, then administer what has been said about the cure for ulcerous inflammations that occur in the womb.
E si accideys flux de sanc, lahoras deyssendas en ayguas stipticas e aministra l’autra curacio.	And if bleeding occurs, then apply astringent waters and administer the other treatment.
E yeu ja e vist una femna en le ventre de la qual era fet mort, e aprop sobre aquel foc autra veguada emprenhada, e aprop foc mort es le fet autre.	"I have seen a woman whose belly was killed dead, and shortly afterwards she became pregnant again, but the child died as well."
Accidit al u aprop lonc temps apostema en le sieu embelic; e inflat es entro que foc ubert, e comensec a getar brac.	"An abscess happened to him in his belly quite some time ago; it swelled up there where the wound opened, and then he began to suffer."
E yeu fu appelhat a la cura de lu, e medicat a lu per lonc temps, e la plagua no es consolidada.	"And I was called to care for him and treated him for a long time, but his illness did not improve."
Adonc yeu pausegui sobre lu de alscunas causas emplastra de forta atraccio, e eyssic de lu un os, e aprop passero alcus jorns, e eyssic un autre os; e yeu fu trop meravilhat, cum en le ventre no sia os.	I place upon him certain poultices with great attraction, and I remove from him one bone, and afterward it passes some days, and I remove another bone; but I was greatly amazed, because there are no bones in the belly.
E adonc yeu cogitegui que eran dels osses del fet mort.	And then I thought that they were of the dead man's bones.
Donc yeu enguisigui la plagua, e extrayssi de lu motz osses , la femna existent en las sieuas milhos disposicios, e ja visquec en tal manieyra per lonc temps, correc de lu un petit de brac.	Therefore I treated the plague, and extracted from him many bones, the woman who was in her best condition, and she lived thus for a long time, running from him with only one small arm.
E yeu no afermegui asso esser stranh, sino quar en aquo es sciensa e ajutori ad aquo que le metge artifec am la ma per curacio aministra.	And I did not think it was strange, for in this there is science and help for what the skilled physician effects with his hand to administer cure.
De las formas dels instrumentz que so necessaris a extrayre le fet.	Of the forms of instruments that are necessary to extract the fetus.
Forma de vertitge am la qual es uberta la mayre:	Shape of vessel with which the mother is opened:
Aquesta es la forma de strenhedor en le qual so engualhatz les libres, al qual engualhament sian dos virtitges en doas extremitatz de dos futz.	This is the shape of the speculum in which the books are bound, in which binding there are two vessels at both ends of two feet.
May empero aquesta virtitge cove que sia pus subtil de strictori, e sia fayt o de eba o de fust de boys.	Moreover this vessel must be more subtle in narrowing, and it should be made of brass or ebony or boxwood.
E sia la latitut de quascun fust quays dos ditz e le marge de quascu amdos quays un dit, e la longitut de quascu es un palm e mig; e en le mieg loc de dos fustz so dos ajustaments de aquel meteys fustz les quals ja son fermatz, dels quals la longitut es la maytat de un palm e un pauc mes, e la latitut de quascu es quay dos ditz, o un pauc mes.	"The width of each stake is two fingers and the margin between each is one finger; its length is one and a half palms. In the middle of these two stakes are two adjustments of this meter stake which are already fixed, with a length of about one palm and a bit more, and each has a width of two fingers or slightly more."
E aquestz dos additamentz sian entromeses en la boca de la mayre per que sia uberta am aquels quan tu revolves las doas prescriptas virtigges.	"And these two adjustments are inserted into the mouth of the main stake so that it is open with them when you turn the two prescribed virtues."
Forma autra semblant de aquela pus subtil e pus leugiera:	"Another form similar to this, but more subtle and lighter:"
Sia fayta de fustz de eba o de boys segon la semblansa de forceps.	"Let it be made of ebony or boxwood according to the likeness of forceps."
Mays empero en la extremitat de lu so dos additament ayssi cum vezes, e la longitut de aquels additament es quays un palm, e la latitut de quascu es dos ditz.	"But at the end of those two adjustments there are thus holes, and their length is one palm each with a width of two fingers."
E cum tu vols am aquels ubrir la mayre, lahoras tu fay cezer la femna sobre le lieyt les pes pendentz, ubert aquo que es entre las coyssas de lu.	"And when you want to open the mouth with them, then place the female on top of the lieit so that what is between its legs hangs down, opening it there."
E aprop obre la tua ma am le instrument ayssi cum fas am forfexs engualment segon la quantitat que vols de la aprecio de la boca de la mayre entro que la metrona fassa so que vols.	"And then open your hand with the instrument thus, as you do with forceps when grasping something according to the amount of pressure you want on the opening of the mouth of the womb until it reaches what you want."
La forma de vertitge la qual diysero les antics:	"The form of virtue that they called it in ancient times:"
Forma de impellent am le qual es empellit le fet:	"The form of 'impellent' with which the fetus is pushed out:"
Forma de amisidat2 am le qual es conterit le cap gran	"The form of 'amisidat' with which the large head is contained."
E es asemblat a forceps al qual so dentz en la extremitat, ayssi cum vezes, e alcunas veguadas es fayt lonc ayssi cum forceps segon aquesta forma, ayssi cum vezes, al qual so dentz ayssi cum dentz de ressegua am le qual es inscidit e conterit.	"And it is similar to forceps with teeth at the end thus, as you see, and sometimes it is made long like forceps according to this form thus, with teeth like the teeth of a comb with which it cuts and contains."
Forma de amesidat pauc:	"The form of 'amesidat' little:"
Forma de unci havent una spina:	"Form of a hook having a spine:"
Forma de unci havent doas spinas:	"Form of a hook having two spines:"
Forma de forceps a la qual so dentz de cerra am le qual le cap del fet sia conterit:	"The form of forceps with which its teeth are like a comb with which the head of the fetus is contained."
Forma de spatum havent dos extremitatz am le qual le cap es abscindit:	"Form of spatula having two extremities with which the head is cut off:"
Forma de dos espatums latz:	"The form of two spatulas latched together:"
Totz aquels instrumentz so excersitatz, e quan mes so multiplicadas las specias de aquel e so preparadas deves le artifexs, quant es pus leugier a la sua opperacio e pus aut deves les homes per la sua quantitat.	"Although those instruments are exercised, and the more species of them there are and the better prepared by the artisans, the easier it is for their operation and the more skilled you will be with their quantity."
E no obres de aquels instrumentz ja sia qua sia deves tu aparalhat, quar la necessitat de aquels no es excusabla.	"And do not disdain those instruments, whatever they may be, for the need of them is inexcusable."
De extraccio de la segondina.	"Regarding the extraction of the placenta."
Quan la segondina es retenguda deves le enfantament, lahoras cove que tu comandes a la malautae que retengua le sieu ale, e aprop fay aquela stornudar am condizi, e strenh la tua ma sobre la boca de lu e sobre las nars de lu, e si per aysso es defora eyssit, bo es.	"When the placenta is retained at childbirth, then you must order the midwife to hold her breath, and make that woman sneeze with condition, and press your hand over her mouth and nose, and if by this means it comes out, well."
E sino, lahoras tu pren una ola e perfora en la cuberta un trauc e pausa en aquela erbas ubrent la boca de la mayre, ayssi cum calament e ruda e anet e camamilla e scicados arabic e cassia lignea e santaurea.	"And if not, then you take some oil and make a hole in its cover, and put it on that herb which has been burned in the mouth of the womb, thus with calament, rue, aneth, chamomile, chicory Arabic and Cassia wood and Santureja."
Totas aquestas erbas o alcunas de lor sian submersas en aygua en la ola, e pausa aquela sobre le foc.	"All these herbs or some of them should be immersed in water in the oil, and put that on the fire."
E aprop pausa una canula de canaviera en la boca de la mayre, e tengua aquela entro que la evapor vengua a la concavitat de la mayre.	"And then put a reed cannula into the mouth of the womb, and hold it in such a way that the vapor comes to the cavity of the womb."
E aprop fay aquela stornudar ayssi cum havem dit, e la segondina sira fora-getada am velocitat.	"And then make her sneeze as we have said, and the placenta will come out with great speed."
Mays si roman aprop aquesta curacio e no es eyssida, lahoras tu comanda a la matrona que submerge la sua ma sinistra en oli sizami o en micellage de altea, e aprop entrometa aquela en le conh e queresca am aquela la segondina, e cum aquela auras trobada, lahoras pren la e exten aquela pauc a pauc Mays si es annexsa en le preon de la mayre, lahoras entrometa la sua ma segon que havem recomtat, e quan aura trobat la segondina, extragua aquela petit a petit segon rectetut per so que la mayre no caja deves la atraccio vehement.	"But if this treatment does not work and it is not expelled, then you order the midwife to immerse her left hand in olive oil or in an ointment of althea, and then insert that into the womb and try with that to find the placenta, and when it has been found, then take it out little by little. But if it is attached to the wall of the womb, then insert your hand as we have recommended, and when you have found the placenta, pull it out little by little according to the right path so that the mother does not suffer from violent traction."
Abantz cove que sia permudada als costatz dreyt e sinestre am facilitat.	"It is necessary that they be moved on both the right and left sides with ease."
E aprop sia ajustat en la quantitat de atraccio, quar ela obedira e evasira de adhirencia.	"And then it should also adjust the amount of traction, for it will obey and disengage from adhesions."
E si la boca de la mayre es coartada, nos ja havem recomtat la curacio am sturnutacio e am medicacio de la ola am erbas.	"And if the mouth of the womb is constricted, we have already recommended the treatment with sneezing and with the medication of oil with herbs."
Mays si no es fora-getada am totas las causas las quals havem recomtadas, lahoras guarda te que no fetigues sobre aquela en iteracio de abstracio, mays empero cove que aquo que es eyssit de lu a la boca de la mayre lies a la coyssa de la femna, e aprop cristeriza aquela am enguent e tetrafarmacon; quar aquel fara poyrir aquela aprop alcus dias e sira dissolvuda e sira fora-getada.	"But if it is not expelled despite all the causes we have recommended, then be careful not to fatigue yourself with repeated attempts at abstraction, but rather what comes out of her into the mouth of the womb should be put on the thing of the woman, and then cauterize that with ointment and tetrafarmacon; for that will make it disappear little by little over a few days and will dissolve and come out."
Mays quan se poyreys, es de lu elevada mala audor al cap, e al estomac, e aquo ledeys la malauta; e adonc cove que sian aministradas sub-fumiguacios e convenientz ad aquo.	"But when it disappears, there will be a foul smell rising to the head and stomach, and that will bother the midwife, and therefore fumigations and remedies appropriate for it should be administered."
Mays alcus dels Antics ja so esproatz sub-fumigacio de nazitort e de figuas seccas.	"But some of the Ancients have already used fumigation with rue and dried figs."
Forma de instrument am le qual la femna es sub-fumiguada deves la retentio de mestruas e de la segondina:	"The form of the instrument with which women are fumigated for retention of menses and placenta:"
Sia fayta de veyre o de eram.	"Make a vein or wound opening."
E sia pausada la extremitat subtil en le conh e la extremitat ampla sobre le foc, e la sub-fumiguacio sia pausada sobre las brazas del foc.	"And place the thin end of it in the cone and the wide end over the fire, and apply the smoke gently over the embers of the fire."
E tengua aquela entro que sia consumida aquela sub-fumiguacio e itera·n autra.	"And hold that until that smoking is consumed, then repeat another."
De curacio del cul del enfant no-perforat.	"Treatment for a non-perforated child's anus."
Motz enfantz naysso e les culs de lu no so perforatz, les quals ya ciphac subtil e opilat.	"Some children are born and their anuses are not perforated, which are both narrow and closed."
Adonc cove a la matrona que perfore am le sieu dit aquel ciphac; e sino, perfora aquel am spatum agut, e guarda se que no toque le lacert.	"Therefore it is up to the midwife to pierce that opening with her finger; and if not, then pierce it with a sharp spatula, being careful not to touch the rectum."
E aprop pause sobre aquel lana enfusa en vi e oli; e aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia senat.	"And apply a poultice made of wool soaked in wine and oil; and apply this ointment until it is healed."
Mays si temes que sia opilat, lahoras pausa en le trauc una canula per motz dias, e osta la quan le enfant voldra degerir.	"But if you fear that it may be closed, then place a cannula in the track for several days, and remove it when the child wants to defecate."
E ja accideys oppilacio del cul per consolidacio de plagua o de apostema; adonc cove que aquela consolidacio sia inscidida, e aprop sia curada am aquo que avem dit de la curacio e del plom.	"And if there is closure of the anus due to consolidation of a plug or an abscess, then it is necessary that that consolidation be incised, and apply what has been said about the cure and the lead."
De curacio de las fistulas que endeveno dejos.	"Treatment for fistulas that come from there."
Las fistulas que endeveno en la partida dejos pus bassa so nodacio e grossetut las quals endeveno prop del cul defora o en l’espazi de la una partida.	"The fistulas that begin in the lower part of the buttocks are usually hard and large, which begin near the anus outside or in the space between the thighs."
E es una fistula o motas.	"And it is one fistula or more."
E cum aquela nodacio es antiquada e corr de la humiditat aygosa blanca o poyridura subtil, e alcunas veguadas so de aquestas fistulas alcunas penetrantz.	"And since that hard swelling is old and runs with humid pus or thin purulent matter, sometimes there are some penetrating fistulas."
E aquelas penetrantz so conogudas per aquo que es eyssit de aquelas per la egressio e per ventosetat; e alcunas vetz use le malaute de egressio, e fort leu es eyssit de aquelas verm.	"And those penetrating fistulas are known by what flows from them through the exit and by the windiness; and sometimes there is a feeling of discharge, and it often comes out as worms."
E so de aquelas fistulas alcunas veguadas en l’espazi penetrantz entro a la vesica, e entro al meat de la vergua; e so de aquelas penetrantz entro la junctura de la coyssa e entro al notz de la coeta.	"And sometimes from those fistulas there are penetrating fistulas into the bladder and into the urethra, and into the junction of the vagina and into the rectum."
E aquo en que es conoguda fistula penetrant entro al cul e no-penetrant, es que tu metas le tieu dit endic en le cul, e entrometas tenta subtil de eram o de ferr en la fistula quan no y es turtuositat.	"And how a penetrating fistula into the anus is known and not penetrating, is by inserting the tip of your finger into the anus, and gently inserting a thread of sinew or iron in the fistula when there is no tortuosity."
Mays si en aquela es turtuositat, lahoras entromet en aquela tenta subtil de plom o de pels de caval entro que tu sentas la tenta o le pel en le tieu dit.	"But if there is tortuosity in that one, then insert a thin thread of lead or horsehair into it until you feel the thread or the hair on your finger."
E si no sentas aquela de tot ni no procezeys del trauc alcuna causa de egestio ni verm ni ventositat, ayssi cum havem dit, lahoras sapias que es no-penetrant, e lahoras coyta te a la curacio.	"And if you do not feel that one at all, and there is no cause of discharge or worms or windiness through the track, as we have said, then know that it is not penetrating, and then you can proceed to the cure."
E quan la fistula es penetrant entro a la vesica o entro al meat de la vergua, lahoras la significacio de lu es eyssiment de urina de aquela e prohibicio de lu ad aysso que·l loc am medicina sia consolidat.	"And when the fistula is penetrating into the bladder or into the urethra, then its meaning is the emission of urine from it and prohibition of it until that place in medicine is consolidated."
Mays si es penetrant entro la junctura de la coyssa o entro al os e envencio de dolor en le circuit, lahoras senhal de lu es que la tenta perve entro aqui si en lu no es turtuositat entro al os, e envencio de dolor en le circuit de la partida; e que de lu yeys poyredura tostemps; e que no val en aquela medicacio, ni es consolidada am enguent.	"But if it is penetrating into the junction of the vagina or into the bone and there is pain in the area, then its sign is that the thread should pass through here, if there is not tortuosity into the bone, and there is pain in the area of the part; and that pus always comes from it; and that medication does not help, nor is it consolidated with an ointment."
E en totas aquelas fistulas penetrant no es curacio de tot, e la curacio de aquelas es trebalh e vanetat dels folyls metges sobre·l qual so fermatz.	"And in all those penetrating fistulas there is no complete cure, and the cure of them is the effort and futility of foolish physicians on which we place our trust."
Mays en aquela que no es penetrant e no antiqua, sanacio am ferr es sperada segon que yeu a tu recomtare, e aquo que ja yeu e proat.	"But in that one which is not penetrating and is not old, cure with iron is expected according to what I will recommend to you, and what I have already said."
E es que le malaute jagua entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos e eleva las cambas de lu entro sus, las coyssas sian enclinadas al ventre de lu, e aprop entromet tenta de plom, o de eram si es en la fistula turtuositat, entro que sapias le loc on perve la tenta.	"And it is that the pain wanders between your buttocks and mainly around your anus, raising its mounds inside, the cheeks of your buttocks leaning towards its belly, and gently insert a thread of lead or sinew if there is tortuosity in the fistula until you know where the thread goes."
E si aquela sent le malaute entorn le cuol, lahora cove que tu entrometas le tieu dit endic en le cuol.	"And if that one feels the pain around the anus, then it is necessary for you to insert the tip of your finger into the anus."
E si sentas en le tieu dit la tenta ja per si meteyssa descuberta penetrar, otra aquo que sentas entre le tieu dit e aquela siphac o carn, lahoras sapias certanament que aquela es penetrant; e adonc no trebalhes en aquela, quar no es en aquela sanacio, ayssi cum havem dit.	"And if you feel the thread already passing through the finger that you inserted into it openly penetrating, other than what you feel between your finger and that one or flesh, then know certainly that that one is penetrating; and therefore do not work on that one, for there is no cure in it, as we have said."
Mays empero diyssero alcus que es sana en alcus homes tart.	"But however some say that it is cured in some men."
E de la medicacio per la qual es sperat juvament en lu es que tu ignes cauteri subtil segon le ample de la fistula, ayssi cum es precedit, e intrometas aquel ignit en la fistula entro que pervengua entorn le cuol; e aprop itera aquel doas o tres vetz entro que sapias que ja son adhustas totas aquelas carns ajustadas fistuladas que so semblantz a cana de pluma de ausel.	"And of the medication by which one hopes for its improvement is that you ignite a cautery with fire according to the width of the fistula, as it is said before, and insert that burning into the fistula until it reaches around the anus; and again repeat it two or three times until you know that all those tissues surrounding the fistula are already burnt, which resemble the feathers of birds."
E aprop cura aquela am calguas envolopadas en boder entro que en yescan totas aquelas carns que so adhustas, e aprop cura aquela am medicinas la carn engendrantz e consolidantz, e si es sanada, bo es; e sino, lahoras no es sana en degun temps per autra curacio.	"And then treat it with hot poultices wrapped in linen until all those tissues that are burnt are covered, and also treat it with medicines that generate flesh and consolidate it, and if it is healed, well; and if not, then know that it will not be healed at any time by another cure."
E si la tenta intra, e no penetra entro·l tieu dit le qual es en le cul, e entre aquel e la tenta que es velament spes de carn o de ciphac, e vezes la fistula en aquo que siec la superficia de la codena, lahoras secca la codena del comensament de la fistula, e tu ve seccan am la tenta, e sia en la fistula entro que la seccio pervengua al loc en le qual perve la extremitat de la tenta, e per la tenta es liberat e catz.	"And if the thread goes in and does not penetrate into your finger which is in the anus, and between that one and the thread that is wrapped in flesh or skin, and sometimes the fistula runs along the surface of the thigh, then cut off the thigh from the beginning of the fistula, and you will see it cut with the thread, and let the section reach to where the end of the thread goes, and through the thread it will be released and healed."
E aprop mundifiqua aquelas carns fistuladas las quals so asembladas a canula de pena de ausel e no romangua de aquelas alcuna causa.	"And then cleanse those tissues surrounding the fistula which resemble the feathers of birds, and do not leave any cause for them to remain."
Mays si flux de sanc vezes que vengua entre tu e la tua opperacio quan ensideysses aquelas carns, lahoras le milh que sia e del pus leugier instrument es cauterizar am foc o am medicina acuta, quar cauteri am foc ajusta bonas doas habitutz: so es adhustio de aquelas carns ajustadas, e abscizio del sanc exseccacio de las humiditatz.	"But if bleeding happens sometimes during your operation when you are cutting those tissues, then the harm that is done is from pus and a light instrument should be cauterized with fire or with an acute medicine, for cautery with fire has two good habits: it is burning of those burnt tissues, and abstraction of blood and drying out of humidity."
E aprop cura aquela am calguas envolopadas en boder o en caus trissat entro que·l loc geta brac, e aprop lahoras cura la plagua am enguentz carn dura engendran e consolidan.	"And then treat it with hot poultices wrapped in linen or in torn cloth until the place gets warm, and then treat the wound with ointments that generate hard flesh and consolidate."
E so medicinas en las quals so stipticitat e exseccio; quan lahoras es restaurada ja es sanada e no temes iteracio.	"And so medicines in which there is astringency and dryness, when the wound is healed then it is already healed and does not need repetition."
Mays si la fistula ja perve entro al preon del cul e es elonguada de lu superficia del cos, lahoras entromet le tieu dit en le cul e inquireys am aquel.	"But if the fistula goes inside the anus of the buttocks and is elongated from its surface on the body, then insert your finger into the anus and examine it with that."
E donc si centes la tenta e entre tu e ela es velament de ciphac o de carn, e es propda a la penetracio, lahora no es operacio en lu sino segon via di fiducia e de speransa.	"And therefore if the thread is cut and between you and it there is wrapping of skin or flesh, and it is close to penetration, then it is not an operation on that one but according to the way of faith and hope."
La qual causa es aministrar en lu una de tres manieyras: o que cauterize aquela ayssi cum havem dit; o que secces aquela entro que consieguas la conquavitat de lu per que sia a tu possible entrometre las qualcas e la curacio propdana; e no procesiscas mot am seccio per so que no inscidas le lacert contenent le cuol, e que accidisque sobre le malaute eyssiment de la egistio ses voluntat; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit quar fort leu sira sanat; o que elongues aquel velament e mondes aquel pus que seccas aquel entro prop le cul, ayssi cum havem dit, o am tenta o am autre instrument de aguda extremitat, e aprop mondifique aquelas carns fistuladas las quals so en la seccio entro la on podes am percrustacio; e aprop esforsa te a far la restauracio de tota la plagua am seccio, e si le orrifici pus desus no es consolidat, e romangua la fistula uberta en la partida del cul, e sira pus leugier per le malaute.	"And that cause can be managed in one of three ways: either cauterize it as we have said; or cut it off until the concavity of it is achieved through which you can enter your finger and perform the operation suggested; and do not proceed with cutting so that you do not wound the lachrymal sac containing the coccyx, and that accidents happen over the judgment of the estate without its will; and then treat it with water as we have said for strong wine will heal quickly; or extend that wrapping and cleanse that pus which dries out that until near to the anus as we have said, either with a thread or with another instrument of sharp point, and then cleanse those tissues surrounding the fistula which are in the section through which you can cauterize them; and then make an effort to restore all the wound by cutting it off, and if the opening above is not consolidated, and the fistula remains open in the parting of the buttocks, then pus will leak out because of illness."
E alscunas veguadas la fistula es finida segon aquesta manieyra: es quan tu entrometas la tenta en la fistula, e es en le latz del cul entorn la superficia del cos am la codena e en le marge del cul, lahoras pren tenta de perforada extremitat, que es ayssi cum agulha de preparantz les coers segon aquesta forma:	"Some fistulas are finished in this manner: when you insert the probe into the fistula, on the side of the buttocks near the surface of the body and on the edge of the anus, then take a probe with a perforated end, similar to those used for preparing hearts."
e entromet en aquela fiel envolopat de v fiels o entorn aquels; e aprop entromet tenta am fiel en la fistula entro que consiegua la conquavitat de lu.	"Then insert the probe into that field enveloping it with five fingers or around those; and then insert the probe with forceps inside the fistula until you reach its concavity."
Mays si es penetrant en le marge del cul prop dedintz, lahoras tu extratz le fiel de aquel trauc ayssi que tu intrometas le tieu dit en le cul; e extraguas la extremitat del fiel e ajustes las duas extremitatz essemps, e estrenh cascuna, e leyssa aquo per un dia o per dos, e quan mays inscideys le fiel en la carn, estrenh be aquel entro que aquelas carns sian inscididas las quals so entre doas extremitatz del fiel e que cajan.	"But if you are penetrating near the edge of the anus from behind, then remove the probe from that path in such a way that you insert your little finger into the anus; and then pull out the end of the probe and adjust both ends evenly. Then tighten each one and leave it like that for one or two days. And when more tissue has been cut into the flesh, carefully remove that which is between those pieces of flesh which are between the two ends of the probe."
E aprop cura la plagua entro que sia consolidada e sanada.	"And then cure the wound until it has consolidated and healed."
Mays si le orrifici de la fistula no es penetrant, lahoras fay aquel penetrar, en qualque manieyre sia a tu preparat, sino que sia mot en le preon, quar no es a tu que fassas aquo per que no inscidas le lacert; e aprop fay am aquela entro que sia sanada.	"But if the opening of the fistula does not penetrate, then make it penetrate in whatever manner you have prepared, but do not be too eager about it because otherwise you might injure the skin. And then heal that wound."
La forma de spatum spinos am lo qual es fenduda la fistula: la curvitat del qual es mot aguda e l’autra partida es no-aguda, per so que no inscidas aquo que no es necessari, ayssi cum vezes.	"The shape of the spatula used to split open the fistula is like this: one end is very sharp and the other end is not sharp, so as not to cause unnecessary injury, as sometimes happens."
De sutura de emorroydas en las quals corra sanc en la inscizio de aquelas.	"For the stitching of hemorrhoids from which blood flows through the incision."
Emorroydas so segon dos manieyras, quar o so entre le cul semblantz aysi que es de carbos, o quays aquelas sian cum a gras de rasim.	"Hemorrhoids come in two kinds: either they are between the buttocks resembling small coal piles, or they are like hard lumps of resin."
E de aquelas so petitas e grans, e que le sanc corr de aquelas tostemps e es una, e so motas, e so fora·l cul, e en las extremitatz de lu.	"And those that are small and large, from which blood constantly flows in one place, many of them, and some are outside the anus, and at its extremes."
Mays empero aquelas que so foro le cul so segon las mes de pauca humiditat, de las quals corr aygua citrina o un petit de sanc am cos continuabla, e so segon la color del cos.	"But those that are outside the anus are according to the months of little humidity, from which citrine water or a little blood with continuous flow comes forth, and they are according to the color of the body."
E la curacio de aquela que es dedintz le cuol es que comandes al malaute que se assela e que se exprema entro que le cuol yesca e las emoroydas apparescan a tu.	"And the treatment for that which is inside the anus is to command the patient to sit and squeeze until the anus opens and the hemorrhoids appear."
Adonc tu te coyte e suspen am uncis o que tenguas aquelas am la tua ungla, e aprop incideys aquelas deves las suas razitz.	"Then you grasp them with a forceps or your nail and immediately cut them at their roots."
Mays si les uncis no so tengutz en aquelas per la humiditat de lor e mollificacio de aquelas, lahoras pren aquelas am drap aspre o am coto o am flassada de lana, e extratz aquelas am les tieus ditz, e aprop inscideys aquelas e polveriza sobre lor alcunas polveras caudas aprop la inscizio, per que sian ad aquelas en loc de cauteri; o cauteriza aquelas segon que es precedit en le capitol de cauterizar.	"But if the forceps cannot hold onto those because of their humidity and softness, then grasp them with rough cloth or cotton or a wool pad, squeeze them out with your fingers like that, and immediately cut them at their roots. Then sprinkle some powdered myrrh on the incision so that it may cauterize those wounds instead; or cauterize them as has been described in the chapter on cauterization."
E aprop cura aquelas am l’autra curacio entro que sian sanadas.	"And then treat them with another cure until they are healed."
E si le cul no obezeys a egressio, lahoras cristerisa le malaute am cristeri en le qual sia mordicacio petita, e sia lavat am aquel aquo que es en le cuol e que obezesca a egressio leugierament quan le malaute s’esprem.	"And if the anus does not obey evacuation, then wash it with water from the anus and let it be gently evacuated when the patient squeezes."
Mays si las emorroydas so defora le cul, lahoras la causa de lor es leugiera, e es que tu prenguas aquelas am la tua ungla, o que prenguas aquelas am unci, e inscidas aquelas, e aprop cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit entro que sian sanadas.	"But if the hemorrhoids are outside the anus, then their cause is slight. Take them with your nail or with forceps and cut them. Then treat them with water as mentioned earlier until they are healed."
E aquel que avoreys inscizio, cove que aministres sutura de lor segon aquesta manieyra: pren fiel envolopat e entromet aquel en agulha e aprop extratz las emorroydas a las partidas dessus, e fay aquel penetrar am la agulha en la razit del autra part, e envolveys las doas extramitatz del fiel en la partida pus dejos de la agulha, e so latitudinalment; e estrenh la emorroyda am strectura fort, e aprop noza le fiel e extratz la agulha.	"And when you have made the incision, it is necessary to stitch them closed in this way: take a thread and wrap it around a needle, then insert it into each of the wounds above. Then make the needle penetrate into the other side's root, and wrap both ends of the thread perpendicularly on the farther side from the needle. Then tightly tie the hemorrhoid with a knot, and cut off the excess thread and remove the needle."
E fay aquo a totas, e layssa de aquelas una e no la cozes, per so que la superfluitat del sanc corra de aquela.	"And do this to all of them, leaving one untreated so that the excess blood may flow from it."
E aprop pausa sobre le cul drap enfus en oli rozat o en cerot; e pausa aquel sobre·l cuol e comanda al malaute que·s repause.	"Then place a cloth soaked in rose oil or wax on the anus, and have the patient remain in bed for some time."
E aprop layssa aquela entro que caja; e quan es casuda, cura aquelas am enguentz o am autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	"And leave it alone until it has dried. Then treat it with a poultice or another cure until it is healed."
De curacio de fistulas.	"On the treatment of fistulas."
Motas veguadas accideys per exseccacio de fenda o per costriccio de natura.	"Many times, a fistula may occur due to dryness or constriction by nature."
E cum so antiquadas e no val en aquela medicina, lahoras cove que tu razas aquelas am la puncta de spatum o am la tua ungla entro que sian faytas humidas e sia hostada de aquelas la escorsa pus desus, la qual prohibeys aquelas de consolidacio; e aprop cura aquelas entro que sian consolidadas.	"And when they are old and do not respond to medicine, then you must open them with a punctum spatula or your nail so that they become moist, and remove the scabs from above which prevent them from healing. Then treat them until they have healed."
Lahoras tu osta aquelas am razio pus vehement que la primieyra entro que mot sancno e sian excoriadas; e aprop cura aquelas entro que sian sanadas.	"Then scrape out those fistulas with a sharp point so that much blood does not flow and they are not irritated. Then treat them until they have healed."
De curacio de almesamir, so es clau.	"On the treatment of hemorrhoids, which is called 'clavi.'"
Sapias que alamermar, so es clau, e no es si no notz redon segon la color del cors semblant a cap de claviel, e es fayt en tot le cors e majorment en las partidas dejos les pes e als ditz, e endeve per aquels dolor deves le anament.	"Know that 'almesamir' is another name for hemorrhoids, and they are not always red but resemble the head of a nail in color. They occur throughout the body, especially around the buttocks and anus, where they cause pain during bowel movements."
E adonc cove que sia inscidit aquo que es en le circuit del clau, e sia tengut am les forfexs o am unci, e sia eradicat de la sua razit; e aprop cura aquel.	"And therefore it is necessary to cut what is in the hemorrhoid's path, grasp it with forceps or fingers, and remove it from its root. Then treat it."
E si vols, cauteriza le segont que es precedit en le sieu capitol.	"And if you wish, cauterize them according to what has been described in its own chapter."
Mays de veruca es eminencia petita aspre fistulada redonda sobre la superficia del cos, e motas veguadas veno en las mas dels enfantz.	"But a 'verruca' is a small, rough, fistulous prominence on the surface of the body. Many times they appear in many children."
E curacio de lu es que estendas e inscidas aquela, o que estrenhas aquela am fiel o am pel entro que caja.	"And its treatment: stretch and cut it, or tie it with thread or hair until it dries up."
E si vols, cauteriza aquo, segon que havem dit, am foc o am medicina acuta.	"If you wish, cauterize it according to what has been said, with fire or an acute medicine."
E ja so eradicadas enversas e no-enversas am le instrument le qual yeu diyre.	"And verrucae can be eradicated both inward-facing and outward-facing using the instrument that I will describe below."
Mays formica es eminencia petita feutrada o fistulada grossa sobre la superficia del cos anant mot en le preon, e quan le freg atroba aquela es centit en lu semblant de mordificacio de formigua, e es fayta entorn le cos.	"But 'formica' is a small, downy or fistulous prominence on the surface of the body, especially on the forehead. When it is touched, it feels like an ant bite, and they appear all over the body."
E curacio de lu es que prenguas una canula de pena de auca o de pena de voltor, e sia fort, e pausa aquela sobre la formigua entro que la contengua le cercle de la canula de las partidas de lu; e aprop revolveys la tua ma am la canula entro que inscidas aquo que es en le circuit de la formigua, e pauses aquela en le preon de la carn, e que eradiques la formigua de la sua razit.	"To treat it: take a quill from an owl or vulture feather and make it strong. Place the quill on the 'formiga' so that its circle encompasses all sides of it. Then rotate your hand with the quill until you have incised what is around the 'formiga,' and press down on the skin's surface to remove the 'formiga' from its root."
E si vols, fay aquo am canula de eram o de ferr segon aquesta forma:	"And if you wish, do this with a copper or iron needle according to this method:"
Sia la partida desus de la canulha trahent a subtilitat, sorda (so es no-perforada), envolopada per so que sobre le dit la aprencio de lu sia ablaviada e la revolucio de aquela.	"Make the tip of the needle thin, blunt (i.e. not perforated), and wrapped with wax to ensure that it slides smoothly over the skin's surface when rotated."
E si vols cauteriza la formiga segon que es denant dit en la cauterizacio de atheyl en le capitol de cauteri.	"And if you wish, cauterize the 'formiga' according to what has been mentioned earlier in the chapter on cautery concerning 'athley.'"
De forma dels instrumentz que so aministratz a dar cristeri.	"On the shape of instruments used for cautery."
Alcunas veguadas es fayt cristeri de argent o de lato o de eram fondut o malleat; e alcunas veguadas es fayt de aquels instrumentz petit e gran segon aquels als quals so aministratz, quar aquel que es aministrat en la curacio dels petitz enfants sia petit; e de aquel dels quals los culs son freuls o doloyrozes, les cristeris de aquels sian petitz.	"Sometimes cautery is performed with silver, brass, copper or iron melted and hammered. Sometimes instruments are made small or large according to the size of the patient, as those that are used for treating young children should be small; and those used on patients with round buttocks or dolorous ulcers should have small cauteries."
La forma de cristeri gran e pauc:	"The shape of a large and dull cautery:"
Le cap de la canula de lu desus en le qual es liada la borsa sia ampla segon aquesta manieyra; e sia a lu distinacio la on la borsa es liada ayssi cum vezes.	"The head of the needle above which the bag is tied should be wide in this manner, and it should differ from where the bag is tied as shown here:"
E la extremitat de lu pus dejus, la qual es entromesa en le cul, sia sorda (so es no-uberta) mot leon, atrasent a subtilita; e en la un del latz de lu sian dos traucs, e en l’autre costat un trauc, e sia la amplesa del trauc segon la groseza dels rays e pus gros un petit.	"The extremity of the pus that is within it, which has entered into the anus, should be made deaf (i.e., closed) with a gentle, subtle motion; and on one side of its entrance there should be two threads, and on the other side one thread, whose width should be according to the thickness of the rays of pus, making a smaller one for a smaller [amount of] pus."
E sia la borsa en la qual sian pausadas las medicinas de vesica de bestia o de pel de ovelha, e la razit de lu sia un palm.	"The bag in which the medications made from bladder or sheepskin are placed should have an opening of one palm's width."
E sia perforada per motz traucs ayssi cum es revolvuda; e si l’espazi le qual es entre les traucs la grossetut del dit.	"And it should be pierced by many threads, as it is turned; and the space between the threads should be the thickness of a finger."
E aprop entromet en aquels traucs fiel fort de fiel cru le qual sia de detz fiels, o enviro aquels; e ajusta am aquel la borsa; e quan es pausada en lu la borsa, sia streyt en le cap del cristeri entre dos distingentz am fort costriccio, e aprop cristeriza am aquel quascun trauc: Mays la qualitat de cristerizar am aquel es que tu omples la borsa de la medicina, que sia escalfada segon la quantitat de la tolleransa del malaute; e guarda te que no sia trop cauda ni trop freja.	"And then firmly insert into those threads a hot, warm cloth that has been moistened with ten parts of honey or wrapped around them; and secure it tightly with that cloth. And when the bag is placed in it, tightly close the opening of the chest between two fingers with strong pressure, and then wrap it around each thread: But note that the manner of wrapping should be such that you fill the bag with the medicine, which has been warmed according to the amount of tolerance of the patient; and make sure that it is not too hot nor too cold."
E aprop le malaute sia resupinat sobre le sieu dos, e eleva las suas cambas en sus e pausa dejos lu un cuer sobre le qual ja so les homes o un lansol; e aprop unta la extramitat del cauteri am oli o am album de huou o am mucellage de fenugrec o de semblantz; e aprop entromet aquel en le cul am facilitat, e aprop le ministre prengua la borsa e exprema aquel am doas mas e essemps am vehemencia entro que sia evacuat en le budelh tot aquo que es en le cristeri; e aprop extra le cristeri e le malaute leva las suas cambas a la paret.	"And then have the patient lie on their back, elevate their buttocks and place underneath it something soft such as felt or wool; and then anoint the tip of the cautery with oil or egg albumen or fenugreek mucilage or similar substances; and then gently insert it into the anus, and then the assistant should take the bag and squeeze it two or three times vigorously until all that is in the chest has been evacuated into the bowels, and then remove the chest and have the patient bring their buttocks down to the bed."
E si la medicina forsa aquel a eyssiment, tengua le tant quant poyra; e si dorm am aquel per tota una nueyt, es mays derier en juvament.	"And if the medicine causes an evacuation of that kind, hold it as long as possible; and if he sleeps with it all night, it is even better for his recovery."
Mays si tu cristerizas aquel en las malautias de solucio de ventre e l’eyssiment de lu le coyta, lahoras tu itera le cauteri entro que sia sanat.	"But if you cauterize him in illnesses of retention of urine and discharge from the bladder, then you should repeat the cautery until he is healed."
E si en le cul so emorroydas o apostemas ledens, lahoras sia le cristeri mot subtil e leon, dels cristeris am les quals les enfantz so criterisatz.	"And if there are hemorrhoids or tender fistulas in the anus, then the cautery should be very subtle and gentle, using those cauteries with which children are cauterized."
De curacio de las plaguas.	"On the treatment of plagues."
Yeu ja e dit en la divisio de la curacio de las plaguas aquo que convenia al libre, e yeu dic assi la curacio de aquelas am ma e am medicinas segon le conpliment.	"I have already spoken in the division of the treatment of plague about what was fitting for the book, and I say thus the treatment of those with my hand and medicines according to their completeness."
Donc dic que las plaguas son diversificadas segon aquo en que son faytas las plaguas e segon le loc sobre le qual cazo las plaquas.	"The plague is various in accordance with what causes it and according to the location where the plague occurs."
E las causas per que motas vetz son faytas las plaguas so ayssi cum getament de peyra, o inscisio d’espaza o de cotel, o percussio am lansa, o am fustz, o am sageta, o semblantz ad aquels de motas causas.	"And the causes by which many times plague is brought about are thus: impact of stone, or incision with scissors or knife, or perforation with lance, or with club, or with arrow, or resembling those of many causes."
Mays las plaguas que so en les locz del cos so ayssi cum plagua la qual catz sobre le cap, o·l col, o·l pietz, o·l ventre, o·l fitge, e semblantz ad aquels dels membres.	"But the plague that is in the parts of the body are thus: plague that falls on the head, or neck, or foot, or belly, or hip, and resembling those of the limbs."
E yeu so recomtant la curacio de alcunas plaguas per que pauses aquela ratiocinacio e regla sobre las autras plaguas.	"And I am recounting the treatment of some plague for which that reasoning and rule applies to other plague as well."
E yeu comensare de las plaguas del cap simplas, quar la rememoracio de las compostas vindra al comensament del tertz capitol.	"And I will begin with simple head wounds, because the reminder of composite ones will come at the beginning of the third chapter."
Donc dic que quan accideys en le cap plagua simpla e no es fractura, lahoras considera: si es per getament de peyra o de semblant, e ja ha trinquada la codena tant solament e es gran plagla e temes sobre aquel malaute havinement de apostema caut, lahoras tu te coyta e fleubotoma la cephalica tantost, e no tardas aquo; e extrats ad aquel del sanc segon la quantitat de la vertut de lu si no mes alcuna causa prohibent de fleubotomia, majorment si·l sanc que es eyssit de la plagua es pauc.	"So I say that when a simple wound occurs in the head and it is not a fracture, then consider whether it was caused by an impact with stone or similar. If the chain has only been broken and the wound is large and you fear that apostema caut may happen afterwards, then quickly perform cephalic flebotomy and do not delay this; and remove from there as much blood according to the quantity of its virtue if no other cause prohibits flebotomy, especially if the blood issuing from the wound is little."
E sia la flaubotomia del contrari de la partida plaguada; e guardase le malaute de replecio e de vi e de viandas grossas.	"And let flebotomy be done on the opposite side of the wounded part, and take care that the patient avoids exposure to wind and wine and coarse foods."
Mays si de la minuicio prohibeys alcuna causa, lahoras sia aminorat de la vianda e no apropinque a carn ni a vi.	"But if you prohibit any cause due to smallness, then let the diet be reduced, and do not approach meat or wine."
E pausa sobre la plagua, si a lu accideys apostema caut, coto enfus en oli rozat solet o en vi en le qual es stipticat.	"And if an apostema caut occurs over the wound, then cut it open and rinse with rose oil as usual or with wine in which there is styptic."
Mays si est segur de apostema caut, lahoras pausa sobre la plagua, si es recent am le sieu sanc e le ayre no ha mudat aquela la polvera la qual yeu recomtare aprop petit.	"But if you are sure of an apostema caut, then pause over the wound until it has its own blood and the air has not changed that powder which I will recommend later."
E si le ayre ja ha mudada aquela, lahoras pausa sobre alscus enguentz entro que sia sanada.	"And if the air has already changed that, then pause over the wound until it is healed."
Mays si la plagua es gran o es per inscizio d’espaza e de semblantz, e no so ajustadas las labias de lu per puvils, lahoras ajusta aquelas am sutura segon que yeu recomtare de la sutura de lor.	"But if the wound is large or was caused by a cut from a sword or similar and the edges of it are not approximated by forceps, then approximate them with suture according to what I will recommend about the suture of those."
Mays si la plagua ja es discuberta del os e pen, e no es retencio de lu sino un petit suspensori, lahoras inscideys aquela e aprop cura la plagua am medicinas e restaura la carn aprop en loc de codena, e comanda al malaute que sia pescut de viandas en las quals es groceza: caps e formen coyt e semblantz a lor, entro que sia compost.	"But if the wound is already laid bare to bone and tendon and there is only a slight suspension, then cut that open and cure the wound with medicines and restore the flesh appropriately in place of the chain, and command the patient to avoid coarse foods: heads of cabbage and leeks and similar, until it is composed."
E si atrobas en la codena putrefaccio e no adhereys al os, lahoras tu inscideys tot aquo poyrit e geta aquo, e aprop cura aquo.	"And if you find putrefaction in the chain and it does not adhere to the bone, then cut away all that corruption and throw it out, and cure it."
Mays si en aquestas plaguas es arteria o vena de la qual fluxs de sanc pot evenir, e no es abscindida per medicinas, lahoras tu inquier sobre la arteria, e si atrobas aquela no-inscidida, lahoras tu inscideys aquela am spatum, o lia aquela; e si necessitat te provoca que aquo que havem dit no comfereys, lahoras tu cauteriza entro que·l sanc sia abscidit.	"But if in these wounds there is an artery or vein from which blood flow can occur and it is not cut off by medicines, then inquire about the artery, and if you find that it has not been cut, then cut it with a scalpel or ligate it; and if necessity compels you such that what we have said does not help, then cauterize until the blood is cut off."
E si aquestas plaguas son simplas e petitas, lahoras la causa de lor es leugiere; enayssi que tu polverizas sobre aquelas aquesta polvera, quar consolidada aquela denant que l’ayre mude aquelas.	"And if these wounds are simple and small, then the cause of them is light. Therefore, you powder those with this powder, so that they may be consolidated before the air changes them."
E la manieyra de la polvera es aquesta: recipe oli de enses partida una, de sanc de drago partida doas, de caus no-extincta partidas tres; sia tot mot trissat e crivellat, e de lu sia la plagua omplida, e sia constrengida per bona constriccio entro que be sobre aquela aderesca, e sia coagulada am le sanc.	"And the manner of the powder is this: take oil of unripe olives one part, dragon's blood one and a half parts, quicklime three parts; let all be thoroughly pounded and sifted, and let the wound be filled with it, and let it be held by good compression until it adheres to it, and let it be coagulated with its own blood."
E aprop strengeys aquela desus am pulvils e leyssa aquela, e no la deslias mentre esta ayssi que no es apostemada, quar no es eredicada de lu la medicina entro que sia sanada.	"And then compress it above with forceps and leave it alone, and do not remove it while it is like that until it becomes apostematous, because the medicine does not depart from it until it is healed."
E alcuna vetz fa aquo sola cautz, quan no es a tu en present enses e sanc de drago.	"And sometimes you can do this alone with cautery when unripe olives and dragon's blood are not at hand."
E ja fa aquesta meteyssa operacio en las grans plaguas quan conveneys que sia pausada sobre aquelas e sian streytas, e so plaguas recentz am le lor sanc, las quals le ayre no ha alteradas.	"And this same operation is done in large wounds when it is convenient to pause over them and compress them, and these are fresh wounds with their own blood which the air has not altered."
E si le ayre las ha alteradas, e majorment quan es en temps d’estiu, lahoras no es entencio a la posicio de aquesta polvera, mays adonc cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit, enayssi que tu pauses sobre aquelas alcus enguents degistius, o que pauses sobre aquelas pols de la farina del ordi am aygua e mel entro que getan poyredura; e aprop cura aquelas am l’autra curacio entro que sian sanadas.	"And if the air has altered them, and especially when it is in summer time, then this powder does not have its intended effect. Rather, cure those with what we have said: pause over those wounds with clean dressings dipped in oil or with flour paste with water and honey until corruption stops; and then cure them with other remedies until they are healed."
Mays si accideys am la plagua fractura en os, e es petita, lahoras tu extratz aquo am gesti.	"But if a fracture of the bone occurs in the wound and it is small, then extract that with a hook."
E yeu diyre la cura de las fracturas del cap en aquo que es envenidor.	"And I speak about the treatment of fractures of the head in what follows."
De las plaguas del col.	"Concerning wounds of the neck."
Mays si la plagua accideys en le col, lahoras no es en lu differencia en medicacio, e entre la plagua del cap quan es simpla.	"But if a wound occurs in the neck, then there is no difference in treatment between it and a simple wound of the head."
Mays si ja le nervi del col es inscis o arteria, lahoras si es nervi, no es en lu engen sino que sia evitada curacio de lu am aquo que fa vehement stipticitat, ayssi cum ziniar e zegi que es vetriol e semblantz a lor quar nozo als nervis e contrazo aquel.	"But if the nerve of the neck is cut or an artery, then if it is a nerve there is nothing to be done but avoid treatment of it with anything that causes great astringency, such as verdigris and vitriol and similar substances because they harm nerves and harden it."
E no pauses sobre la plagua alcuna causa de tot freja, quar la sustancia dels nervis es freja e la continuacio de lu es am le cervel, le qual es le pus aut de totz les membres.	"And do not compress the wound with any hot cause because the substance of nerves is hot and their continuation is with the brain, which is the seat of all members."
E si’ aquo am que es curat de medicinas leugieras, ayssi cum es caus lavada am aygua dousa, alcuna veguada enfusa en oli rozat o no-rozat, e thucia quan es lavada am aygua dousa e las autras peyras minarantz segon aquesta manieyra, e enguentz humitz.	"And if it is cured with light medicines thus: the wound washed with rosewater, sometimes infused in sweet oil or not, and turpentine when washed with rosewater, and other ointments according to this manner, humid dressings."
Mays si la plagua es gran, lahoras aministra sutura, o coarta las labias de lu, e aprop cura aquela am pulvils entro que sia sanada.	"But if the wound is large, then perform suturing or compress the lips of it, and then cure it with powders until it is healed."
Mays si a la plagua es profunditat o accideys en lu a la pus bassa partida poyredura, lahoras perfora aquela en le loc mays depremegut.	"But if there is depth to the wound or if it occurs in the lower part where putrefaction has taken hold, then perforate it at its deepest point."
Mays si en la plagua ja es inscisa arteria e es conseguit flux de sanc, lahoras separa o secca aquela, o lia aquela, o cauteriza aquela si necessitat te provoca ad aquo.	"But if an artery has been cut in the wound and bleeding has occurred, then separate or dry it out, ligate it, or cauterize it if necessity compels you to do so."
Mays si ja ha insciditz les spondils del golayro o tot, e so salvadas las venas del col, lahoras tu ajusta las labias de la codena am sutura sobre la cana del golayro e no toques aquel; abantz egala aquel e reduzeys aquel sobre la sua figura natural, e aprop strenh aquel am strectura decent, e leyssa aquela per alcus jorns; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz en les quals es stipticitat e excitacio entro que sia sanat.	"But if the vertebrae of the neck or all have been broken and the veins of the neck are saved, then approximate the lips of the wound with sutures over the spine of the neck and do not touch it; draw them together and reduce them to their natural figure, and then compress them with a suitable splint, and leave them alone for several days; and then cure them with dressings in which there is astringency and excitement until they are healed."
Mays si la plagua ja en le os a fayta enprecio, lahoras percuireys aquela, e lahoras si en lu ha fragmentz de hos, extratz totz aquels que podes de lor; e aquo que a tu no es apparelhat, leyssa aquo entro que la plagua se poyrisca, e sia separat e la egrecio de lu sia alleujada.	"But if the wound has reached the bone and caused fracture there, then explore it with probes, and then if there are fragments of bone, remove all those that you can; and what cannot be removed, leave it alone until the wound has putrefied and separated, and its inflammation has been alleviated."
E si la plagua es recent lahoras polveriza sobre aquela polvera la qual t’e recomtada.	"And if the wound is fresh then powder it with the powder that I have recommended for you."
Mays si en la plagua es fayta fistula, lahoras cura aquela am aquo del qual la rememoracio vindra aprop en le sieu capitol.	"But if there is a fistula in the wound, then cure it with that which is mentioned specifically in its chapter."
De las plaguas del col o de semblantz quan fayta entre las spallas e es fayta am spaza o am cotel o am lansa o am semblantz.	"When plague boils appear between the shoulders, they are opened with forceps or scalpel or lancet or similar tool."
Si es percussio de lansa o de cotel, e vezes de lu la profunditat, lahoras considera mays si de la plagua yeys ventositat quan le malaute elena; lahoras sapias que la plagua es mortal.	"If it is a puncture from a lance or scalpel, sometimes its depth should be considered. Then you should examine whether the boil has wind (air) inside it when the patient exhales; then you will know that the boil is deadly."
E si en lu no es profunditat e la plagua es recent am le sieu sanc, lahoras tu pauses en lu de la primieyra horo polvera, e no strenhas aquel per que no sia le sanc retengut en la profunditat de lu e que retorne al cor e que aucigua le malaute, mays pausa en lu enguent atractiu, e deslia aquela doas veguadas le dia.	"If the boil is not deep and it's fresh with its own blood, then you should pause the operation at the first hour of powdering. Do not stretch that area so that the blood is not retained in its depth and does not return to the heart and worsen the condition, but pause there with gentle attraction, and wipe it twice a day."
E si l’enguent no es a tu present, lahoras tu pausa en le orrifici de la plagua coto viel per que sucque aquo que yeys de las humiditatz; e fay que le malaute dorma sobre la plagua per que corra aquo que es en lu ajustat.	"If the ointment is not available, then you should pause at the opening of the boil's mouth to wait for it to absorb whatever humidity there may be. And make sure the patient sleeps on the boil so that what is inside can drain out."
Mays si ja de la plagua son passatz tres dias o mays e no accideys al malaute spasme ni tremor de cor mal ni strictura de ale, e vezes las autras dispozicios bonas de lu, lahoras sapias que plagua es salva; e adonc cura aquela am calguas e am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanada.	"But if three or more days have passed since the boil appeared and there has been no spasm nor heart tremors nor constriction of the throat in the patient, and they show other good dispositions, then you know that the boil is safe. Then cure it with warm compresses and any other treatment until it is healed."
Mays si la sanacio de lu es excusada, e ja tot temps es uberta, lahoras sapias que ja es fayta fistula; cura donc aquela per le sieu capitol.	"But if the boil's healing is delayed and all this time has passed, then you know that it has already become a fistula. Cure it according to its chapter."
E si la plagua es per inscisio de spaza o de cotel, e es simpla en la superficia del pietz o del dos, lahoras cura aquela am aquo que es precedit de sutura, si es gran, o am polvera, si es petita.	"And if the boil is caused by a cut from a razor or knife and it's simple on the surface of the skin or back, then cure it with what is preceded by stitching if it's large, or with powder if it's small."
Mays si ja ha fayta enprecio en le os, e so ja de lu inscizas pessas, lahoras tu torqua la plagua e coyta ad extrayre aquelas pessas, si so separadas.	"But if there is already bone involvement and some pieces have been cut off from it, then twist the boil and try to extract those pieces if they are separate."
Mays si no so separadas, lahoras leyssa las entro que se poyresca la plagua, que la extraccio de lor es alleujada.	"But if they are not separate, then leave them inside until the boil can be pushed out, because their extraction is eased that way."
E de las autras plaguas accidentz en les autres membres le juvament en curacio es le juvament de aquo que havem dit.	"And for other accidental boils in other members, the treatment is the same as what has been said [for other kinds of boils]."
De las plaguas del ventre.	Of abdominal boils.
L’indisposicio la qual accideys en le ventre es o gran, o pauc, o migiera.	The disposition that occurs in the belly is either large, small, or moderate.
De la gran alcunas veguadas yeys le budel o nervi del budel, per que es fayta intromissio de lor e la sutura de lor esser pus vehement e pus subtil.	Of large boils sometimes the bowel or nerve of the bowel comes out, so that there is an entrance for them and their suture should be done vigorously and carefully.
E disrupcio petita es fayta dificil per autra manieyra, e siec se que la reduccio de lor es pus dificil, si no te coytes de la intromissio de lor al sieu loc tantost, quar se ubre e es engrossat per que le intrament de lu es fayt difficil.	And small disruption is difficult to achieve in another way, and so reducing it is also difficult, unless you quickly try to introduce it back into its own place before it opens up and becomes enlarged, because then introduction into it is difficult.
E donc la milhor disrupcio es migiera, quar en aquela no es dificil la reduccio del budel, ayssi cum es dificil en las doas specias denant ditas.	And therefore the best disruption is moderate, because in that one there is no difficulty reducing the bowel, just as there is none in the two kinds mentioned above.
E sapias que sutura del ventre es segon quatre manieyras, mays doas suturas son comunas que conveneysso en suturas de las autras plaguas del cors.	And know that suture of the belly is done in four ways, but two sutures are common and convenient for sutures of other boils on the body.
E duas autras suturas proprias comunican a las autras plaguas, mays empero so mays proprias en la sutura del ventre.	And the other two sutures are proper to other boils, but they are more proper in the suture of the belly.
E yeu recomti a tu quascuna am exposicio e declaracio.	And I will recount each one with exposition and explanation.
Donc dic que quan la plagua es petita e es eyssit alcuna causa del budel per aquela, e es fayt dificil a reduzir aquel, lahoras aquo es en una de doas manieyras: o per parvitat de la disrupcio ayssi cum havem dit, o quan al budel es venguda inflacio per la frigiditat de l’ayre.	Therefore I say that when the boil is small and some cause of the bowel comes out through it, and it's difficult to reduce it, then this happens in one of two ways: either because of the smallness of the disruption as said above, or when swelling has come to the bowel due to the coldness of the air.
E donc quan aquo es ayssi, lahora cove que tu scalfes aquel enayssi que tu submerges una sponga ho drap humit en aygua tebeza sola, o que coguas en aygua squinant, e cyperum, e spic, e embroques am aquela le budel entro que la imflacio sia resolvuda.	And therefore when this happens, then you should cut it open in such a way that you immerse a sponge or damp cloth in water boiled alone, or water with squinant, cyperus, and spica, and embroches, so that the swelling may be resolved within the bowel.
E alcunas veguadas fa aquo vi en le qual ha stipticitat, e es milhor que la aygua sola en resolucio de la imflacio.	And sometimes it happens with this medicine in which there is astringency, and it's better that water alone be used for resolving the swelling.
E donc cum tu vezes la imflacio esser resolvuda, lahoras tu humecta le budel am aygua en la qual es coyta altea e malvas, quar per aquo es alleujat le intrament de lu am pauca causa.	And therefore when you see that the swelling has been resolved, then moisten the bowel with water in which there is altitude and mallows, because by this means entrance into it is made easier with little harm.
Mays si es escusat le intrament de lu aprop aquesta curacio, lahoras scindeys la disrupcio un petit am strument am le qual so inscididas emorroydas.	But if entering the bowel has been prevented by this treatment, then cut open the disruption a little with an instrument that has been inserted with smegma.
E la curacio primieyra es milhor, quan es propriada que no es seccio, e no sia occupacio a seccar aprop necessitat e defaliment.	And the first treatment is better when it is appropriate and not necessary to cut open, so that there may be no occupation with cutting unless it is necessary and urgent.
Del instrument, sec se la forma de lu:	Of instruments: what shape they should have
La una partida de lu torta aguda, e l’autra partida no-acuta, e la extremitat subtil, e no sia am la subtilitat de spatum, abantz sia obtusa un pauc.	One end of it is cut off sharply and the other not-sharply, with a subtle point that is not too sharp like a spatula, but slightly obtuse.
E donc cum la plagua es amplificada e yeys fora le budel, lahoras cove que la sua reduccio sia segon la forma de lu natural, en le sieu loc propri, si es possible sobre aquo, quar milhor es.	And therefore when the boil has become enlarged and the bowel comes out, then its reduction should be done according to its natural form, in its own place if possible on that, because it's better.
Mays quan la disrupcio es ampla, e es en la partida pu bassa del ventre, lahoras cove que tu fassas jazer le malaute sobre le sieu dos, e pausa las suas cambas pus autas que·l sieu cap; e si es en la partida pus desus del ventre, lahoras tu pause le cap de lu e·l pietz pus autz que las partidas dejos.	But when the disruption is large and is in the lower part of the belly, then you should make the patient lie on their back, and elevate their buttocks as much as their head; but if it's in the upper part of the belly, then you should elevate the head and place the feet higher than the shoulders.
E semblantment si la disrupcio es en una de las doas partz del ventre, lahoras pausa la tua entencio e la tua consideracio tostemps en aysso per que la partida en la qual es la plagua sia pus auta que l’autra.	And likewise if the disruption is in one of the two parts of the belly, then always pay attention and consideration to this so that the part in which the boil is may be higher than the other.
E ayssi cove que tu aministres aquo en las plaguas grans e en las plaguas migieras.	And do this also for large boils and moderate ones.
E en las plaguas petitas, pausa aquo que es a tu preparat, e aprop fay que·l ministre sia entre las tuas mas pyatados, le qual tengua la disrupcio tota am la sua ma e ajusta las labias de lu, e aprop descuebre de aquela ad aquel que siec la sutura alcuna causa aprop autra.	And for small boils pause this: that you have prepared yourself, and especially make sure that the person who ministers has his hands between your armpits, holding the disruption completely with one hand and adjusting its lips, and especially uncovering it from that which should be sutured first.
E aquesta es la manieyra de sutura comuna: una que prenguas la agula, o comte de agula segon la cantitat de la amplitut de la plagua; e aprop layssa de la extremitat de la disrupcio del dit anular, e strenh la agula una, otre que tu no metas fiel en las doas extremitatz de la codena, am doas extremitatz del ciphac que es dejos la codena de las partidas dedintz, entro que fassas aquela penetrar de aquela partida; e tu ja has agreguadas doas extremitatz de la codena e doas extremitatz del ciphac, e so faytas quatre ordes.	And this is the common way of suturing: one in which you take a needle, or count needles according to the amount of the width of the boil; and then leave the end of the disruption from the middle finger of your left hand, and stretch the needle through one, so that you do not put thread into both ends of the cord with two threads on either side of the cord of the digits inside that part, until you have made it penetrate that part; and you already have four orders.
E aprop strenh am fiel doble en le circuit de la agula, e alcunas veguadas de doas partz ensemps, e aprop agregua las doas labias e la plagua per agreguacio decent; e aprop layssa la grossitut del dit e fiqua una autra agulha en aquela, e aprop lia aquela am fiel ayssi cum fiest am la primieyra agulha; e no cesses far aquo si es necessitat am las agulhas entro que ajas complida tota la contriccio de la plagua.	And then stitch with doubled thread around the needle, sometimes two parts at once, and especially join both lips and the boil by proper joining; and then leave the thickness of the finger and put another needle in that, and then tie it with thread like the first needle; and do not cease doing this if necessary until you have completed the contraction of the boil.
E sian las agulhas migieras entre groceza e subtilitat, quar las agulhas subtils mot leugierament insciden la carn; e las grossas so de dificil intrament en la codena, e donc per aquo cove que sian migieras en subtilitat e grosseza.	And let the needles be moderate between thickness and subtlety because thin needles scarcely incise the flesh; but thick ones have difficult entrance into the cord, therefore they should be moderate in thickness and subtlety.
E no cove que la agulha sia ficada en doas extremitatz de la codena propdana mot, per so que la carn no sia inscidida leugierament e que la plagua se huebra devant la sua consolidacio.	And it is not necessary that the needle be fixed at both ends of the cord nearby because then the flesh will be scarcely incised and the boil will heal before its consolidation.
E no sian prolonguadas de sutura per que la plagua no sia prohibida de consolidacio.	And do not prolong suturing so that the boil may not be prohibited from consolidation.
E aprop inscideys las extremitatz de las agulhas per so que no ledescan le malaute deves le sieu dormier; e pausaras sobre la sutura pulvils expanduts de tota partida, les quals tenguan las extremitatz de las agulhas; e layssa aquelas entro que sapias que la plagua ja es consolidada.	And then cut the ends of the needles so that they do not cause discomfort while sleeping; and you will apply powdered ointments on both sides of the sutures, which will hold the ends of the needles; and leave them until you know that the boil is consolidated.
E aquestas specias de sutura am agulhas en cal manieyra es pus convenient en las plaguas petitas, quar habasta en la sutura de lor una agulha o doas o entorn aquelas.	"And this type of stitching with needles is most suitable for small wounds because it only takes one or two needles to close them."
Mays la segonda sutura es cominal: e es que tu aministres am sutura las quatre extremitatz, de la codena e doas extremitatz del ciphac, en una veguada, am agulha en la qual sia fiel envolopat engual en subtilitat e grosseza.	"And the second type of stitching is as follows: you should administer it by suturing all four extremities (the neck and both ends of the scrotum) in one go, using a needle with thread that is fine and thin."
E aprop quan am la agulha auras penetrat aquestas quatre extremitatz, reduzeys la agulha de aquela meteyssa partida de la qual comensest, per so que le fiel retrayt caja de la pus subirana partida a la plagua, per so que la sutura sia segon sutura de drap am la qual les draps so strengutz.	"And then, when the needle has pierced these four extremities, you should reduce the needle of that first part where you started, so that the thread pulls the skin together from the inside out, making the stitching like sewing cloth with which the skin is drawn tight."
E pausa entre quascuna sutura la quantitat del gros del dit mendre.	"And pause between each stitch for a duration equal to the thickness of the little finger."
E aquesta sutura sabo les homes.	"And this stitch is known among men."
E am tal sutura yeu cozegui la plagua la qual era accidida a un home en le sieu ventre le qual era stat plaguat am un cotel, e era la disrrumpcio de la plagua major de un palm, e era eyssit dels budels entorn dos palms del budel del mieg loc e era la disrupcio en le mieg del membre; e adonc yeu reduzegui aquel depus que le budel havia stat foro la plagua per xxiiii horas.	"And with this stitch, I sewed up the wound that had occurred in a man's belly who had been stabbed with a knife. The disruption of the wound was more than a palm wide and extended from the gut around two palms near the middle of the belly to the center of the member. And then I reduced it after 24 hours, as the gut had been forced out by the wound."
E la plagua fo consolidada en le spazi de xv dias o entorn, e curegui aquel e es sanat; e aprop aquo visquec per motz ans, e es conversat en las suas disposicios.	"And the wound was consolidated in the space of about fifteen days and he recovered and healed. And around that time, he lives for many years and returns to his former condition."
E les autres metges havian jutgat que no fora sanat; e per miracle foc, quar yeu no curegui aquel am enguent, quar era en loc en le qual enguent no era atrobat ni deguna medicina, mays pausegui sobre la plagua coto viel dos veguadas lo dia e ablucio assiduo am aygua de mel entro que foc sanat.	"And the other physicians had judged that he would not be healed. And by miracle it happened, for I did not heal him with any ointment, since there was no place where an ointment could be applied or any medicine used. Instead, I simply paused over the wound twice a day and washed it assiduously with water mixed with honey until it was healed."
Mays yeu diyre dos specias de sutura proprias segon narracio de Paraula.	"But you should know that there are two kinds of stitches proper to narration, according to the Word."
E es que tu comenses am sutura de la codena, e entrometas agulha de la partida deforo a la partida dedintz.	"And it is that you begin with a running stitch, and insert the needle from the outer part towards the inner part."
E donc cum la agulha penetra en la codena e en aquel meteys lacertz segon rectetut e en longetut de tot le cos, e layssa la extremita del ciphac en le qual has entromesa la agulha; e fay penetrar en la autra extremitat la agulha de la partida dedintz a la partida deforo en l’autra extremitat del mihat.	"And when the needle enters the bone and that muscle according to its rectitude and length of the entire body, leaving the extremity of the hip joint in which you inserted the needle; then make the needle penetrate from inside out at the other extremity of the thigh."
E don cum tu auras fayta aquela penetrar, lahoras tu fay aquela penetrar autra veguada en aquela meteyssa extremitat del mihat de la partida deforo a la partida dedintz; e leyssa la extramitat del ciphac que es en aquest latz, e fay penetrar la agulha en l’autra extremitat de la partida dedintz a la partida deforo.	"And then when you have made that penetrate, now make it penetrate again into that same extremity of the thigh from outside to inside; and leave the extremity of the hip joint that is on this side, and make the needle penetrate into the other extremity from inside to outside."
E fay penetrar am aquela la tua penetracio am la qual fas aquela penetrar en le ciphac en la extremitat del mirat la qual es en la partida de lu entro que tot aquel penetre.	"And then make your penetration with that through which you made it penetrate into the hip joint at the extremity of the thigh which is on the inside."
E aprop comensa de aquest meteys costat e cus aquel am la extremitat que es del ciphac en l’autra latz, e extratz la agulha de la codena la qual penetrec, e aprop redutz aquela en aquela codena e cos la extremitat del ciphac que es en l’autra costat am aquesta extramitat del mirat; e extratz aquela de la codena la qual es de part de lu.	"And therefore start from this side and pull that with the extremity which is of the hip joint on the other side, and extract the needle from the bone which you penetrated, and then reduce it into that bone and sew the extremity of the hip joint which is on the other side with this extremity of the thigh; and extract that from the bone which is on its part."
E fay aquo una veguada e autra, e fay aquo una veguada aprop autre veguada entro que tu cozes tot aquo que es deforo segon aquel eysemple.	"And do this once or twice and then do it again from inside according to that example."
E la suma de aquesta manieyra de sutura es que tu cozes am sutura de pellicies am la qual cozo las pels, enayssi que tu cozes le ciphac una veguada de la part de la extremitat de la codena, e que leysses aquela autra veguada entro que la ajas complida.	"And the sum of this manner of suture is that you should sew with silk sutures with which you sew the skin, in such a way that you sew the hip joint once from the side of the bone's extremity, and leave that other time inside until it is completed."
Mays la segonda specia de sutura propria la qual dieys eyssament Gualia , e aquest es de sermo de lu e per lu recomtat, es que tu cozas aquela segon semilitut am la qual alcus medicantz cozo aquela, enayssi que agreguan tota partida a la sua compar partida a lu convenient per natura; e aplican la extremitat de autre de lu e la extremitat del mirat al autra extremitat de lu, e aquo es fayt segon que yeu a tu recomti.	"And the second species of suture which is particularly mentioned by Galen, and this is about it and for its treatment, is that you should sew it according to semilunar form with which some doctors sew it, in such a way that they approximate all parts to their corresponding parts according to nature; and they apply the extremity of one to the other extremity of the bone, and this is done as I have recommended."
Cove que tu fiques la agulha en la extremitat del mirat a tu propdana de la partida deforo, e fassas aquela penetrar a la partida dedintz en aquel sol, e leysses dos extremitatz del ciphac; e aprop revolveys la agulha e fay aquela penetrar de foro a la dedintz en dos extremitatz del ciphac.	"See that you leave the needle in the extremity of the thigh at your disposal from the outside, and make it penetrate into the inside in that sun, and leave two extremities of the hip joint; and then turn the needle around and make it penetrate from the outside to the inside in two extremities of the hip joint."
E aprop revolveys aquelas cascunas, e fay penetrar quascunas de la partida dededintz entro a la partida deforo en dos extremitatz del mirat autras que so en le latz contrari.	"And then turn those casings around, and make each casing penetrate from the inside to the outside in two extremities of the thigh on the other side than that which is on the contrary side."
E aquesta manieyra de sutura es milhor de la sutura comuna leugiera, e es sutura de la qual precedic rememoracio.	"And this manner of suture is better than common light suture, and it is the suture of which a preceding remark was made."
Aquest es le sermo de Gualia	"This is Galen's speech"
E mays le diyssero alcus, sutura del ventre es rectificada am dos agulhas, so es que tu entrometas en aquestas a quascunas un fiel, e comensa am intromiccio de agulha de aquo que es deves tu, e fay aquela penetrar entro al autra latz segon sutura de aquels les quals cozo les cuers engualment.	"And some say that abdominal suture is corrected with two needles, so that you insert into each a thread, and begin with needle insertion from where it is necessary to do so, and make it penetrate inside the other side according to the suture of those who sew the entrails evenly."
E sapias que quan disrupcio es en le mieg loc del ventre, lahoras la sutura de lu es pus difficil que dels autres locs del ventre.	"And know that when rupture is in the middle of the abdomen, at that time abdominal suture is more difficult than that of other parts of the abdomen."
Mays le juguament de medicacio de plagua es jutgament de las autras plaguas.	"However, the judgment of plague is judged by other plagues."
La qual causa es quar quan tu consieguas la plagua recent am le sieu sanc denant que l’ayre altera aquela, e reduses le budel e cozes aquela e aptas aquela decentment, lahoras pausa sobre aquela polvera encarnativa.	"The cause is this: when you manage to extract the recent plague with its blood before the air alters that, and return the intestine and cover it well and prepare it properly, then pause over that powdered medicine."
E si le ayre ja ha alterada la plagua, lahoras pausa sobre aquela alcus enguentz les quals so a tu presens entro que fassan peyra dura e cajan les fiels, e sian consolidatz ciphac e mirat; e aprop cura aquela ayssi cum es la curacio de las autras plaguas entro que sia sanat.	"And if the air has already altered the plague, then pause over those cloths which are present there and make them dry and wring out their juices, and let them be well washed and examined; and treat it thus as is the treatment of other plagues until it is healed."
Mays si a tu no so presens las medicinas, lahoras pausa sobre aquela tantost, pus que comensa a getar brac, coto viel, e permuta aquel dos veguadas le dia, ayssi cum a tu e ensenhat, entro que sia sanat, quar tu no indigeysses de autra medicacio en motas disposicios quan las plaguas so simplas.	"But if you are not present, then pause over that immediately because it begins to grow warm, thickens and changes color daily as I have taught you until it is healed, for you do not need another treatment in many situations when the plague is simple."
Mays si tu temes que la plagua comunique en lesio als membres principals, lahoras cove que tu submergas lana leon en oli de trempada qualiditat, o en oli rozat, e pausa aquela en le circuit dels locs que so entre les angonas e dejos las aysselas.	"But if you fear that the plague might communicate to cause injury to the principal limbs, then you should immerse lion's wool in good quality olive oil or rose oil and apply it around the affected area and leave it on."
E si sent dolor o putrefaccio en les sieus budels, quar motas veguadas aquo s’endeve, lahoras cristeriza aquel am vi stiptic negre tebe, e majorment si la poyredura es pervenguda en le budel e es fayta exitura penetrant entro la conquavitat de lu.	"And if there is pain or putrefaction in its bowels, for this often happens, then mix it with wine and black treacle, and especially if the decay has reached the bowel and is difficult to expel from within the cavity."
E sapias que aquela que es del budel gros es de pus leugiera sanacio que aquela que es en les budels subtils.	"And know that that which is in the large intestine is of easier healing than that which is in the subtle intestines."
E es de dificil sanacio quar le budel le qual es apelat “gegunu” no recep sanacio de plagua que caja en lu de tot; e aquo es per la gran multitut de venas que so en lu e per la magnitut de lu que so en aquelas, e per subtilitat del cos de aquel, e per propinquitat de aquel a natura de nervis.	"And it is difficult to heal because the bowel called 'gegunu' does not receive healing for any plague that falls into it; and this is because of the great multitude of veins that are in it and its size which is in those, and because of the subtlety of its body, and because of its closeness to the nature of nerves."
Mays si aquo que procezeys de la plagua es la tela, e conseguas aquela recent, redutz aquela segon la tua rectetut am la qual reduzes les budels engualment.	"But if that which proceeds from the plague is flesh, and you obtain it fresh, then cut it according to your skill with which you reduce swollen intestines."
Mays si es passat a lu spazi e ja es feyt vert o negre, lahoras que tu strenguas aquela am fiel sobre le loc que es denigrat de lu, per so que vengua fluxs de sanc, quar en la tela so venas e arterias.	"But if it has passed into it some time and is now green or black, then you should press it with quicklime on the location that is discolored by it, so that flows of blood may come forth, for in the flesh are veins and arteries."
E aprop inscideys aquo que es otra aquel liament, e pausa dos extremitatz del fiel pendentz de la partida dejos de la plagua foro lu, per que sobre tu sia alleujada la atraccio de lu deves le cazement de la tela e emissio del brac de la plagua.	"And properly cut away that which is other than the limb, and hang two extreme points of the quicklime from the edge of the plague forceps, so that over you there may be alleviated the attraction of it, for then you should have discharge of the flesh and emission of the branch of the plague."
Rememoracio de las plaguas quan accideysso en le budel.	"Memorandum on Plagues when they occur in the bowel."
Quan accideys disrupcio en le budel e es petita, lahoras es possibla que sia resteurada en alcus homes, per aysso quar yeu vi aquel le qual era stat plaguat en le sieu ventre am percussio de lansa et era la plagua de la part dreyta del stomac, e la plagua era antiquada e fayta fistula, e eyssic de lu gestio e ventositat.	"When there is disruption in the bowel and it is small, then it is possible that it may be restored in some people, for example thus: one man who had been plagued in his belly with a lance wound and the plague was on the right side of the stomach, and the plague was old and had made a fistula, but it was handled gently and with ventilation."
Adonc yeu pansegui la curacio de lu ja sia que no era confizat en la sanacio de lu, mays cessegui subtiliar aquel entro que foc sanat e le loc es consolidat.	"Then I pursued the cure of it although it was not yet confirmed in its healing, but I ceased to probe that which had been healed and the location was consolidated."
E yeu pus que vi le loc ja consolidat, timegui sobre le malaute que endevengues sobre lu accident de mal en le sieu ventre; e no endevenc alcu per aquo mal accident e romas en las suas milhos disposicios mangant e bevent, e aprop entrec en banh e es exercitat en sos ditz.	"And I put that I saw the location already consolidated, but the illness that befell him because of the mishap in his belly did not occur again; and no one was harmed by this mishap and they remained in their usual dispositions eating and drinking, and properly entered into baths and were exercised in their words."
E ja diysero alcus experimentados que quan endeve plagua en le budel, e es petita, lahoras cove que sia liada segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu prenguas fromiguas de grans caps; e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua e pausa una fromigua de aquelas que aja la boca uberta sobre las doas labias de la plagua; donc quan pren sobre aquelas e strenh la sua boca, abscindeys le cap de lu, quar adhereys e no es dissolvut.	"And already some experienced ones say that when plague occurs in the bowel and it is small, then it ought to be tied in this manner: namely, you should take frogs with large heads; and properly adjust the two lips of the plague and place one of those which has its mouth open over the two lips of the plague; therefore when it seizes on those and stretches its mouth, cut off its head, for it adheres and is not dissolved."
E aprop pausa autra formigua prop la primieyra, e no cesses aquo a far am formiguas una aprop autra segon la quantitat de tota la plagua.	"And properly place another frog near the first one, and do not cease doing this with frogs one after another according to the quantity of all the plague."
E aprop reduzeys aquela e cos la plagua; e romanguan aquels caps annexces en le budel entro que·l budel sia sanat; e no accideys al malaute degun nocument.	"And properly reduce that and sew up the plague, and those attached heads remain in the bowel until the bowel is healed, and no harm befalls anyone."
E ja es possible que·l budel sia liat am fiel subtil lo qual es fayt del budel de bestia annexs am lu, pus que es mes en agulha; e es que tu prenguas la extremitat de aquestz fiels de budel, e sia mot descarnat, e aprop lia la extremitat de lu am fiel de li, envolopat, e aprop entromet aquel fiel en agulhas e cos am aquel le budel, e areduzeys aquel en la disrupcio.	"And it is possible that the bowel may be tied with subtle thread which is made from the gut of an attached beast, for it is more like a needle; namely you should take the extremity of these guts, and let it be well defleshed, and properly tie the extremity of it with a thread of it, wrapped around, and then insert that thread into needles and sew it up with that bowel, and reduce that in the disruption."
E aquesta manieyra de sutura am formiguas no es sino segon via de fiducia e d’esperansa.	"And this manner of suturing with frogs is but a way of trust and hope."
Mays si la plagua es gran e ampla, majorment si es en un dels budels subtils, quar lahoras no es engen sino subtiliacio, e no es sanacio de lu de tot.	"But if the plague is large and wide, especially if it is in one of the subtle bowels, for then it is only subtlety, and not healing of it at all."
De curacio de zuchem e fistula.	"On the cure of zuchem (fistula)"
Sapias que tota plagua e apostema quan se envilheseys e se Antiqua, e es fayt ulcus, e no es consolidat e geta braç tot temps e no es abscindit, lahoras, en qualque membre sia, universalment es nompnada fistula e nos la apelam aquela azukem.	"You should know that every ulcer and abscess, once opened and ancient, becomes an ulcer, and is not consolidated and continually discharges pus without being cut off; then, in any limb it may be, generally it is called a fistula, which we call that same."
E fistula segon veritat es nodacio feutrada, dura, blanqua am la qual no es dolor e a la qual es conquavitat ayssi cum es conquavitat de pena de ausel; e per aysso nompnat aquela alcus rizatz, id est pena.	"A fistula in truth is a knotlike fleshy growth, hard and white, which causes no pain, having a cavity like that of the eye socket. Thus it is named that hollow ulcer or ulcer with an indentation."
E es en alcus homes humida, la qual geta brac; e fort leu la humiditat es abscidida en alcunas horas.	"And sometimes in men there is a moist ulcer which discharges pus; but when the moisture is cut off, it heals in some hours."
E alcunas veguadas aquesta humiditat es mota, e es pauca, e es grossa, e es subtil.	"Sometimes this moisture is thick and scanty, copious and thin."
E yeu ja he denant dit en la divisio, lahoras cum yeu diyssi las plaguas, que tot ulcus que no es sanat ni no es en lu nuda carn, no es aquo sino per una de ix causas: de las quals la una es o per pauquesa de sanc en le cos; o per malicia de lu; o quar entre lu e las labias es carn dura prohibent nativitat de carn; o quar es de mota legesa; o quar aquel ulcus en si meteys es poyrit e la materia que es a lu tramesa es de mala qualitat; o quar la medicina es enconvenient en la curacio de lu; o quan corrupcio catz en la regio, e es pestilencia; o per proprietat de regio ayssi cum endeve a Saragossa , en la qual es fayta difficil degestio de las malautias, e es tardada en aquela sanacio de apostema per natura; o quar en lu es os un, o motz osses.	"And I have already said in the division, when I discussed ulcers, that every ulcer which does not heal or is not on bare flesh, happens due to one of these nine causes: either due to lack of blood in the body, or due to malice of the ulcer, or because there is hard cartilage between the ulcer and its lips preventing the growth of new tissue, or because it has too much skin overlying it, or because the ulcer itself becomes putrid and the material transmitted to it is of poor quality, or because the treatment being used is inappropriate for that ulcer, or because corruption occurs in the region and there is pestilence, or due to the nature of the region, as happens in Saragossa, where difficult digestion of diseases occurs and healing of ulcers is delayed by nature, or because a bone or many bones are present within the ulcer."
Ja e mostrat totas aquelas causas, e·ls senhals de aquelas e la curacio de lor am medicinas en la divisio.	"I have already explained all these causes, their signs and their treatments with medicines in the division."
E cove assi que yeu fassa a tu saber la curacio de fistula la qual es fayta per via de operacio am ma.	"And so I want to tell you about the treatment of fistula, which is performed through an operation using a knife."
E sapias que fistula accideys en totz les membres del cos; quar de aquelas son fistulas que perveno a las venas grantz e arterias, o als nervis, o al ciphac, o al budel, o a la vesica, o ad alcuna de las costas, o ad alcu dels spondils del dos, o ad alcuna de las juncturas compostas per composicio ayssi quo de la ma e del pe; e de aquelas so que dan a lu propinquitat del membre principal e de semblantz.	"And you should know that fistulas occur in all the members of the body; for some are related to large veins and arteries, or nerves, or the bladder, or the bowel, or the urinary bladder, or to one of the ribs, or to one of the vertebrae of the spine, or to one of the joints composed by composition such as that of the hand and foot. And some are close to the main member and similar ones."
E donc aquela de aquestas fistulas que es segon aquesta manieyra es de las malautias de dificil sanacio, e no recep curacio, e occupacio am aquela es trebalh e ignorancia.	"And therefore those fistulas which are of this kind have difficult healing and do not receive treatment, and dealing with them is a matter of trial and error and ignorance."
E si es de las fistulas alcuna la profunditat de la qual no perve ad aquestz locs que e dit, e esperas e confizas en la curacio de lu, e vols pervenir a cognicio de lu, lahoras pren tenta de eram o de ferr, e si la fistula va segon rectetut, e perquireys aquela am lu.	"And if there is one of these fistulas whose depth does not reach any of the places I have mentioned, and you hope and trust in its healing, and you want to know its extent, then take a probe of silk or iron, and if the fistula goes straight ahead, insert it into it."
Mays si la fistula es tortuissitat, lahoras investigua aquela am tenta de plom subtil, quar plom am la levitat del sieu cors es alleujat e curvat deves la tortuositat.	"But if the fistula is tortuous, then investigate it with a probe of thin lead, because lead due to its weight follows the curvature of its course."
E si la fistula es havent motz horrificis, no es a tu possible que signifiques sobre lu am tenta.	"And if the fistula has many horrifying branches, it is not possible for you to mark them with a probe."
Adonc cristeriza le orrifici per sos orrificis, quar la humiditat per la qual clisterizas aquela va deves las autras orrificis e corr de lor.	"Then cleanse the openings for their openings, for the moisture used to cleanse that one will go towards the others and cause them to flow."
E aprop inquier exquisitament, segon qual manieyra a tu es possible que conoguas si aqui has os o nervi, e es la conquavitat de la fistula longinqua o propdana, o es una fistula a la qual so motz orrificis e esta sobre aquo tot am la suma de la tua fortaleza, am la tua enterroguacio, am la qual enterroguas le malaute, e la invencio de la dolor deves la tua compressio am la ma sobre le loc, e semblantz de las significacios e de las causas accidentz al apostema.	Translation:
E cum tu auras stat sobre totas aquelas causas am stacio veraya, lahoras ve a la curacio segon confidencia: e es que tu consideras lahoras si es fistula apparent propinqua o en loc sal, longinqua de junctura, o de nervi, o de arteria, o de vena, o de un dels locs les quals yeu a tu e ditz.	"And once you have stood on all those causes with true steadfastness, then proceed to the treatment according to your confidence: and it is that you consider now whether the fistula is apparent near or in a safe place, far from joint, nerve, artery, vein, or any of the places which yield to you and are spoken of."
Lahoras tu secca la fistula segon que denant es dit de la naracio de lu, e osta aquo que es en aquela filtracio e de carns corrumpudas, e aquo que es nascut en le orrifici de la carn, o de theil e de semblantz, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	"Now you dry the fistula according to what is said before about its nature, and remove that which is in that filtration and of corrupted flesh, and that which is born in the opening of the flesh or of skin and similar, and cure it inside until it is healed."
Mays si la fistula es de longinqua profunditat, e es segon rectetut, lahoras cove que inscidas aquela en le preon atant quant a tu sira possible, e aprop mondifica aquela de totas las suas carns corrompudas; e aprop administra calguas envolopadas en medicinas acutas, e intromet aquelas entro a la conquavitat de la fistula, la qual has conprenduda am ferr.	"But if the fistula is of great depth and is according to rectitude, then it is necessary that you insert that into the perineum as far as it will be possible for you, and appropriately cleanse that of all its corrupted flesh; and appropriately administer hot cloths wrapped in sharp medicines, and introduce those inside the concavity of the fistula, which you have comprehended with iron."
E fay aquo am aquela alcunas veguadas entro que la medicina acuta corroda tot aquo que es romas en la conquavitat de la fistula de la corrupcio.	"And do this many times inside until the sharp medicine corrodes all that is rough in the concavity of the fistula from corruption."
E aprop restaura aquela am enguentz les quals engendran carn sana entro que sia sanada.	"And appropriately restore it with ointments which generate healthy flesh inside until it is healed."
Mays si no es sanada per aquo, lahoras tu cauteriza aquela segon que havem recomtat.	"But if it is not healed by that, then you cauterize it according to what we have recommended."
Mays si la causa de fistula es os e es deves tu certificat aquo, lahoras tu inquireys aquela e secca aquela segon que havem recomtat, si tu no prohibeys alcuna causa de vena o de nervi o de membre principal ayssi cum havem dit.	"But if the cause of the fistula is bone and you should be certain about it, then you incise it and dry it according to what we have recommended, if you do not prohibit any cause of vein or nerve or main member as thus we have said."
Mays si le os es a tu descubert e es en lu alcuna corrupcio e negror, lahoras tu ratz aquel entro que la corrupcio sia hostada tota; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que lu encarne entro que sia sanat.	"But if the bone is exposed and is in no corruption or blackness, then you scrape that inside until all corruption is removed; and appropriately cure it with that which causes flesh to grow inside until it is healed."
E si no es sana e gieta brac ayssi cum fazia, lahoras sapias que tu no est pervengut a la eradicacio tota de la corrupcio; e adonc tu descuebre sobre lu segondanament e exquisitament fay la razio de lu e la mundificacio de lu am la deriera fortalasa tieua, e aprop restaura aquel.	"And if it is not healed and continues to throw out pus as before, then know that you have not reached the total eradication of corruption; and therefore you uncover it carefully again and meticulously make the cause of it clear and cleanse it with the final cautery of your choice, and appropriately restore it."
E donc si es sanat, bo es; e sino, lahoras sapias que aquela corrupcio es en la profunditat longinqua del cors, la qual no ha conseguida, e adonc a tu en aquel no es engen sino laysar aquela.	"And therefore if it is healed, good; but if not, then know that that corruption is in the distant depth of the body which has not been reached, and therefore there is nothing else to do but leave it."
E si le os corromput es petit, o es a tu possible atirar aquel, lahora tu le atira am forceps subtils las quals conveno ad aquo.	"And if the corrupted bone is small or can be removed, then you remove it with subtle forceps which are suitable for that."
E si so motz osses, lahoras exquisitament fay la extraccio de totz aquels, e de aquels no laysses denguna causa am la tua fortaleza.	"But if there are large bones, then meticulously perform the extraction of all those, and leave none behind without your cautery."
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat alcuna causa de las humiditatz, e en lor inscizio no ha temor ni error, lahoras inscideys aquelas liaments o carns si so aqui, e deliura les osses.	"But if you encounter any difficulty in the incision of the humidity and there is no fear or mistake in their incision, then cut those ligaments or flesh which are here, and cleanse the bones."
Mays si a tu no es preparacio de ostar les osses de la tua hora, lahoras pausa sobre la plagua aquo que poyresca la plagua aquela, e layssa aquela entro que aquo es al enviro de aquels osses de carns e de liamentz, e guarda la plagua que no sia consolidada, e sia constrengida la seccio la qual tu has inscidida en la tua operacio.	"But if you have not prepared to remove the bones at your discretion, then pause over the wound that produces the wound and leave it alone until that is around those bones of flesh and ligaments, and guard the wound so that it does not consolidate but rather be constrained by the section which you have incised in your operation."
Habantz, si temes, pausa sobre lu coto submers en sopre trissat am oli, o coto submers en anguent egipciac, o en alcu dels enguentz vertz, quar quan poyriran aquelas liaments, e les osses son de lor seperatz la ablacio, e de aquels atraccio es alleujada.	"Wait, if you fear it, pause over the wound submerged in threefold oil, or wound submerged in Egyptian pitch, or in one of the green ointments, for when those ligaments dry up and the bones are separated from their attachment, then attraction is eased."
Mays si es un gran os ayssi cum le os de camba o de coyssa o semblantz ad aquels, e aquo que de lu es corromput es la facia de lu tant solament, lahoras ratz aquela am resio tant solament derriera entro que sia ostada aquela negror e corrupcio, e aprop restaura la plagua.	"But if it is a large bone such as the thighbone or shinbone or similar ones, and what of it is corrupted is only its surface, then scrape that alone with a curette until that blackness and corruption are removed, and appropriately restore the wound."
Mays si aquo que de lu es corrumpyt es gran partida, e la corrupcio ja ha conseguida la medulla del os, lahoras es causa necessaria cerrar aquel e aquel tot inscidir entro al loc on es pervenguda la corrupcio, e lahoras cura aquel entro que sia consolidada.	"But if what of it is corrupted is a large part and the corruption has reached the marrow of the bone, then it is necessary to close that and incise there where the corruption has reached, and therefore cure it until it is consolidated."
E yeu recomti a tu aquo que endevenc ad un home en la sua coyssa per que pausez aquela a eyssempli e adjutori sobre la tua operacio.	"And I advise you that which befell a man in his thigh for which he paused and had helpers on your operation."
Foc un home jove per etat entorn xxx ans, al qual accideys dolor en la sua cueyssa, e de las partidas dedintz mauguda es sobre la materia dedintz le cors entro que la materia es pervenguda a la cueyssa, e es materia de apostema am gran apostema, e no foc a lu causa extrinseca.	"A young man around 30 years old happened to have pain in his thigh, and it was on the inner side of the thigh where there was matter inside the body which had reached the thigh, and it was a case of an abscess with a large abscess, and not from any external cause."
E adonc foc extendut le temps am aquela per la error dels metges entro que l’apostema es hubert, e acorrero de lu materias motas, e la sua curacio foc aprop pausada entro que la camba foc fistulada, e faytz son en lu motz orrificis les quals totz getavan poyredura e las humiditatz del cos.	"And therefore the time was extended with that because of the error of doctors until the abscess burst and there was much matter flowing out, and its cure was appropriately paused until the thigh became fistulated, and many orifices were made in it which all flowed pus and humidity of the body."
E adonc le curec multitut de metges entorn dos ans, e no foc en aquels savia ma en la art, entro que yeu fu appelat.	"And therefore he consulted many doctors for about two years, and there was no knowledge among them but in the art of it until I was called."
E vi la camba de lu e las materias que corrian de lu aquels orrificis per gran cors; e ja le cos de aquel home era tot stabozit e la color de lu era citrina.	"And when I saw his thigh and the matter that flowed from those orifices through a large body, the whole body of that man was already stiffened and his color was yellowish."
E adonc yeu intromesi la tenta ad un de aquels orrificis e pervenguec la tenta al os.	"And therefore I inserted a tent into one of those orifices and reached the bone with it."
E aprop yeu e perscrutat tostz les orrificis e trobegui aquels pervenir a lor de totas partidas de la camba.	"And appropriately I searched and examined all the orifices and found that they had come from all parts of the thigh."
E adonc yeu me coytegui e inscidegui sobre un dels orrificis aquels entro que descrobegui una partida del os, e atrobegui aquel corromput, e ja era terros e corrumput e denigrat; e era ja corrumpuda una partida de la camba entro que havia penetrat entro a la mezola.	"And therefore I took courage and incised over one of those orifices until I discovered a part of the bone which was rotten, and I removed that corrupted part which was earthy and rotting and blackened; and already a part of the thigh had been corrupted where it had penetrated into the muscle."
E adon yeu serregui aquo que a mi era discubert e preparat del os descubert.	"And therefore I covered what had been discovered and prepared by me of the bone that was laid bare."
E yeu cujegui que no fos en le os sino aquela corrupcio la qual abscidigui e serregui, e yeu ja havia derraziguada.	"I judged it not to be in the bone but only that corruption which I had cut off and covered, and I had already decided."
E aprop pausegui la restauracio de la plagua am medicina consolidativas per lonc temps, e no es consolidada.	"And therefore I paused the restoration of the wound with medicinal consolidatives for a long time, but it did not consolidate."
E aprop yeu iteregui e descubregui sobre le os segondament sobre le descubriment primier, e atrobegui continua corrupcio am le os.	"And therefore I reopened and discovered over the bone again following the first discovery, and I found continuous corruption with the bone."
E serregui aquo que a mi apares de aquela corrupcio, e aprop yeu fo perforsat fayre la curacio de lu e restauracio, e no es restaurat.	"And covered what seemed to me of that corruption, and therefore I continued the cure and restoration appropriately, but it was not restored."
E adonc yeu descubri sobre lu autra veguada e no cessegui inscidir le os petit a petit particuladament e perforsa la restauracio de lu, e no es restaurat entro que inscidigui entorn un palm de lu, e aquel extraxi am la medula sua, e aprop restauregui aquel am medicinas, e es consolidat leugierament e sanat.	"And therefore I discovered again over it the third time and did not cease to incise little by little particularly on the bone until about a palm of it was incised, and that extracted with its marrow, and appropriately restored it with medicines, and it consolidated easily and healed."
E no es necessaria iteracio en la operacio de lu e seccio de lu sino per la disposicio de la freulesa de lu e per la paucitat de la tollerancia de lu e paor de lu de mort, quar a lu accidia en totas horas per superfluitat de evacuacio sincopi mala.	"It is not necessary to repeat the operation and section of it except for the disposition of his weakness and for the poverty of his tolerance and fear of death in him, because he was always depressed because of excessive evacuation with syncope."
E donc sanat es per sanacio entiera, e nada es en loc de os carn dura; e es fayta bona la disposicio de lu en le sieu cors e retornec la vertut de lu; e es conversat en las suas disposicios e no fec a lu contrarietat en ambulacio ni nocument en denguna causa.	"And therefore it was healed by entire healing, and nothing remained in place of hard bone or flesh; and his disposition in his body was good and he returned to his strength; and he changed his habits and did not do anything contrary to walking nor any harm in any cause."
Mays si es os eminent en loc del cors ja trauquat, lahoras cove que tu secces aquel segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu prenguas liament e strenh aquel en la extremitat de aquel os eminent, e comanda ad alcu que extenda aquel en sus; e pausa aquel liament de lana pus gros del primier liament; e aprop lia aquel sobre la carn que es dejos le os, e exten la extramitat de lu per que atires la carn a las partidas dejos, e tu descuebras la carn sobre le loc le qual voles serrar per que la serra no leda la carn.	"But if the bone is prominent in place of the body, then it is necessary that you cut it according to this manner: and that you take linen and stretch it over the extremity of that prominent bone, and command someone else to extend it on his side; and pause that first linen with another thicker linen; and appropriate cover it over the flesh that is below the bone, and extend the extremity of it so that you draw the flesh towards its sides, and uncover the flesh over the place where you want to saw in order for the saw not to touch the flesh."
E pausa fust o taula dejos le os decentment, quar quan tu fas aquo no es prohibida la serra que no secce la carn corrumpuda.	"And place a cloth or table beneath the bones decently, for when you do this, it does not hinder the saw from cutting rotten flesh."
E cove que sia la serradura sobre le loc corrumput petit a petit, quar si es en la concavitat del os corrupcio e no appar en la sua apparicio al sentiment, e forssa a serratura de lu autra veguada.	"And ensure that the sawing is done gradually on the rotten spot, for if it is in the concave part of the bone and does not appear on its surface to touch, then it must be sawn from another side."
E si le os es corrumput e no-eminent, abantz es la una partida continuada am la autra, e la corrupcio es al mieg loc o en partida de lu, lahoras tu descuebre la carn de totas partz tota; e aprop pausa fust dejos, e aprop serra aquel de la primiera partida la on es la corrupcio entro que sia continuada la serratura del autra partida.	"And if the bone is rotten and does not stand out, then one continuous piece is made with another, and the corruption is in the middle part or in a part of it. Therefore you uncover all the flesh from every side; and then place a cloth beneath, and saw that of the first part where there is corruption, so that the sawing may be continued on the other part."
E sia la serradura segon le loc de la corrupcio un petit, segon que havem dit.	"And saw according to the location of the corruption, a little bit at a time, as we have said."
E si la corrupcio es en la junctura, inscideys aquela junctura corrumpuda, e serra le os la on es continuat del autra part.	"And if the corruption is at the joint, then cut into that corrupted joint, and saw the bone where it continues from the other part."
E si de la corrupcio es en la continuacio de doas juncturas, lahoras no es en lu razio sino engen.	"But if the corruption is in the continuation of two joints, then it is not a matter for cutting but rather for treatment."
E si la corrupcio es en le pecte de la ma o del pe, es mot dificil; empero cove que tu inquieras la corrupcio en qual manieyra appareys a tu, e que abradas aquela, e mondes aquela segon quascuna disposicio la qual es a tu possibla, e am cascum engen sia rectificat a tu, quan no fa a tu contrarietat vena o nervi.	"And if the corruption is in the palm of the hand or foot, it is very difficult. However, you must inquire into the corruption and find out how it appears to you, and then abrade that area and clean it according to each disposition that is possible for you, and with each remedy make sure that you do not harm any vein or nerve."
E sapias qual es inscididors e las serras a inscidir aquestz osses son motz segon le situament dels osses, e la preparacio de aquels, e la grosseza de aquels, e la subtilitat e la grandeza e la parvitat de aquels, e la duricia e la lor raritat; per que cove que tu prepares a tota specia de operacio estrument convenient ad aquela opperacio.	"And know that incising tools and saws for incising these bones are very different according to the situation of the bones, their preparation, thickness, subtlety, size, smallness, hardness, and rarity. Therefore, you must prepare suitable instruments for each type of operation."
E sapias que aquela operacio significa a tu sobre la specia del strument del qual indigeysses; quan am tu es gran studi e lonc e conoyssensa de las manieyras de aquesta art, e testimoni de manieyras de malautias, quar lahoras ja tu las avias per tu meteys aquo que es convenient a lu dels sturmentz a tota malautia.	"And know that this operation indicates to you the type of instrument that you will need. When you have great knowledge and long experience in the ways of this art, and are familiar with the symptoms of illnesses, then you already know what is suitable for each instrument for every illness."
E yeu so a tu formant en la fi de aquest capitol le nombre dels instrumentz les quals pausaras cum eyssimples am les quals proceziras a la tua prohibicio la qual experimentaras sobre las autras.	"And here at the end of this chapter, I give you the number of instruments that you will use simply with which you will proceed to your prohibition, which you will experience on others."
Forma de serra:	"Shape of saw:"
Forma de autra serra:	"Form of another saw:"
Forma de autra serra:	"Form of another saw:"
Forma de autra serra gran:	"Form of another large saw:"
Forma de ray:	"Form of a rasp:"
Sia le cap de aquest ray segon la forma de cap de clau stellat, e les puntz de lu sian segon la forma dels puntz alstefegi.	"The head of this rasp should be in the shape of a star-pointed key head, and its points should be in the shape of alstar points."
E no conveneys sino que am aquel sian confricadatz les caps de las juncturas quan so corrumpudas, o es la boca gran ampla.	"And it is not sufficient that with this rasp you rub the heads of the joints when they are corrupted, or if the mouth is large and wide."
Forma de razori major dels autres:	"Form of the larger razor compared to others:"
Forma de razori menor:	"Form of a smaller razor:"
Forma de razori lat:	"Form of a broad razor:"
Forma de serra autra decentment fayta: sia fayt arc de lu pus sobira e la acuitat de lu de ferr, e le membre de lu de boys punhal descentment fayt.	"Form of another saw suitably made: let it be arched as high as possible and sharp like iron, and its side blades should be suitably made like a descending punch."
Forma de lu:	"Form of it:"
Forma de razori en la qual ha concavitat:	"Form of razor with concavity:"
Forma de razori autra subtil:	"Form of another fine razor:"
Forma de autra razori de curvada extremitat:	"Form of another razor with curved tip:"
Forma de rasori petit semblant a tenta:	"Form of a small rasp resembling an awl:"
Forma de incisori am le qual so inscidit les osses:	"Form of the incising tool with which bones are incised:"
Forma de inscisori autra minor:	"Form of another smaller incising tool:"
Forma de un autra inscissori; aquest semblant a ray, e la extremitat de lu es cum serra, e es exhibit en motz locs en la razio dels osses:	"Form of yet another incising tool: this one is similar to a rasp, and its tip is like a saw. It is used in many places on the bones."
Forma de ray lo qual conveneys a rasio de aquel que es perforat dels osses:	"Form of the rasp which is suitable for the ratio of that which is perforated by the bones:"
E la extremitat de lu es triangulada e de aguda extremitat.	"And its tip is triangular and has a sharp point."
E es fayt de ferr de India , e semblantment cove que totas las causas que havem ditas de rasoris e de inscissoris e de serras.	"And it is made of Indian steel, and similarly all the causes that we have mentioned regarding razors, incising tools, and saws."
De inscizio extremitatz e de la serratura dels osses.	"Of bone cutting and sawing."
Las extremitatz se poyresso o per causa intrinseca o per causa extrinseca, o cum tu auras medicat aquela corrupcio per curacio de aquelas medicinas e la curacio no comfereys, o vezes la corrupcio anar deves le membre la qual no percuteys denguna causa, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquel membre entro aquo la hon acossec la corrupcio, per que le malaute evasesca per aquo de mort o de malicia que es major defeliment del membre.	"Extremities can be shortened either due to an intrinsic cause or an extrinsic cause. This may happen because you have treated the corruption with medicines and yet there is no improvement. Sometimes, the corruption may spread to other members without any apparent cause. In such cases, it is necessary that you incise that member where the corruption occurs so that the illness can be alleviated from death or malice, which is a greater damage to the member."
E le senhal de aquel al qual accideys, es que·l membre es fayt negre entro que sia cujat que foc la ja comburit, o se poyreys aprop la negror entro que la poyredura aquela ane entro aquel membre que siec lu e que prengua tot le cors; e donc coyta te am inscizio de aquel.	"And the sign of this is that the member becomes black where it has been burned, even though no fire was there. Or, putrefaction approaches with blackening within which corruption occurs and extends throughout the entire body; therefore, you should incise that one."
E semblantment si es causa de la corrupcio percussio de alcunas causas venenosas ayssi cum de scorpio mari o de vupera o de rutela e de semblantz.	"And similarly, if corruption is due to the bite of some venomous cause such as that of a scorpion, mare's tail, viper, or similar ones."
E si la corrupcio o la percussio es en la extremitat del dit, lahoras tu inscideys le dit e no dones spazi a la corrupcio per que ane entro a la ma.	"And if the corruption or bite is at the tip of the finger, then you should incise the finger and not allow the corruption to spread to the hand."
E semblantment si accedeys a la ma, lahoras tu inscideys aquela de la razit del focil, e no dones spazi a la corrupcio entro que prengua en le focil del bras.	"And similarly, if it extends to the hand, then you should incise that one from the wrist joint so that corruption does not spread to the arm."
E si envezeys aquel, lahoras inscideys le bras entro al coyde en la junctura.	"And if it goes further than this, then you should incise the arm at the elbow joint."
E si passa otra la corrupcio e la vezes enviro le coyde, lahoras en aquel es la mort del malaute; e aministrar autra causa otra aquo en curacio es quantitat de vertut.	"And if corruption passes beyond this and even reaches near the elbow joint, then it is the death of the illness. Administering another cause for cure at that point requires a larger amount of virtue."
E semblantment fay del pe quan corrupcio envezeys le dit del pe, lahoras tu inscideys aquel entro ad un dels nozes.	"And similarly, if corruption extends to the toe of the foot, then you should incise that one at one of its joints."
E si pren en la pente del pe, lahoras tu inscideys tot le pe.	"And if it reaches the heel, then you should amputate all of the foot."
Mays si pueja entro al denol, lahoras tu inscideys la camba entro a la junctura del denol.	"But if it can reach the ankle, then you should incise the calf at the ankle joint."
E si la corrupcio ja es pervenguda sobre le denol, lahoras en lu no es engen sino dimissio, e layssar le malaute a la mort.	"And if corruption has already reached the ankle, then there is nothing else to be done except to abandon it to death."
E la manieyra de inscidir le membre o de serrar lu es que tu strenhas le liament en la partida pus dejos la qual voles inscidir, e strenh autre liament sobre le loc; e extenda le ministre un liament a las partidas dejos, e extenda le ministra autra liament en sus; e tu separa la carn la qual es entre dos liamentz ain spatum lat entro que sia descuberta tota la carn; e aprop sia inscidit o serrat.	"The manner of incising the member or sawing it is to stretch the ligaments at the farthest part where you wish to incise, and stretch another ligament above that place. Then extend one ligament at each end and another on top. Separate the flesh between two ligaments using a broad spatula until all the flesh is exposed, then incise or saw it."
E cove que sia pausat drap de li de totas partidas per so que no toque le loc sa, e que vengua al malaute lesio ajustada e apostema caut.	"And it is necessary that cloth of linen be placed at all parts so that the place may not touch it, and that the illness receives proper injury and cauterization."
Mays si accideys flux de sanc quan obras, lahoras tu cauteriza le loc coytadament, o pausa sus lu alcunas polveras restrenhentz le sanc; e aprop retorna a la tua medicacio entro que sia complida.	"But if bleeding occurs while working, then you should cauterize the place carefully or apply some powders that restrain blood. Then return to your treatment until it is completed."
E aprop lia le membre plaguat am liament al u convenient, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	"And then bind the member with ligaments as appropriate and cure it until it heals."
E yeu recomti a tu aquo que endevenc a un home en le sieu pe, aquest meteys accident le qual yeu e a tu recomtat, le qual es quar accidic a lu negror en le sieu pe am adustio que era asemblada a combustio de foc.	"I also recommend to you what happened to a man in his foot. This one had the accident which I and you are recommending, which is the fourth one: blackness occurred in his foot with scorching that was similar to fireburn."
E aquela corrupcio accidic primierament en le sieu dit entro que tendec tot le pe.	"And this corruption first appeared at his toe which then spread throughout his entire foot."
E adonc aquel home preparec per si meteys pus que vic la curacio anar al membre am la vehemencia de lu que atrobec de dolor e de adustrio de lu, e el inscidic aquel pe entro a la junctura, e foc sanat.	"And then that man decided to amputate his foot himself because the corruption was advancing with great force and pain. He incised his foot at the ankle joint, and it healed."
Lonc temps accidic a lu aquela meteyssa corrupcio en le dit de la ma indic.	"For a long time that same corruption occurred to him in the index finger of his hand."
E adonc venc a mi, e so me perforsat repercutir aquela superfluitat am aquo que pausegui sobre la ma de las medicinas, aprop la mundificacio del cos de lu; e no es repercussa la superfluitat e comensec anar al autra dit entro que comensec en la ma.	"And then it came to me and that same superfluity persecuted him with what I had put on his hand for the treatment of his wound. And so the superfluity did not recede, but began to spread to another finger until it reached his hand."
E el apelec me a inscidir la ma de lu, e yeu no volgui far aquo sperant sobre la repercussio de aquela superfluitat, e mays que temegui deves la inscizio de la ma de lu mort, quar la vertut del malaute era sobre cazement.	"And he called me to incise his hand, but I did not wish to do so hoping for improvement from that excess, and more than anything I feared the incision of his hand leading to death, for the power of the illness was great."
E pus que el se desperec de mi, es retornat en la sua terra e pervenguec a mi que aquel home preparec e inscidic la sua ma tota, e es sanat.	"And since he persisted with me, he returned to his land and eventually heard that that man prepared and incised his entire hand, and was healed."
E no he adhuzida aquesta narracio sino per que sia adjutori sobre aquo que catz de aquesta malautia, e que sia significacio per la qual sia significada e segon la qual sia obrat.	"And I do not recount this narrative except to serve as a reminder about that which falls under this illness, and what sign it signifies and according to which sign it is operated."
De cura sinuum et qualitate clisterizationis cum medicinis.	"The treatment of sinus problems and the quality of cleansing with medications."
Quan accideys apostema en alcus membres carnozes e·l spazi de l’apostema es prolonguat entro que fa colleccio de sania, e aprop es romput e perforat, e es eyssida de lu la sania, e roman le loc vuoyt quays cum si era vayssel, e la codena que es desobre lu ayssi cum drap subtiliat, e no es pervengut a deriera corrupcio, e no inprimeys en le os o en nervi ni en liament, es apelat sinu, e no es nompnat fistula.	"When an abscess occurs in certain flesh members and the space of the abscess is prolonged until it collects pus, and then it ruptures and perforates, and the pus comes out, leaving the place empty like a vessel, and the cord that remains above it is like a thin cloth, and there has been no further corruption, and it does not impress upon the bone or nerve or ligament, it is called a sinus, and it is not called a fistula."
Mays empero si le spazi es prolonguat entro que la corrupcio enprema en alcun membre, lahoras es appelada fistula e no zukem.	"But if the space is prolonged until corruption impresses upon some member, then it is called a fistula and not a sinus."
E la cura de lu es que inscidas aquela codena tota ayssi cum es revolvut, e majorment quan es subtiliada e es fayta cum drap, e comfizas que no adhereys al loc per la sua corrupcio.	"And the treatment of it is that you incise that cord completely as it revolves, and especially when it is thinned out and made like cloth, making sure that it does not adhere to the place due to its corruption."
Mays si tu speras que la codena adheresca e que aquela corrupcio no aja conseguit per deriera consecucio, e en la codena ha spassitut de cara, lahoras tu cura aquel am clisteri.	"But if you hope that the cord will adhere and that that corruption has not yet reached its end, and there is an opening in the cord on the surface, then you treat it with a clyster."
E es que consideras al sinu, e lahoras si es gran, e·l brac que yeys es de fetent odor, lahoras clisteriza aquel am medicament egipciac le qual es de oli e vi agre e ziniar recebent partidas enguals, e sian ajustadas en un vayssel, e sian coytas sobre le foc entro que’l medicament se fassa rog e pervengua a specitut de mel.	"And if you consider the sinus, then if it is large and the arm that goes into it has a foul odor, then you cleans it with the Egyptian medicament which is made of oil, vinegar, and cinammon received in equal parts, put together in a vessel, and cooked over the fire until it reaches the consistency of honey."
E aprop tu pren de lu aquo que es necessari e dissolveys lu am aygua e mel; e clisteriza am aquel le sinu, e strenh le orrifici de lu, e layssa la medicina en lu per la quantitat de doas horas.	"And then you take from it what is necessary and dissolve it with water and honey, and cleans the sinus with that, and strengthen the opening of it, leaving the medicine in it for a period of two hours."
E aprop extratz aquela am sprecio; e fay aquo per tantz dias entro que sia mundificat le sinu e sia remauguda la pudor.	"And then extract it with precision, and do this for so many days until the sinus is cleansed and the pus is removed."
E alcunas veguadas es clisterizat am aygua de cendre, quan no es a tu prezent aquest medicament; e es que tu prenguas la cendra de vitz, e met sobre lu aygua; e aprop cola aquela e clisteriza aquel am ela entro que te confizes que·l sinu lahoras es ostat.	"And sometimes it is cleaned with water of ashes when this medicament is not present. And if you take the ash of vine wood and put it on the water, then boil it and cleanse that with it until you are sure that the sinus has opened."
E si le malaute no ha tollerancia sobre le medicament egipciac ni l’aygua de la cendre, lahoras clisteriza aquel am aygua e mel e quays sia mesclat ziniar trissat, e clisteriza aquel am vi e mel mesclat, quar de proprietat de mel es que mondifique e lave, e le vi fa adherir le sinu, e majorment quan en le vi ha superfluitat de stipticitat e de siccitat.	"And if the patient cannot tolerate the Egyptian medicament or the water of ashes, then cleanse it with water and honey mixed together in equal parts, and also use wine and honey mixed together, for the property of honey is to cleanse and wash, and wine causes the sinus to adhere, especially when there is an excess of astringency and dryness in the wine."
E cum tu fas aquo alcunas veguadas e te comfizes que·l sinu ja es remaugut, lahoras clisteriza aquel am aquo que fa naysser la carn en lu.	"And when you do this several times and are sure that the sinus has been removed, then cleanse it with something that causes flesh to grow in it."
E es que prenguas de enguent dyafinicon e dissolveys aquel am oli rozat e vi stiptic; o que clisterizas aquel am alcunas medicinas e enguentz autres que hajan las proprietatz les quals ja he yeu scritz en le tractat dels enguents.	"And if you take some refined diaphoretic ointment and dissolve it with rose oil and astingent wine, or use some other medicines and ointments that have the properties that I have already written about in the treatise on ointments."
E si le orrifici del sinu es streyt en le qual no es recebuda la canula del clisteri, lahoras tu le amplifique aquel am ferr petit a petit, e pausa en lu calgua envolopada en enguent egipciac o en enguent basilicon entro que sia amplificat.	"And if the opening of the sinus is narrow and the cannula of the clyster cannot be received into it, then widen it gradually with a small file, pausing in it with hot water wrapped in Egyptian or basilicon ointment until it has been widened."
E semblantment si le orrifici es ample, lahoras tu agregua las labias de lu am sutura e layssa de lu quantitat en la qual intre le clisteri ses addicio.	"And similarly if the opening is wide, then bring together the lips of it with stitches and leave in it the quantity that intervenes between the clyster without addition."
E si le orrifici de lu del qual corr le brac es elevat a las partidas desus, lahoras secca aquel en le pus bas loc que es en lu per que le brac corra entro dejos, quar quan le brac es coartat en la preondeza de sinu la carn esser en lu engendrada.	"And if the opening of the sinus from which the arm emerges is raised up on its sides, then dry it with pus in a place that is low down so that the arm may run freely within it, for when the arm is compressed by the pressure of the sinus, flesh will be generated there."
E si no es a tu possible seccar le sinu entro al enviro del os pus bas segon que voles, lahoras te perforssa que prepares le membre am preparacio per la qual corr de lu le brac leugierament segon que es a tu apparelhat e que no sia en lu retengut alcuna causa del brac.	"And if it is not possible for you to dry the sinus in the area of the pus as you wish, then prepare the member with preparation so that the arm runs freely through it according to what pleases you and without any cause of retention remaining in it."
E pren medicinas consolidativas que sian pausadas sobre le sinu convenientz ad aquo que vols exxten aquelas sobre drap de li.	"And take consolidating medicines that are applied to the sinus appropriately, with whatever you wish extended over them on linen cloth."
E le drap sia de tan gran quantitat cum fa la comunicacio de tot le sinu; e aprop inscidey am las forfexs en le dreyt del orrifici del sinu un trauc pus ample un pauc que l’orrifici del sinu; e aprop exten sobre autre drap de li dels enguentz leons segon la quantitat del trauc, e pausa le sobre aquel per posicio longinqua del orrifici del sinu per que sia aleujat le eyssiment del brac de lu e no ostes le drap gran sino aprop alcus dyas una veguada.	"And let the linen be of such a size that it covers all of the sinus; and then cut with forceps on the right side of the opening of the sinus a slit somewhat wider than the opening of the sinus, and then extend over another piece of linen some ointments according to the quantity of the slit, and apply it above it at a distance from the opening of the sinus so that the exit of the arm from it may be alleviated and the linen not remain for too long, only for a few days once."
Mays aquel que es sobre le orrifici del sinu, le qual remauguas en tota hora per so que yesca aquo que es ajust en lu del brac.	"But remove that which is on the opening of the sinus at every hour so that what has adhered to it may be discharged from the arm."
E per que sapias si aquo que corr de lu del brac es mot o pauc, o es digest, o es no-digest.	"And so that you may know whether what flows out of the arm is much or little, whether it is digested or undigested."
E am aysso tu considera le loc de aquel sinu, si en lu sent le pacient dolor o no, e si es en lu apostema.	"And now you shall consider the place of that joint, whether in it the patient feels pain or not, and if it is inflamed."
E cum la tua medicacio es prolonguada en la tal manieyra, e vesas la matiera que es gitada sobre le orrifici del sinu ja adhereys, o se apropria adherencia, lahoras le mayti tu le deslia o le tertz dia, e quan deslias la plagua, lahoras muda le drap per autre e renova le enguent.	"And when your medication is prolonged in this manner, and you see that the matter which is cast upon the opening of the joint has already adhered or nearly adheres, then on the third day, carefully detach it; but when you detach it, immediately change the bandage for another one and renew the ointment."
Mays si del sinu aprop lon spazi yeys virus subtil, lahoras no te desperes de la adherencia de li, quar la sanacio de lu se apropria, quar so alcus homes en les quals tarda generacio de carn en las lors plaguas, e de aquels so en les quals es fayt le contrari de lu.	"But if from the joint a rather long space has yawned with subtle virus, then do not despair of its adhesion, for the healing of it is nearly accomplished; for there are some men in whom the generation of flesh in their bandages is tardy, and of those some in whom the contrary takes place."
E si del sinu aprop motz dias es yssit brac indigest, lahoras sapias que·l sinu no adhereys; e si es tardada la adherencia del sinu e es la causa prolonguada, lahoras tu ajusta en exsiccacio de las medicinas, e si las medicinas so humidas en lor substancia e en la sua vertut, son seccas ayssi cum enguent dyafinicon, quan es en lu ajustada superfluitat de addicio de zegi.	"And if from the joint more than ten days has issued thick pus, then you know that the joint does not adhere; and if there is tardiness in the adhesion of the joint and this is the cause prolonged, then you shall adapt medicines for drying; but if the medicines are humid in their substance and in their virtue, they shall be made dry thus with fine ointment."
E le mays derier am le qual es curat, es que prenguas de enguent dyafinicon e sia dissout en oli rozat, e sia sobre lu vojat vi antic engual en la sua substancia, e aprop comfeys aquel am lu, e usa de aquel.	"And the last thing with which you shall cure it is to take some fine ointment and dissolve it in rose oil, and let there be placed upon it old wine vinegar in its substance; and thus apply that ointment with it, and use it."
E ja fa semblant en aquela accio, quan no y a brac, enguent dyafinicon, mel quan es coyt entro que sia engrossat, e usa de lu; o que prenguas mirra e aloen e enses, e trissa tot e polveriza sobre le mel quan es sus le foc, e aprop lineys aquo sobre drap e strenh aquel sobre le sinu; e lineys aquel am le mel le qual has cuoyt entro que es engrossat, e polveriza sobre drap e strenh aquel.	"And it seems that in this action when there is no pus, fine ointment should be used with honey, when it is cooked until it is thickened, and use it; or else take myrrh and aloe and sesame, and grind all together and powder upon the honey while it is on the fire, and then strain that upon a cloth and apply it to the joint; and sprinkle that with the honey which you have cooked until it is thickened, and powder it upon the cloth."
E alcunas veguadas so administratz am lu aristologia longua e razitz de lili celesti (e es lili celesti) e farina de errs e centaurea, e usa de aquels simples o ajustatz, trissa aquels e cribela e polveriza sobre le mel le qual he recomtat; e husa de lu.	"And sometimes it is administered with long pepper and the roots of celestial lilies (and that is celestial lily) and barley flour and centaurea, and use these simples or adjust them, grind them and sift them and powder upon the honey which has been prepared; and use it."
E si es prolonguat le sinu, e no es sanat per aquesta curacio, lahoras sapias que la corrupcio es en le preon de lu, e ja fa enquisicio en les osses o en les autres membres durs o als liaments; lahoras tu le cura am curacio fistular, ayssi cum desus es dit.	"And if the joint is prolonged and not healed by this treatment, then you know that there is corruption in its premise, and therefore make an examination of the bones or of the other hard members or of the ligaments; then you shall treat it with fistula cure, as has been said above."
De curacio de panarici et unguis attritae et incisione digiti additi et sectione.	"On the treatment of pimples, rubbed-on ointments, nail-cutting and adding a finger and cutting."
Panarici es apostema le qual nays dejos la ungla del dit pous de la ma o del pe, e fort leu nays en les autres ditz, e cum es prolonguat e la sua curacio es mens prezada, o es apostemat de apostema caut, o es corrumput, e gieta brac entro que corrodeys la razitz de la ungla, e fort leu corromp aquela tota, e fort leu perve la sua corrupcio al os entro que es a lu odor fetent, e es fayta la extremitat del dit lada, e la color de lu es fayta fusca.	"A pimple is an abscess that arises from beneath the nail of the finger or toe of the hand or foot; it commonly occurs on other fingers and when prolonged its treatment is less valued; otherwise it is an apostema of cauterized apostema, or corrupted, and pus emerges from it which corrodes the root of the nail, often corrupting all of it entirely, and it sometimes extends its corruption to the bone so that there is a foul odor and the tip of the finger becomes reddened, and its color becomes dark."
E donc quan tu auras aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu inscidas am ferr tota la superfluitat que es romasa de la ungla e aprop cauteriza la plagla aprop aquo, quar cauteri mot es juvatiu en aysso.	"And therefore when you have done what we said in the division and your treatment does not relieve it, then it is necessary that you incise with iron all of the superfluity that remains of the nail, and immediately cauterize the wound with that, for cautery is greatly beneficial in this."
Mays si le os es sa e la ungla es sana, e las addicios de la ungla vuoydas ja compremen las carns a las partidas dedintz, e comensan lu punger e ledeysso aquela, lahoras cove que tu pauses ray subtil dejos le angle de la ungla que pungeys la carn, e impelleys aquela sus e inscideys aquela carn am facilitat, e pausa sobre aquo que roman de la carn de las medicinas comburentz corrosivas entro que sia tot remaugut; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	"But if the bone is sound and the nail is healthy, and yet the edges of the nail begin to cut into the flesh within, and it starts to prick and cause pain there, then you must make a subtle incision from the angle of the nail that pricks the flesh, and push it out and incise that flesh easily, and place upon what remains of the flesh medicines that corrode and consume everything; and then apply ointment until it is healed."
Mays si la corrupcio ja enprem en le os, lahoras cove que tu inscidas le os aquel e le extraguas, car nul temps no es sanat que sia en lu le os corrumput.	"But if corruption has already entered the bone, then you must incise and extract that bone, for it is never healed when the bone is corrupted."
E si vezes la corrozio e la corupcio anar en le dit, lahoras tu inscideys aquel en un dels nozes segons que es premesa la sua rememoracio, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	"And if sometimes corrosion and corruption go into the finger, then you must incise that in one of its joints according to how it has spread, and then apply treatment until it is healed."
Mays si a la ungla endeve percussio o atricio, e endeve en aquela dolor vehement, lahoras cove que tu al comensament fleubotomes le malaute, e aprop secca la ungla am spatum agut am seccio transversa desus en jus, e guarda te que la seccio no pervengua entro a la carn que es dejos la ungla, quar tu faras accidir al malaute dolor vehement, e sira causa a nativitat de la carn ajustada superflua en le loc; e aprop cura aquel loc am aquo que ceda dolor.	"But if the nail has received percussion or injury and there is intense pain in that place, then at first you must bleed the malady, and then dry the nail with a sharp spatula using a transverse cut from above to below, being careful that the cut does not extend into the flesh beneath the nail; otherwise you will cause intense pain and stimulate the birth of superfluous flesh in that place; then treat that place with something that alleviates pain."
Mays dit ajustat, le qual es nat en las mas de alcus homes, fort leu es carnos tot, e fort leu so en lu osses, o fort leu es en lu ungla.	"But what is said above, which is born in most men, is usually entirely fleshy, and often on the bones or often on the nail."
E alcus de lu son natz en la razit de la junctura, o es la nativitat de lu en alcus nozes dels ditz.	"And some are born at the root of the joint, or their birthplace is in some joints of the fingers."
Mays aquel que es nat en alcus nozes del dit no se mau, e aquest que es nat en las juncturas fort leu es maugut.	"But that which is born in one of the joints of the finger is not painful; and that which is born at the joint is often painful."
E de aquels que son natz carnoses, la seccio es leugiera, e es que tu inscidas aquel deves la sua razitz am spatum lat.	"And those that are born fleshy, the incision will be easy; and it is necessary that you incise it close to its root with a broad spatula."
Mays de aquel que es nat en la razitz de la junctura, la curacio es dificil; e donc guarda te de la abscizio de lu.	"But that which is born at the root of the joint is difficult to treat; therefore beware of its excision."
Mays en aquel que es nat en dit deves les nozes, cove que tu inscidas al comensament la carn de lu am inscizio redonda entro al os, e aprop serra am una de aquelas serras convenientz ad aquo, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	"But in that which is born in the finger between the joints, it is necessary at first to incise the flesh of it with a round incision down to the bone, and then saw through it with one of those suitable saws fitted for that purpose, and then treat it until it is healed."
Mays consolidacio la qual accideys als ditz entre lor motas veguadas o per nativitat del home que nays enayssi, o per consolidacio de plagua o per combustio de foc, o per semblantz, adonc cove que secces aquela consolidacio entro que les ditz retorno a la sua forma natural.	"But consolidation which occurs in the fingers between their many joints or through birth defects of man born thus, or from injury or burning by fire, or from contusion, then it is necessary to remove that consolidation until those digits return to their natural form."
E aprop pausa entre lor draps de li enfuzes en oli rozat per que no sian consolidatz leugierament, e separa entre aquels, o pausa entre aquels una lamina de plom subtil entro que sia consolidat segon que cove.	"And then place between their wrappings of them hot oil-soaked wool so that they are not easily consolidated; and separate those or place between them a thin sheet of lead until it is consolidated as necessary."
E semblantment si accideys consolidacio en alcus ditz am la palma, lahoras tu secca aquela consolidacio segon que es preparada e conveneys a la figura del membre.	"And similarly if consolidation occurs in some digits with the palm, then you must remove that consolidation according to how it is prepared and suitable for the shape of the limb."
De inscizio de vices, so son varicas.	"Of incisions of veins, there are many."
Vices so son varicas, e so venas envolutas grossas plenas de superfluitatz melencolicas las quals veno en motz dels membres del cors, e le major adveniment de lor en las cambas, e majorment en las cambas dels itinerantz e dels laborantz e dels portantz.	"Veins are many, and they are large veins wrapped around thickly full of blackish superfluity which come into prominence in the limbs of the body, and their most frequent occurrence is in the legs, especially in those of travelers, workers, and carriers."
Adonc cove que tu administres purguacio del cors de colera negra alcunas veguadas am expulcio fort, e aprop sangna le pacient de la vena basilica.	"Therefore you must administer a purge to the body of black bile several times with strong expulsion, and then bleed the patient from the basilic vein."
Mays la curacio de lor am ferr es segon dos manieyras: la una es que sia inscizas e sia atirat aquel sanc negre, e l’autra manieyra es que sia elevada la vena e sia extrayta tota.	"But the treatment of them with iron is according to two methods: one is that they should be incised and that black blood drawn out; the other method is that the vein should be raised up and all extracted."
La seccio de lu es segon aquesta manieyra: embroca al comensament la camba am aygua cauda mot entro que le sanc gros sia resolvut, que es feculent de la camba, e aprop strenh la camba del malaute a la partida pus sobirana de la coyssa entro a la partida dejos del denol am una benda, e aprop secca la vena en un loc, o en dos, o en tres am seccio ampla, e aprop eleva le sanc negra am la tieua ma de la partida dejos de la camba entro en sus, e desus en jus, entro que del sanc sia yssida la quantitat que voles e que vezes habastar, e la qual tollera la vertut del malaute.	"The section of it is according to this method: first, incise the thigh with cold water at its beginning until thick blood is resolved, which is the sediment of the thigh; then bind the thigh of the sick person to the superior part of the hip joint up to the lower part of the knee with a bandage; then cut through the vein in one place, or two, or three with an ample incision; then raise black blood with the index finger at the lower part of the thigh upward and downward until as much blood as you wish and deems sufficient has been removed."
E aprop lia aquela, e comanda a lu que abstengua de las viandas colera negra engendrantz.	"And then bind that [the bandage/wound], and instruct them to abstain from foods generating black bile."
E itera la curacio per fleubotomia quan las venas so umplidas e aquo notz al malaute.	"And perform the cure by phlebotomy when the veins are full, as is known to the patient."
Mays la elevacio de lor es segon aquesta manieyra: tu que razas la camba del malaute, si en lu so motz pels, e aprop met le en banh e embroca la camba de lu am aygua cauda entro que s’enrogesesca e las venas sian exuberadas; o que sia exercitat per exercici fort, si banh no es a tu present, entro que·l membre sia scalfat.	"Here is how the elevation of their legs should be done: you who raise the patient's leg, if it moves easily, and then place it in a warm bath, immerse the leg's bandage with cold water until it reddens and veins become prominent; or let them exercise vigorously, if there is no bath nearby, until that member becomes scarlet."
E aprop secsa la codena en le dreyt de la vena per seccio en le lonc o en le derier de lu deves le denol, o en le pus bas de lu deves lo talo.	"And then cut the cord on the right side of the vein, either at its length or at its end, and then remove it, or else cut it below where the foot is."
E aprop uobre la codena am uncis e excorja la vena de tota part entro que appara al sentiment, e es deves la appericio de lu que vezes aquela roga declinant a negror.	"And then tie off the cord with forceps and remove the vein from all parts until it appears visible to sensation. And it is necessary for one who knows that wound to decline towards blackness."
E donc cum evazeys e de la codena tu vezes aquela blanca quays sia corda.	"And afterwards, with evacuation having ceased, tie off that white which was like a cord."
E aprop tu met dejos aquela le ray entro que sia elevada e sia gitada de la codena, e sospen aquela am onci orp leon.	"Then place that rope within so it may be elevated and cast off from the chain, and suspend it with a hook."
E aprop secsa autra seccio aprop aquela seccio per tres ditz, e aprop excorja la codena de la partida desus de la vena entro que apparia.	"Furthermore, cut open that section for three days, and then remove the chain from the part above the vein where it appears."
E aprop eleva aquela e inscideys aquela en deriera seccio deves le talo, e aprop extratz aquela e eleva aquela entro que sia yssida per la seccio segonda, e aprop extratz aquela de la seccio que es sobre aquela.	"Then elevate it and cut that section on the other side near the stalk; then extract it and elevate it so it may be passed through the second section; and then extract it from the section above."
E fay aquo entro que extraguas aquela de la seccio que es pus sobirana o pus auta de totas las seccios, entro que tota es yssida; e lahoras inscideys aquela.	"And do this so that you may extract it from the section which is placed underneath or above all sections, so that all may be removed; and then cut it."
E si no obezeys a tu ad extrayre e elevar, lahoras intromet una agulha am fiel fort doble e ligua aquela e extratz la, o intromet dejos lu le ray e revolveys la tua ma a tota part entro qu’en sia getada.	"And if you cannot extract and elevate it, then insert a doubled needle with thread and tie that off and extract the chain, or insert it within the rope and twist it all around in whatever way."
E guarda te que no sia inscidida; quar si es trencada, es fayt a tu dificil elevar aquela mot e es vengut sobre le malaute per aquela nocument.	"And be sure that it is not cut; for if it is broken, it will make it difficult to elevate the person and cause harm due to that injury."
E cum aquela tota auras fora-gitada, lahoras pausa sobre le loc de la plagua lana submerssa en vi e oli rozat e oli no-rozat, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	"And once all has been extracted, then pause upon the place of the wounded lane submerged in wine and both rose oil and non-rose oil, and care for it until it is healed."
E si la vit es contrayta havent tortuositat a la qual sia envolucio a las partidas, e no es segon rectitut segon que havem dit, lahoras cove que tu fendas sobre aquela a tota partida de tortuositat de lu e als locs de envolucio de lu, e aprop suspen aquela am uncis entro que eleves aquela tota.	"And if the vein is contracted with tortuosity that cannot be straightened out as we have said, then you must cut through all the parts of the twist and the locations where it is wrapped around; and also suspend it with hooks so that you may elevate it entirely."
E guarda te deves la tua seccio que no inscidas la vena e que no plagues aquela, quar dificil sira a tu elevar aquela; e serva la tua prudencia en aquela.	"And be sure to guard your section so that you do not cut the vein and cause harm to it, for it will be difficult to elevate if it is harmed. Use your caution in this."
Forma del inscident am le qual es seccada vit:	"Form of the incident with which a vein is severed:"
Forma de unci orp:	"Shape of a hook or clamp:"
No es a lu accuitat ayssi cum als uncis ni es de aguda extremitat per so que no plague la vena; e es de grossa flexibilitat leon, quar si era subtil, inscidira la vena per la sua subtilitat; habantz es en lu superflua grosseza ayssi cum havem dit.	"It is not sharp like hooks and does not have a pointed extremity so that it may not harm the vein. It is of thick flexibility in its lion part; for if it were thin, it would cut the vein due to its thinness; having surplus thickness as we have said."
De extraccio venae cruris.	"Of the extraction of the vein of the thigh."
Aquesta vena es engendrada en las cambas en terras caudas ayssi cum al- Ategi en terra de Arabics e en las terras de India caudas e aridas de pauca teneritat e en las quals no nays erba ni aybre.	"This vein is generated in the chambers in tawny lands such as Al-Aqaba in Arabic lands and in dry lands of India with little tenderness where there is neither grass nor herb."
E fort leu es engendrada en autres locs del cors otra las cambas.	"And it is also generated in other parts of the body besides the chambers."
E la gestacio de lu es de putrefaccio que ve dejos la codena ayssi cum venen dedintz le cors serpentz e vermps e scarides e verms engendrantz entre la codena e la carn.	"Thus, the condition of this one is due to putrefaction that comes from leaving the intestines as if they were venomous serpents and worms generating between the intestines and the flesh."
E senhal de la suscepcio de l’adveniment de lu es de aquesta vena que accideys en la camba enflammacio vehement; e aprop le loc es vesicat; e aprop comensa la vena yssir del loc de aquela vesicacio quays sembla razit de planta.	"The sign of the onset of this condition is from this vein that appears in the inflamed chamber; and near the location it is congested, and near there begins the vein to emerge from the site of that congestion which resembles a plant root."
E adonc cum appar de lu la extremitat, lahoras cove que tu envolvas sobre aquela una pessa de plom del qual sia le pes de una drac. entro a ii drac., e noza aquela e layssa le plom suspendut de la camba.	"Then, when the extremity appears, at that time you should wrap around it one piece of lead weighing as much as two dragons, and then tie it and leave the lead suspended from the chamber."
E tantas veguadas cum yeys de lu alcuna causa a las partidas defora, envolveys aquo em plom e noza aquel.	"So many times when something goes outwards due to this condition, you should wrap that in lead and tie it up."
E si mot es prolonguat, lahoras tu inscideys una partida de lu e envolopa le romanent; e no inscidas aquela de razit entro que sia fora yssida, quar si inscideys aquela es contrayta e intra en la carn e fa accidir apostema e poyredura en le loc e ulceracio mala.	"And if it does not prolong itself, then you should cut off a part of it and wrap the remaining portion; but do not cut it from the root, for if you cut that it will contract and enter into the flesh and cause an abscess and putrefaction in the location with a bad ulceration."
Per que cove que sia tractada suaument e sia extrayta petit a petit, entro que sia fora-gitada del derier de lu e no remangua de lu alcuna causa en le cors.	"So that it may be drawn out gradually and extracted little by little, until the last of it is pulled out and none of it remains in the body."
E de aquesta vena es yssit en alcus homes que es en la sua longitut de v palms e de detz e ja es pervengut a mi que yssic un de xx palms.	"And from this vein, some men have said that it is as long as two and twenty palms, but I have seen one which was thirty."
E si es inscidida en la hora de la sua medicacio, lahoras intromet lo ray en le trauc de lu e perfora aquela am lonc trauc am le cors, entro que sia evacuat tot aquo que es en la materia, e administra putrefaccio del loc per alcus dias am medicinas; e aprop cura aquela per la curacio de apostemas.	"And if it is cut in the time of its treatment, then insert a tube into the wound and pierce that with a long tube into the body until all that is in the matter is evacuated, and apply putrefying medicines to the location for some days; and afterwards treat it with the cure for apostumes."
E aquesta vena alcunas veguadas ha motz ramps, e majorment quan apar a la junctura del pe o en le pe, e veno a lu motz orrificis, e es yssit de quascu orrifici ram.	"And this vein sometimes has many branches, especially when it appears at the junction of the foot or in the foot itself, and comes from many openings; and it is said that each opening sends forth one branch."
E donc cura aquela ayssi cum havem dit en la divisio e am aquo que es desus dit.	"And thus treat it as we have said in the division above, with what has been mentioned previously."
De sectione super vermes generatos sub cute et dicitur aegritudo bovina.	"Concerning cutting for worms generated under the skin, and is called bovine illness."
Aquesta malautia es nompnada en alcuna terra deves nos malautia bovina per so quar motas veguadas endeve als bious e es verm pauc un le qual es nat entre la codena e la carn, e va en tot le cos pujan e devalan, e es mostrat al sentiment deves le sieu anament de membre en membre entro que disromp la codena e yeys fora.	"This illness is called in some lands 'bovine disease' because often it occurs in oxen and there is one worm which is born between the backbone and the flesh, and it goes throughout the body pushing and pulling itself along until it tears apart the backbone and comes out."
E la generacio de lu es per putrefaccio de alcunas humors ayssi cum accideysso verms e serpentz e lombrics e ascaridas en le ventre.	"And its generation is due to the putrefaction of certain humors, just as happens with worms, serpents, earthworms, and roundworms in the belly."
E es temut per la malicia de lu, quar quan el va en le cors e es elevat al cap, e es pervengut al huel, lahoras fort leu uebre en lu e intra e destruzeys le huel, e aquo endeve motas veguadas.	"And it is feared on account of its malice, for when it goes into the body and rises up to the head, and reaches the brain, then often it breaks open there and enters in and destroys the brain, which happens many times."
E donc quan tu voles curar aquel e extraire lu, lahoras no se fa si no deves la sieua ambulacio e apparacio de lu al sentiment, e adonc cove que tu strenhas aquo que es sobre lu e aquo que es dejos lu am liament e constriccio fort, e aprop secca sobre lu e extratz aquel.	"And therefore when you wish to treat it and extract it, first determine its course and appearance by feeling. Then constrain with something that is above it and something that is below it with pressure and binding, and then dry around it and extract it."
E si es preondat en la carn e no le atrobes, lahoras tu pausa cauteri am foc sobre le loc entro que mora, e la major causa que es temuda es corrupcio de lu am la qual corrump le loc ayssi cum havem dit.	"And if it is caught in the flesh and not removed, then apply a caustic with fire to the location where it resides until it dies. The greatest cause that is feared is corruption of it, by which it corrupts the location as has been said."
May si tu vezes aquel esser pervengut al cap prop del huel, lahoras strenh sobre le sobrecil am fort strictura, e aprop secsa sobre lu, e extratz aquel; e cove que·l malaute use de mondificacio del sieu cors am medicinas evacuantz humors putridas malas, e guarda se de viandas generantz putrefaccio.	"But if you wish that one who has come near the head to be removed from there, then constrain over the eyebrow with strong binding, and dry around it, and extract it. And let the patient use medicines to purify his body by evacuating bad putrid humors, and avoid foods that cause putrefaction."
De sectione super aegritudinem nafir.	"Concerning cutting for the illness called 'nafir'."
Aquesta malautia es nompnada en nostra terra nafir, e es dolor la qual ve en alcus membres, e aprop es permudada de membre en membre.	"This illness is called in our land 'nafir', and it is pain that comes to certain limbs, and also moves from limb to limb."
E yeu ja e vista aquela segon que yeu te recomtare.	"And I have already seen that one as I will tell you about it."
Yeu fu apelat a una femna malauta ad una vila, e descubric le sieu bras e vi una imflacio petita en la vena funis del bras, e pus que fu romas per una hora, vi aquela imflacio anar ayssi cum va verm pujan ad aquest, mays pus leugierament que esser por, ayssi cum si fos argent viu quan corr de loc en loc.	"I was summoned to a sick woman in a village. Upon exposing her arm, I saw a small inflammation on the vein of the forearm. After an hour had passed, I observed that inflammation spreading thus: it appeared as if it were alive and moved from place to place, but more slowly than porphyry."
E adonc anet s’en la dolor de aquel loc e fiquet se en le muscle, e aprop aqui stec per una hora.	"Then the pain went away from that spot and fixed itself in the muscle. It stayed there for about an hour."
E aprop correc en l’autre cors entro que pervenc al autre bras.	"And then it moved to the other side of her body, reaching her other arm."
E aprop recomtec a mi que revolvia se per tot le cors sieu segon que yeu vi; e fo trop meravelat de la permutacio de lu e de la velocitat de membre en membre.	"And I saw that it was moving around her entire body, changing places rapidly from member to member. It was truly remarkable."
E yeu ja havia vist denant aquo en les mieus huels segon aquela manieyra, empero yeu he vistz motz les quals atroban dolor esser permutada de membra a membre.	"I had seen something like this before in my practice, though I had rarely heard of pain being transferred from member to member."
Mays no vi aquo am les huels ayssi cum en la femna.	"But I have never seen anything like this in the hospitals as I did with this woman."
E yeu no cogiti esser aquo sino que es per aquo quar la femna era de viela, on so de secs cors e de venas descubertas, e en aquesta apparec al sentiment aquela ventositat permutada.	"And I thought that it was because the woman was elderly, with dry skin and visible veins, which made the movement of this wind-like sensation more apparent."
E es necessari que no apparesca segon aquesta retro-curacio en aquels que son delicioses e am cors humitz de venas ameguadas.	"And it is necessary that this condition does not appear in those who are delicate and have humid bodies with hidden veins."
E cum tu voles la curacio de lu, e le pacient sent aquela dolor, lahoras no es a tu aparent al huel ayssi cum havem dit, lahoras tu strenh sobre aquel e dejos lu leugierament e secse sobre aquel entro que sia yssida aquela ventositat coartada, e cauterize le loc.	"And when you wish to treat it, if the patient feels pain, then after an hour or two has passed without any apparent sign at the hospital as we have said, then press upon that spot lightly and gently until the restricted wind-like sensation has been released, and cauterize the location."
Mays si tu no la vezes am los tieus huels, alhoras tu cura aquel am excussio del cors e am aquo que expelleys ventositatz, e carmina aquelas am pillulas fetidas e am pillulas de serapi e semblantz.	"But if you do not see it at your hospitals, then treat it with exercise of the body and whatever expels wind. Use pills made from fetid herbs and pills containing serpentaria and similar substances."
De extraccio de sagetas.	"On arrow extraction."
Sagetas son diversificadas segon las specias, e segon les locs dels cors en les quals cazo, quar la lor diversitat es que de aquellas so que han grans puntas, e petitas, e concavas, e sordas, so es solidas; e de lor so que han tres angles, e de aquelas a las quals so que han lenguas; e de aquelas a las quals so astelas.	"Arrows are varied according to species and according to the parts of the body where they strike. Their variety is such that some have large points, others small, concave, or blunt, which are solid. Others have three edges, while yet others have tongues; still others are star-shaped."
E aquela que es segon les membres e las pessas en las quals cazo es segon dos manieyras: quar les membres o so membres principals concaus, ayssi cum le cervel, le cor, e·l fitge, e le pulmo, e les ronhos, e les budels, e la vezica, e a lor semblantz; e donc quan catz en alcu de aquestz membres e aparo a tu senhals de mort, la qual causa yeu recomtare aprop, lahoras cove que tu evites extraccio de aquela sageta en aquels quar la mort siec aquel en le qual en las majors disposicios, e quan a tu no appareysso aquestz mals senhals, e la sageta no es amaguada en la profunditat del membre, lahoras tu extratz aquela e cura la plagua.	"And those that are according to limbs and parts where they strike follow two methods: for the limbs or principal members cause death directly, such as the brain, heart, liver, lungs, kidneys, intestines, bladder, and their like. Therefore, when struck in one of these members and signs of death appear, which I will recount later, it is then necessary to avoid removing that arrow in those where death would ensue from removal in the best of conditions. But if such signs do not appear, nor is the arrow hidden deep within the member, then you may remove it and treat the wound."
E dels senhals del servel es quan catz en lu sageta, e trespassa le os, e es yssit del cyphac le qual es sobre le cervel, quar accideys per lu soda vehement, e scotomia, e vertige, e rogor en les huels, e imflamacio e rogor de la lengua, e spasme e permixtio de entendament e vomi de colera, e fort leu es abscindida la paraula e es destruida la votz, e es yssit del loc de la plagua humiditat blanca semblant a pols, e yeys de lu semblant ad aquositat de la carn.	"And signs of brain injury include when struck by an arrow which pierces the bone and exits through the fontanel above the brain. This causes sudden loss of consciousness, darkness of vision, vertigo, heat in the eyes, inflammation and heat of the tongue, spasms and confusion of intellect, vomiting of bile, difficulty speaking and loss of voice, and there appears from the wound white fluid like dust, and watery discharge like the moisture of flesh."
E donc si appareyso a tu aquestz senhals, lahoras tu abste de la curacio e de la extraccio de la sageta, si non es fora.	"And therefore, if such signs appear to you, then you should abstain from treating and removing the arrow unless it is outside."
Mays les senhals de la sageta quan catz en le cor, so que ela es prop de la mamila senestra, e sent am aquela quays sia ficada en causa dura, e no es causa vueda; e fort leu le movement de la sageta es semblant a movement del pols, e corr de la plagua sanc negra, e siec aquel fregiditat de las extremitatz, e suzor freja, e sincopi; e donc sapias que la mort descen ses tot dopte.	"But signs of an arrow having struck the heart include: it is near the left nipple and feels firm where it has lodged, not hollow; there is a strong sensation like the beating of the pulse, and black blood flows from the wound. Death ensues suddenly without delay."
E les senhals quan la sageta ha plaglat le pulmo so eyssiment de sanc spumos de la plagua, e les vayssels que so prop del col so apostematz, e es mudada la color del malaute, e expira sperit gran aut, e demanda atraccio de ayre freg.	"And signs that an arrow has struck the lung include: frothy blood issues from the wound, vessels near the throat are suffocated, and the patient's complexion changes. He exhales much breath rapidly or sighs for air."
E si catz la sageta en le velament le qual es en le pietz, e la dolor lahoras es prop de las costas petitas, e es fayt le ale gran am vehement dolor e am sospir, e no so maugutz totz les membres dels muscles.	"And if the arrow strikes the pleura which is in the chest, there is pain near the little ribs. Breathing becomes difficult with violent pain and sighing, and the muscles of all members are not moved."
E si catz la sageta en le stomac, lahoras fort leu yeys de la plagua vianda alcuna indigesta.	"And if the arrow strikes the stomach, thereupon much undigested food issues from the wound."
E si catz la sageta en le ventre, e es ficada en lu, yeys alcuna fenda de la plagua, o la tela, o budel le qual es disromput, e no es speransa en la curacio de lu extraccio de la sageta.	"And if the arrow strikes the abdomen and becomes lodged there, thereupon some opening of the wound appears, or the skin is torn, or an intestine is ruptured. There is no hope in treating the removal of the arrow."
E si la sageta catz en la vesica, e es yssida defora urina, e procesesca de lu alcuna causa a las partidas defora, e fort leu es dolor sobre le malaute, lahoras sapias que es mortal.	"And if the arrow strikes the bladder and urine is expelled from outside, and thereupon some part of the wound appears externally. There is strong pain over the wound, therefore know that it is mortal."
Mays les autres membres ayssi cum es la cara, le col, e·l golayro, e las spallas e le adjutori, e les spondils del dos, e la furcula, e la coysa, e la camba e a lor semblantz dels membres, son salvatz segon las majors disposicios quan la sageta no atroba vena ni arteria e no es sageta venenosa.	"But the other members such as face, neck, throat, shoulders, arms, shoulder blades, spine, collarbone, hip bone, and leg, and their counterparts of the limbs are saved according to their natural positions when the arrow does not strike a vein or artery and is not poisoned."
E yeu recomtare aquo a tu que he vist del esser de aquestas sagetas, per que signifiques per aquo sobre la curacio tieua.	"And I will tell you what I have seen concerning these arrows, so that you may know how to treat them."
La qual causa es, quar en un home cazec sageta en le lacrimal del huel de lu en la razitz del nas, e yeu extrayssi aquela a lu del autra partida, dejos le grays de l’aurelha de lu, e es sanat, e no accidic en le huel de lu nocument.	"It happened that an arrow struck the tear duct of the eye in one person's nose. I removed it from another opening near his ear, and he was healed without damage to his eye."
E extrayssi autra sageta a un Juzeu la qual cazec en lu en lo grays del sieu huel, dejos la palpebra pus dejos, e la sageta ja era occultada e no so conseguit de aquela sino una petita extremitat am la qual adhereys al sieu fust, e era gran sageta de las sagetas agudas dels Turcs , am ferr leon en la qual no havia aurelhas.	"And I removed another arrow from a Jew which had struck him in the socket of his eye. I left the eyelid closed and then opened it gradually until at last the arrow was exposed, but only a small part of its tip remained attached to its shaft. It was one of those sharp arrows used by the Turks, with a lion-head point and without feathers."
E senat es le Juzieu , e no accidic en le sieu huel mal accident.	"And the Jew recovered, suffering no damage to his eye."
E extrayssi una autra sageta a un home Crestia la qual era cazuta en le golayro, e era sageta arabica, e es aquela a la qual so aurelhas; e adonc yeu inscidegui sobre aquela entre doas guidegi, e ja era submersa en le golayro de lu; e adonc yeu so subtiliat am aquela, e aprop extraxi aquela, e es sanat le Crestia .	I extracted another arrow from a man named Crestian, which had fallen into his thigh, an Arab arrow it was, and it's that one with its ears; then I incised him between two tendons, for it was submerged in his thigh; then I gently removed that one, and Crestian is healed.
E extraxi autra sageta a un home la qual era cazuta en le sieu ventre, e cogitegui que moris per aquela; e donc, pus que foro passatz xxx dias e no es mudat sobre lu alcuna causa de las suas disposicios, inscidegui sobre la sageta e engenagui sobre aquela, e es sanat, e no accidic a lu accident mal.	I extracted another arrow from a man which had fallen into his belly, and I thought he would die from it; and since thirty days have passed and there is no change in his condition, I incised over the arrow and removed it, and he is healed, and no bad accident happened to him.
E vi mays un home en le qual cazec una sageta en le dos de lu, e consolidada es la plagua sobre lu, e pus que foc aprop set ans, yssic la sageta en la razitz de la coyssa.	I saw another man in whom an arrow had stuck in his back, and the wound was consolidated there; since it was necessary to remove the arrow from the middle of the flesh.
E vi una femna a la qual cazec sageta en le sieu ventre, e la plagua es consolidada dedintz lu, e no es mudada en las suas disposicios en re, e la femna no atrobec nocument en alcunas de las suas opperacios naturals.	I saw a woman in whom an arrow had stuck in her belly, and the wound was consolidated inside her, and she did not change in any of her bodily functions, nor did she suffer harm from it in any way.
E vi un autre home al qual cazec sageta en la sua cara e consolidada es la plagua e romas la sageta, no atrobant aqui mota dolor, e motz semblantz ad aquestz.	I saw another man in whom an arrow had stuck in his face and the wound was consolidated but the arrowhead remained, without causing much pain, and many others appeared like these.
E extrayssi la sageta del home dels princeps del rey que era cazuda en le mieg loc del nas sieu e ja havia declinat a la partida dreyta un petit, e occultada era tota la sageta.	I extracted the arrow from one of the king's princes who had it stuck in the middle of his nose and was already inclining towards the right side a little, and the whole arrow was hidden.
E yeu fu appelat a la curacio de lu aprop le cazement de la sageta entro a tres dias.	And I was called to treat him about three days after the arrow had entered.
E adonc yeu atrobegui la plagua de la sageta mot streyta; e adonc yeu inquirigui aquela am tenta subtil, e no sentigui aquela; mays el la sentia puncio dejos la aurelha dreyta, e adonc speregui que aquela punccio era per la extremitat de la sageta.	And then I found the wound of the arrow very narrow; and then I probed it carefully with a probe, but did not find anything; but he felt pricking from behind the right ear, so I thought that that pricking was caused by the point of the arrow.
E amplastregui le loc am emplaustre en le qual es vertut atrectiva e digestiva, confizant de mi que·l loc se apostemes per que appares a mi le loc de la sageta, per que secces sobre aquela.	And I widened the place with an emollient plaster which has attractive and digestive virtues, being confident that the place would be opened up so that I could see the place where the arrow was, in order to extract it.
E no accidic en le loc accident significant que la sageta hagues conseguit aquel loc; e yeu continuegui am le emplaustre sobre lu per motz dias e no accidic accident; e consolidada es la plagua entretant, e romas le malaute de la extreccio de lu per spazi de motz dias entro que un jorn sentic la sageta dintz le sieu nas e recontec aquo a mi.	And there did not happen in the place any accidental sign that the arrow had reached that place; and I continued with the plaster on it for many days, and nothing accidental happened. And the wound became consolidated meanwhile, and the illness from extracting it lasted for many days until one day he felt the arrow inside his nose and told me about it.
E adonc yeu pausegui sobre la plagua medicina acuta corrosiva per motz dias entro que foc ubert, e am la tenta yeu assagegui aquel, e atrobegui la extremitat de la sageta subtil, la qual adhereys al fust.	And then I put on the wound an acute corrosive medicine for many days until it was opened up, and with a probe I explored there and found the point of the arrow subtly adhered to the shaft.
E aprop yeu ajustegui en la apersio de la plagua per aquela medicina acuta entro que apparec a mi visiblament la extremitat de la sageta, e passec a mi temps am aquo per le spazi de temps entro quatre meses.	And immediately afterwards I adjusted the application of that acute medicine on the wound until the point of the arrow appeared visibly to me, and it took me more than four months to do this.
E aprop pus que la plagua foc amplificada, e foc a mi possible entrometre las forfexs en lu, e remaure aquela, e no obezic ad eyssiment, lahoras yeu no cessegui subtiliar e ingeniar sobre aquela am manieyras de engen, entro que comensegui un dia sobre aquela am manieyras de engens pendre lu am forceps descentment faytas, segon que vindra la forma de aquelas en la fi del capitol, entro que extraxi aquela; e aprop restauregui aquela plagua.	And when the wound was enlarged enough so that I could introduce forceps into it, and did not close up again afterwards, then I did not stop probing and devising about it with various methods of engineering until one day I began to extract it using forceps made specifically for this purpose, as described at the end of this chapter, until I extracted it; and immediately afterwards I dressed that wound.
E alcus metges jutgavan que la cartillage del nas no es restaurada, e yeu restauregui aquela e la plagua es consolidada, e sanat es le malaute per sanetat entiera, e no noguec en lu en deguna causa.	And some doctors judged that the cartilage of the nose could not be restored, but I restored it and the wound became consolidated, and the illness was completely healed without any remainder.
E yeu recomti a tu la qualitat de extraccio de alcunas sagetas per que pauses aquo regla e significacio sobre aquo que no he dit, quar las partidas de aquesta art e las difinicios de aquela no so conprehendudas am narracio ni no comprehen aquelas le libre.	And I tell you the quality of extracting some arrows, so that you may understand better what I have not described here, for the parts of this art and the definitions of it are not understood through narration nor can they be comprehended from this book.
E le artifexs savi compara am pauc sobre mot; e am aquo que es present sobre aquo que es absent; e atroba operacio novela e instrument novel deves le descendement de las causas extranhas del art quan accideysso.	And the wise craftsman compares little with much; and about what is present he speaks more than about what is absent; and he finds new operation and new instrument according to the descent of foreign causes of the art when they happen.
E donc yeu dic que sagetas no son fora-gitadas dels membres en les quals son ficadas sino segon dos manieyras: o per atraccio del loc en le qual intrec; o per le contrari de la autra partida.	And therefore I say that arrows are not thrown out of the members in which they are stuck except by two means: either by attraction of the place where it entered, or by the opposite part.
E aquela que es gitada per le loc don es intrada, o es sageta procedent en loc carnos, e es atirada e fora-gitada.	And that which is thrown out by the place where it entered, either is an arrow proceeding in a fleshy location, and is attracted and expelled.
E si no obezeys a eyssiment de la hora en la qual catz, lahoras cove que tu la laysses per alcus dias entro que poyresca la carn que es al enviro de lu, e sia alleujada l‘atraccio de lu e la sua egressio.	And if it does not happen immediately upon being struck, then you should leave it for some days until the flesh that is around it swells up and the attraction of it and its exit are alleviated.
E semblantment si es ficada en os e no obezeys a tu a eyssiment, lahoras layssa aquela per alcus dias e itera aquela am atraccio e mocio en quascun dia, e ja es fora-gitada.	Similarly, if it is stuck in bone and does not come out immediately, then leave it for some days and stir it daily with attraction and motion, and soon it will be expelled.
E si no obezeys a tu eyssiment aprop alcus dias, lahoras cove que tu perforas en le circuit de la sageta en aquel os de tota partida am taravel subtil entro que·l loc sia amplificat de la sageta, e aprop extratz aquela.	And if it does not come out even after several days, then you should bore around the arrow in that bone with a subtle awl until the location is widened by the arrow, and then extract it.
E si la sageta es ficada en le os del cap e ja ha procezit en un dels ventres del cervel, e apparo en le malaute alcus de aquels accidentz les quals yeu e ditz, lahoras abste de la extraccio de la sageta e layssa aquela entro que·l sieu esser sia equat aprop alcus dias; quar si la sageta perve al ciphac, lahoras la mort no es a lu prolonguada.	And if the arrow is stuck in the bone of the head and has already proceeded into one of the ventricles of the brain, and some of those accidents appear which I have mentioned earlier, then abstain from extracting the arrow and leave it there until its owner's condition is equalized for a few days; for if the arrow pierces the cerebrum, then death cannot be prolonged.
E si la sageta no es ficada sino en le cors del os tant solament e no passa entro al ciphac, e roman le malaute per alcus dias, e no accideys a lu denguna causa de aquels accidentz, lahoras tu engenia en la atraccio de la sageta e en la atraccio de lu.	And if the arrow is stuck only in the body of the bone and does not pass into the cerebrum, and the illness lasts for several days without any cause of those accidents occurring, then you should devise methods to attract the arrow and attract it out.
Mays si es mot ficada e no obezeys a tu a extraccio, lahoras tu aministra taravels en le circuit de la sageta ayssi cum havem recomtat, e aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat.	But if it is deeply stuck and will not come out, then you should administer awls around the arrow as we have described, and afterwards dress the location until it is healed.
Mays si la sageta ja es amaguada en le loc del cors, e es amaguada del sentiment, lahoras tu inquireys aquela am tenta, e si tu sentas aquela, lahoras atira aquela am alcus sturmentz les quals so convenientz a la atraccio de lu.	But if the arrow is already hidden in the location of the body and is hidden from sensation, then you should search for it with a probe, and if you find it, then attract it out with some instruments which are suitable for its attraction.
E si no podes sobre lu per la constriccio de la plagua e per la longitut del preon, e aqui no es os ni nervi ni vena, lahoras tu fen sobre la plagua entro que sia amplificada e que sia possible extrayre la sageta.	And if you cannot reach it because of the contraction of the wound and the length of the point, and here there is neither bone nor nerve nor vein, then you should operate on the wound until it is widened and it becomes possible to extract the arrow.
E si so a lu aurelhas am las quals sia tenguda, lahoras tu deliura la carn en la qual es ficada de tota partida am tot le engen que poyras far; e ingenia sobre aquo, si no podes sobre la evasio de la carn en la fractura de las aurelhas e en torssio de aquelas entro que obezesca.	And if it is held by the ears with which it is gripped, then you should loosen the flesh in which it is stuck on all sides with whatever engineering you can devise; and devise how to achieve this, if not by means of the escape of the flesh through the fracture of the ears or twisting of them until it comes out.
E quan tu administras la extraccio de la sageta en quascun loc on sia, lahoras tu usa am torcio de la tua ma am forceps a totas partidas entro que fassa aquela obezir; e subtilia am deriera subtilitat que la sageta no sia trencada e que sia fayta a tu dificil atraccio de lu e de aquela extraccio.	And when you are administering the extraction of the arrow in any location, then use your hand twisted with forceps on all sides so that it can achieve its objective; and be very subtle about this so that the arrow is not broken and it is done easily for you both in attracting it out and extracting it.
E si no podes sobre aquela de la tua hora, lahoras tu layssa per alcus dias entro que se poyrescan las partidas que so en le circuit de lu, e aprop itera aquela quar lahoras es alleujada.	And if you cannot reach it at that time, then leave it for some days until the parts around it have recovered, and afterwards try again; for now it will be easier.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat flux de sanc, lahoras tu administra aquo que havem dit de curacio en le sieu capitol.	But if you experience counterflow of blood, then administer what we have said about treatment in its chapter.
E guarda la tua vertut de inscizio de vena o de nervi, o de corda, e aministra engen en tota manieyra a tu possibla de la evasio de la sageta; e fay aquo am facilitat e tranquillitat e tarditat e fermetat ayssi cum yeu e a tu recomtat.	And guard your power of incision of vein or nerve or cord, and administer whatever engineering you can think of for the escape of the arrow; and do this with facility and calmness and slowness and steadfastness as I and you have recommended.
E donc que fassas contrayre la sageta per so que·l malaute sia segon la figura segon la qual foc deves le cazement de la sageta en lu, quar es mays juvatiu.	And ensure that you compress the arrow so that the illness follows its natural course according to the figure which the arrow was supposed to follow in it, for this is more beneficial.
Mays si aquo no es a tu possible, lahoras tu aministra aquo que es a tu possible per las figuras.	"But if this is not possible for you, then you shall perform what is possible according to your knowledge."
Mays las sagetas que son fora-gitadas per le contrari del autra partida, o que ja de lu procezeys alcuna partida a las partidas de fora, o fa gilbositat la extramitat de la sageta per sentiment de la partida pus desus de la codena propdana e vezes aquela eminent; adonc tu secsa sobre aquela; e sia la seccio segon la quantitat en la qual prenguan las forceps; e aprop atira aquela, quar ela es fayta leugiera a eyssiment.	"But the arrows that are shot from the other side of the target, or those for which no partition has yet begun to be made in the partitions of the other side, or those whose extreme tip is felt in the partition above the nearest prop, you shall cut across it; and make your section according to the quantity in which the forceps take hold; and then throw that one away, as it is too light to use."
Mays si es retenguda en le os, lahoras tu tortz lama segon contrarietat entro que la sageta enprema en le os, e amplifique a si meteys, e aprop extratz aquela.	"But if it is retained in the bone, then you shall twist the arrow according to its direction of entry into the bone, and extract it little by little, bit by bit."
E sino, layssa aquela per alcus dias, e aprop itera aquela entro qu’en yesca.	"And if not, leave that one alone for a few days, and then remove it when it has begun to rot."
E si le fust de la sageta es en aquela, lahoras tu impelleys aquela am lu.	"And if the shaft of the arrow is in there too, then you shall pull it out with it."
Mays si le fust es cazut e voles aministrar inpulsio, lahoras tu intromet e aquela, si es sorda, sturment concau per so que intre la concavitat de lu en la coa de la sageta e aprop impelleys aquela am lu.	"But if the shaft has broken off and you wish to administer traction, then insert a probe there, if it is not too short; curve it concavewards so that its concavity fits over the end of the arrow, and then pull it out."
Mays si la sageta es concava, lahoras tu impelleys aquela am sturment fort intrant en aquela, quar la sageta es alleujada per aquela.	"But if the arrow is concave, then you shall pull it out with a probe entering into that curve, for the arrow will be lightened by that."
E si la sageta es entoxiguada, lahoras cove que tu concaves tota la carn en la qual es le vere, si es a tu possible aquo, e aprop cura aquela am aquo que si conveneys.	"And if the arrowhead is barbed, then you must cut away all the flesh in which it is embedded, if that be possible for you; and then dress the wound with whatever seems suitable."
E si la sageta catz en le pietz, o en le ventre, o en la vesica, o en le costat, e es propinqua per so que tu tocas aquela am la tenta, e es a tu possible secsar sobre aquela, lahoras secsa sobre aquela e guarda te de inscizio de vena o de nervi, e extratz aquela, e aprop cos la plagua si indigeys, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	"And if the arrow has entered the bone, or the belly, or the bladder, or the flank, and is close enough for you to touch it with your hand, and it is possible for you to cut upon it, then cut thereupon and guard against injury to a vein or nerve; extract the arrow and sew up the wound if necessary, and dress it until healed."
Forma de forceps am las quals so atiradas las sagetas:	"Forms of forceps with which arrows are extracted:"
Sian las extremitatz de lor cum a bec de ausel que son faytas cum serra quan prendon sobre la sageta per so que no la layssen.	"The ends of them are shaped like the beak of a bird, and they have teeth like a saw when they grasp the arrow, so that it is not allowed to slip away."
E de aquelas son faytas motas specias, grans, paucas e migieras, segon la quantitat de la grandeza de la sageta e de la sieua pauqueza, e de la amplitud de la plagua, e de la constriccio de lu.	"And they come in many different shapes, large and small, few or numerous according to the size of the arrowhead and its thickness, and the width of the wound and the closeness of its contraction."
Forma de impellent concau de aquesta extremitat conquava ayssi cum pena de ausel per so que sia alleujat le intrament de la sageta en lu, e impulcio de aquela sorda:	"Form of concave probe, shaped like the quill of a bird, to facilitate entry into the wound caused by an arrow and traction upon it when it is short:"
Forma de impellent de sorda extremitat:	"Form of probe for extracting barbed arrows:"
ayssi cum ray per so que sia alleujat le intrament de lu en la sageta concava e es impellida am aquel.	"like a hook, to facilitate entry into the wound in a concave arrow and its extraction with it."
De fleubotomia de las venas.	"On phlebotomy of veins:"
Las venas de fleubotomia de las quals corr costuma de fleubotomar so xxx, de las quals so en le cap xvi, so es doas venas pulsatils las quals so aprop las aurelhas, dic alhasisain; doas herbas que so en les dos templars apparentz; e doas venas que so en dos lacrimals de dos huels que son appeladas aspicientz; e la vena preparada en le mieg loc del front, e la vena que es en la extremitat del nas; e doas guidegi que so al col; e doas venas que so en la labia desus; e doas venas que so en la labia dejos; e — aquestas so las venas que so appeladas algelic —; e so doas venas que so dejos la lengua.	"The veins commonly used for phlebotomy are thirty in number, of which sixteen are in the head. These include two pulsating veins near the ears, called helixes; two herbs that appear on both temples; two veins located in the lacrimal ducts of both eyes, called aspiciences; a prepared vein in the middle of the forehead; and a vein at the tip of the nose; two jugulars at the neck; two veins on the upper lip; two veins on the lower lip; two veins that are called algels; and two veins below the tongue."
Mays las venas que so fleubotomadas en les brasses so v; quar de aquelas es una cephalica, e es deves le latz silvestre; e le poble appela “la vena del cap”, e sorda, e es vena migiera, e es composta de un ram de la basilica, e de autre ram de la cephalica; e nomna aquela le poble “vena de tot le cors”, e basilica es vena la qual es pausada en le latz domestic, e es nomnada “citillar”, e nompnan aquela les vulguars “vena del ventre”; e funis del bras, e es pausada sobre le focil, e es aquela en la qual es fleubotomat, e es aquela que appar sobre le poutz per apparicio manifesta; e salvatella, e es la vena que es entre lo dit auricular e·l pus petit dit, e so en lu dos ramps.	"But the veins that are commonly opened in the arms are five in number: of these one is cephalic, and it lies on the outer side; the people call it 'the vein of the head'. Another is median, composed of a branch of the basilica and another of the cephalic; the people name it 'vein of the whole body'. The basilica is that vein which is situated on the inner side of the arm, and is called 'cubital' by the vulgar. The funis of the arm lies upon the forearm, and this is where phlebotomy takes place when it manifests itself above the elbow. And the salvatella is the vein that lies between the little finger and the one next to it."
E en le pe e la camba so tres venas; la una de aquelas es que es dejos la curvatura del denolh del latz silvestre; e la segonda es sophena, e·l loc de lu es dejos la camba del latz domestic; e la vena sciatica, e·l loc de lu es dejos la camba del latz silvestre; e en la camba son autras venas semblantz ad aquelas.	"And in the leg and thigh there are three veins: one of these lies below the curvature of the knee on the outer side. The second is the saphenous vein, whose location is behind the thigh on the inner side. The sciatic vein lies behind the thigh on the outer side. And there are other veins similar to these in the thigh."
Le juvament de las venas que so aprop las aurelhas es a cataris antics e emigranea e sahafati e ulceracios del cap malas antiquas.	"The use of the veins near the ears is for ancient catarrhs, migraine, sciatica and ulcers in the head from old injuries."
E la qualitat de sagnar aquelas es segon que yeu recomti a tu: es que sia ras le cap del malaute, e sia freguat le cap del malaute en le occipiti en le loc de amdoas las venas am drap ample am bona fricacio; aprop strenha le malaute le sieu col am una benda entro que apparan las doas e les locs de lor so aprop las aurelhas en dos locs depremegutz del cap; e quereys aquela am le tieu dit, e si tu sentes le pols de aquelas am le dit tieu, aqui senha am tenta.	"And the manner of opening those veins is as follows: first, shave the head of the patient and rub it well with a soft cloth on both sides where the veins are located. Then place a firm bandage around the neck of the patient so that two places appear near the ears in two depressed areas of the head. Find the vein with your index finger and feel its pulse with your finger, then make the incision there."
Aprop tu pren la lancea cutellar, e es aquela que es inscident, e aprop tu intromet aquel dejos la vena en la codena entro que·l fleubotomi vengua al os.	"Then take the lancet scalpel, which is inserted, and introduce it below the vein in the elbow so that phlebotomy reaches the bone."
E aprop eleva la tua ma am la vena e la codena a las partidas desus e inscideys la vena am inscizio inscident.	"Then raise your hand with the vein and elbow above, and make an incision in the vein with an incising cut."
E sia la longitut de la inscizio la quantitat de dos ditz ajustatz o entorn de aquo; e fay yssir del sanc atant quant voles.	"And let the length of the incision be about two fingers or thereabouts, and let blood flow out as much as you wish."
E aprop strenh am pulvils e layssa aquela entro que sia sanada.	"Then press with cotton and plaster to stop it from bleeding until it is healed."
E ja e precedit en le comensament del libre la inscizio de aquelas e de lor la cauterizacio.	"And it has already been mentioned at the beginning of this book how to perform incisions on these veins and how to cauterize them."
Mays de las doas venas arterias que so als templars le juvament de la fleubotomia es a emigranea antiqua e sode malvada e obtalmia assidua e cors de superfluitatz acutas effusas als huels.	"But of the two arterial veins that are in the temples, phlebotomy is useful for ancient migraine, chronic headache, habitual ophthalmia, and acute effusions of blood from the eyes."
E la qualitat de fleubotomar aquelas es segon que yeu recomti a tu: constrengua le malaute le sieu col mot entro que apparan las doas venas al sentiment per appericio manifesta e sia demonstrat le pols de lor dejos le tieu dit; e lahoras tu senha am tenta.	"And the manner of phlebotomy on those veins is as follows: tie a cloth tightly around the patient's neck until both veins appear prominently and their pulsation can be felt with your finger. Then make the incision there."
E aprop tu eleva la codena desobre la vena a las partidas desus am le tieu dit indic, e intromet le fleubotomi inscident dejos, e eleva la vena en sus; e inscidey aquela ayssi cum has fayt en las doas venas autras; e fay correr del sanc segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	"And then raise the elbow above the vein with your index finger, introduce the phlebotomy scalpel beneath it in an incising manner and elevate the vein upwards. Then make the incision as you would on other veins, allowing blood to flow according to your needs."
E aprop deslia la coartacio del malaute, e pausa le tieu dit sobre la vena per una hora, e aprop pausa sobre aquela coto e pulvils e strenh aquela desus am fort constriccio, e layssa aquela entro que sia sanada.	"And then untie the bandage from the patient and place your finger on the vein for an hour. Then apply cotton and powder to it and press firmly with a tight bandage until it is healed."
E ja es precedida la rememoracio de lor, e de aquelas la inscizio, e la atraccio en le comensament del libre.	"And their memorization and incision, as well as those of the other veins mentioned earlier in this book, have already been described."
E donc le juvament de fleubotomia de la vena del front es aprop la fleubotomia de la cephalica a las malautias antiquas de la cara e a emigranea e rogor e ulceracios fetidas.	"And the use of phlebotomy on the frontal vein is especially useful for ancient diseases of the face, migraine, redness, and foul ulcers."
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es segon que yeu recomti a tu; so es que·l malaute strenha le sieu col am una benda entro que apparesca la vena; e aprop pren le insturment le qual es nompnat fossori del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	"And the manner of phlebotomy on that vein is as follows: have the patient tie a bandage around their neck so that the vein appears. Then take the instrument called the 'fossor', which has this shape:"
Pausa la puncta eminent la qual es al cap del fossori sobre aquela vena e percuteys sobre lu am penche o am autre causa en la manieyra de lu, e layssa lo sanc correr segon la quantitat la qual voles; e aprop deslia la perforacio del malaute e strenh aquela entro que sia sanada.	"Place the point of the 'fossor' on that vein and pierce it with a quick strike or other cause in the manner shown, allowing blood to flow according to your desire. Then untie the perforation from the patient and press it firmly until it is healed."
E alcunas veguadas es uberta am fleubotomi lat, empero no cove que·l fleubotomi sia de acuta extremitat ayssi cum les autres fleubotomis, abantz sia de lada extremitat, e fleubotoma aquela segon le tranvers, quar le os es propda e fort leu trencaria en lu le fleubotomi quan es subtil.	"Sometimes it is opened with a lat flebotomy, but it need not be of acute point like other flebotomies; rather, it should be on the blunt end, for if sharp, it might break against the bone when subtle."
Mays le juvament de las duas venas que so als lacrimals de dos huels per scabia del huels per rogor e sebol en les huels, e a las malautias de la cara.	"The junction of both veins which are near the tear ducts of two eyes for scabies of the eyelids due to heat and grease in the eyes, and for facial diseases."
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia es que·l malaute strenha le col sieu am una benda, e aprop fleubotoma aquelas, e tu sias stant sobre le cap de lu.	"The quality of the flebotomy is such that the patient should hold their head steady with a bandage, and carefully perform the flebotomy thereupon, standing above the patient's head."
E sia fayta la fleubotomia segon le transvers a longitut un pauc am fleubotomi pauc, quar en le loc no es carn; e si le fleubotomi es subtil, fort leu la extremitat de lu es trencada.	"And the flebotomy should be performed horizontally for about half an inch with a thin flebotomy needle, as there is little flesh in this area. If the flebotomy needle is too sharp, it might break."
E aprop fay correr del sanc atant quant es a tu necessari, e pausa sobre aquelas coto, e strenh aquelas per una nueyt, e aprop deslia aquelas.	"And carefully make the blood flow as much as necessary, and pause thereupon, pressing with that until the next day, and then remove the bandage."
Mays le fleubotomi de la vena del nas es conferent a febre acuta e a soda vehement, e a las malautias de la cara e emigranea e rogor que accideys en la cara, e majorment quan es antiqua.	"But the flebotomy of the nasal vein is beneficial for acute fever and sudden sneezing, and for facial diseases, migraine, and heat that occurs in the face, especially when it is chronic."
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute strenha le sieu col e aprop te le sieu nas am la tua ma sinistra, e pren le fleubotomi subtil lonc e fica aquela en le mieg loc del cap del nas segon rectitut, quar la vena no appar al sentiment aqui, e quar le sanc comensa a fluir tantost.	"And the quality of this flebotomy is that the patient should hold their head steady and place their nose on their left hand, taking a thin flebotomy needle and inserting it into the middle of the forehead vertically, as the vein does not appear palpable here, and blood will begin to flow soon."
Cove que tu ultimes la tua ma am le fleubotomi petit a petit e fassas correr del sanc segon la tua necessitat; e aprop lia aquela per una nuoyt, quar aquela es restaurada leugierament.	"Then slowly withdraw your hand along with the flebotomy needle and make the blood flow according to your needs; then bind it for one night, as it heals quickly."
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de las doas guidegui a constriccio de ale e a comensament de lepra e a motas malautias e inpetige e malas ulceracios corrosivas ayssi cum herpotromeno.	"But the benefit of flebotomy on both cheeks is to relieve pain and congestion, and to prevent or treat leprosy, eczema, itching, and corrosive ulcers like herpes."
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquelas es que el malaute strenha dejos quascuna en le sieu col am liament; e estia le artifexs sobre le cap del malaute, e le malaute sia sezent sobre una sezela.	"And the quality of this flebotomy is that each patient should hold their head steady with their hands; and the operator should stand above the patient's head, while the patient sits on a stool."
E aprop fleubotoma la vena al lonc am fleubotomi ample petit a petit; e aprop extratz de sanc segon temprada quantitat o segon aquo que vezes de necessitat que es ad aquo; e aprop fay semblant del autra vena.	"And then carefully flebotomize the vein on the long side with a large flebotomy needle little by little; then draw blood according to moderation or as much as necessary, and do the same for the other vein."
E aprop deslia le liament e strenh las doas venas am strictura migiera per so que·l malaute no sia prefocat, e laysa entro al mati quar la plagua es sanada.	"And then untie the bandage and press both veins with a moderate compression to prevent the patient from fainting. Let him rest for the night, as the wound will be healed by morning."
E le juvament de la fleubotomia de las venas algerich, comfereys a petitas apostemas e pustulas de la boca e corrupcio de las gengivas e malas ulceracios e fissuras, e a malas ulceracios que so en le nas e en le circuit de lu.	"And the benefit of flebotomy on the veins at the elbows is to treat small abscesses and pimples in the mouth, gingivitis, ulcers, fissures, and ulcers around the nose and its surroundings."
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquelas es que fases cezer le malaute denant tu, e strenh le col de lu am una benda, e aprop revolveys las labias de lu e reguarda a doas venas de las quals la una es de la dextra de la labia e la segonda de la senestra; e la demonstracio de quascuna es per la negror de quascuna de amdos, e aquo mays es quar en le circuit de aquelas so venas menudas negras; e adonc inscideys cascuna per inscizio inscident.	"And the quality of this flebotomy is that you should make the patient sit in front of you and hold their head steady with a cloth. Then gently turn their lips and observe the two veins, one on the right lip and the other on the left; their demonstration is through their darkness, and especially where there are small dark veins around them. Then incise each one with an oblique incision."
Mays si dubitacio es dejos tu, e no sabes qual es de aquelas, lahoras tu enten a inscisio de la major de aquelas, e de la pus manifesta de aquelas.	"But if there is doubt and you do not know which one it is, then make the incision on the larger one of those two, or where there is evident pus."
E fay le semblant de las doas venas que so en las labias desus.	"And do the same for both veins that are above the lips."
Mays costuma corr mays a inscidir las doas venas que so en la labia dejos.	"But it is customary to incise both veins that are on the lower lip more often."
Mays de doas venas que so dejos la lengua le juvament es aprop la fleubotomia de la cephalica a prefocacios que so en le guolayro, a la malautia de la uvula, e a malautias de la boca.	"But the benefit of flebotomy on both veins under the tongue is to treat fainting spells that occur in the throat, uvitis, and oral diseases."
E la qualitat de fleubotomar aquelas es que segue le malaute entre las tuas mas denant le solel, e eleva la lengua de lu, e reguarda dejos la lengua, de la un latz de lu vena e del autre latz vena, e la color de quascuna es declinant a negror.	"And the quality of flebotomizing those veins is that you should stand behind the patient facing the sunlight, raise their tongue, and observe it from below. On one side there is a vein and on the other side another vein, both tending towards darkness in color."
E adonc fleubotoma quascuna; e guarda te que no ultimes la tua ma en fleubotoman aquelas, quar dejos aquelas so arterias.	"And then flebotomize each one; but be careful not to go too deep with your hand while flebotomizing those veins, as beneath them are arteries."
E las tuas venas que so fleubotomadas en le coyde so en las quals corr costuma en totz les homes, e la fleubotomia de lor es fayta segon dos manieyras, o pongen am le fleubotomi mirtilat o olivar a subtilitat declinant; o secsar am fleubotomi cutellar, e apelha si alnessil, e aquesta es la forma de lu:	"And the veins that are commonly flebotomized in the elbow are those that are present in all men. Flebotomy of these is performed in two ways: either with a flebotomy needle dipped in myrtle or olive oil, subtly inclined; or cutting with a flebotomic scalpel called 'alnessil,' and this is its form:"
E aquest alnessil es que conveneys a seccio e de aquels so specias latz e subtils segon la amplitut de las venas e segon la strictura de aquelas.	"And this 'alnessil' is appropriate for sectioning, having sharp and subtle sides according to the width of the veins and their tension."
Forma de fleubotomi mirti:	"Form of myrtle flebotomy:"
sia le latz de lu ayssi cum vezes, e conveneys a obrir las venas concavas plenas procedentz apparentz grossas, e ad aquelas que conteno sanc gros torbat.	"The side of it should be like this: it is convenient for opening concave veins filled with blood, especially those appearing thick and containing turbid blood."
E aquesta es la forma de fleubotomi olivar:	"And this is the form of olive flebotomy:"
E aquest fleubotomi es de menor latitut e de pus subtil extremitat, e conveneys a fleubotomia de venas subtils que conteno sanc subtil citri.	"And this flebotomy needle is of lesser width and has a very subtle tip. It is convenient for flebotomizing small veins containing clear blood."
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de la vena basilica la qual es una de tres venas: quar extratz le sanc de las malautias que so dejos le guolayro e·l col, e de aquo que siec le pietz e·l ventre.	"But the benefit of flebotomizing the basilica vein, which is one of three veins, is that it draws blood from diseases that are below the throat and neck, as well as from sciatica and abdominal pain."
E conveneys al fleubotomador, quan fleubotomia aquela, que guarde be aquela e sia sobre-temor en aquela, quar dejos lu ha arteria, e si erra e ajusta en la punctura del fleubotomi, inscidira aquela arteria e accidira fluxs de sanc, per so que cove que no fleubotomes aquela am fleubotomi pungent, abantz sia sectant cum alnessil.	"And it is convenient for the flebotomist, when flebotomizing that vein, to carefully observe and be cautious in it, as there is an artery below it. If they err and strike with the flebotomy needle, they will cut that artery and cause bleeding. Therefore, it is not advisable to flebotomize it with a pointed flebotomy needle, but rather cut with alnessil."
E si no appar la basilica per apparicio manifesta, lahoras cove que tu laysses aquela e que tu mudes a la autre, o que cerques alcun ram sieu; o que fleubotomes en loc de lu finis del bras, quar aquela es manifesta; e secsa aquela am fleubotomi alnessil ayssi cum havem dit.	"And if the basilica vein does not appear through manifest appearance, then you should leave it and move to another one, or seek some of its branches; or flebotomize in place of it at the end of the arm where it is manifest. And cut it with alnessil flebotomy as we have said."
Mays si tu voles la fleubotomia de lu meteyssa, lahoras cove denant la strictura del bras que toques le loc entro que conogues le loc dels pols, e aprop senha sobre lu am tencha; e aprop lia le bras e secsa la vena am seccio concava am fleubotomi alnessil ayssi cum havem dit; e guarda te que caja la percussio per alcu spazi del loc de la arteria.	"But if you want to flebotomize the median vein, then it is necessary in front of the tension of the arm that you touch the place within which you know the location of the pulse. Then sign over it with your thumb; and bend the arm and cut the vein with a concave section using alnessil flebotomy as we have said. And be careful not to strike the artery some distance away from its location."
E quan tu vezes, cum strenhes le liament, imflacio en le loc que has senhat am tencha, lahoras aquela inflacio es inflacio de la arteria, e donc squiva aquela.	"And when you wish, as you tighten the ligature, press in the place where you have marked with your thumb. Then that swelling is swelling of the artery, and therefore avoid it."
E si vezes le sanc fluir en la fleubotomia ayssi cum aurina de enfant, e·l sanc es subtil rog, lahoras sapias que es del sanc de la arteria; e lahoras tu coyta e pausa le tieu dit sobre aquel per lonc spazi; e aprop osta le tieu dit, e si lo sanc es abscindit, quar motas veguadas es abscindit, lahoras tu strenh le bras e layssa aquel.	"And if blood flows like a child's urine during flebotomy and the blood is red, then know that it is arterial blood. Then lift your finger from there for some distance; remove your finger, and if the bleeding stops, as often happens, then tighten the arm and leave him."
E guardes le malaute de la moccio de lu, e sia sobre-temor de lu e no maugua aquel per alcus dias entro que sia sanat.	"And protect the patient from mucus of that wound. And be cautious with it for several days until it is healed to prevent infection."
Mays si le sanc no es abscindit, e vezes que deves tu no es present medicina ad aquo, lahoras tu inscideys la arteria, si appar a tu; quar la extremitat de lu es contrayta, e es abscindit le sanc; o que prenguas scorsa de fistic, e fen aquela, e pren la una maytat e strenh aquela sobre le loc de la vena am strictura descent am liament e am pulvils entro al autra dia.	"But if the bleeding does not stop and you feel that it is necessary to use a medicine for this purpose, then you have cut the artery. If it appears to you, as the end of it is contracted and the blood stops. Then take a fistful of cotton and place it there; then take some mustard seed and plaster it on; and wrap it with bandages and powder for another day."
E lahoras si le sanc es abscindit, bo es; e sino, lahoras cura aquel am aquo del qual es precedit a la rememoracio del loc de las polveras abscindentz flux de sanc.	"And if blood is cut off, it is good; and otherwise, then treat that with which the preceding was remembered to absorb the flow of blood."
E la abscizio del sanc de lu es dificil en motas disposicios per le loc petit de la plagua e la possibilitat del liament del bras.	"And cutting off the blood from it is difficult in many positions due to the small space of the wound and the possibility of hitting the arm's ligament."
Mays de la vena fusca la fleubotomia es juvament que extratz lo sanc de la partida subirana del cap e a la partida dejos del cors; per aquo quar es composta de ram de la basilica e de ram de cephalica, ayssi cum havem dit.	"However, phlebotomy of the black vein is beneficial for drawing blood from the upper part of the head and from below the chest; for this reason it consists of branches of the basilic vein and branches of the cephalic vein, as we have said."
E cove al fleubotomant aquela que sia sobre-temor en la fleubotomia de lu, quar dejos aquela es un nervi; e adonc si ajusta en la punctura del fleubotomi e atroba le nervi, accidira a lu stupor, e es difficil la sanacio de lu, e fort leu no es sanat de tot, E aquest nervi motas veguadas apar al sentiment; e si es ocultat ad alcus homes e es subtil e no es monstrat, lahoras cove que tu pauses le fleubotomi am le qual tu fleubotomas am seccio de alnessil, e evita le nervi am la tua fortalesa.	"And therefore one should be especially afraid during the phlebotomy of that [vein], because underneath it is a nerve; and therefore if one adjusts in the puncture of the phlebotomy and touches the nerve, stupor will occur, and its healing is difficult, and often it is not healed entirely. And this nerve can be seen by sensation many times, but if it is hidden from some people and is subtle and does not appear, then you should pause the phlebotomy with which you are performing the phlebotomy, and avoid the nerve with your strength."
E si la vena es entre dos nervis, lahoras tu fen la vena en la longitut.	"And if the vein is between two nerves, then you should cut the vein lengthwise."
Le juvament de la fleubotomia de la vena cephalica es que atratz le sanc del cap e comfereys a las malautias dels huels.	"The benefit of phlebotomy of the cephalic vein is that it draws blood from the head and relieves illnesses of the eyes."
E cove en aquest propriament, si vols que la fleubotomes pungen am fleubotomi olivar o am fleubotomi mirti; quar es la pus salva de totas las venas, quar no es dejos lu arteria ni nervi.	"And therefore in this case, if you want the phlebotomist to puncture with an olive-shaped or myrtle-shaped phlebotomy instrument, because it is the safest of all veins, for it has neither artery nor nerve underneath."
Mays empero conveneys a tu deves la fleubotomia que guardes que am le fleubotomi no punguas le cap del lacert tant solament, e cerques le loc pus leugier, e no notz a lu, si no es atrobat am la percussio primieyra que sia sobre aquela am fleubotomia alcunas veguadas.	"But nevertheless you should take care that with the phlebotomy instrument you do not puncture the head of the lizard alone, and search for the place where it is lightest, and do not touch it unless it is encountered first with percussion before that phlebotomy."
Mays empero fort leu es apostemat en alcus homes, quan no es fleubotomat en la primieyra percussio, mays no notz en re aquel apostema.	"But nevertheless, sometimes an aposteme occurs in some people when it is not phlebotomized in the first percussion, but do not touch that aposteme."
Mays la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquela e les accidentz de lu so motz, en les quals te cove cogitar en lor rectificacio.	"But nevertheless, the quality of this phlebotomy and its accidents are many, in which you should consider their correction."
Le primier de lu es del qual cove que sapias que fleubotomia no es aministrada sino en conservacio de sanetat e per speransa de lu e cautela de aveniment de malautias, e que sia fayta fleubotomia en la una de las venas que so en le coyde, so es: cephalica, fusca e basilica; e que sia fayta fleubotomia al comensament de primaveyra, sobre dejun en primaviera e autunppne, e en invern aprop la comestio, quan apparo significacios de replecio.	"The first of these is that you should know that phlebotomy is administered only for the conservation of health and in hope of its benefit and caution against the occurrence of illnesses, and that it should be performed on one of the veins which are in the elbow, namely the cephalic, basilic, or median cubital vein; and that it should be performed at the beginning of spring, after fasting in spring and autumn, and in winter close to meals, when signs of repletion appear."
E sia fayta fleubotomia e le tertz dia o al primier pus que del jorn siran passadas tres horas.	"And phlebotomy should be performed on the third day or at least one day after three hours have passed since the previous bloodletting."
Mays fleubotomia que es aministrada, mays quan provoca convenencia e necessitat ad aquo, o de nuoyt o de dia, en tota hora e en tot temps.	"But phlebotomy which is administered when it provokes convenience and necessity at that time, whether now or later, on any day or hour or time."
E cove que efant no sia fleubotomat entro que aja xiiii ans, e femna que sia prenhs no sia fleubotomada sino del quart mes entro al sete, e les viels no sian fleubotomatz les quals ja han passatz lx ans.	"And children should not be phlebotomized until they are at least fourteen years old, and women who are pregnant should not be phlebotomized except from the fourth to the seventh month, and elderly people who have already passed seventy years should not be phlebotomized."
E cum alcu vol esser fleubotomat per qualque manieyra sia, cove que mondifique les sieus budels denant la fleubotomia am clisteri leon, si en aquels ha mota fenda retenguda, per so que las venas no atiro las superfluitatz en la fleubotomia dels budels, que son puridas, e que no noguan als membres principals.	"And when someone wants to be phlebotomized for any reason, they should cleanse their bowels beforehand with a lion's claw purgative, especially if there is much retained fæces in them, so that the veins do not draw the superfluities into the phlebotomy of the bowels which are purified, and do not harm the principal members."
E no sian fleubotomatz les pascientz naucea sacertiva e crapula, ni evasent de malautia ni de ebretat entro que aquo sia remaugut aquo de lor, ni malaute de ydropici, e mays que fleubotomia sia temuda aprop colica passio e aprop vomit, e aprop cos de ventre, e aprop multiplicacio de coyt e de trebal e de exercici de dejunis o de vigilias e de tota causa que dissolveys la vertut, o sia corpore28 o animal.	"And patients with sacred nausea and gluttony should not be phlebotomized until they have removed themselves from their illness or drunkenness, nor those suffering from dropsy, and moreover phlebotomy should be feared near colic pain and vomiting, near abdominal tumors, and near multiplication of coitus and work and exercise during fasting or vigils or for any cause that dissolves virtue, whether corporeal or animal."
E aprop considera en subtiliacio de humos denant aquo si le sanc es gros, am viandas e beures, e am medicinas si aquo es a lu possible ad aquo.	"And also consider the subtlety of the humors before that, if the blood is thick, with foods and drinks, and with medicines if it is possible to do so."
E aprop intre en banh si alcuna causa no prohibeys, o sia excersitat per alcun exercici per so que·l sanc sia subtiliat.	"And also take a bath if there is no prohibition for doing so, or stimulate with some exercise so that the blood may be subtilized."
E pausa la fleubotomia de lu en le pietz del dia, so es enviro la hora de tercia, ayssi cum havem dit.	"And pause the phlebotomy of it in the evening, around the hour of Terce, as we have said."
E perforsa te que·l pietz de aquel sia guardat en aquel dia de totz mals accidentz animals, ayssi cum es angustia, ira, temor, e de totz accidentz corporals, ayssi cum es trebal e pena superflua e coyt e semblantz a lor.	"And perform that evening as guarded in that day from all animal bad accidents, such as anxiety, anger, fear, and from all corporeal accidents, such as work and superfluous effort and coitus and their like."
E a la sua sezelha fassa esser presentz las causas en le us de la qual corr costuma dels homes am aromaticitat e odorament e am bals e semblantz ad aquels segon la cantitat de possibilitat.	"And at his seat, let the causes be present in the use of which men are accustomed with aromatics and fragrances and with balms and their like according to the quantity of possibility."
E segua le fleubotomador sobre un coyssi que sia pus aut que·l coyssi de aquel que deu esser fleubotomat.	"And follow the phlebotomist on a cushion that is higher than the cushion of the one who is to be phlebotomized."
E aprop extragua le sieu bras, e fregue aquel am la sua ma le fleubotomador doas o tres veguadas; e aprop strenha le liament am correia e involva aquel doas veguadas.	"And also extend his arm, and rub that with his hand the phlebotomist two or three times; and also stretch the limb with a bandage and wrap it twice."
E sia la strictura temprada, quar la strictura quant no es engual, o la strictura es am superfluitat, lahoras prohibeys de fluxs del sanc; o es am mollificacio, e lahoras prohibeys le cors del sanc eyssament.	"And let the bandage be moderate, for a bandage that is not equal can prohibit the flow of blood, or one with superfluity, and likewise one with softening can prohibit the course of the blood equally."
E aprop la strictura, cove que aquel que deu esser fleubotomat fregue las suas mas ensemps entre lor entro que las venas sian imfladas, e sian declaradas al sentiment.	"And also during the bandage, let him who is to be phlebotomized rub his hands together within them until the veins are inflated and declared to the touch."
E aprop le fleubotomador unte le sieu fleubotomi am un pauc de oli antic propriament; e aprop pausa le sieu di indic de la ma senestra sobre aquela vena, dejos le loc del qual vol la fleubotomia, per que la vena fuja un pauc, e la percussio sia sessada quar de las venas es la qual atrobas ayssi cum corda fugent deves la fleubotomia, e de aquelas es que es plena de ventositat e quan pauses le fleubotomi sobre aquela es contrayta deves le fleubotomi, e es desceubut le fleubotomador; e le fleubotomi no uobre la vena, e si uobre, aquela es streyta.	"And also the phlebotomist should anoint his scalpel with a little ancient olive oil properly; and also let him place his index finger of his left hand over that vein, away from the location where the phlebotomy is desired, so that the vein may yield somewhat, and the percussion be situated where one of the veins which underlie the phlebotomy is struck, like strings fleeing beneath it, and those are full of windiness, and when the scalpel pauses upon them they contract beneath the scalpel, and the phlebotomist descends; and the scalpel does not open the vein, and if it opens, that vein is narrow."
E donc, per aquo cove que·l fleubotomador sia fermat e sia sollicit en totas aquestas causas.	"And therefore, let the phlebotomist be firm and attentive to all these causes."
E aprop depause le fleubotomi, mays si la vena es huberta en una veguada, lahoras bo es; e sino, tu itera aquo autra vaguada dejos aquel loc un pauc, o sobre lu am festinacio, si le loc no es apostemat.	"And also let him pause the scalpel, but if the vein is opened in one attempt, that is good; and if not, then repeat that elsewhere away from that location somewhat, or above it with haste, if the location is not inflamed."
Et si le loc es apostemat, o le malaute se spauresca, lahoras tu le layssa per un dia o per dos, e no strenha le liament, quar fort leu atirara apostema caut, ni no intre en banh.	"And if the location is inflamed or the illness worsens, then let him leave it for a day or two, and do not stretch the limb, for otherwise it would draw an ulcerous inflammation, nor take a bath."
E aprop itera la fleubotomia si la ama.	"And also repeat the phlebotomy if necessary."
E si la apercio es petita e corr sanc subtilment, e temes que non yesca sanc la cantitat que voles, lahoras tu itera le fleubotomi en aquel trauc segon rectitut e ajusta en la appercio un pauc, e fay aquo am festinacio denant que·l loc sia apostemat, quar le loc es apostemat en motz homes deves pauca apercio.	"And if the opening is small and blood flows subtly, and you fear that it will not let out the desired quantity of blood, then repeat the scalpel in that track according to rectitude and adjust the opening somewhat, and do this with haste before the location becomes inflamed, for many people have inflammation occur due to a few openings."
Mays si vezes aquel ja apostemat, lahoras no iteres sobre lu, quar no escusa a tu alcuna causa; e pausa sobre aquel alcuna partida de la fenda de oli, quar alleuja le cors del sanc.	"But if the location is already inflamed, then do not repeat upon it, for it serves no purpose; and pause upon it some part of the fold of olive oil, for that alleviates the course of blood."
E es milhor en aquest loc que oli e que les autres olis.	"And it is better in this location to use olive oil than any other oils."
E semblantment aministra fenda de oli en tota fleubotomia am la qual fleubotomes las venas deves la prohibicio de cors de sanc, e fan aquo tyriaca alfadoc e sagzenea quan es pausat de la una de aquelas sobre le loc, quar le sanc es subtiliat e es revolvut quan es gros.	"Similarly administer oil during any phlebotomy to prevent veins from prohibiting the flow of blood. They do this with theriac and sagazena when placed upon one of those locations, because blood becomes subtler and revolves when it's thick."
E si en le loc de la fleubotomia es engendrat gran apostema, quar motas veguadas accideys, e majorment ad aquel que no es stat sangnat sino aquela veguada, o en la apercio de la vena pauca, e lahoras tu coyta, e pausa sobre le loc sponja infuza en aygua e sal, un pauc scalfada, e strenh aquela per una hora, quar es dissolvut.	"If a large boil forms at the site of phlebotomy, as often happens, especially if not much blood has been drawn previously, or when the vein is barely opened, then you should, immediately after, place on that location a damp sponge infused with water and salt, slightly warmed, and hold it there for an hour, as this will dissolve it."
E cove que fassa aquo aprop le yssiment del sanc de aquela vena am compliment de lu o de autra vena.	"You should also do that near the site of bloodletting from that vein with some vinegar or from another vein."
E si roman en le loc per alcus dias alcuna negror o viriditat, no notz aquo; e si voles, pausa sobre aquel alcuna causa de aloen e de mirra dissolvut, o alcuna causa de suc de mentastre o de calament o semblant de lu.	"But if some blackness or greenness remains at the site for several days, do not worry about it. And if you wish, place over that area some plaster of aloe and myrrh dissolved in vinegar, or some plaster of mint juice or chamomile juice or something similar."
E motas veguadas accideysso apostemas e eminencias deves fleubotomia de la basilica.	"And many times it happens that boils and swellings occur which need phlebotomy at the basilica."
E donc pausa la tua ma sobre aquela, e si lahoras tu atrobas mollicia deves la tua compressio sobre aquela, lahoras aquela eminencia es malvada e mala; e adonc guarda te que pauses sobre aquela alcuna causa de aquo que havem dit, quar fort leu fluira de la arteria sanc.	"And then place your hand over it, and if you suddenly feel softness, apply pressure with your hand on that swelling, for at that moment the artery is flowing strongly. And then protect yourself by placing some of what we have said upon it, because a lot of blood flows from the artery."
E fay emplaustre am aquo en que es stipticitat, per que le loc sia endurat, e aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	"And make an emplaster with what is styptic, so that the location remains firm. And treat it with other treatments until it heals."
E cove que extraguas del sanc a tot hom segon la quantitat de la sua vertut e segon la color vencent sobrc le sanc segon que appar.	"And you should draw blood from each person according to the quantity of their strength and according to the prevailing color that appears above the blood."
Quar si le sanc es negre, lahoras tu le layssa yssir entro que sia rog; e semblantment si tu le vezes gros, lahoras tu le layssa yssir entro que sia subtiliat; e semblantment si es agut, entro que sia ostada la acuitat de lu.	"For if the blood is black, let it flow until it becomes red. And similarly, if you find it thick, let it flow until it thins out. And likewise, if it is sharp, let it flow until its sharpness subsides."
E cove ad aquel que es ple e fort e ha necessitat de extraccio de sanc en una veguada, que sia amplificada la fleubotomia de la vena e le fleubotomi sia lat.	"And for one who is full and strong and needs bloodletting at once, the phlebotomy of a vein should be increased and the phlebotomy wound made wide."
E en aquel que es freul, sia fayt le contrari de aquel, e cove que extragua aquel en tropas veguadas, e que le trauc sia streyt.	"And in one who is frail, do the opposite of that, and let blood from him little by little over several days, and let the wound be narrow."
E le milhor que es administrat en fleubotomia de vena es que sia la seccio transversa, no punctura.	"It is better to make a transverse section in phlebotomy of a vein than to make a puncture."
E aquesta manieyra de fleubotomia es salva de flux de sanc e de inscizio de nervi, e es pus lausabla e pus salva que fleubotomia segon latitut e longitut.	"And this manner of phlebotomy saves from the flow of blood and from injury to nerves. And it is more praiseworthy and safer than phlebotomy made according to width and length."
E a la qual es acostumat sobrevenir sincopi deves la fleubotomia, e cove que tu cures aquel denant la fleubotomia am un petit de pa infus en vi de milgranas o de oximel simple scalfat; e extratz a l u del sanc en tres veguadas o quatre.	"And for one who is accustomed to fainting during phlebotomy, you should treat him beforehand with a little bread infused in rue wine or simple celery seed wine and scraped. And let blood from him three or four times."
E si es enfregiditat de compleccio, lahoras prengua denant la fleubotomia pa infus en eyssarop de mirra o en eyssarop de mel aromatizat am specias ayssi cum am pebre, canela, gingiebre e semblantz, o en eyssarop aromatizat e mot odorant.	"And if it is coldness of temperament, then take beforehand in phlebotomy bread infused in myrrh syrup or in aromatic honey syrup with spices such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger and the like, or in syrup that is aromatic and very fragrant."
E si accideys sincopi deves la fleubotomia, e es causa de lu issiment de mot sanc, lahoras cove que prengua en beure aygua de carn e eyssarop mot odorant subtil; e use de aromaticitat am algualea, e sia linit le sieu pietz am aquela.	"And if fainting occurs during phlebotomy and it is due to the loss of much blood, then you should give him to drink water of meat and very fragrant syrup. And use aromatics with almonds, and let him lie down on his left side."
E usa de las autras causas que havem ditas en la divisio en le capitol de sincopi per evacuacio.	"And use the other causes that we have mentioned in the division in the chapter of fainting due to evacuation."
E qui vol eventar le sieu bras e dissolver le sieu sanc segonda veguada, cove a lu del qual la fleubotomia es per mota evacuacio, e la vertut de lu es freol, que evacue le sanc petit a petit, so es segon la quantitat de la vertut en les dias continuables.	"And whoever wants to stimulate his arm and dissolve his blood on the second day should let blood from one who has had much evacuation by phlebotomy, and whose virtue is frail. Let it flow little by little, according to the quantity of his strength over several continuous days."
Mays qui vol eventar le sieu bras, e gitar lo sieu sanc segonda vetz, e le sieu cors es fort, lahoras fassa aquo aprop vii horas o ix de la primieyra fleubotomia.	"However, whoever wants to stimulate his arm and draw his blood again on the second day, and if his body is strong, then do this about seven or nine hours after the first phlebotomy."
Mays qui vol atirar le sanc del cors sieu al contrari de la partida a la qual declina, cove que sia eventat en le segon dia o le tertz.	"However, whoever wants to draw blood from his body contrary to the part that declines, let it be done on the second or third day."
Mays aquel cors en le qual es mot sanc ja scalfat e es acuit e fa accidir febre, cove que sia gitat de lu sanc en una veguada e sia de lu gitada gran cantitat e sia amplificada la apercio entro que accidesca sincopi, pus que tu auras conservadas totas las condicios de fleubotomia; e que pauses la tua ma sobre le pols de lu deves le cors del sanc, per que no endevengua mort en loc de sincopi, quar motas veguadas endeve aquo quan le fleubotomador es ignorant e negligent.	"However, in a body where there is little blood already scraped and it is sharp and causes fever, let blood be drawn from him once and let much blood flow. And make the opening wide so that fainting may occur, for you have preserved all the conditions of phlebotomy. And place your hand over the pulse of his artery before letting blood, so that he does not die instead of fainting, because many times this happens when the phlebotomist is ignorant and negligent."
E no cove quan tu voles desliar le bras e evacua le sanc segonda veguada, cum ja sia claus le orrifici de la vena e sia fayt difficil issiment del sanc, que tu premas subre aquel am vehemencia e encurvat sia extendut leugierament, quar aquo es trop mal.	"And when you want to stimulate the arm and evacuate blood again on the second day, it is not necessary to do so if the opening of the vein has already been closed and it is difficult to draw blood. Then press upon that with force and curve it gently, for that is too bad."
Habantz le layssa entro que sia fleubotomat segondament; o remau aquo am la acuitat del fleubotomi que es coagulat del sanc en le orrifici de la vena; o pausa sobre aquel de tyriaca alfarach, o de sagzenea, e comprem aquel am compressio leugiera entro que·l sanc sia fora yssit.	"Let him lie down until he can be phlebotomized again. Or remove that with the acuteness of the flebotomy which is coagulated from the blood in the opening of the vein. Or place upon it tyriaca alfarach or sage, and press upon it gently until the blood flows out."
E si la vena es apostemada, lahoras layssa aquela e no la toques entro que·l apostema sia sedat.	"And if the vein is inflamed, then leave that alone and do not touch it until the inflammation has subsided."
E si necessitat te provoca a evacuar le sanc segondament, e no es excusacio, lahoras tu sagna aquel sobre aquel loc o en l’autre bras en autra vena.	"And if there is a need to provoke you to evacuate blood again and there is no excuse for it, then do so on that same spot or on the other arm in another vein."
E la vena apelada “funis del bras” es fleubotomada en loc de la fusca o de la basilica, quan no so atrobadas o so amaguadas, quar es composta de aquelas.	"And the vein called 'the rope of the arm' is phlebotomized in place of the cephalic or the basilica when they are not found or are obscured, for it is composed of those."
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute intrometa la sua ma en aygua cauda entro que·l focil se enrogezesca e que la vena apparia manifestament.	"And the quality of phlebotomizing him is that the patient should put his hand in warm water until the vein appears prominently."
E aprop sia strengut sobre aquel am liament am strictura migana; e aprop fleubotoma segon le tranvers petit, no latitudinalment ni segon la longitut.	"And phlebotomize strongly upon that with a bandage with moderate tightness. And phlebotomize according to the transverse line, not latitudinally nor according to length."
E sia la apercio ampla e sia la tua fleubotomia am la qual tu fleubotomas aquela sobre la junctura de la ma un petit.	"And let the opening be wide and let your phlebotomy be such that you phlebotomize him on the junction of his hand."
E si es prohibit le fluxs del sanc, lahoras tu itera la ma en l’aygua cauda e layssa le sanc correr en la aygua entro que consieguas la tua necessitat.	"And if the flow of blood is prohibited, then immerse your hand in warm water again and let the blood run into the water until you achieve your purpose."
Mays si tu eras en les dias d’estiu, lahoras tu yest excusat de la iteracio de la ma en l’aygua cauda, e le mes es pausat le cors del sanc en aygua cauda en temps de yvern.	"However, if it is summer, then you are excused from immersing your hand in warm water. And in winter, the body of the blood should be kept warm in warm water."
E la fleubotomia de aquesta vena es pus salva que de totas las autras venas, quar dejos lu no ha vena pulsatil, ni nervi.	"And phlebotomizing this vein is safer than all other veins because there are neither pulsating veins nor nerves in its vicinity."
E la fleubotomia de la savatella de la ma dreyta es conferent a las malautias del fetge.	"And phlebotomizing the wrist of the right hand corresponds to diseases of the liver."
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que tu strenguas la ma am liament o am la tua ma, pus que tu l’as mesa en ayga cauda, entro que la vena sia imflada e sia be demostrada al vezement; e aprop fleubotoma aquela transversan; e si inscidas aquela de tot no nozera aquo en re.	"And the quality of phlebotomizing him is that you should strengthen his hand with a bandage or with your hand, because you have placed it in warm water until the vein becomes inflated and is clearly visible. And phlebotomize him transversely; and if he does not faint completely, do not worry about it."
E conserve que no ultimes la tua ma am la fleubotomi, quar dejos lu so les nervis dels ditz denudatz de carn.	"And be careful not to extend your hand during phlebotomy because there are nerves nearby that are devoid of flesh."
E aprop itera la ma en l’aygua cauda e laysse correr le sanc en aquela, quar si tu no iteras aquela en l’aygua cauda, le sanc sira coagulat en lo orrifici de la vena, e es prohibit de flux.	"And be sure to immerse your hand in warm water and let the blood run into it because if you do not immerse it in warm water, the blood will clot at the opening of the vein and prevent its flow."
E cum es extrayt le sanc segon la quantitat de necessitat, lahoras tu pausa sobre la vena oli e sal, per que no sia consolidada coytadament; e semblantment cove que tu fassas en tot ram streyt.	"And when the blood is extracted according to necessity, then place over the vein oil and salt, so that it may not be consolidated carelessly."
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de aquela de la ma senestra, es que es conferent a las malautias de la melsa.	"Among the benefits of phlebotomy is that it relieves illnesses of the liver."
E fay semblantment en la fleubotomia de lu ayssi cum has fayt en l’autra.	"And do likewise in the phlebotomy of the other arm, just as you have done with the other one."
E le juvament de la vena sephena de la fleubotomia es a las malautias que so en la partida dejos del cos, ayssi cum so malautias de la mayre, e a retencio de mestruas, et a las malautias dels ronhos e ulceracios de coyssas e de cambas antiquas, e a lor semblantz de las malautias.	"And the benefit of the saphenous vein phlebotomy is for illnesses that are in the lower parts of the body, such as diseases of the womb and retention of menses, and for the healing of wounds, old ulcers on thighs and legs, and their like."
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute entrometa lo sieu pe en aygua cauda e fassa sobre aquel fricacio entro que be apparen las venas; e lia sobre la junctura del pe am correia; e le loc de la vena le talo apparent deves le dit pous, e de aquela so ramificatz en la facia del pe motz ramps.	"And the procedure for phlebotomy is that the patient puts his foot in cold water and makes friction around where the veins appear; then tie a bandage above the joint of the foot; and the place of the vein should be apparent below the said hole, from which many branches go forth on the face of the foot."
E donc fleubotoma le pus ample ram o dejos la camba deves le talo deves la agreguacio de lu, quar es milhor e pus sal.	"And then perform phlebotomy on the most prominent vein or one below the ankle below the joint, for it is better and more beneficial."
E si fleubotomas aquela en la facia del pe, lahoras tu te guarda dels nervis que so dejos aquela sobre la facia del pe, e pausa la tua fleubotomia am la qual tu fleubotomas per le travers, quays cum si tu la volias inscidir.	"And if you perform phlebotomy on the face of the foot, then beware of the nerves that are below that on the surface of the foot, and pause your phlebotomy with that which you cut across, as if you wanted to incise it."
E sia le fleubotomi vosil.	"And thus ends the phlebotomy."
Mays si es prohibit le issiment del sanc; lahoras tu itera le pe de lu en l’aygua cauda e layssa correr le sanc en aquela entro que sia evacuat.	"It is forbidden to let blood from him; therefore, you warm his foot in hot water and let the blood flow into that vessel until it is evacuated."
E si le fleubotomador erra en la primieyra veguada, lahoras itera am le fleubotomi en sus un pauc, quar le loc es sal; e no temes de lu malician, mays que te guardes dels nervis ayssi cum havem dit.	"And if the bloodletter errs in his first attempt, he should repeat it elsewhere, for the place is swollen. Do not fear causing harm, but rather protect yourself from nerves as we have said."
E semblantment fay de la sophena del autre pe engualment.	"And similarly, do the same with the other foot."
E de la vena sciatica, le loc ayssi cum havem dit es deves le talo dejos la cavilha de la partida silvestra.	"Regarding the sciatic vein, the place is at the back of the ankle joint below the bone of departure."
E le juvament de la fleubotomia de lu es a dolo de anca quan es per sanc caut.	"And the benefit of bloodletting from him is for a pain in the hip when it is for burning blood."
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute intre en banh, e festine e strenha la cueyssa de lu del latz de la ancha entro desus le talo desus quatre ditz an una benda longua subtil, quar no appar sino per aquo.	"And the quality of bloodletting from him is that he enters into a bath, and quickly and vigorously tie his chest on the right side of the hipbone above the ankle with a long thin bandage so that it does not appear except by that."
E donc quan appar, lahoras tu fleubotoma aquela segon cascun engen que es a tu possible e segon le tranvers, e es milhor; o inscidas aquela per inscizio o secces aquela per seccio, quar le loc de lu es sal.	"And then when it appears, you should bloodlet from that according to each vein that is accessible and according to the cross section, which is better. Or else cut that with an incision or cut it with a section because the place is swollen."
E ela es en motz homes mot ameguada; e si atrobas aquela, e no appar al sentiment de tot, lahoras fleubotoma alcun ram de lu, e es aquel que appar en le dos del pe enves le dit auricular e le anular.	"And it is especially common in young men. And if you cannot find that vein, then bloodlet from any branch of it, and it is that which appears on the back of the hand near the said little finger and ring finger."
E guarda te dels nervis, e fay correr del sanc la quantitat que voles.	"And guard yourself from nerves, and let the blood flow out in the amount you desire."
E aprop deslia la strictura e pausa sobre le loc de la fleubotomia coto e strenh le loc, quar leugierament es sanat.	"Then loosen the ligature and pause on the place of the bloodletting until it stops. Then squeeze the place gently because it is easily healed."
De ventozacio e de las qualitatz de uzar de aquelas.	"Of wind breaking and of its qualities for using those."
Ventozas so de corns, o de eram, o de veyre.	"A ventosa can be made from horns, or earthenware, or glass."
E ventozacio es fayta segon doas manieyras: la una de lor es am scarificacio e extracio de sanc, e l’autra es ventozacio ses scarificacio.	"And bloodletting is done in two ways: one of them is with scarification and extraction of blood, and the other is without scarification."
E aquesta ventozacio que es ses scarificacio es segon doas manieyras, quar o es am foc o ses foc.	"And this bloodletting which is scarification occurs in two ways, either with fire or without fire."
E a las ventozas que so administradas am scarificacio e extraccio de sanc son xiiii locs del cors, dels quals la un en lo qual so pausadas ventozas es alnocrati, e es la deriera partida del cap; e le mieg loc d’el de doas partz del col ensemp; e ventozas del mento dejos la mandibula pus dejos de la boca; e ventozas de doas spatulas; e ventozas de alohoster, e es sobre la fi de la coeta; e ventozas de dos focils, e so de dos brasses; e ventozas de doas cavilhas; e ventozas de doas cuoyssas.	"And the locations where bloodletting is performed through scarification and extraction of blood are fourteen parts of the body. Of these, one is on the nape of the neck, which is the last part of the head; the middle location between two parts of the collarbone; the chin below the mandible near the mouth; the spatulas' locations; the alocostrum, which is above the end of the ribcage; the forearms, two on each arm; and the cavities, as well as the buttocks."
E ventozacio no extratz le sanc sino de las venas menudas sparssas en la carn, e per aquo no catz la vertut per aquelas, ayssi cum es cazement per fleubotomia; ni no cove que ventozacio sia fayta am foc o ses foc en alcuna malautia fayta per replecio entro que le cors tot sia evacuat.	"And bloodletting does not extract blood from the large veins but rather from the small ones scattered throughout the flesh, and therefore it does not draw out the vital spirits in that way, just as phlebotomy is said to do; nor should bloodletting be performed with fire or without fire in any illness caused bypletion until the whole body has been evacuated."
Mays si necessitat provoca a ventozacio per malautia o per continua, aministrem aquela en tota hora al comensament del mes e en la fi de lu, e en le mieg loc de lu e en qualque temps sia.	"But if bloodletting is necessary due to illness or continually, we administer it at the beginning of the month and at the end, and in the middle of it, and at any time that may be appropriate."
La qual causa es quar dels homes es en les quals es sanc multiplicat entro que indigeys de extraccio de lu per ventozacio e atroba en le sieu cap graveza e soda; e de aquels es que atroba replecio e rogor en la sua cara e en le sieu cap, e en le sieu col; e de aquels es que atroba pruziment en la sua cara e en le sieu front e tenebrositat e hebetut en les sieus huels; e de aquels que gieta le loc de la sua ventozacio; e de aquels es que le lor ris es multiplicat; e de aquels es que atroba gustament de sanc en la sua boca, o que la lengua es apostemada e escup sanc; e de aquels es que lor dormir es multiplicat, e de aquels que vetz sanc en lo dormir rogor e antics e plaguas e autras causas a lor semblantz.	"The reason for this is that some men have an abundance of blood within them, which necessitates its extraction through bloodletting and produces symptoms such as heaviness and dizziness in the head; others exhibit signs ofpletion such as heat and redness in their face, head, and neck; while others show signs of melancholy such as dullness and darkness in their eyes. Some have an increased desire to yawn; others laugh excessively; some have a taste of blood in their mouth or a bleeding tongue that spits out blood; still others sleep too much or experience nightmares with heat, anxiety, and other causes that affect them."
E donc quan vezes en alcuna causa de aquelas, e propriament si es en le tertz o miga del mes, lahoras comandam ventozacio esser fayta pus que so passadas del dia dos o tres horas.	"And therefore, when there is a need for bloodletting due to one of those causes, especially if it is in the third or middle of the month, we command that bloodletting be done three hours after two hours have passed."
E juvament de ventozacio de la nuca es que quan aquela confereys a gravitat en le cap e ad aquo que es efondit als huels; mays cove que aquo sia aprop evacuacio de tot le cors.	"And the benefit of bloodletting from the neck is that it relieves heaviness in the head and prevents dizziness and fainting spells; but this should be done as part of a general evacuation of the whole body."
E aquesta ventoza es en le loc de fleubotomia de la cephalica.	"And this bloodletting is performed at the location called phlebotomy of the cephalic vein."
E no es legut que use de lu aquel que es de frega complecio, o en le qual es catarr, quar dona ad aquel gran nocument.	"It is not suitable for those who are of cold complexion or have catarrh to use it, as it causes great harm."
E per aquo no cove que uso de aquela les vielhs, e en les caps dels quals so malautias frejas.	"And therefore, it should not be used for the elderly, nor for those with hot illnesses in their head."
Mays ad aquel que sobre aquela es continuant sobre lu es fayta oblivio; e per aquo cove que tu comandes al ventozador que depause la sua ma un petit am la ventosa a las partidas dejos, temen de la generacio de oblivio.	"But those who continuously use bloodletting become forgetful of it; therefore, you should command the bloodletter to pause his hand slightly after placing the bloodletting cup on the skin at its departure points, so as to prevent the generation of forgetfulness."
Mays ventozacio de alkehel es en loc de fleubotomia de la vena fusca e de la basilica: e per aquo confereys a asma, e a la constriccio de ale e a la scissura del sturment de ale, e a tos, e a replecio.	"But bloodletting at the elbow is done at the location of phlebotomy of the dark vein and the basilica vein: therefore it treats asthma, constriction of the throat, and tearing of the instrument of respiration, as well as coughing andpletion."
E cove que sia enpellida la ventoza alkehel un petit, quar si es pausada dejos, engendra debilitat en le cors e en le stomac.	"And it is necessary to remove the bloodletting cup from the elbow a little earlier than usual, because if left too long it causes weakness in the body and stomach."
E la ventozacio de alhagdahan confereys a las dolors accident en le cap e a obtalmia, e emigranea, e prefocacio, e a dolors en las razitz de las dentz; e es en loc de fleubotomia de la basiliqua.	"And bloodletting at the angle of the jaw treats accidental pains in the head, ophthalmia, migraine, and inflammation of the face, as well as pains in the roots of the teeth. It is performed at the location of phlebotomy of the basilica vein."
E cove que comandes al ventozador que no prema la sua ma am scarificacio per que no inscida la arteria e accida fluxs de sanc.	"And you should command the bloodletter not to press his hand during scarification, so as not to cut the artery and cause an excessive flow of blood."
E ventozacio dejos le mento comfereys a alcola en la boca, e a corrupcio de la gingiva, e a semblantz a lor de las malautias que so en la boca, e stan en loc de fleubotomia de aliheric que so en las doas labias.	"And bloodletting from the chin treats thrush in the mouth, gum disease, and symptoms of diseases that are present there. It is performed at the location of phlebotomy of the linguual veins found on both lips."
Mays la ventozacio que es fayta sobre las doas spatulas confereys a caphatan, le qual es fayt per replecio de caliditat.	"But bloodletting done over the two spatulas treats headache, which is caused bypletion of heat."
E la ventosacio de las doas partidas dedintz dels focils confereys juvament de la fleubotomia de tres venas, so es de la basilica, fusca e cephalica, quar aquela atratz le sanc de totas aquelas venas pus manudas que so en la carn, e aquelas venas menudas de las autras venas pus grossas entro que pervengua la atraccio a las tres venas.	"And bloodletting at the two divisions of the temples treats the benefits of phlebotomy of three veins, namely the basilica, dark, and cephalic veins. This is because it attracts blood from all those smaller veins found in the flesh, as well as the smaller veins connected to those larger veins, so that the attraction reaches the three veins."
E comanda al ventozador que trop no procezesca en scarificacio, quar le loc es denudat de carn, e dejos lu so nervis e arterias.	"And command the bloodletter not to proceed with scarification, because the location is bare of flesh and there are nerves and arteries near it."
E es una ventoza am la qual es ventozat sobre alshosses e confereys a las emorroydas del cul e a las ulceracios pus dejos.	"And this bloodletting is performed on the ankles, treating hemorrhoids of the anus and ulcers nearby."
E cove que comandes al ventozador que sia gran ventoza, e que sia de eram, quar le loc indigeys de fort seccio; e fort leu so traucadas ventozas subtils e sia scarificat am scarificacio.	"And it is necessary to command the bloodletter that a large cup should be used and made of brass because the location requires a strong section; furthermore, subtle bloodletting cups are poorly drawn here, and scarification with scarification is necessary."
Mays ventozas de las cambas minueysso per minuicio manifesta, quar atiran le sanc de tot le cors, e comfereysso a dolors antiquas dels ronhos e de la mayre, e de la vesica; e provocan las mestruas, e comfereysso a bothor e ademil; e stan en loc de fleubotomia de doas sophenas, e alahorcoben, e de doas cavilhas.	"But bloodletting from the thighs diminishes by diminution manifests that it attracts blood from all over the body and treats ancient pains of the loins and belly, as well as the bladder. It also provokes menstruation and treats boils and ulcers. It is performed at the location of phlebotomy of two saphenous veins, the angle of the knee, and two cavities."
Enpero mot debelitan tot le cors e fan accidir sincopi en motz homes.	"However, it also debilitates the whole body and causes fainting spells in many men."
E de las ventozas alahorcoben le juvament es propda al juvament a las ventozas de doas cambas.	"And the benefit of bloodletting at the angle of the knee is similar to the benefit of bloodletting on both thighs."
E la qualitat de la posicio de las ventozas es que pauses la ventoza al comensament vueda e sucguas per succio temprada, e no prolongues la posicio de las ventozas, mays pausa aquelas leugierament, e reman aquelas coytadament, e que las humors venguan al loc per adveniment engual.	"And the quality of the position of bloodletting is that you should pause at the beginning, remove it slightly and follow up with gentle suction, and not prolong the position of bloodletting but rather pause it lightly and remove it gently so that the humours come to the location by gradual attraction."
E no cesses iterar aquo e continuar entro que veja le loc ja enrojezir e inflar e que appara la rogor del sanc.	"And do not cease repeating this until you see the location already reddened and swollen, and that the color of blood appears."
E lahoras tu scarifiqua e itera la succio pauc a pauc, e aprop considera en la dispozicio dels cors.	"Then scars are made and suction is repeated little by little. And consider well the condition of the patients' bodies."
Quar aquel home que es de tendra carn de rars pors, cove que tu le scarifiques una veguada e no pus, per que le loc no sia ulcerat.	"Because that person who has tender flesh and rare pores should be scarified once but not more than that, so that the location does not become ulcerated."
E comanda al ventozador que amplifique la scarificacio e pronde un pauc, e atempre la succio am facilitat.	"And command the bloodletter to amplify scarification slightly and prolong it a little, and apply suction with ease."
E si en le sanc es grossitut, lahoras cove que scarifiques doas veguadas, quar en la primieyra veguada es uberta la via de subtiliacio al sanc e a la aquositat de lu.	"And if there is thickness in the blood, then it is necessary to scarify twice because in the first scarification, the way for suction of the blood and its fluidity is opened."
Mays en la segunda a la perscrutacio aquisida de la extraccio del sanc gros.	"But in the second one, the extraction of thick blood is acquired by observation."
E si le sanc es mot feculent, lahoras sia fayta scarificacio la tersa veguada per que consiegua le derier.	"And if the blood is very fetid, then there should be no scarification in the third veigning so that it may be dried."
E derierament, quan volem extrayre le sanc pauc a pauc o un petit, abasta a nos una scarificacio.	"Finally, when we want to extract blood little by little or a little at a time, one scarification suffices for us."
E si volem extraccio de mot sanc, scarificam am mota scarificacio; e si nos conoyssem que·l sanc es gros, lahoras cove que scarifiquem per scarificacio preonda.	"And if we want to extract a lot of blood, we scarify with many scars; and if we know that the blood is thick, then it is necessary to scarify with prolonged scarification."
E le terme de scarificacio en la qual es la profunditat de la codena tant solament.	"And the term of scarification is only as deep as the skin."
E si aquel del qual la codena es grossa, dura, fusca, e les sieus pors so streytz, cove que les locs de las ventosas sian untatz lenitius, apertius resolutius; si es en temps d’estiu, ayssi cum es oli de aloen o oli de violat, o oli de amellas dossas, o oli de cemensa de coja; e si es en temps ivern, lahoras oli narci, o oli de liri, o oli de camamilla, o de sanc, e ad aquels semblantz.	"And if the skin is thick, hard, dark, and its pores are narrow, then the locations of bloodletting should be anointed with lenient, open, resolvent oils; if it is in summer time, such as oil of aloe or violet oil, or oil of bitter almonds, or oil of chamomile flower; and if it is in wintertime, then oil of narcissus, or lily oil, or camomile oil, or blood oil, and those similar."
E si la superfluitat es grossa, freja, lahoras le oli sia amaranti, o oli de balsamita, o oli de aloen, o oli aneti, e a lor semblantz.	"If excess fluid is thick and cold, then the oil should be myrrh, or balsamite, or aloe, or aneth, and their like."
Mays si le ventozador es de amples pors de tendra carn, lahoras cove que sia prohibit de oli, e cove que ad aquest les locs de ventozas de lor aprop la ventozacio sian lavatz am ayguaros o am aygua freja de solatrum, o am aygua de coja, o am aygua de bordolaguas, e semblantz ad aquelas.	"If the patient has tender skin with wide pores, then oil should be prohibited, and instead, the places where vents occur nearby should be washed with hot or cold water of salt, or with decoction of wormwood, or with decoction of borrage, and similar remedies."
E aquel del qual le sanc es de mota humiditat, lava las suas ventozas am vi agre, o am aygua de mirt e sumac e semblant ad aquels.	"And for one whose blood has great humidity, wash their vents with sour wine, or water of myrtle and sumac, and similar remedies."
E de aquel del qual las superfluitatz son grossas, lava las suas ventozas am vi antic, o am aygua de sansuc, que es majorana, o de decoccio de anet, o de camamilla, e a lor semblantz.	"And for one whose excess fluids are thick, wash their vents with old wine, or water of hyssop, which is majoram, or decoction of dill, or chamomile, and their like."
E cove que la ventozacio sia guardada denant de banh; habantz cove que sia aministrada aprop issiment del banh per una hora o per doas, e cove que dorma aprop la ventozacio.	"And it is necessary that the ventosing be done before bathing; having to be administered near to the time of bathing for one hour or two, and having to sleep near to the ventosing."
Quid est quo oportet ut regatur ventosandus aus phlebotomatus ante ventosationem.	"What is it that is necessary so that a patient who has undergone bloodletting should regulate his vents before ventosing."
Cove que consideras al comensament: lahoras si le ventozador o aquel que·s deu fleubotomar es coleric e ventz sobre lu sanc agut e imflamacio, lahoras cove que prengua causas infrigidantz, ayssi cum milgranas acetosas, e endivia an vi agre e laytuguas, e secanabin, e julep, e a lor semblantz.	"At the beginning, consider if the patient or the one who should undergo bloodletting is choleric and vents over his hot and inflamed blood, then they should take cooling remedies, such as acetic grapes, endive with sour wine and lettuce, and secanabin, julep, and similar ones."
E pausa a lor viandas ayssi cum poletz, e carns de auzels serbiges, e viandas conditas am agras, e a lu semblantz.	"And pause their meals such as poles ( turnips), and flesh of roasted birds, and foods seasoned with sourness, and similar ones."
E de aquel del qual la compleccio es freja, cove que prengua en beure eyssarop almiva, o eyssarop de alsecanabin de semensas, e sumac, e vi mot odorant migier entre viel et noel; e que a lu sia comendat que use de paucitat de beure e de mangar, e pausa las viandas de lu poletz e canabir e pissers e petitz auzels e colombat.	"And for one whose constitution is phlegmatic, let him take to drink syrups such as aloe syrup, or althaea syrup of seeds, and sumac, and sweet-smelling wine between autumn and winter; and that he be advised to use little drinking and eating, and pause from foods such as turnips, cannabis, peas, and small birds and doves."
E cove que en lo dia de ventozacio e de fleubotomia le beure sia major que la vianda.	"And on the day of ventosing and bloodletting, drinking should be greater than eating."
E cove que sia donat en beure en alcunas horas ad alcus homes tyriaca alpharac, o medicamentz de musc, so es muscada, o alcelita denant la ventozacio o denant fleubotomia o aprop, per so que·ls membres principals sian confortatz e que·l sanc sia subtiliat; e no cove que prenguan aquela scalfatz.	"And it should be given to drink to some men tyriaca alhacema, or musc medicines, such as musk or aloe syrup, before ventosing or bloodletting or near the time of it, so that their principal members are comforted and their blood is subtilized; and they should not take that scalphat."
Mays las ventozas que so ses scarificacio sian ventozas que so pausadas sus le fetge, e sobre la melsa e podagra, e sobre le umbelic, en les locs dels jonolhs, e la pixida del ancha, quar aquestz membres no suffertan scarificacio sobre si.	"But the ventosings that are not scarifications are those paused over the liver, and over the spleen and gout, and over the navel, in the joints of the thighs, and the pit of the stomach; because these members do not suffer scarification upon them."
E no es querit per aquelas sino atraccio de sanc de membre, ayssi cum pausam ventosa sobre mamilha en malautia de flux de sanc del sanc de las nars; e usam de aquela per que sia dissolvuda ventositat freja inviscade del membre, ayssi cum pausam sobre le ventre e l’umbelic; quar aquela rarifique le membre e scalfa lu e ramau la dolor quar resolveys ventositat.	"And they are not sought by those, but attraction of blood from the member, such as pausing a ventosa on the breast in a disease of bleeding of the blood from the nose; and we use that one so that it may dissolve the phlegmatic vents that stick to the member, such as pausing over the belly and navel; for that one rarifies the member, scrapes it, and removes pain because it resolves ventosity."
E ja es pausada sobre les ronhos quan accideys en lor opilacio o poyra, quar per vertut de atraccio fort leu huobre opilacio e erradica le poyra de son loc.	"And it is paused over the ears when accidents happen in their opacity or pus; for by virtue of attraction it strongly draws out opacity and eradicate pus from its place."
E semblantment fa quan es pausada sobre le fetge e la melsa deves ventositat en aquels enclausa.	"And similarly it does when paused over the liver and spleen to draw out vents enclosed in them."
E aquestas ventozas so administradas vuedas amb succio tant solament; e alcunas veguadas so administradas am foc.	"And these ventosas are administered only with suction; but sometimes they are administered with fire."
E alcunas veguadas so administradas plenas de aygua tebeza en las malautias de la melsa.	"And sometimes they are administered full of warm water in the diseases of the spleen."
E aquo es per que la ventoza sia umplida e sia pus gran, so es aygua cauda sola o aygua en la qual sian cuytas herbas ad aquo convenientz.	"And this is so that the ventosa may be filled and become larger, it should be water alone boiled or water in which suitable herbs have been cooked."
Forma de ventoza aministrada am foc: sia la amplitud del orrifici de dos ditz, segon que nos la havem formada; e la quantitat del preon sia la maytat de un palm; e sia en lo latz de lu, en le loc que es en le circuit, la maytat de lu, le trauc sia petit segon la quantitat que intre en lu una agulha.	"Form of ventosa administered with fire: Let the aperture of it be two fingers wide according to how we have formed it; and let the quantity of pitch be as much as a palm; and let it be on the side of him, in the place that is in the circuit, as much as he, and let the wick be small according to the quantity that enters into it through an awl."
Sia fayta de eram rog o citri, de grosses marges, leon, enguals e terses per so que no leda le membre deves la sua posicio sobre lu.	"It should be made of earthenware or glass, thick-walled, lion-shaped, egg-shaped, and round for so that it does not hurt the member by its position on it."
E sia al mieg de lu vergua transversa de eram o de ferr, on es pausada candela am lo foc.	"And let there be in the middle of it a crosswise iron or earthenware wick on which is paused candle with fire."
E ja sia aquesta ventoza gran major de aquela la qual havem recomtat; e la pauca mendre de aquela segon las malautias e la etat de aquel que usa de aquela.	"And let this ventosa be much larger than that which we have recommended; and the small one less according to the diseases and state of him who uses it."
E las ventosas dels efantz e extenuatz so autres que las ventozas dels joves e de grosses corssas.	"And the ventosas of the weak and emaciated are different from those of the young and robust."
E la qualitat de pausar aquesta ventoza am foc sobre le membre es que extenda la meca am foc de lenha decentment denant una pauca candela de cera, e pausa aquela sobre le mieg de la vergua transversa en le mieg loc de la ventoza, per que le foc sia accendut enviro la partida dejos per que no sia comburit le cors del malaute.	"And the quality of pausing this ventosa with fire on the member is that it extends the meca with fire of decent wood before a small candle of wax, and pauses that one on the middle of the crosswise wick in the middle place of the ventosa, so that the fire may be kindled around the partition of the joints so that not the body of the sick person may be burned."
E aprop sia pausada sobre le membre del malaute, e le dit sia sobre le trauc que havem dit, entro que quan tenem las ventozas e non indigem que osten le dit e que yesca la vapor sobre aquel trauc, lahoras la ventoza sira tantost dissolvuda.	"And immediately it should be paused on the member of the sick person, and let him be over the wick that we have said, until when we have the ventosas and do not need to hold the wick and let out the vapor over that wick, then the ventosa will soon dissolve."
E prop igneys la meca segon la sua manieyra, e itera aquela si indigeyssas de aquela.	"And then put out the meca according to its manner, and repeat it if necessary."
Mays en ventosa que es aministrada en la malautia de plauressi, am aygua, en la qual no ha vergua transversa ni trauc, e no es aministrada sino que sia umplida de aygua, e es pausada sobre le membre tant solament.	"But in the ventosa that is administered in the disease of pleurisy with water, there is neither crosswise wick nor wick and it is not administered except that it should be filled with water and paused on the member only."
E aquesta es la forma de lu: E aquesta ventoza quant plus es gran, tant es milhor, per que puya recebre gran quantitat de aygua.	"And this is its form: And this ventosa, the larger it is, the better; for it can receive a large quantity of water."
Capitol .xcvii.	"Chapter XCVI."
Sanguissuguas no so administradas en motz membres sino en les membres en les quals non es possible posicio de ventosas, per la parvitat de aquels, ayssi cum le pot e gingiva e semblantz a lor; o en membre denudat de carn, ayssi cum le dit e·l nas e lors semblantz.	"Sanguissugas are not administered on most members but on those where it is not possible to place ventosas because of their smallness, such as the throat and gums and similar ones; or on a member denuded of flesh, such as the finger and nose and their similars."
E la qualitat de usar de aquelas que si has trobadas sanguisugas que so en las ayguas dossas de poyredura mundas.	"And it is said that sanguissugas should be used when found sanguissugas that are in the muddy waters of ditches."
E aprop sian layssadas le dia e la nueyt en aygua dossa entro que sian famolentas, e que no romangua alcuna causa en le ventre de aquelas; e aprop sia evacuat le cors en le comensament am fleubotomia e am ventozas; e aprop fregua le membre del malaute entro que s’enrojezesca; e aprop sian pausadas sobre lu.	"And they should be placed during the day and night in muddy water until they are hungry, and that none remain in the belly of them; and immediately the body should be evacuated at the beginning with flebotomy and ventosas; and immediately rub the member of the sick person until it becomes reddened; and immediately pause them on it."
E cum son umplidas e caso.	"And when they are full, remove them."
E si es possible succio del loc am ventoza, es mays derier en juvament.	"If suction from the place with ventosa is possible, it should be preferred in judgment."
E sino, lahoras lava le loc am vi agre e aprop am mota aygua; e sia freguat e expremut.	"But if not, then wash the place with vinegar and immediately with warm water; and let it be rubbed and squeezed."
E si es prolonguat le cors del sanc aprop le cazement de las sanguissuguas, e es aquo resudan, lahoras tu enfon un drap de li en aygua freja, e pausa aquel de sobre entro que sia abdida la resudacio.	"And if the body of blood is prolonged immediately after the removal of the sanguissugas, and it remains there, then you put a cloth dipped in hot water on it until the bleeding stops."
E si le sanc es multiplicat, lahoras polveriza sobre lu vitriol trissat, o guallas e semblantz a lor de las causas stipticas, entro que·l sanc sia abscidit; o sian pausadas sobre le loc las maytatz de favas excocicadas, e sian layssadas entro que las favas aderescan al loc, e es le sanc abscidit.	"And if the blood is multiplied, then dust it with crushed vitriol, or guallas and similar ones of the causes stipticas until the bleeding stops; or pause on the place many of cooked beans, and let them be left there until the beans adhere to the place and the bleeding stops."
E cove, si es necessaria, iteracio de sanguissuguas, quan es possible mudar aquelas.	"And it is necessary, if necessary, to repeat the sanguissugas when it is possible to change those."
E si las sanguissuguas son prohibidas de suspenssio, lahoras sia freguat le loc am sanc recent o fique una agulha en les locs entro que yesca sanc; e aprop sian pausadas, quar aquelas quan sento alcun sanc tantost adarysso.	If bloodletting is prohibited by suspension, then let fresh blood be drawn from the area or place a needle in the spot where blood will come out; and immediately cover it up, for those who feel any blood soon faint.
E quan voles que cajan, polveriza sobre aquelas un pauc de aloen trissat, o sal, o cendre, e cazo tantost.	When you want them to faint, sprinkle a bit of ground aloe over that area, or salt, or ashes, and then cover it up immediately.
Ayssi comensa lo prolec de la tersa partida: de restauracio.	Thus begins the third part: On Restoration.
Aquest capitol es motas veguadas necessari en la art de medicina; e es restauracio de fractura e de dislocacio accident en les osses.	This chapter is often necessary in the art of medicine, and concerns the restoration of fractures and dislocations of bones that occur by chance.
O, filh, sapiatz que jactan se de aquest capitol les fols metges e les vulguars e aquels que degun temps no reguardero les libres dels Antics ni legiro de aquels una letra.	Oh, son, know that those who brag about this chapter are foolish doctors and laymen, and those who at any time do not regard the books of the Ancients nor read even one letter from them.
E per aquesta causa es fayt que aquesta manieyra dels scients in terra nostra es privat; e yeu no ho e obliat en aquo degun temps be de tot; e no he adhibit aquo que apres, sino per longitut de lectio dels libres dels Antics e studi sobre le entendement de aquels, entro que extrayssi la sciencia de aquels.	And for this reason it is that this method of the Ancients in our land has been lost; and you will not find anyone now who knows all about it. And I have not added what follows here, except to make reading easier from the books of the Ancients and understanding their meaning better, so as to extract knowledge from them.
E aprop adirigui a experiment e studi en la longitut de la mieua vida.	And therefore I direct myself towards experimentation and study throughout my life.
E yeu ja he de aquo descrit en aquest capitol tot aquo que conte la mieua sciencia e sobre le qual es passat lo mieu experiment; pus que agui abreujat aquo a vos autres e deliuregui aquo de occupacio de elonguacio; e abreujegui aquo en la fi de abreujacio; et e monstrat aquo en la fi de declaracio; e formegui en aquo motas formas dels sturmentz que so administratz en aquel, cum es fayt per addicio de declaracio, ayssi cum he fayt en dos capitols precedentz.	And therefore I have already described in this chapter all that my knowledge contains and on which my experience has been passed. Since here I have shortened it for you others and freed myself from the occupation of lengthening it; and have shortened it at the end of shortening; and have shown it at the end of declaration; and have formed many forms of instruments that are administered in that, as is done by addition of declaration, as I have done in two previous chapters.
Capitol primier.	Chapter One
Summae et collectiones ex esse fracturae ossium, ex eis quarum praemissio necessaria est, antequam incipiamus rememorationem membrorum fraftorum et diversorum si uniuscuiusque.	Summary and Collections from the Essence of Bone Fractures, Before Beginning Remembrance of Members Broken in Various Ways and Their Diversities if Possible.
Cove donc que diguam en le prohemi de aquest capitol las summas del sermo; e les capitols al entendament dels quals en le comensament es forsat le artifexs e a stacio sobre la veritat de aquels; so es vos e aquels que so promptz que sapian o aprenguan aquesta art nobla autres de vos.	Therefore, I shall now state the summaries of this discourse in the prologue of this chapter; and the chapters that are necessary for understanding at the beginning for artisans and for standing firm on the truth of these [summaries], so that it is you and those who are eager to know or learn this noble art other than you.
E donc dic que quan accideys a alcu fractura o dislocacio o torcio o cazement, lahoras cove que tu te coytes al comensament am fleubotomia o aleyar aquel, o quascu ensemps, si no prohibeys alcuna causa, ayssi cum debelitat de vertut, o es aquel al qual accideys effant, o viel en decrepitat, o es temps de vehement calor, o de vehement freg.	And therefore I say that when some fracture or dislocation or torsion or luxation occurs, it is necessary at the beginning to perform phlebotomy on that [person], or to apply a poultice, or whatever seems appropriate, if no prohibition prevents it, such as debility of virtue, or if the person affected is an infant, or elderly, or if it is time of great heat, or cold.
E aprop sia content en vianda sieua de erbas frejas e de carns de auzels e de crabotz; e prohibem carns grossas e umplir si de viandas e de tota vianda que umple las venas de sanc, entro que siras segurat de apostema caut, e si no temes efusio de materia al membre.	And moreover it should be content with its own food of fresh herbs and of the flesh of birds and of crabs; and prohibit thick meats and filling foods and any food that fills the veins with blood, so that you may be sure of avoiding an abscess, and if not afraid of effusion of matter in the member.
E lahoras retorne le malaute al sieu regiment primier am le qual corr costuma de lu.	And then return the patient to its first regimen, with which it is accustomed to live.
E donc cum le os trencat comensa esser restaurat, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia pascut de viandas nutritivas de nutriment mot e gros e greu en les quals sia viscositat, ayssi cum so viandas faytas de froment cueyt am aygua, e ris, e caps, e pes, e ventres de vacas, e huous, e peys fresc, e vi gros e semblants ad aquels, e am aquest regiment es fayta coagulacio de fractura pus leugierament e miels.	And therefore when the broken bone begins to be restored, then it is necessary to pasture the patient with nutritious foods of great and heavy nourishment in which there is viscosity, such as foods made from wheat cooked with water, and rice, and capons, and fish, and intestines of cows, and eggs, and fresh cheese, and thick wine, and similar ones, and with this regimen coagulation of the fracture is effected more easily and quickly.
E sapias que les osses trinquatz quan so en les homes que so en la primiera vilura e en los decrepitz, no es possible que sian continuatz e sian consolidatz segon lur natura per la exsiccacio dels membres de lor.	And know that bones broken when they are in the first youth or old age in men cannot be joined and consolidated according to their nature by drying of the members to which they belong.
E son consolidatz e continuatz segon lor natura tot temps per la exsiccacio de aquels membres, e so continuatz e consolidatz aquels que so de lor en la fi de la lenitat, ayssi cum les osses dels petitz effantz.	And they are consolidated and joined according to their nature all the time by drying of those members, and those that are from them at the end of growth are joined and consolidated, such as the bones of young infants.
Mays empero natura ajusta e amnecteys sobre le os trencat de tota partida alcuna causa semblant a glut en le qual es grossitut que adhereys e strenh aquel entro que so ensemps conglutinatz e liatz ensemps, entro que venen la fi de fortitut e de fermesa, ayssi cum foc al comensament, entro que denguna causa no prohibeys aquel de las suas obres.	But nevertheless nature adjusts and adapts itself to the broken bone in such a way that it adheres to the place where it has been separated, growing thicker there until it is joined together and consolidated, until the end of strength and firmness, as fire at the beginning, unless some cause prohibits it from its works.
E per aquesta causa es necessari que pauses las viandas del malaute, viandas en las quals so gravitat e viscozitat e grosseza, ayssi cum havem dit.	And for this reason it is necessary that you pause the foods of the patient with foods in which there is gravity and viscosity and thickness, as we have said.
Mota diversitat de fractura segon diversitat del membre.	There are many diversities of fracture according to the diversity of the member.
E sapias que las specias de fractura son diversas segon la diversitat dels membres, quar fractura del os de la camba es diversa de la fractura del os del cap; e la fractura del os del pietz es divers de la fractura del os del dos; e semblantment totz les autres membres son diverses entre lor.	Fractures differ according to the variety of limbs, for a fracture of the leg bone is different from that of the head; and a fracture of the foot bone is diverse from that of the hand; and similarly all other limbs are diverse amongst themselves.
E yeu venc am rememoracio de tota specia de fractura, expausada en le sieu capitol distincta del autre.	And you have come with the memory of every kind of fracture, explained in its own chapter, separate from the others.
Mota diversitat de fractura en si meteyssa.	Many kinds of fractures occur within itself.
E son diversificadas las specias de fractura del os en lor meteyssas; quar es fayta fractura arcuada otra aquo que accidan en lu stellas; e alcunas veguadas es fayta fractura segon la longitut del os: e so las fracturas de lu satagia e astelhas e addicios procedentz e no-procedentz, ayssi cum es fayt en la pena quan es preparada a escriure, e es fractura am plagua e disrupcio en le cap, e es fractura fissura petita.	And the kinds of bone fractures are diverse in themselves; for example, an arch fracture can occur in the stars, and sometimes they are made according to the length of the bone: such as those of the satire and asterix, additional procedures, and non-procedural ones, like when a pen is prepared to write, and it is a fracture with swelling and disruption at the head, and there is a small fissure fracture.
E a tota specia es engen o turment propri en restauracio de lu segon que vindra rememoracio de lu distincta en les sieus locs.	And in every species there exists its own torment proper to the restoration of that which will come later, remembering it distinctly in its places.
Mota senhal de fractura del os.	Many signs of bone fracture.
E per aquo es conoguda fractura del os: es tortuositat de lu, e de aquel eminencia e appericio de lu al sentiment, e so de lu quan compremes aquel am la tua ma.	"Therefore it is recognized as a fracture of the bone: it is twisted, and from that prominence and appearance of it to the touch, and it becomes so when you grasp it with your hand."
E donc quan no es en le loc tortuositat apparent ni so no es feyt deves le tieu tocament quan toques le os am agitacio e le malaute no atroba gran dolor, lahoras no es aqui fractura.	"If there is no apparent twisting and no deformity felt when touching the bone with agitation, and the patient does not feel great pain, then it is not a fracture."
Habantz es possible que sia tortuositat o petita fissura, adon no cove que tu mauguas aquel am la tua ma e am compressio de tot; habantz pausa sobre lu de las medicinas de las quals ve rememoracio aprop aquel moment le qual conveneys al loc; e aprop sia streyt per strictura subtil.	"It is possible that there may be some twisting or small fissure present, so do not move it with your hand and compress it all at once. Instead pause on it and apply the appropriate medicine from which you have a reminder at that moment, as this will be beneficial for the location; especially if it is narrow due to subtle stricture."
E sapias que·l loc quan es arcuat e no es scindit en dos o otra aquo que no accidan en lu satagie, cum es remauguda tota partida de la sua compar, lahoras cove que comenses de la tua hora a rectificacio de lu habantz que a lu accida apostema caut.	"And you should know that when the place is curved and not split in two or otherwise broken during the examination, if it is entirely separated from its comparison, then you must begin immediately with the correction of it so that it may become adherent by cautery."
E si a lu accida apostema caut, lahoras layssa aquel per alcus dias entro que cesse le apostema; e aprop engualha aquel segon quascuna manieyra que podes de levitat e de engen.	"And if an adherent cauterization occurs there, then leave it alone for several days until the cautery stops. And again, lift it up and engage it according to each method that you can use."
E sapias que restauracio de lu e agulacio de lu es pus leugiera que del os en le qual accideysso sathagie.	"And you should know that the restoration of that place and the cauterization of it are easier than on bone where such examination has taken place."
E aprop strenh aquel segon que vindra la rememoracio de lu.	"And also strengthen that according to what comes to your memory of it."
Mays si en le os so satagias, lahoras es necessaria extencio de aquest membre trencat de doas partz, si es la ma o le pe; o am la tua ma si le membre es petit; o am doas cordas o am una corda e la ma.	"But if you have examined the bone, then it is necessary to extend this broken member in two parts, whether it is the hand or foot; or with your own hand if the member is small; or with two strings or with one string and your hand."
E sia la tua posicio am la qual pauses le membre loc engual segon la sua figura natural, mentre que las partidas so extandudas del membre trenquat, lahoras te perforsa que fassas retornar aquelas addicios am engen e segon quascuna manieyra que poyras en lor locs.	"And you should position yourself in such a way that the member is placed where it was originally located according to its natural shape, while the broken parts are being extended. Then perform the following: bring those additions back with engagement and according to each method that you can use in their locations."
E guarda te segon la tua forssa que no accida sobre le malaute per la tua operacio delor ni lesio; e perforsa te segon le tieu poder que tu appliques la un os am l’autre son companho segon lors milhors formas.	"And beware according to your strength that no harm comes upon the sick through your operation on them or their injury. And perform yourself according to your ability, applying one bone with its companion according to their best forms."
E cove que en aquela hora aprofitablament tu toques am la tua ma aquel, e si vezes aqui alcuna causa diversa, rectifiqua aquel e enguala aquel per la quantitat de la tua vertut.	"And it is necessary that you touch that one appropriately with your hand at that time. And if sometimes some different cause arises, correct and engage it according to the quantity of your virtue."
E exquiva vehement extenssio e compressio, ayssi cum fan mots fols metges que motas veguadas fan accidir apostema caut per la sua operacio, o fan accidir contraccio en le membre ayssi cum havem vist aquo per la operacio de lor motas veguadas.	"And avoid violent extension and compression, as some foolish doctors do who often cause adherent cauterization to occur due to their operation or cause contraction in the member, as we have seen happen many times."
E aprop annecteys, aprop equacio e decent operacio e strictura de aquel membre, e repaus e tranquilitat; amoneste le malaute sobre aquo e fay le squivar que no maugua aquel en la hora de las suas vigilias e del sieu dormir, e ves la sua revolucio e agitacio, e deves la sua egestio, e deves totz les sieus movementz am tota la sua vertut; e aguarda se que la posicio del membre sia posicio am la qual sia asegurada la dolor, la qual causa es quar quan sent en la disposicio de la posicio del membre delor o lesio; lahoras cove que permutes aquel ad autra disposicio de aquela am la qual non senta dolor; e guarda am aquo que la posicio de lu aquela sia dreyta e engual, per so que al membre non accida tortuositat quan es restaurat.	"And also apply annecting, adaptation, gentle operation and restriction of that member, rest and tranquility. Warn the sick person about this and make sure they do not disturb that one during their watches or sleep. Observe his revolution and agitation, and ensure his evacuation, and watch all his movements with all your strength. And see to it that the position of the member is such that it ensures no pain. When he feels discomfort in the position of the member due to injury, then you must change that to another position where there is no pain. And make sure that the position of it is straight and well-adapted so that the member does not become twisted when it is restored."
E la qualitat de la strictura del membre tranquat es aquela que yeu recomti; per que sapias que·ls membres trencatz so diversificatz en lor parvitat e en lor grandeza e en la forma de aquels.	"And the quality of the restriction of the broken member is what I recommend. Therefore, know that broken members are diverse in their smallness and greatness and in their forms."
E de aquels que son petits ayssi cum le bras e·l dit e·l focil e semblantz ad aquels, lahoras cove que la envolucio sia de drap mol subtil.	"And of those that are small, such as the arm, hand, and foot, and similar ones, then the bandage should be made of very fine cloth."
Mays aquels que so grosses ayssi cum la cuoyssa o la camba, cove que en aquels sia envolucio lada e dura, quar la liadura lada connecteys le membre gran e strenh aquel de tota part am strictura engual, enayssi que en lu no intre macula.	"But those that are large, such as the thigh or calf, require a firm and strong bandage. For the bandage tightly connects the large member with equal restriction on all sides so that nothing penetrates into it."
E aprop comensa, aprop la tua evacuacio de equacio, pausar liament convenient ad aquo, sobre le loc de aquela fractura am tres envolucios o quatre segon que·l membre mereys; e strenh la tua ma un petit am le liament.	"And then begin gently with your evacuation of the bone, placing a suitable linen there on the location of that fracture with three or four bandages according to what the member deserves. And tighten your hand slightly with the linen."
E aprop ve am aquel a la partida pus sobirana del loc de la fractura, e strenh mens que no foc la tua strictura am la qual has strengut le loc de la fractura.	"And then take that one to the uppermost part of the location of the fracture and tighten more than you had previously tightened at the location of the fracture."
E aprop elongua te am envolucio del loc de la fractura un pauc, e mollifiqua la strictura petit a petit, entro que prenguas del loc sa una gran partida.	"And then extend yourself with a bandage from the location of the fracture somewhat and slowly loosen the restriction little by little until you take hold of it in one great piece."
E aprop pren una autra benda e envolveys aquela autra veguada sobre le loc trenquat am envolucio, e aprop ve am las envolucios a la partida pus dejos de la fractura; e sia la tua operacio en la strictura de la envolucio e en mollificacio de aquela segon que havem dit en la envolucio primieyra desus.	"And then take another bandage and wrap it around the broken location with a bandage. And then go with those bandages to the part farthest from the fracture, and your operation should be in the restriction of the bandage and in its loosening according to what was said regarding the first bandage above."
E aprop pausa entre las volucios de stopa leon o drap am le qual sia engualada la tortuositat de la fractura, si en lu es tortuositat; e sino, no pauses en lu alcuna causa.	"And then pause between the bandages with a piece of lion's skin or cloth with which the torsion of the fracture may be adapted if there is any torsion. And if not, do not add anything in it."
E aprop pausa sobre lu autra benda, e aprop enguala sobre aquestas envolucios stelhas decentment faytas tantost, si en le loc no es imflacio o apostema caut, e lahoras pausa sobre lu aquo que sede le apostema aquel e que oste la imflacio; e layssa aquela per alcus jorns; e lahoras tu strenh sobre lu las stelhas.	"And then place another bandage over it and adapt it over those bandages that are decently made. If there is no inflammation or adherent cauterization in the location, then pause on what sits beneath the cauterization or removes the inflammation. And leave that for a few days. And then tighten the bandages."
E sian las stelhas de la maytat de canna lada raza, e be formada saviament; o sian de fust de pi; o de ramps de palma ; e sia le ample de quascuna stelha segon aquesta forma e aquesta figura:	"And let the splints be made of strong cane split lengthwise and skillfully formed; or they may be made of hazel wood; or of palm branches. And let each splint be shaped according to this form and figure:"
Empero cove que la astelha que es pausada sobre aquela fractura sia pus grossa e pus lada un petit que las autras astelhas, e la longitut de la stela segon qu’es legut al membre en magnitut e parvitat; e aprop strenh sobre las astelhas am autra benda segon la tua primieyra strictura; e aprop lia desus am fiel decentment segon que havem dit de strictura, e es que sia la tua strictura segon le loc de la fractura mes, e quant mes es alonguat de la fractura, es mendre la strictura.	"However, the splint placed on that fracture should be thicker and firmer than the other splints, and its length should be proportional to the size of the member. And then tighten over the splints with another bandage according to your first restriction. And then tie it above with a knot made decently as was said regarding restriction. And let your restriction be greater at the location of the fracture, and the further away from the fracture, the less the restriction should be."
E cove que les fils sian migiers en grossesa e subtilitat, e sian de li mol; e si les fils so grosses, ayssi cum yeu he vist per la operacio de alcus fols pausantz les lors fils de cordas de li tort, e es error gran, quan catz la strictura fora equalitat.	"And the threads should be medium in thickness and fineness, and made of soft wool. And if the threads are thick, as I have seen some fools using ropes for binding, it is a great error when the restriction is unequal."
E eyssament fils subtils no so convenientz, quar tu no consaguiras per strictura am aquels aquo que voles, e no cove que entre astela e astela haja mens de un dit.	"And very fine threads are not convenient because you will not be able to tighten with them as much as you want. And there should not be less than one finger's breadth between splint and splint."
E si le malaute es ledit per las extremitatz de las stelas aprop la strictura en les locs sas, lahoras pausa dejos aquelas de stopa leon o lana carmenada entro que aquo no li fassa lesio.	"If the patient feels pain at the ends of the splints near the restriction in the swollen places, then pause those with lion's skin or woolen cloth until that ceases to cause injury."
Alcunas veguadas fractura es am plagua, e accideys disrupcio en la codena, e yeu vindre am rememoracio en aquela en le capitol segon singularitat.	"Sometimes fracture occurs with contusion, and dislocation happens in the shoulder joint. I have spoken about that one in the chapter on singularities."
E sapias que ges tot membre trencat no es streyt am stelhas al primier dia; la qual causa es quar le membre, quan es gran, no cove que pauses sobre lu stelhas sino aprop v dias o vii o mays, segon la tua seguratat de adveniment de apostema caut.	"And know that not every broken member should be immediately bound with splints on the first day. The reason is that when a member is large, it does not require splints to be placed upon it until about five or seven days have passed, according to your certainty of the arrival of an adherent cauterization."
E aquesta es la manieyra dels emplaustres am les quals les Antics restauravan, les quals so pausatz sobre fractura e dislocacio e torcio.	"And this is the manner of splints with which the Ancients used to restore fractures and dislocations and torsions."
Manieyra de emplaustra comu abruejat de restaurament de fractura, convenient a motas compleccios e majorment a las femnas e als efantz, quar es de aquo sobre le qual no ventz calor ni freg: e es que prenguas de polvera de moli, e es la medula de la farina que pen deves le movement de la mola en las paretz del moli.	"The manner of splinting commonly used for the restoration of fractures, convenient for many complexities and especially for women and children, is this: Take some powder of wheat flour, which is the meal that remains after grinding. Place it in a bag made of fine cloth or leather, and apply it over the place where there is no heat nor friction."
E comfeys aquel ayssi cum es, sino que cribelles aquel am album de huou, e pausa la comfeccio de lu no-spessa ni subtil; e aprop usa de aquela.	"And comfort him thus: sift that powder with egg white, then pause the mixture's preparation not too thick nor thin; and then use it."
Autra manieyra de emplaustre restaurant fractura e dislocacio e torcio: recipe de assafetida, de lapdanum, de acacia, de enula, e migrach, que es razit de milgraner salvage, de totz ana drac. x; de mirra e aloen ana drac. v; alochil ana drac. xx; totz sian trissatz e cribellatz e sian mesclatz am aygua alichil o am album de huou si la compleccio del malaute es scalfada; e aprop usa de aquest emplaustre, quar es de bona composicio e restaura les osses trencatz leugierament, e confereys a motz homes.	"Another method for making a plaster to reduce fractures and dislocations: take assafetida, lapdanum, acacia, enula, and millet seed, which is the seed of wild celery, all four ounces each; mirra and aloen, each five drachms; alochil, twenty drachms; all are ground and sieved and mixed with almond oil or egg white if the patient's complexion is scalded. Use this plaster, for it has a good composition and helps to heal lightly broken bones."
Autra manieyra de emplaustre le qual comfereys a fractura e torcio: recipe migrach e met de altea blanca ana drac. x; de mirra e de aloen ana drac v; de acacia drac. vi; de bol armenic drac. .xx.	"Another method for making plaster that helps with fractures and dislocations: take millet seed, white metheglin (honey mead), mirra, aloen, acacia, and gum arabic, each in the amounts specified. Mix them together well."
Totz sian trissatz en mortier am mota contricio, e sian cribellatz, e sian comfitz am aygua o am album de huou e sia administrat.	"All these are ground together in a mortar with wheat flour, then sieved and mixed with water or egg white before administration."
Manieyra de emplaustre a juncturas e osses separatz de lors locs, e seda dolor accident en aquels e a fissuras e fractaduras: sia presa lana sutza e sia submersa en vi agre e oli cuyt e sia pausat sobre le loc.	"Method for plastering dislocations and separated bones in their locations, to relieve accidental pain therein and for cracks and fractures: take raw wool and submerge it in sour wine and oil of cypress; then place it on the location."
Mays en aquest emplastre no es vertut de restauracio, de apostema caut e expelleys dolors propriament.	"It should be noted that this plaster does not have a virtue for restoring fractures or drawing out pus, but rather it serves to relieve pain directly."
Autra manieyra de emplastre que restaura os trancat: pren fuelas de figuier sort e fuelas de papaver salvatge; contereys tot e fay emplastre de lor.	"Another method for making plaster that restores broken bones: take fig leaves and poppy leaves, both fresh; mix them together evenly to make the plaster."
Manieyra de emplastre abreujat aministrat deves la restauracio de fractura de os e quan tu voles resolucio del romanent de apostema: recipe razitz de altea, de camamilla e flors de violes, de farina de ers, de totz ana partida i; sian totz trissatz e sian cofitz am vi, si·l membre no es scalfat.	"An abbreviated method for plastering to aid in the restoration of bone fractures and when you want resolution of the remnant of pus: take equal parts of rose leaves, chamomile flowers, violet flowers, and barley flour; grind them all together and mix with wine if the member is not scaled."
Mays si es scalfat, lahoras comfeys aquel am aygua de coliandre humit o am aygua e usa de lu.	"But if it is scaled, use that made with wet coriander water or simply water and egg white instead."
Autra manieyra de emplastra pus fort en resolucio que aquest primier, quan accideys apostema dur deves la restauracio del membre: recipe de razitz de altea e de semensa de li, e de balaustia, e mellilot, majorana, flors de viol, de camamilla, de totz ana partida i engual; totz sian trissatz e sian cofitz am aygua de sauze o am aygua dousa o am vi, tot aquo segon la qualitat del membre e le repaus de la color de lu.	"Another method for making plaster that is very strong in resolving abscesses when they occur during the restoration of a member: take equal parts of rose leaves and their seeds, balm, melilot, marjoram, violet flowers, chamomile, and wheat bran; grind them all together and mix with water from sauce plants or sweet water or wine, depending on the quality of the member and the appearance of its color."
Mays Ypocras no diyssec en le sieu libre que sia pausat sobre le membre trenquat deves la restauracio de lu sino cerot fayt de cera e de oli e no autre causa; e recomtec que sia migier entre grossitut e subtilitat.	"But Hippocrates does not specify in his book that it should be placed on the broken member during its restoration, but rather he recommends a cerate made from wax and oil, not otherwise. And he advises that it should be of medium thickness."
Mays a Gualia es vist que sian pausatz sobre le membre trencat deves la restauracio de lu e las causas en las quals es exsiccacio am petit de caliditat so ayssi cum mirra, enses e semblantz a lor de aquelas causas que havem recomtadas.	"But it is seen in Galen that they should be placed on the broken member during its restoration, and he lists the causes for which it is used with less heat, such as myrrh, incense, and similar substances, according to those causes that we have recommended."
Manieyra de emplastre que comfereys a lesio e dolor: recipe migat, de cezes, de pels de home inscizes o pena de auzel, e de altea, e sal, partidas enguals; sian trissatz e cribellatz e sian cofitz, e sia fayt emplastre.	"Method for making plaster that relieves injury and pain: take myrtle, cypress leaves, human hair shavings or chicken feathers, rose leaves, and salt; mix them all together evenly; grind and sieve them, then mix to make the plaster."
Mays la quantitat segon la qual cove que romangua la liadura e aprop sia disliada, es que consideres si no es accidit dolor ni pruziment ni le os es trencat no es maugut de son loc, lahoras tu no deslies de motz jorns.	"But the quantity that should remain on the plaster according to how it should be removed and properly loosened is this: if there is no pain or swelling, nor is the bone broken, then do not remove it for several days."
E si accideys al loc dolor vehement o prusiment o imflacio, lahoras tu te coyte o deslie aquel en la hora, e osta le emplastre de lu.	"And if severe pain or swelling or inflammation occurs in that place, then you should remove it immediately or cut it away in that hour and remove the plaster from there."
E pren drap de li e spongia marina leon humida, e submergeys aquela en aygua tebeza, e am aquela lava le loc entro que cesse aquel pruziment e la dolor sia sedada; e aprop layssa repausar le membre per una hora; e aprop pausa sobre lu lana sutza submersa en vi agre e oli o oli rozat, e lia sobre lu per una nuoyt entro que sias segur de apostema caut, e que repause la imflacio del membre, e sia remauguda la dolor de lu.	"And take a cloth and a damp sea sponge, and submerge that in hot water. With it, wash the affected area until the swelling subsides and the pain is calmed. Then let the member rest for an hour. Next, place clean wool soaked in vinegar and oil or sweet oil on it, and leave it there overnight to ensure that the abscess is cauterized and that the inflammation of the member has passed, and that the pain has been relieved."
E aprop itera aquela strictura subtil e emplastre petit e no·l strenhas per la tua constriccio primieyra, e subtilia am aquel entro que sia sanat.	"And then reapply the plaster gently and in a small amount, not binding too tightly with your first bandage, until it is healed."
E si vezes que le apostema e la rogor e la dolor e la imflacio e tots les accidentz ja so remaugutz de tot, e indigeysses de emplastre e de strictura, lahoras tu itera aquel ayssi cum has fayt al comensant engualment.	"And if it happens that the abscess, redness, pain, inflammation, and all other accidents have been entirely relieved, and you still need plaster and bandaging, then apply it again in the same way as you did at the beginning."
E si no accideys al membre alcuna causa de aquelas que havem ditas, lahoras no deslies aquel sino aprop tres dias o quatre o v o vii; e alcunas veguadas tot aquo es layssat per xx dias segon que a tu appar per la desliadura del membre, ayssi cum havem dit, entro que la fractura adhereys, e se acosta a la coagulacio de la carn sobre aquel.	"And if the member does not experience any of those causes that we have mentioned, then do not remove the plaster until three or four or five or seven days have passed. And sometimes it is left on for twenty days according to how the healing of the member appears, as we have said, until the fracture adheres and approaches the coagulation of the flesh upon it."
E lahoras ajusta en la strictura mays que en la tua strictura primieyra tota, e ayusta en la engrossacio de la vianda del malaute, segon que es precedida la rememoracio de lu.	"And then adjust the bandage more tightly than your first one, and adjust it according to the swelling of the wound, as healing progresses."
Mays si tu vezes le loc de la fractura ja desiccar e extenuar mays que no cove, lahoras sapias que·l nutriment es prohibit pervenir ad aquel; e donc embroca aquel am aygua tebeza deves tota veguada que delias aquel; e sia aquo en totz tres dias; e alleuja la strictura un petit, e per aquesta operacio corr al membre le nutriment, e es sanat leugierament.	"But if you find that the site of the fracture has dried out and wasted more than it should, then know that nutrition is prohibited from reaching it. Therefore, moisten it with hot water every time you remove it; do this for all three days. And loosen the bandage a little, and by this operation, you will bring nourishment to the member, and it will heal easily."
Mays aquo que fan les fols restauradors de la fractura del membre autra veguada quan no es restaurat al comensament, segon que cove, e es restaurat segon tortuositat, es error segon la operacio de lor, e temor gran, e si fos dreyturier aquo agrandit les Antics en lors libres e agueran am aquo obrat.	"But those who foolishly restore a fracture of the member at another time when it has not been set properly from the beginning, and is set incorrectly with crookedness, is an error according to their operation, and causes great fear. And if this were done correctly, the Ancients wrote about it in their books and performed it thus."
E yeu no he vist ad alcu de lor aquo far, per que es pus razonable que aquo no fassa.	"And I have not seen any of them do that, so it is more reasonable that they should not do it."
Capitol segon: De fractura quan accideys en le cap.	"Chapter Two: On fracture when it occurs in the head."
Las specias de fracturas son motas, e las figuras de lor son diversas, e las causas son distinctas, quar de fracturas alcuna es fayta per percussio de spaza, e la percussio osta tot le os entro al ciphac, le qual es dejos le os, ayssi cum fay ayssa en le fust, e per aquo aquesta specia es nompnada ascial; o la spaza inscideys alcuna partida del os, e inscideys la carn de lu e no passa la inscizio entro al derier de lu; e aquesta specia de fractura es nompnada levatio absoluta.	"The types of fractures are many, and their shapes are diverse. And the causes are different, because some fractures are caused by impact from a blow, which leaves all the bone inside the skull, leaving the bone bare like wood, and this type is called "exulsion." Or the blow cuts off some part of the bone and cuts the flesh around it without penetrating to the inner side of it. This type of fracture is called "avulsion absolute."
E la plagua de aquestas doas fracturas o es gran o pauca, e de fractura que es contricio o atricio; e causa de lu es percussio am poyra o cazement sobre peyra, e a lor semblantz.	"The severity of these two fractures is either great or slight, and their cause is percussion with heavy or sharp force."
E aquesta fractura o es penetrant que ja apropinqua al pannicol le qual es dejos le os; o es en la facia del os, e la plagua de aquestas doas fracturas o es gran o pauca.	"This fracture may be penetrating, approaching the panniculus which is attached to the bone, or it may be on the surface of the bone. The severity of these two fractures is either great or slight."
E de fractura es que es ameguada en le os, en la subtilitat del cabel petita, e per aquo es nompnada aquesta specia fractura capillar.	"This fracture is one that is confined within the bone, in its finest capillary subtlety, and for this reason it is called a capillary fracture."
E es fractura que es fayta o per cazement o per percussio de peyra e a lu semblantz, que fa intrar alcuna lamina del os a las partidas dedintz, e es fayta en le loc concavitat ayssi cum accideys als payroles de eram quan accideys a lor percussio e es partida de lor intrada a las partidas dedintz.	"This fracture occurs from a blow or percussion with heavy force, causing some of the bone's laminae to enter into its interior, similar to what happens to egg shells when they are struck and their insides crack."
E majorment es fayt aquo en les cors de osses humitz, ayssi cum so caps de efantz.	"Especially this occurs in the bodies of moist bones, such as those of children's heads."
E so a totas aquestas specias fracturas satagias, so son pessas ayssi cum stelhas separadas.	"And thus all these species of fractures are painful, like separated stars."
E yeu vindre am reremoracio de tot aquo en son loc.	"I have come to remind you of all this in its proper place."
E conoyssem totas aquestas specias de fractura per deteccio sobre aquelas e per inquisicio de lor am tentas e ostament de carn corrumpuda que es sobre lor.	"And I know all these species of fracture by their detection through the skin and by inquiry with touch and inspection of rotting flesh that is over them."
E specia capillar es conoguda per aysso que es descubert sobre le os, e es abstergit, e linit sobre lu am tentha, quar la fractura appar negra.	"The capillary species is recognized by this: it appears on the bone and is wiped clean; then it is touched with the hand, as the fracture looks black."
Mays en la curacio de fractura considera al comensament les accidentz del malaute, e lahoras si tu vezes per los accidentz que signifique per significacio manifesta sobre paor, ayssi cum es vomit de colera, e extencio, e perdement de entendament, e abscizio de votz, e sincopi, e febre acuta, e eyssiment dels huels e rogor de aquels, e semblantz a lor dels accidentz en las majors disposicios, ses dopte no es sanat.	"But in the treatment of fractures, first consider the accidents of the illness. If there are any accidents that indicate the presence of fear by manifest signs, such as vomiting from cholera, extension and loss of consciousness, sudden loss of voice, syncope, acute fever, dilation of pupils, redness of eyes, and similar accidents in major conditions, then it is not healed."
E si vezes accidentz no-correntz tu speras salut, lahoras tu comensa la curacio de lu.	"But if there are no current accidents, then you may expect recovery, and at that point begin the treatment of it."
La qual causa es quar si es vengut a tu le plaguat en le comensament cum es plaguat e aquo es en les dias de ivern, lahoras cove que tu studias en le ostament del os denant le dia xiiii segon tota disposicio.	"The reason for this is that if it happens to you at the beginning as it happened, and especially during the winter days, then you should study the appearance of the bone before the 14th day according to every condition."
E si es en les dias d’estiu, lahoras cove que te coytes ostar le os denant le vii dia, habantz que aquo que es dejos le os sia corromput del pannicol, e que accidescan les accidentz que havem recomtatz.	"And if it happens in the summer days, then you should uncover the bone before the seventh day, having ensured that what remains of the bone has been corrupted by the flesh, and that the accidents we have mentioned occur."
E si la fractura ja es pervenguda al pannicol cubrent le cervel, e es am partidas menudas e atricio, lahoras cove que inscidas la partida conminuta e atrita, segon que yeu recomtare a tu.	"And if the fracture has already reached the flesh covering the brain and is in many small parts and adherent, then you should insert the comminuted and adherent fragments according to what I will tell you."
E es que tu razas le cap del malaute plaguat, e descuebres sobre le os segon costuma e manieyra a tu possible segon la figura de la plagua, e que sia leugier sobre le malaute.	"And so you should shave the head of the patient and uncover the bone according to your usual custom and manner as best you can, following the shape of the fracture, ensuring that it is light on the patient."
E si accideys a tu deves la deteccio del os, fluxs de sanc o apostema caut, lahora tu te oppausa a lu am aquo que cove, e es que huemplas le loc de draps infuzes en vi e oli rozat, e fassa repausar la plagua entro que sia sedat le apostema, e sies segur de fluxs del sanc; e aprop comensa en la circuicio del os e en la ablatio de lu.	"And if it happens to you that the detection of the bone is difficult, with fluxes of blood or hard abscess, then you should postpone the operation with whatever is necessary, and this is what you should do: apply dressings infused in wine and rose oil to the place, and let the wound rest until the abscess has subsided and you are sure that there is no bleeding; then begin with the circumcision of the bone and the ablation of it."
E aquo sia segon una de dos manieyras de operacio.	"And this is according to one of two ways of operating."
E la una manieyra es que tu inscidas le os am inscisori de streyt tal, e aquesta es la forma de lu: E aprop administra un autre inscissori aquest, un pauc pus lat que aquel; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	"And the first way is that you insert the bone with an incision of such a size using an incision tool; and this is its form:
E aprop administra mays le inscissori pus lat que·l segon.	"And next administer a larger dressing than the second one."
E cove que sia deves tu nombre de inscissoris diverses, dels quals alcus so pus latz que alcus autres; e alcus de lor so pus breus que·ls autres e sian en le derier de acuitat de las suas extremitatz, e sian de ferr indi o felod.	"And you should have various dressings available, some of which are larger than others; some are shorter than others and have sharper edges, made of iron or steel."
E usa de lor am facilitat en percussio sobre le inscissori per so que no concutesca le cap e leda aquel.	"And use them with ease in percussion on the dressing so that you do not strike the head and hurt the patient."
E si le os es fort, dur, lahoras cove que perfores en le circuit de lu denant que tu administres los inscissoris am les taravels, les quals so nomnatz taravels no-profundantz.	"And if the bone is strong and hard, you should first perforate around it before administering dressings with non-penetrating tweezers."
E no so nomnatz ayssi sino quar aquels no pausan le terme de l’os del test ad aquo que es aprop lu, per so quar al taravel es redonda extremitat o marge sobre aquel que es dejos le cap de lu agut semblant a marge o a cercle petit, le qual prohibeys esser submergit e passar la spissitut del os.	"And these are not called thus because those do not reach the term of the bone's end where it is appropriate, so that the tweezers have a rounded extremity or margin over that which is left behind the head sharp like a margin or small circle, which should be prevented from being submerged and passing through the thickness of the bone."
E es convenient que tu prenguas de aquestz taravels gran nombre dels quals quascu convenesca a la spicitut de quascun os, entro que sia a tu present en tottz testz del cervel la extremitat del qual sia aguda, la quantitat en longitut e brevitat sia segon la quantitat de spicitut de aquest test.	"And it is convenient for you to take many of these tweezers which fit the thickness of each bone, so that there are enough present in all tests of the brain whose extremities are sharp, and their quantity in length and width should be according to the quantity of thickness of this."
E aquesta es la forma de tres specias de teravels: La qualitat de perforar en le circuit del os trencat es que pauses le teravel sobre le os e revolvas aquel am les tieus ditz entro que sapias que l’os ja es penetrat; e aprop permuda le terevel ad autre loc, e pausa aquo que es entre tot trauc la quantitat de la grosseza del ray o enviro aquo.	"And this is the shape of three kinds of tweezers:
E aprop inscideys am inscissoris aquo que es entre quascun trauc del os, e fay aquel pus subtil que podes sobre aquo en fi de levitat, ayssi cum havem dit, entro que erradiques le os, o am la tua ma, o am alcuna autra causa per alcus sturmentz les quals auras apparelhatz ad aquo, ayssi cum tanalhas e forceps subtils.	"Impede the fracture with an incision using scissors, and gently squeeze out as much pus as possible from between each broken bone towards the end of the elevation, as mentioned earlier, until you can radiate or remove the bone with your hand or any other tool suited for this purpose, such as tweezers."
E cove que tu guardes am tota cautela que l’inscissori no toque alcuna causa del ciphac.	"And make sure that the scissors do not touch any part of the patient's body."
E donc cum auras circuit le os perforan, e sira separat del ciphac si es continuat am lu, e auras aquel extrayt, cove que razas e enguales aquel en la asperitat de lu de aquo que es en le os am autra sturment semblant a inscissori, mays empero cove que sia pus teon e pus subtil que les autres inscissoris.	"And then, once you have circled the bone perforation and separated it from the patient if it is continuous with them, you will extract it using a tool similar to scissors but more jagged and sharp than others."
E si roman alcuna partida dels osses petitz e satagias, lahoras pren aquela am facilitat am aquo que es deves tu dels sturmentz; e aprop aquo cura la plagua am lichinis e enguentz les quals havem ditz.	"And if there are any broken small bones and you try to put them back together easily using whatever tools are available, then dress the wound with linen and bandages as mentioned earlier."
E l’autra manieyra de operacio es leugiera, longinqua de paor, la qual diyssec Gualia e la lauzec per gran lausor; e aquest es le sermo de lu: necessari es a tu en le comensament que comenses descobrir la partida del os del loc en le qual es la fractura pus vehement e pus manifesta, entro que quan auras descubert aquela partida e auras pausat dejos lu la extremitat de aquest inscissori lent e alegre del qual aquesta es la forma:	"And another way of operating is gentle and far from frightening, which Galen describes and praises highly. This is the method: it is necessary for you to begin by uncovering the bone fracture site as soon as possible and clearly."
E es que la partida lenticular es leon e no inscideys alcuna causa, e la partida aguda es de lu en dos latz avantz en longitut, ayssi cum vezes; que la partida lenticular sia ajustada al ciphac am la facia de lu inscident aguda en le os.	"And the lenticular cut is made without cutting anything else, and the acute cut is made on both sides along its length like this: so that the lenticular cut fits tightly against the patient with the sharp face of the bone facing inwards."
E aprop percuteys sobre le inscissori de una partida am un petit malhet entro que inscidas tot le os am facilitat ayssi cum es revolvut, e tu sias segur del pannicol que no accida en lu accident que temas en denguna manieyra, e si le medicant14 era le pus fol de totz les homes e le mays ignorant de lor; certament, e si era dorment.	"And then strike the scissors of one cut with a small hammer until you have easily cut through all the bone in this way. And be sure that no accident happens to the patient, and if the doctor was the most foolish of all men and the most ignorant, certainly he would be asleep."
Lahoras si romania alcuna causa annexa al os del pannicol en alcus locs de os, inscidira aquel de lu am la extremitat del inscissori aquel lenticular, e deliuraria aquel de lu am facilitat, quar es deliurat de lu ses nocument e ses paor.	"Then if there are any attachments of the soft tissue to the bone in certain places, cut those with the lenticular end of the scissors and remove them easily, for they are removed without harm or fear."
E si fractura del os no penetra entro al pannicol, e aquo que es abscidit o es ostat del os es la facia de lu, e roman en lu asperitat e satagias subtils, lahoras cove que razas aquela asperitat e erradiques aquelas satagias am razoris subtils per les quals tu has preparat le nombre, de diversas quantitatz per que sia a tu possible administrar de aquels en tot loc les pus convenientz de lor e le pus dreyt de aquels segon aquo en que te perduzeys la tua operacio aquel os trencat e la figura de lu.	"And if the bone fracture does not penetrate into the soft tissue, and what is cut off or scraped from the bone is its surface, which remains rough and with delicate projections, then you must shave off that roughness and remove those projections using fine razors which you have prepared in different quantities so that you may use them conveniently and correctly according to how you plan your operation on that broken bone and its shape."
E cove que administres en la tua razio am la qual razes le os al comensament le pus lat de aquels razoris, e aprop usa aprop lu del pus subtil de lu, e no cesses far aquo segon continuitat entro que pervenguas ad aministrar le pus teon e·l pus subtil de totz aquels.	"And you must use in your rasping of the bone at the beginning the widest razors, and then immediately use the most subtle ones, and continue doing this until you arrive at using the thinnest and finest of all."
Mays en quascuna de las autras fracturas petitas capillars e fractura subtil, cove que administres cura segon aquo que perduseys ad rectificacio de lu.	"But in each of the other small capillary fractures and subtle fractures, you must provide care according to what you have planned for their correction."
E es causa que no es ameguada sobre totz les quals han studi en aquela art.	"And this is not mentioned among all those who have studied that art."
E stec sobre aquo que nos scriut havem mostrat en grans fracturas.	"And concerning what has been said, we have shown it in large fractures."
E si le pannicol es retangut quan tu erradiques le os, lahoras cove que prenguas drap de li segon la quantitat de la plagua, e submergeys aquel en oli rozat, e pausa aquel sobre le orrifici de la plagua; e aprop pren autre drap doblat o triplicat e submergeys lu en vi e oli rozat e pausa aquel sobre drap prim e fay aquo al pus leugierament que podes sobre aquel, que no graves le ciphac; e aprop administra sobre aquel liament lat, e no strenhas aquel sino per quantitat que tengua la plagua tant solament.	"And if the soft tissue is torn when you are removing the bone, then you must take cloth according to the amount of the wound and immerse it in rose oil, and place it over the opening of the wound. Then take another piece of cloth folded or tripled, immerse it in wine and rose oil, and place it gently on top of the first cloth without pressing down too hard. Then apply a wide bandage, and do not tie it too tightly but only according to the amount that the wound requires."
E layssa aquel am aquesta cura per un dia o per dos entro que sias segur de apostema caut; e aprop deslia aquel e aprop aministra medicinas am las quals es superflua siccitat, ayssi cum razitz de lin e farina de errs, e polvera de enses e de aristologia, e de semblantz ad aquels.	"And leave it with this dressing for one or two days until you are sure that there is no suppuration. Then remove the dressing and apply medicines that promote dryness, such as linseed resin and iris flour, powder of incense and of aloe, and similar ones."
E es que tu fassas de aquestas medicinas polvera que sia pulverizada sobre la plagua, ayssi cum son secas; e universalment, administra en aquel tota medicina de proprietat de la qual es que abstergesca e no mordique.	"And if you make these medicines into powders that are sprinkled on the wound, they should be dry. In general, apply any medicine that has the property of cleansing and not biting."
E guarda te segon la tua vertut que la plagua en la tua curacio sia neta; e no sia en lu surdicia de enguent ni autra; ni no layssas agreguar virulencia en lu; quar quan es ajustada sobre le pannicol del cervel, corromp aquel e poyreys aquel, e accideys sobre le malaute aprop aquo malicia maligna.	"And make sure that the wound in your care is clean and not foul with grease or anything else. Do not let it become infected with virulent matter, for if it does, it will corrupt the soft tissue of the brain and cause illness."
E accideys en le ciphac del cap, cum de lu es mondificat le os e majorment quan es menspresada la cura de lu, e es negror en la superficia de lu; e donc considera lahoras si accideys al malaute les accidentz que havem ditz, sapias que es parnicios ses tot dopte.	"And if inflammation occurs in the head wound, especially after the bone has been scraped and when care is not taken, it will appear black on its surface. Then consider that you have caused the harmful accidents mentioned earlier, and know that they are fatal without doubt."
E si no accideys negror sino de la medicina que es pausada desus, e es en vertut de aquela medicina que fassa aquela negror, lahoras cove que tu prenguas de mel una partida e de oli rozat partidas iii, e am aquels linieys un drap, e aprop pausa aquel sobre le ciphac; e aprop cura aquel am las specias de curacio que conveneys entro que sia sanat.	"If there is no blackness but only from the medicine applied on top, then it is the virtue of that medicine which causes the blackness. Therefore, take one part honey and three parts rose oil, mix them together with a cloth, and apply it to the inflammation. Then treat it according to the usual methods of care until it heals."
Capitol .iii.	"Chapter 3"
De restauracio del nas quan es trincat.	"On the restoration of the nose when it is crushed."
Sapias que no es trencat del nas sino doas partidas ensemps pus sobiranas, o una de aquelas alcunas veguadas, per so quar en lu has dos osses, quar la partida dejos es cartillaginosa, e no es trencada e no accideys a lu sino atricio e tortuositat e sinuitat.	"You should know that the nose is not broken except by two parts being crushed together and pushed upwards, or one of those parts being displaced. This happens because there are two bones in the nose, the left one being made of cartilage and not broken, but rather becoming bruised and distorted."
Mays si es trencada la una de las doas partidas de lu, lahoras cove que tu intrometas le dit petit en le sieu nas, e que engualhas aquela fractura dedintz am le tieu dit indic, e am le dit pous defora, entro que retorne le nas segon la sua figura natural.	If one of the patient's limbs is broken, then you should insert the little finger into its socket and immobilize that fracture using your thumb and index finger from within, and your palm externally, until it returns to its natural shape.
E sia fayt aquo per tu am facilitat, e guarda te que no caja per aquela tua operacio sobre le malaute delor.	And do this carefully, ensuring you don't hurt the patient during this procedure.
E si la fractura es en la pus sobirana partida del nas, e le dit no perve ad aquela, lahoras cove que sia equat am la extremitat del ray en le qual sia petita grossitut.	And if the fracture is in the upper part of the nostril and your finger cannot reach it, then use the tip of a small stick instead.
E si la fractura es en doas partidas, lahoras tu fay le semblant de aquo.	If the fracture involves both parts, proceed as follows:
E coyta te am restauracio de lu en le primier dia de la fractura, si es possible; e sino, lahoras aprop le vii o·l x deves le repaus del apostema caut.	Try to restore it on the first day of the fracture if possible; otherwise, wait seven or nine days for the swelling to subside before doing so.
E aprop entromet en la extremitat del nas una meca de drap de li, si la fractura es en una partida, o metz doas calguas, si la fractura es en doas partidas, e sia en la calgua grossitut de tanta quantitat que umpla le trauc del nas.	And insert a cloth wick into the nostril tip if the fracture involves one part, or two cotton pads if it involves both parts, ensuring that they are thick enough to fill the nasal passage.
E diysso alcus dels antics restauradors que las calguas sian enfundudas en boder, e sian permudadas en tot dia, mays no es vist a mi; habantz cove que la meca sia enfunduda en album de huou comfit am polvera de moli; e aprop layssa la qualgua entro que l’os sia fermat e sia endurazida la cartillage.	Some ancient surgeons claim that cotton pads should be bandaged at the edges and changed daily, but I do not find this necessary. Instead, wrap the wick in a thin layer of album made from egg white mixed with powdered myrrh; leave it in place until the bone is healed and the cartilage has regained its strength.
E alcunas veguadas sia entromes en le nas, en loc de calgua, pena de auca pus que es envolopada de drap de li leon; e sia que ja te la fractura del nas pus vehement e que le malaute no sia prohibit de inspiracio.	Sometimes, instead of cotton pads, a linen cloth folded into the shape of a cone may be inserted into the nostril to prevent any accumulation of pus within it. This can be done even if the nasal fracture is severe and the patient has difficulty breathing through their nose.
E aquesta causa no es a tu necessaria; e si voles, fay aquo, e si voles, fay calguas.	You don't need to do this; if you wish, you may use the linen cloth instead of cotton pads, but it is not necessary.
E si accideys autra veguada apostema caut, emplastra le nas am cerot o am coto enfus en vi agre e oli rozat, o am diaquilon.	And if another abscess forms later on, apply a plaster made of wax or cotton soaked in vinegar and rose oil, or diacylon.
Mays si no accideys apostema caut, lahoras cove que emplaustres aquel defora am farina de sizami e am polvera de enses cofitz am album de huou; e aprop pausa sobre lu stopa leon, e no lies le nas am alcuna causa.	But if an abscess does not form, you should then plaster the outside of it with ground sesame seeds and powdered myrrh mixed with egg white. Place a linen strip over this plaster, and do not manipulate the nose in any way.
Mays si so trencats les osses del nas am fractura petita o so conminuitz, lahoras cove que scindas sobre aquels, e extraguas aquels am insturmentz que conveno ad aquels; e aprop cos la scissura, e cura aquela am aquo que encarna e consolida, e am emplastres ad aquo convenientz.	But if the bones of the nose are broken with a small fracture or are merely comminuted, you should then cut over them and extract those fragments using appropriate instruments. Then suture the wound and treat it with substances that promote healing and consolidation, along with suitable plasters.
E si accideys plagua dedintz le nas, lahoras cove que cures aquela am calguas e administra canulas de plom entro que sia de tot sanat.	And if a deformity occurs inside the nose, then you should treat it using cotton pads and lead cannulae until it is completely healed.
Capitol .iiii.	Chapter IV
De restauracio de la mandibula quan es trincada.	On the restoration of the jawbone when it is broken.
Quan la mandibula dejos es rompuda e la fractura de lu no es am plagua, reguarda lahoras si la fractura es deforas tant solament, e no es trencada en dos e es curvada a las partidas dedintz, lahoras la sua cognicio es leugiera.	When the jawbone is broken and the fracture does not heal properly, examine whether the fracture is displaced only on one side and not completely shattered or bent inward.
E cove donc, si la fractura es en la part dreyta, que tu intrometas le tieu indic senestre en la boca del malaute; e semblantment si la fractura es an la mandibula senestra, lahoras intromet le dit indic de la ma dreyta; e impelleys am aquel la gilbositat de la fractura dedintz am facilitat a las partidas defora, am la tua autra ma de la partida defora del os; am aquel decentment equa aquelam.	Therefore, if the fracture is on the right side, insert your left index finger into the patient's mouth and similarly for the left mandible. Then gently push the fracture inward with this finger while supporting it from outside with your other hand.
E si la fractura de la mandibula ja es separada en doas, lahoras cove que administres extensio de doas partz segon rectitut entro que sia possibla la equacio de lu.	If the jawbone fracture is already separated into two parts, then you must apply traction to both parts in a straight line until it is possible to reduce the fracture.
E si accideys conmocio de dentz a disrupcio, lahoras strenh aquelas de las quals speras que romandran am fil de aur o de argent o de ceda; e aprop pausa sobre la mandibula trencada cerot, e aprop pausa sobre lu drap duplicat, e pausa sobre le drap gran stelha decentment fayta, o una pessa de sola engual a la longitut de la mandibula; e aprop lia aquela desus segon que a tu es apparelhada la liadura de lu e que conveneys la applicacio, entro que no es destruida.	If teeth are displaced or loosened due to the fracture, then strengthen those that you expect may break with gold, silver, or silk thread. Apply pressure gently on the broken jawbone using cotton pads and then place a folded towel, a piece of gauze, or a sandbag along the length of the jawbone to maintain its position until reduction is achieved without causing further damage.
E comanda al malaute que use de repaus e tranquilitat, e pausa la vianda de lu sorbicios leons.	Tell the patient to rest and avoid activities that require excessive jaw movement for a while, especially eating hard or chewy foods.
E si extimas que ja es alterada la figura en alcuna manieyra, lahoras tu te coyta e deslia aquel al tertz dia; e aprop rectifica aquo que ja es alterat de lu e emplaustra aquel am polvera de moli, am album de huou, o am farina de cisami, pus que tu auras ostat le cerot de lu, e pausa sobre le emplastra lana leon.	If you notice any changes in the patient's appearance at any time after reduction and fixation of the fracture, remove the splint on the third day. Then examine the area for any signs of infection or other complications, remove any remaining cotton, and apply a dressing using powdered borax, egg albumen, or flour to promote healing, followed by a bandage.
E adonc cum sta annex e ajustat aquel emplastre sobre lu, e la disposicio del os no es alterada, layssa aquel, que no le deslies entro que sia sanat e strenh la fractura; quar motas veguadas aquesta fractura es streyta en tres sempmanas.	Once the dressing and splint are applied correctly without altering the position of the bone, leave them in place until healing is complete and the fracture is stable. Often, these fractures heal within three weeks.
E si autra veguada accida apostema caut, lahoras administra aquo que havem dit motas veguadas en la sedacio de lu entro que sia sanat, e sia remaugut aquel apostema.	If an abscess forms later on, follow these steps until it heals and is drained:
E si la fractura es am plagua, lahoras considera si es pessa del os separada o satagias, lahoras tu te subtilia que ostes aquelas satagias am aquo que conveneys ad aquo en la remocio de aquelas dels sturmentz.	"If the fracture is in a visible place, then consider if it's a separation of bone fragments or shattered pieces. Then subtly remove those shattered pieces with whatever tools are appropriate for their removal."
E si le orrifici de la plagua es streyt, lahoras tu le amplifique am le fleubotomi segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	"If the opening of the wound is narrow, then widen it using the forceps according to your need."
E aprop quan tu auras ostat aquelas satagias, e de aquelas no sira remaugut re, lahoras tu cos le orrifici de la plagua si es ampla; e sino, pausa sobre aquela un dels emplaustres que conveneysso ad aquo e encarnan aquela, entro que sia sanada.	"And when you have removed those shattered pieces and there is no more left to remove, then if the opening of the wound is wide enough, proceed with your treatment. But if not, apply one of the plasters that are appropriate for this purpose and cover it until it heals."
Capitol .v.	"Chapter Five."
De restauracio de la furcula quan es trinquada.	"On the restoration of the clavicle when it is fractured."
Motas veguadas es trencada la furcula de la partida denant deves le muscle, e aquela fractura es fayta en una de tres manieyras.	"The clavicle is often broken at its middle third, and this fracture occurs in one of three ways:"
Quar o es trencada, o seperada, o es seperada en doas partz otra que no accidan satagias; e es leugier a la restauracio de lu; o es ayssi que accideysso en lu satagias, e es dificil a restauracio de lu; o es ayssi que la fractura es am plagua.	"Either the clavicle is broken into two separate pieces with no shattered fragments, which is easy to restore; or it is separated in such a way that there are shattered fragments, which makes restoration difficult; or the fracture occurs with an open wound."
E la operacio en aquela, quan la fractura es ses plagua, es que tu fassas esser present dos ministres, per so que la un tengua le adjutori e siegua la furcula trencada, e l’autre extenda le col ves aquela partida.	"And the operation in this case, when the fracture is closed, is that you have two assistants present, one to hold the retractor and follow the broken clavicle, and the other to extend the patient's neck at that location."
E aprop enguala la fractura am les tieus ditz entro que sia fayta la forma de lu segon que cove, e no sia en lu eminencia pauca ni concavitat.	"And once you have exposed the fracture with the said tongs, make sure that the bone ends fit together properly according to their original shape, without any prominence or concavity."
E si indigeysses mes de extencio, lahoras cove que pauses dejos le titillic del malaute spera de drap o de lana, e sia la grandesa de lu segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat; e exten e eleva la furcula e coarta la spera am la tua ma entro que enguales la frectura segon que cove.	"And if you need more extension, then you should place a wad of cloth or wool behind the patient's shoulder to support it, according to how much is needed. Then extend and elevate the clavicle and compress the wad with your hand until the fracture is properly reduced."
E si no podes atirar la extremitat de la furcula a las partidas defora, per so quar es pervenguda al preon, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sua cervitz, e pauses sobre le muscle de lu un coyssi migier en grandeza.	"And if you cannot bring the end of the clavicle back into its proper position because it has become shortened, then have the patient sit up on their shoulders and place a pillow or cushion under their upper chest."
E le ministre prema le muscle de lu a las partidas dejos entro que l’os de la furcula sia elevat que es en le preon en sus, e lahoras tu rectifique la fractura e enguala aquela am les tieus ditz.	"And the assistant presses on the muscle at that location while you elevate the clavicle until it is in its proper position. Then you can reduce the fracture and secure it with the said tongs."
Mays si sentes satagias de la furcula e so maugudas, lahoras cove que fendes sobre aquela e extraguas aquelas satagias am facilitat.	"But if there are any sharp edges or spikes on the clavicle, you should cut them off and remove them carefully."
E si es retenguda en le os, lahoras tu ingenia inscisio de lu am un dels inscissoris les quals has apparelhatz ad aquo, pus que havias pausat dejos la furcula le sturment que serve le ciphac; e es sturment de fust o de ferr del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	"And if the clavicle is retained in the bone, then you should make an incision through it using one of the scalpel blades that you have prepared for this purpose. You had previously placed a retractor on the clavicle to expose the instruments, which are made of wood or iron and have this shape:"
E es semblant a culier del qual aquesta es la concavitat; e sia la sua latitut segon aquo que has necessitat de lu, segon la grandeza del os o la pauqueza de lu.	"It is shaped like a spatula with this concavity. Its width should be according to your needs, depending on the size of the bone or its thinness."
Mays la longitut de lu sia segon que es a tu possible a la operacio; que haja doas extremitatz ayssi cum vezes, e la una extremitat sia ample e l’autre streyta.	"But its length should be as short as possible for the operation, with two ends like this: one end is wide and the other is narrow."
E si la disrupcio de la plagua la qual has inscidida quan has extraytas la satagia del os es ampla, e yest segur de apostema caut, lahoras tu ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura.	"But if the disruption of the wound that you made when removing the spike from the bone is large and likely to form a hematoma, then close the wound edges with sutures."
E si la disrupcio es pauca, o temes apostema caut, lahoras tu uemple la plagua am draps e pulvils segon la quantitat de la scissura de la plagua.	"But if the disruption is small or you fear a hematoma, then fill the wound with dressings and powders according to the size of the wound."
E si accideys apostema caut, lahoras infon drap en vi agre e oli rozat e vi, e pausa sobre aquel.	"And if a hematoma forms, then soak a cloth in sour wine and rose oil and apply it over that area."
Mays la strictura del os quan es ses plagua e ses seccio, es que pauses emplastre fayt de farina de moli am album de huou, e pausa sobre lu stopa leon, e aprop pausa la spera dejos le titillic de lu, si indigeyssas de aquela, e aprop pren humemate, so es torca la qual teno les Sarrazis , que sia mot longua, e sia latitut de lu de un palm o entorn aquel; e aprop pausa pulvils duplicatz sobre la stopa e l’emplastre; e aprop pren una stela de taula subtil de la qual la latitut d’ela sia de tres ditz e en longitut semblantment; e aprop envolopa aquela en drap, e aprop envolopa aquel drap am la stela en lo loc sobre le loc de la fractura; e aprop pausa humemati ayssi cum es revout, e revol aquela sobre le col de lu e dejos le titillic de lu sa e dejos le titillic de lu malaute, e reduzeys aquela sobre tota partida, e quan vezes que la strictura de la fractura am strictura descent, e es aquo que no es occultat sobre tu.	"But when the bone is stripped of its periosteum and cut, you should apply a plaster made of flour from a millstone mixed with egg albumen. Then place it on top of the lesion and also place a wad of cloth or cotton behind the patient's shoulder to support it if necessary. Then take a long bandage, about as wide as a palm or somewhat wider, and fold it in two lengthwise. Then apply powder doubly over the plaster. Then take a thin tablecloth strip that is about three digits wide and similarly long, wrap it around the bandage, and then wrap the whole thing with cloth at the location of the fracture. Then take another wad of cotton, roll it up, and place it on top of the lesion and behind the patient's shoulder and chest to support it while reducing the fracture in all parts until the fracture becomes firm."
E tot, que no sia mauguda la stelha desobre le os trencat; e per so cove que tu vejas le malaute quascun dia, que quan le liament es mollificat o vezas la stela ja esser remauguda, lahoras tu rectifica aquo e strenh la liadura.	"And all of this is done while avoiding putting pressure on the fractured bone. And you should see the patient every day to ensure that the bandage does not become loose or slip off as the swelling decreases. If it does, then correct it and tighten the bandage."
E aprop pausa le dormir del malaute sobre le col de lu, e pausa dejos le titillic de lu deves le dormir de lu en la nueyt un petit coyssi; per so que am aquel sia elevat le adjutori de lu del latz de aquel, e donc es elevada la la fractura de la furcula a elevacio del muscle; o sia le bras de lu liat al col de aquel.	"And also make the patient sleep on their back with a small pillow placed at their side at night. This will elevate the adjutors of their shoulder and thus elevate the fracture of the clavicle and reduce strain on the muscles, or keep the arm bound to their chest."
E no deslies le liament si no accideys en le loc prusiment o apostema, entro a xii dias.	"And do not remove the bandage until about twelve days have passed unless there is persistent redness or an abscess in that location."
E aprop renovelha le emplastre si has vista la facia de lu ad aquo, e ajusta en la strictura e restaura aquel e layssa entro que sia restaurat e sia coagulat la fractura de la furcula.	"And also renew the plaster if you see that its face is dry by then, and adjust it to fit the swelling, restore it, and leave it in place until the fracture of the clavicle has healed and united."
E es strenguda e comfortada segon le mes en xxviii dias, e alcunas veguadas en alcus homes es fayt en mens de temps de aquel.	"And healing is usually achieved within twenty-eight days, although sometimes it may take less time in certain individuals."
Capitol .vi.	"Chapter VI"
De restauracio de fractura de la spalla.	"On the restoration of fractures of the shoulder."
Spatula tart es trencada en le loc lat de lu e no so trencatz de lu sino les marges.	"A fracture of the scapula usually occurs on its lateral border and does not affect the body of the bone but only the margins."
E donc quan es trencat le loc de lu — e es trencat en le mieg loc de lu — e no es conogut sino per tocament, lahoras segon que es la figura de la fractura sforsa te la preparacio de lu e reduzir aquela segon la figura natural en tota manieyra de engen la qual es a tu possible.	"When the fracture is located on the medial border of the scapula and not visible except by touch, then prepare the reduction according to its shape and reduce it naturally in every way that you are able."
E aprop pausa sobre le loc polvera de moli am album de huou e stopa leon; e aprop pausa pulvil de drap duplicat; e aprop pausa sobre lu stela lada de taula subtil segon la quantitat de la spatula tota o mays un pauc.	"And then apply plaster made of fine powdered millstone with egg albumen and linen cloth. Then apply powder made of folded cloth. Then apply a thin bandage around the entire scapula or somewhat wider."
Mays si dejos la stela es concavitat en alcu dels locs de la spatula, lahoras tu enguala aquela concavitat am stopa leon, e aprop pueja la stela segon equalitat.	"But if the bandage is concave at some point on the scapula, then fill in that concavity with linen cloth and smooth out the bandage evenly."
E aprop strenh desus am humemati longua ab constriccio decent e am fermesa de la stela entro que no sia remauguda del sieu loc.	"And also secure it above with a long wad of cotton that is gently compressed and ensure that the bandage does not slip from its proper location."
E considera le liament en quascun dia; e totas veguadas que sia mollificat, lia autra veguada e stren le e equa la stela si es remauguda del sieu loc.	"Check the bandage every day. If it becomes loose at any time, replace it and tighten it again to ensure that the bandage does not slip from its proper location."
E jagua le malaute sobre le sieu latz sa.	"And make the patient lie on their side."
E la spatula es restaurada en xx dias o en .xxv.	"The scapula is usually restored in twenty days or less."
E donc quan es complit aquest nombre, lahoras tu dissolveys le liament, e que tu scias ensegurat quar aquela es dels osses dels quals la cominicio no es temuda ni lor dissolucio.	"And when this number of days is completed, then remove the bandage, and be sure that you know how to distinguish which bones have solid union without removal."
E si procezeys del loc del os pessa e pongeys dejos la codena, lahoras tu scindeys sobre lu, e osta le, e fay segon que havem dit en la fractura de la furcula de sadacio de apostema caut si accideys aqui.	"And if you are treating a fracture of the humerus and placing it at the side of the elbow, then split it open there and follow what was said regarding the reduction of a hematoma in the clavicle fracture if one occurs here."
Capitol .vii.	"Chapter VII"
De restauracio de la fractura del pietz.	"Regarding the healing of a broken foot."
Le pietz alcunas veguadas es romput en le mieg loc de lu e aquo tart endeve; mays las extremitatz de lu mot endeve que so ciccadas e comminuidas.	"The foot sometimes breaks in the middle and this can be difficult to heal; but its ends usually grow back together, although they are shortened and fragmented."
E dels accidentz de lu quan es trencat le mieg de lu es que declina a las partidas dedintz e accideys a lu gran dolor, e dificultat en lo hale, e tos, e fort leu e vomeys sanc; e es declarada en lu cavitat en le os trencat e no es occulta al sentiment.	"And when the middle of the foot breaks, it declines towards its parts inside and accidents can happen to it with great pain, difficulty in healing, coughing, fever, vomiting blood; and there is an obvious deformity in the cavity of the broken bone which cannot be hidden from touch."
E la restauracio de lu es que sia resupinat le malaute sobre le sieu dos, e pausa entre las spallas de lu un coyssi; e aprop prem als muscles de lu, e ajusta las costas de lu am las mas de dos costatz, e subtilia te en la operacio de lu e en la equacio segon tota manieyra que es ad aquo possibla e que conveneys ad aquo, entro que retorne la figura del os segon que cove.	"And for its healing, the patient should be placed on their back, and a pillow should be placed between the soles of their feet; gently press on the muscles of the foot, adjust the bones with two hands, carefully operate and equalize according to any possible manner that is appropriate and convenient, until the figure of the bone returns to its proper position."
E aprop pausa sobre lu emplastre e estopa e pausa desobre astela de taula subtil de sauze o de caligi e de a lor semblantz en levitat, pus que tu envolopas aquela en drap; e aprop subtilia te en lian aquela sobre le os trencat que no sia maugut; e vay am liadura segon retonditat al dors alcunas veguadas, e strenh aquel am strictura decent; e aprop considera la liadura en tota hora, e quan es mollificada strenh aquela.	"And gently apply plaster and gauze, then place on a thin table board of sauce or chalk and its likes in levitation, since you wrap that up with cloth; carefully apply it onto the broken bone so as not to move it; sometimes tie it around the back according to the roundness, and tighten it with appropriate strapping; regularly check the bandage, and when softened, tighten it again."
E si necessitat provoca a desliament de aquela deves corrossio o pruziment, o dolor, o apostema que accideysso en le loc, lahoras tu coyta e deslia aquela e erradica le emplastre e rectifique aquo que accideys per aquo am manieyra de curacio de lu; e aprop reduzeys le emplastre, si vezes ad aquo la facia; e ajusta a lu strictura entro que sia sanat.	"And if there is a need for removal of the bandage due to corruption or inflammation, pain, or an abscess occurring in that place, you should remove and untie it immediately, remove the plaster, correct what has happened with the manner of curing it; and apply plaster again if necessary, sometimes changing its face; adjust the strapping until it is healed."
Capitol .viii.	Capítulo VIII
De restauracio de las costas quan son trincadas.	Chapter VIII
Sapias que fractura de las costas no catz sino en locs grosses que siegon le dos; e de las extremitatz de lor de la partida denant no accideys ad aquelas contricio sino per aquo quar so cartillaginosas.	Know that fractures of the ribs occur only in large spaces that are on the back, and at the ends of those bones near their joints it happens only rarely because they are cartilaginous.
E cognicio de lu no es amaguada al sentiment deves la inquisicio de lu am les ditz.	And knowledge of him is not concealed from His perception despite His inquiry with them.
E la restauracio sia ayssi que enguales la fractura am les ditz segon la manieyra possibla, entro que sia engulhat segon que cove, e aprop emplastre e strenh le os trencat am stela, si indigeys de aquel.	And the restoration should be such that you align the fracture according to your knowledge with the possible manner, so that it can heal according to need. Afterwards apply plaster and strengthen the broken bone with steel if necessary.
E si la fractura de las costas es declinant a las partidas dedintz, lahoras accideys al malaute dolor vehement e punctura, ayssi cum punctura que accideys ad aquel que ha pleureci, e per aquo quar le os ponh le velament; e accideys a lu difficultat de hanelit, e tos, e vomit de mot sanc; e aquesta es de dificil curacio.	And if the rib fracture extends to its inner partitions, then severe pain and piercing are experienced by the patient, similar to that which is felt by someone who has cried. This happens because the bone pierces the pleura. Difficulty in breathing, coughing, and vomiting blood also occurs, making it difficult to treat.
E ja les Antixs so engeniatz en aquela am motz engientz.	And even the Ancients were skilled in treating that with many techniques.
E de lor so que diso: cove que pauses viandas del malaute que engendro imflacio e ventositat, per que le ventre sia imflat e sia extendut, e la fractura sia impellida a las partidas defora.	And they said this: it is necessary to withhold food from the patient who has caused inflammation and flatulence, so that the abdomen becomes inflated and extended, pushing the fracture towards its outer partitions.
Mays nos avoreyssem aquo per so que no sia causa leugiera a generar apostema caut, si no accideys; e si ja accideys, lahoras ja ajuda ad aquo.	But we should not do this because it could easily cause an internal abscess if not done carefully. And if one has already occurred, then it can help with that too.
E diyssero alcus de lor que sia pausada desus ventoza e aprop que sucque am fortitut; e es semblant a ratiocinacio, mays empero es temut que la ventoza atire las superfluitatz al loc per la debilitat.	And some of them said that one should suspend wind and then suck it with force; this is similar to reasoning. However, it is feared that the wind might drive the excess fluids to the site due to weakness.
E diyssero alcus de lor: cove que·l loc sia cubert am lana que ja es submersa en oli caut, e sian pausatz pulvils entre las costas entro que sia umplida, que sia la liadura engual quan envolopas aquela segon retonditat; e aprop sia curat le malaute am curacio de pleuresi de vianda e de medicina.	And some of them said: the location should be covered with wool that has been immersed in warm oil, and fine powders should be inserted between the ribs until it is filled. Then, wrap it according to its roundness like a bandage. And treat the patient with pleurisy remedies and medicine.
E si causa vehement constrenh le malaute la qual no sufferta, e le os punh le velament am punctura ledent, temem sobre le malaute, lahoras cove que fendam sobre le loc, descubram de la costa trencada, e aprop pausem desobre aquela instrument que conserve le ciphac, la rememoracio del qual es precedida, e que inscidam le os am facilitat, e extraguam aquel.	"If the patient's severe constriction cannot be endured and the bone pierces the membrane with a sharp point, then fear for the patient; therefore we should cut upon that place, break open the shattered rib, and immediately place over that instrument which preserves the circle of remembrance, previously mentioned, and insert the bone gently, extracting that."
E aprop que ajustem las doas labias de la plagua, si es gran, am cozidura, e curem aquela am emplastres entro que sia sanada.	"If we need to adjust both lips of the wound, if it is large, with sutures, and heal it with plasters until it is healed."
E si accideys dedintz apostema, lahoras tu coyta e enfon pulvils en oli rozat e pausa sobre le loc, e que sia curat le malaute am aquo que cove a la apostema dedintz.	"If an abscess occurs inside the wound, then cover it and press powder made from rose oil onto the location, until the wound is healed as necessary for an internal abscess."
E sia ressupinat sobre le latz sobre le qual dorm, entro que sia sanat.	"And let him be propped up on pillows while he lies upon the bed until he is healed."
Capitol .ix.	Chapter ix.
De restauracio de fractura del spondil del dos e del col.	"Concerning the restoration of fractures of the spine of the back and neck."
Alcunas veguadas endeve fractura als osses del col, e tart endeve a lor atricio, e semblantment als spondils del dos.	Some fractures occur in the bones of the neck, and they sometimes become inflamed, likewise those of the spine.
E cum aquo accideys ad alcu e voles saber si sara sanat o no, lahoras considera, quar si vezes las sieuas mas ja mollificadas e stupefaytas e mortas e no pot maure aquelas ni extendre ni strenher aquelas e quan constrenges aquelas am les tieus ditz o punges aquelas am agulha e no sent en aquelas dolor, lahoras sapias que no es sanat, e en las mes de disposicios es mortal.	And if it happens to someone and you want to know whether they will be cured or not, then consider this: if sometimes their muscles are already softened and stunned and dead, so that those cannot move nor extend nor shrink those anymore, and when you press those with your fingers or prick those with a needle and do not feel pain in those, then you shall know that it is not healed, and such conditions are mortal.
E si mau aquelas e sent en aquelas constriccio am les ditz e punctura, lahoras sapias que la nucha de l’os es salva e que le malaute guereys am curacio.	And if those can move and feel constraint with your fingers and prick there, then you shall know that the neck of the bone is saved and that the illness will recover with treatment.
E si ve als spondils del col le semblant ad aquo e voles saber si sira sanat o no, lahoras considera als pes de lu.	And if it seems similar in the vertebrae of the neck and you want to know whether they will be healed or not, then consider their weight.
Lahoras si tu vezes que so ja mollificatz, accideys ad aquels aquo que es accidit en las mas, e aprop quan jatz sobre le sieu dos, yeys ventozitat e egestio ses la sua volontat, e alcunas veguadas es resupinat sobre le sieu dos e vol urinar e no pot, lahoras sapias que es mortal, e adonc no trebales en la curacio de lu.	Then if you find that they are already softened like those above, then it has happened to these what has happened to the muscles, and especially when lying on his back, he feels vertigo and evacuation without his will, and sometimes he is suddenly overturned on his back and wants to urinate but cannot. Then you shall know that it is mortal, and at that point do not bother with its treatment.
Mays si no accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, la causa es milhor e pus leugiera.	But if none of those things happen to him, the cause is better and easier to treat.
E la curacio de lu es que te perforses a la sedacio del apostema caut que pauses sobre le spondil atrissat oli rozat sol, o am mugols de huous asatz; pausa sobre aquela aquel alcunas veguadas le dia entro que sia sedat le apostema caut.	And the treatment of it is that you pierce into the sedative place of the hard abscess which lies over the injured spine on the right side, or with the mouth of a pouch apply heat there: lie over that several times a day until it is softened the hard abscess.
E lahoras pausa un dels emplastres confortantz e exsitans, e strenh sobre aquel am liament; e comanda al malaute que use de repaus e de tranquillitat e que no dorme sobre la partida am la qual atroba dolor entro que sia sanat.	And then apply one of the comforting and dispersing plasters there, and strengthen it with a bandage. And command to the patient that he use rest and tranquility and do not sleep on the part where he feels pain until it is healed.
E si accideys deves la atricio del os satagias o alcuna causa que ja es seperada de lu, lahoras cove que secces sobre la codena e que ostes aquel os; e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua, am sutura si es gran; e aprop cura aquela am alcu encarnatiu dels enguentz, entro que sia sanat.	"If an accident occurs due to a bone fracture or any other cause that has separated it, then you must cut above the elbow and remove that bone. Then immediately stitch the two edges of the wound with sutures if it is large; then treat it with some ointment from herbs until it heals."
Mays si es trencat le derier del os alhoses, e es la fi de la coeta, lahoras cove que tu entrometas le dit pous de la ma senestra en le cul, e que enguales le os trencat am l’autra ma segon que es possible per equacio segonda; e aprop pausa sobre lu emplastre e astelha, si indigeysses de aquels, e aprop strenh aquel.	"If the tip of the bone is broken and it's the end of the joint, then you must insert the index finger of your left hand into the anus and gently press on the broken bone with your other hand as much as possible according to the appropriate position; then apply a plaster or bandage if necessary, and then straighten that."
E si sentes satagias trencadas en lu, lahoras tu fen sobre aquela, e osta aquel, e cura la plagua am la curacio que es precedida entro que sia sanada.	"If you feel something broken inside, then go over there, remove it, and treat the wound with appropriate care until it heals."
Capitol .x.	Chapter .x
De restauracio de la ancha.	Of the Restoration of Health
Les osses de las anchas tart so trencats, e si trencan, lahoras la fractura de lor no es sino communicio en las extremitatz de aquelas e son inscidas en la longitut e declinan a las partidas dedintz; e accideys al malaute dolor en le loc e punctura, e la camba es stupefacta quan es fractura.	"The bones of the arms are sometimes broken and when they break, the fracture is usually located at the ends of those bones and extends along their length towards the interior. In addition to pain in that location and puncture wounds, numbness occurs if it's a fracture."
E la restauracio de lu es que tu extendas la tua ma sobre aquel entro que sia sobre la fractura qual es la figura de lu.	"And the restoration of this is done by extending your hand over that area until it covers the fracture as shown in the figure."
E si fractura es en la extremitat de lu tant solament, lahoras tu enguala aquela segon que a tu es apparelhat per equacio engual entro que sia asemblat a la sua figura natural.	"And if the fracture is only at the end of it, then you should gently press on that area until it aligns with its natural shape according to your judgment."
Mays si la fractura es en le lonc o que ja declina a las partidas dejos, lahoras tu fay jaser le malaute sobre le sieu ventre entro que sia preparada a tu la restauracio de aquela fractura.	"But if the fracture is in the middle or has already shifted towards the interior, then place the patient on their back to prepare for the restoration of that fracture."
E donc quan auras engualada aquela, pausa sobre lu emplastre, e aprop pausa sobre aquel astela de fust o de codena, e strenh per strictura sobre la qual no temas punctacio de fractura ni remocio de la stelha.	"And once you've aligned it, apply a plaster and also apply traction using a splint made of wood or metal, being careful not to cause puncture wounds or displacement of the fracture."
E enguala la concavitat am aquo que uempla aquela entro que aquela prengua la strictura segon equalitat, e comanda al malaute que dorma sobre le sieu dos o desobre le sieu costat sa.	"And align the concave surface and press it until it takes on traction according to equality. Then have the patient sleep on their back or side."
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras tu cessa de extencio de lu e de la sua restauracio entro que sia sedat le apostema caut, e pausa sobre lu aquo que sede aquel segon que es precedit; e aprop retorna a la restauracio de lu, e strenh aquel ayssi cum cove.	"But if an abscess forms later, then stop the extension and restoration until the abscess is drained. Then apply what is needed to drain that according to what has been said earlier; and return to the restoration of it, and strengthen it as necessary."
E si accideysso en le os satagias o son comminuidas, lahoras tu las tratz.	"And if this happens in the leg bones or they are crushed, then remove them."
Capitol .xi.	"Chapter eleven."
De restauracio de la fractura del adjutori.	"Regarding the treatment of a broken bone."
Adjutori es aquo que es entre le coyde entro al cap de la spalla.	"The collarbone, which is between the chest and the head of the shoulder."
E si es trencat, lahoras la restauracio de lu es en una de doas manieyras, de las quals es la una que tu prenguas fust pla de migiera groceza segon aquesta forma:	"And if it is broken, its treatment can be approached in one of two ways. The first way is to take a piece of wood..."
E sian liatz en doas extremitatz dos liamentz, e aprop sia suspendut del loc elevat.	"and attach two bandages at both ends; it should then be suspended from an elevated place."
E segua le malaute sobre una sezela; e aprop gieta fora le sieu bras trencat sobre le fust entro que pervengua al titillic de lu en le mieg loc del qual sia annexa la curvitat del fust.	"The patient should sit on a chair, then place their broken arm over the board so that its tip reaches the middle point where the curvature of the board is attached."
E aprop suspen sobre aquel alcuna causa greu, o·l minestre extenda aquel a las partidas dejos; e aprop le metge eque la fractura am las sieuas mas ensemps, entro que la fractura retorne segon que cove.	"Then suspend something heavy from that [point] or the nurse can gently pull it towards the sides. And then the physician will align the fracture with his hands until the fracture returns to its original position."
E l’autra manieyra es que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sieua cervitz e suspen la ma del col de lu am liament; e aprop comanda a dos ministres que la un de lor tengua aquo que es desobre la fractura am las suas mas; e l’autre tengua le pus dejos de lu; e quascu de lor extenda a la sua partida.	"The other way is for the patient to lie on their back and suspend their arm with a bandage. Then command two nurses: one should hold what is above the fracture with both hands, and the other should hold the part below it. Each of them should gently pull at their respective ends."
E si voles que la extencio sia pus fort, lahoras tu strenh sobre la fractura am liament e sobre aquela am autre liament, e quascu dels dos ministres extendan a doas suas partidas.	"And if you want to increase the traction force, then place another bandage over the fracture and another one above it. Then each of the two nurses should pull at their respective ends."
E donc si la fractura es propinquada a la extremitat del muscle, lahoras cove que sia pausat la mitat del liament sobre le citillic e l’autre dejos la fractura deves le coyde.	"If the fracture is close to the end of the muscle, then place half of the bandage on the tip and the other half below the fracture near the elbow."
E semblantment si la fractura es propdana al coyde, lahoras cove que sia pausat le liament sobre aquel loc e sobre aquel coyde.	"And similarly, if the fracture is near the elbow, then place the bandage over that location and also over the elbow."
Enguala aquela am facilitat e ses trebal, e aprop quant sira engualada segon que cove e es applicada per bona applicacio, lahoras strenh aquela si no accideys apostema caut.	"Once it is properly aligned and secured without causing distress, then wait for it to be set according to what is necessary and applied well. Then gently stretch it so that there is no heat buildup."
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras layssa la strictura entro al vii dia, e pausa sobre lu lana sutza enbeguda en vi agre e oli rozat entro que repause le apostema, e lahoras tu stren aquela.	"But if there is heat buildup, then leave the splint on for seven days. Then remove it and apply a clean cloth soaked in warm water and rose oil over where the heat buildup occurred until it subsides. Then gently stretch it."
E la manieyra de strenher aquela es que pauses emplastre sobre la fractura, e aprop pausa envolopament de drap nau sobre le emplastre; e aprop ajuste le bras sobre aquel adjutori, e pause la sua ma uberta sobre le sieu muscle.	"The way to gently stretch it is to apply a plaster cast over the fracture. Then place a layer of linen cloth soaked in new wine and oil over the plaster cast. Then adjust the arm using that support and place their hand, covered with a cloth, on top of their muscle."
E pausa le drap e strenh sobre le adjutori le bras per so que·l bras sia en loc de stelhas, si no prohibeys de aquo alcuna causa del os trencat.	"And then tie the cloth and gently stretch it over the support for the arm so that the arm is in a straight position, unless prohibited by any reason related to the broken bone."
E lahoras usa de stelhas.	"And then apply splints."
E es que pauses sobre la fractura aquela stela que sia pus lada e pus fort de las autras stelas; e pausa entre quascuna stela la latitut del dit, e sia la longitut de las stelas segon la trencadura am addicio de tres ditz de tota partida.	"And place on the fracture that splint which is widest and strongest among the others. Place it between each finger width apart, and let its length be according to the break with an additional three fingers' width on either side."
E aprop strenh sobre las stelas am la strictura la qual he dita al comensament del capitol.	"And then apply traction using the splint with the bandage mentioned at the beginning of this chapter."
E es que la tua strictura sobre le loc de la fractura sia pus streyt.	"And ensure that your traction is applied as closely to the fracture site as possible."
E quant pus es alonguada la fractura sia la strictura menor.	"And as the fracture heals, gradually decrease the traction."
E donc si vezes le situament de las stelas e la strictura ayssi cum havem dit en la hora en la qual restauras le membre al sieu assituament, lahoras tu fay.	"Therefore, if you wish to remove the splints and traction as described in the time when restoring the limb to its original position, then do so."
E si temes apostema caut, lahoras tu layssa la strictura e las stelas entro al dia vii ayssi cum havem dit.	"And if you fear heat buildup, leave the traction and splints on for seven days, as mentioned earlier."
E aprop considera le liament en totas partidas per tres dias per so que no accida en le loc pruziment o imflacio; o es prohibida la vianda pervenir al membre per disposicio de superfluitat de strictura; e donc rectifiqua tot aquo segon que havem dit.	"Also consider the limb in all cases for three days so that no swelling or inflammation occurs there due to excess pressure from the splint. If necessary, reduce or adjust the diet as prescribed by your physician."
Mays si tu yest sobre confizanssa que no accida alcuna causa de aquo, lahoras no deslias la liguadura sino aprop tres dias o mays.	"But if you feel confident that nothing will happen from this, then do not remove the bandage for three days or more."
E sia la sua dormicio del malaute sobre le sieu dos, e las sieuas mas sian sobre le stomac.	"And let their sleep be on their back with their arms over their stomach."
E pausa sobre le adjutori cocena plena de lana engualment, e considera en tota hora de la nueyt o del dia que no sia deliada ni dissolta la figura del membre trencat, o que sia le liament mollificat, donc rectifica aquo tot am la tua vertut.	"And place a full pillow of wool at the elbow and constantly monitor day and night that the figure of the broken limb does not dislocate or become softened. If it does, then adjust accordingly with your skill."
E pausa la vianda del malaute segon le orde le qual havem denant mes, enayssi que la vianda sia subtil en le comensament entro que es comensat strenher; e lahoras cove que egrossas la vianda de lu.	"And feed the patient according to the order given earlier, ensuring that their food is soft at first until they begin to heal. Then gradually increase the thickness of their food."
Quar de constuma del adjutori e de la camba de lu es que sian strengutz en xl dias; e lahoras cove que sian desliatz e sia administrat banh e sia medicat am enguentz los quals rectifican aquel.	"The custom is that the splint and its cloth are strengthened for forty days. Then they should be removed, a bath administered, and the area treated with ointments that will correct it."
E si la fractura es layha atrita, lahoras tu no deslies de aquela le liament e las stelhas entro a l dias o entro a dos meses.	"And if the fracture is healed completely, then do not remove the splint and splints for one day or two months."
Capitol .xii.	"Chapter XII."
De restauracio de fractura del bras.	"On the restoration of broken arms."
Bras es compost de dos osses les quals so appelatz dos focils; dels quals la un es petit, e es aquel que siec le dit pous, e l’autre es gran e es aquel le qual es pausat dejos le petit dit, de la partida pus dejus.	"The arm is composed of two bones called 'two forks.' One is small and is located near the thumb, while the other is large and extends from the little finger's side."
E fort leu es trencat le focil major solament, o le petit, e fort leu son trincatz ensemps.	"Either the larger fork bone alone can break or both bones together."
E quan es trencat le focil petit desus, lahoras la restauracio de lu es leugiera, e la sanacio de lu es pus leugiera.	"And when the small fork bone is broken at its upper end, then its restoration and healing will be easier."
E quan es trencat le focil de lu dejos la fractura de lu es mala, e la sanacio de lu es dificil.	"But when it is broken near its lower end, the fracture is bad and its healing difficult."
E pus mala de aquela es quan son trencatz dos osses essemps.	"And worse still is when both bones are broken together."
Donc si l’os le qual es trencat es le focil petit desus, lahoras es convenient al metge, deves la restauracio de lu, que pauze petita extencio am facilitat entro que aquel sia engualhat.	"Therefore, if the bone that is broken is the small fork bone at its upper end, then it is necessary for the physician to restore it with ease by using a small extension until it is healed."
Mays si le focil gran es aquo que es trincat, lahoras cove que pause extencio pus vehement.	"But if it is the large fork bone that is broken, then a stronger extension must be used."
E si les dos focils so ensemps trincatz, lahoras cove que tu pauses la extritura mot pus fort.	"And if both bones are broken together, then traction must be applied very strongly."
E cove que pauses la figura de la ma deves la restauracio de lu e la extencio de lu estenduda sobre un coyssi, e sia le pols de la ma a las partidas desus, pus aut que totz les autres ditz, e le dit auricular sia pus bas dels autres ditz, e le malaute sia cezent sobre una cezela cayrada.	"And the figure of the hand must be restored and its extension laid out on a pillow with the palm upwards, placing the thumb highest among all the fingers, the little finger lowest, and the patient centered on a cushioned chair."
E sia un coyssi denant lu en la altetut o endreyt de lu, per so que·l malaute no encorra trebalh.	"And place a pillow in front of him at his height or slightly below it, so that he does not have to struggle."
E aprop le ministre extenda le bras de la partida pus dejos am la sieua ma o am liament, e autre ministre extenda desus semblantment.	"Then one assistant should extend the arm from its lower part with their hand or a bandage, while another extends it upwards in the same manner."
E aprop le metge engualhe le os entro que redugua aquel segon la milhor figura que pot.	"And then the physician should heal the bone until they have reduced it to the best figure possible."
E si en la factura del os so satagias, lahoras te perforsa raduzir tota pessa en le sieu loc am la tua vertut.	"If there is any displacement in the fracture of the bone, then forcefully reduce it back into its proper place with your skill."
E si appar en lu satagia separada que punh la codena e no es a tu speransa en la restauracio de lu, lahoras tu fen sobre lu e osta aquela segon la manieyra la qual havem dita desus.	"If a separated fragment appears that prevents the elbow from extending and you have no hope of restoring it, then perform the procedure described earlier to fix it."
Mays si la fractura es am plagua, yeu ja he fayt ad aquo capitol singular, e donc pren la curacio de aquel.	"But if the fracture is accompanied by a wound, I have already dealt with that in Chapter X. Therefore, take care of it accordingly."
E si accideys apostema caut al comensament de la tua restauracio, lahoras tu lineys un drap am cerot fayt de oli rozat e cera blanca, e sia migier entre specitut e subtilitat, e strenh drap sobre aquel am strictura subtil entro que le apostema sia cedat; e lahoras remau le cerot e pausa emplastre preparat de polvera de moli am clayre de huou, e aprop pausa stelhas; e sia la stela la qual es pauzada sobre aquela fractura pus lada e pus fort.	"And if heat buildup occurs at the beginning of your restoration, then lay a cloth soaked in cerote made from rose oil and white wax over it. The cloth should be neither too thick nor too thin. Then apply gentle pressure with another cloth until the heat subsides. Remove the cerote and apply an emplaster prepared from powdered mallow with clay of eggs and honey. Then apply splints; the splint that is placed over the fracture should be broad and strong."
E sapias que·l nombre de las stelas del bras so vi en las majors disposicios, o sia la fractura en un focil o en dos focils ensemps.	"You should know that the number of splints for the arm varies depending on the situation, whether it is a fracture in one bone or both bones together."
E aprop pausa la tua strictura sobre le loc de la fractura pus fort e pus vehement, e quan mays sira la extrictura a las partidas desus de la fractura o a las partidas pus bassas de lu, pausa la strictura un pauc pus molh segon que es precedida la rememoracio de lu en le comensament del capitol.	"Then apply pressure over the site of the fracture very strongly and forcefully. If the extension is directed towards the upper part of the fracture or its lower part, then apply gentle pressure afterwards according to what was mentioned at the beginning of this chapter."
E les draps que so envolopatz sobre la fractura sian draps mols humitz, e no sian durs ni aspres, e·l fiel am le qual es strenhut sia de li propriament migier entre subtil e gros, ayssi cum havem recomtat.	"Let the cloths wrapped around the fracture be soft and moist, not hard or rough. Let the thread with which it is sewn be neither too fine nor too thick, as we have recommended."
E considera le membre e·l liament aprop alcus dias.	"And consider the limb and its condition after several days."
E si accideys alcuna causa de la qual rectificacio es necessaria, ayssi cum prusiment le qual accideys al membre, e lahoras cove que tu enbroques le membre am aygua cauda entro que cesse aquel pruziment.	"And if any cause arises requiring correction, such as swelling of the limb, then you should apply cold water compresses until that swelling subsides."
E leysses le membre no costreyt entro que repause, e aprop torna la strictura.	"And let the limb rest without constraint until it regains its usual position."
E si la extrictura ja es mollificada e l’os ja es remaugut e semblantz ad aquels, lahoras rectifiqua tot aquo am la tua vertut.	"And once the inflammation has subsided and the bone is aligned properly, then adjust everything with your skill."
E considera mays si le nutriment es prohibit pervenir al membre per superfluitat de strictura, quar lahoras cove que mollifiques aquel un petit e laysses aquel per alcus dias entro que corra ad aquel le nutriment, e aprop strenh aquel.	"And also consider if the nourishment is prevented from reaching the limb due to excessive constriction; then you should gently relax it slightly and leave it for a few days until the nourishment flows freely again."
Mays si al malaute no accideys alcuna causa de aquelas que havem ditas, lahoras no cove que sia desliat entro aprop xx dias o enviro de aquels.	"But if no such cause arises as those we have mentioned, then it should not be released within about twenty days or so."
E aprop sia suspenduda la ma del malaute per la sua vertut de movement agitatius, e fay aquel dormir sobre le sieu dos.	"And then let the patient's arm be suspended by its usual means of movement for a few days, and have him lie on his back to sleep."
E sapias que aquesta fractura es restaurada en xxx dias o en xxxii dias, o fort leu es restaurada en xxviii dias, e tot aquo es segon la disposicio de las compleccios e las disposicios de la vertut.	"And know that this fracture is usually restored in thirty days or sometimes even thirty-two days, but it could also be restored in twenty-eight days, depending on the individual's constitution and the power of their nature."
Capitol .xiii.	Chapter XIII
De restauracio de fractura de la pinche de la ma e dels ditz.	On the restoration of fractures of the fingers and toes.
Sapias que a la pinche de la ma e als nuzes dels ditz tart endeve fractura, e no accideys a lor sino atricio motas veguadas.	"Know that in the case of fractures of the fingers or toes, they rarely happen without some injury to them."
E quan accideys a la ma fractura o atrissio, lahoras cove que·l malaute segua cayrat e denant lu lies cezent segon equalitat, e aprop pausa la ma de lu sobre aquela extenduda.	"And when such fracture or injury happens to the hand, then it is necessary for the patient to lie on his back with his head elevated according to equality, and gently suspend the injured arm above him while extended."
E aprop le ministre extenda les osses trencatz e·l metge engualhe aquels entro que sian congongitz am bona congoncio.	"And then the attendant should extend the broken bones and the physician should bind them together so that they are well aligned with good approximation."
E lahoras cove que pause emplastre e estopa, si no accideys apostema caut; e aprop pausa stela desus segon la quantitat del loc, e tu ja has envolopada aquela en drap de li.	"And then it is necessary to apply a plaster and cotton, unless there is an abscess that requires cauterization. Then also apply a splint above according to the size of the location, with that already wrapped in linen."
Mays si la trincadura es en las partidas dedintz deves le ventre de la palma, e lahoras fay semblant de spera de drap, e comanda al malaute que strenha aquela am la sua palma trincada; aprop sia strenguda am drap lonc.	"But if the fracture is in the middle of the palm near the belly of the hand, then make a similar splint of linen and command the patient to hold it with his palm clasped. Then also secure it with a long strip of linen."
E sia la stelha de cuer am drap en le qual sia levitat, per so que le cuer sia aplicat a la palma; e strenh aquela segon que cove.	"And let the splint be made of leather covered with linen and elevated so that the leather is applied to the palm. Then secure it according to what is necessary."
Mays si la fractura es a las partidas defora, lahoras cove que pauses desus stela e autre estela de la partida dejos en la palma, per so que la ma sia uberta e dreyta; e aprop pausa la strictura, ayssi cum es revolvuda la ma a la rateta entre les ditz am liamentz.	"But if the fracture is at the outside of the hand, then it is necessary to apply a splint above and another splint from the little finger side in the palm so that the hand is elevated and straight. Then also apply the bandage as when wrapping around the wrist."
E si accideys fractura a alcu dels nozes dels ditz, lahoras si es le dit pous, sia engualat segon que cove e aprop sia strenhut am la palma e si·t voles, pausa a lu astela petita dreyta per so que sia elevada la fractura e no sia mauguda.	"And if there is a fracture of one of the toes of the foot, then it should be aligned as necessary and then secured with the sole of the foot. And if you wish, apply a small splint on the outside to elevate the fracture and prevent movement."
Mays si la fractura es en les autres ditz, ayssi cum en aquel del mieg loc, o en le indic, o en le auricular, o en le anular, lahoras sia engualhat e liat am le dit sa le qual siec aquel; o sian totz liatz segon continuacio, e es milhor; o pausa sobre aquel stela petita, ayssi cum havem dit en le pous.	"But if the fracture is in other toes, such as in the middle toe or the index toe, the ring toe, or the little toe, then it should be aligned and tied with the string of the corresponding toe; or all the toes may be tied together continuously, which is better; or a small splint may be applied to it, as we have said for the big toe."
E considera, en la tua restauracio, e aprop aquela, la disposicio de apostema caut e oppose — am la tieua operacio — am aquo que cove quan accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, segon que es iterada la narracio de lu.	"And consider, in the restoration of these fractures, and particularly that one, the condition of any abscess formation or opposition that may occur during your operation. Act accordingly when any such cause arises, as described above."
Capitol .xiv.	"Chapter Fourteen."
De restauracio de fractura del os de la coyssa.	"Of the Reduction of Fractures of the Tibia."
Le os de la cueyssa motas veguadas es trencat e es declarat al sentiment segon que es convertit a la partida denant e a la pus sobirana.	The hip bone of the thigh often breaks and is declared apparent in sensation as it turns to the front and upwards.
E la restauracio de lu se fa enayssi que·l liament es strenhut sobre la fractura e autre liament dejos la fractura, e le malaute sia prostrat sobre le sieu ventre e sobre la cara.	And its restoration is done in such a way that the ligament strengthens over the fracture and another ligament leaves the fracture, and the patient is prone on their stomach and face.
E aprop le ministre extenda tot le liament a la sua partida segon la qualitat, quan la fractura es en le mieg loc del os.	And moreover, the surgeon stretches all the ligaments to their destination according to their nature when the fracture is in the middle of the bone.
Mays si es propdana a la razitz de la cueyssa, lahoras sia le liament propda al denolh a la partida del pentenilh, per so que la extencio caja en sus, e le autre liament dejos la fractura.	But if it extends to the thigh's ridge, then the ligament attached to the tendon should be pulled towards the front of the knee, so that the tension takes place there, and the other ligament leaves the fracture.
E semblantment si la trencadura es propdana al denolh, lahoras sia fayt le liament propda al denol, e sia la extencio a las partidas dejos.	And likewise if the fracture is close to the knee, then it should be done with the ligament attached to the tendon, and its tension should be applied from below.
E aprop le metge enguale le os am amduas las sieuas mas entro que reduzesca aquel segon la semblansa natural e l’os es conjungit per bona conjunccio; lahoras cove que pauses emplastre e strictura, si no accideys al membre apostema.	And moreover the doctor brings the bone together with both of its ends until it reduces according to its natural form and the bone is joined by good union; then it is necessary to apply plaster and compression, otherwise gangrene may occur in the member.
Mays si accideys en lu apostema, lahoras tu layssa aquel per alcus dias entro que l’apostema caut sia cedat, e aprop retorna a la tua curacio.	But if gangrene occurs, then you should leave it for some days until the gangrene has dried up and then return to your treatment.
La strictura de lu sia ayssi fayta: cove que envolopes sobre la fractura una benda dura, e dobla aquela dos o tres veguadas, e remaugua de lu superfluitat; e aprop envolopa la camba entro que pervengua al talo e a la razitz de la cueyssa.	The compression should be done thus: first, wrap a hard bandage over the fracture and fold it two or three times, removing any excess; then wrap the limb so that it reaches the ankle and thigh ridge.
E intromet lonc fiel entre la cueyssa e la camba prop del denol a las partidas dejos, e venguan las extremitatz del fiel de la partida pus sobirana de las doas partz, e aprop revolveys sobre la camba e la cueyssa aquo que superflueys de la benda.	And insert a long splint between the thigh and the bandage near the knee below, bringing the ends of the splint from above on both sides, then wrap it around the bandage and thigh with what remains of the bandage.
E aprop pausa sobre la cueyssa en le loc de aquela fractura astelhas, e pausa de aquelas una stela sobre le os de la camba.	And then place a pad over the thigh at that fracture point, and place one stake on the bone of the leg.
E aprop uempli las vacuitatz entre la camba e la cuoyssa am draps mols, per so que sia coagulada la extrictura.	Then fill the spaces between the leg and thigh with soft rags to keep the compression in place.
E aprop comensa am strictura fort del mieg sobre le loc de la fractura am tres envolucios o quatre, e quant mays tu te alonhas am liament del loc de la fractura, la tua strictura sia menor e pus leugiera e pus molha.	Then begin with strong compression from the middle over the fracture point with three or four layers, and as you move away from the fracture site, gradually reduce the compression, making it less strong and more flexible.
E aprop exten a doas extremitatz del fiel a las partidas dejos entro que pervengua a la cavilha del pe, e strenh amdoas las extremitatz de las stelhas del autra part per so que·l liament no sia remaugut del sieu loc.	Then extend both ends of the splint below to reach the ankle bone, and tighten both ends of the other stake on that side to ensure that the ligament does not slip from its position.
E aprop leyssa la strectura sobre aquel, don esta ayssi que no accideys al membre corrosio ni apostema caut ni emflacio e semblantz ad aquels; e si accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, adonc cueta te am desliament de lu, e rectifica aquo que accideys tot aprop, segon que havem dit motas veguadas.	Then leave the compression in place with this caution: ensure that there is no injury to the limb, nor gangrene or blisters, nor inflammation or swelling similar to these; and if any of these occur, then carefully remove it and correct whatever has happened immediately, as we have said many times before.
Mays si en le os es pessa del os la qual pongua, lahoras cove que tu engualhes aquel segon que a tu es possibla; e sino, fen sobre lu e remau aquel, e cura am aquo del qual es precedida la rememoracio entro que sia sanat.	But if the bone sticks out where it was broken, then you should smooth it off as much as possible; and if not, file it down and remove it, and treat with whatever is necessary for healing until it is healed.
E alcunas veguadas es strenhuda aquesta fractura de la coyssa otra aquo que sian ajustadas a lu stelhas, ayssi cum havem dit en le adjutori e·n le bras.	And sometimes this fracture of the thighbone may become tighter than the stakes used for it, as we have said in the case of the elbow and arm.
Mays empero en la restauracio de lu en tal manieyra fayta no accideys al malaute claudicacio; e si es restaurada sola, otra aquo que li sia applicada l’autra camba, lahoras es necessari que claudique aquel del qual es tostemps.	But nevertheless in the restoration of the limb in this way there should not occur a limp or limping gait. And if it is restored alone without applying the other thighbone, then that leg will always limp.
E sapias que la coyssa es strenhuda en xl dias o un pauc mes o un pauc mens, e tot aquo es segon la diversitat de las compleccios e de las autras dispozicios.	"Know that the illness can last for 40 days or slightly more or less, and all this depends on the diversity of complexions and other dispositions."
Capitol .xv.	"Chapter XV."
De restauracio de la fractura de la rodela del denolh.	"On the reduction of a tooth fracture."
Sapias que fractura de la rodela del denol tart endeve, mays accideys a lu motas veguadas atrissio.	"You should know that fractures of the tooth crown rarely occur, but they can happen due to strong blows or trauma."
Mays si accideys a lu fractura, lahoras no es sino fissura o trauc en las suas partidas, e aquo es am plagua o ses plagua, e sobre aquo tot es estat am le sentiment.	"However, if a fracture does occur, it is usually just a crack or break in its parts, which amounts to very little or somewhat more, and all this is done with caution."
E la restauracio de lu es enayssi que sia engualat aquo que es romput de las partidas de lu am les ditz entro que sia agreguat e conjongit segon que es possible per equacio e facilitat e fabricacio.	"And the restoration of it is easy, so that what is broken of its parts may be joined together with the said glue and congealed according to what is possible for equality, facility, and manufacture."
E aprop pausa emplastre e pausa sobre aquel stela redonda, si indigeysses de aquela; e strenh desus am strictura ad aquo convenient.	"And also apply a plaster and bandage over that round tooth if necessary, and strengthen it with a suitable strapping."
E aprop considera totas las disposicios las quals havem recomtadas en las autras fracturas, ayssi cum es apostema caut e semblant ad aquels enaissi que se oppause a tot accident am aquo que a lu es convenient entro que sia sanat.	"And also consider all the dispositions which we have recommended for other fractures, such as pus cautery and similar things, so that everything may be applied according to whatever is convenient for it, so that it may heal."
Capitol .xvi.	"Chapter XVI."
De restauracio de la fractura de la camba.	"On the restoration of a broken arch (crown)."
Sapias que en la camba so dos osses dels quals la un es gros, e es le nompnat per nom de la camba; e l’autra es subtil, e es nompnat focil.	"Know this: in the hip joint are two bones, one large and named for its resemblance to a chamber, the other subtle and called the trochanter."
E accideys a quascus de las specias de fractura aquo que accideys als dos osses del bras, e per aquo es fayta restauracio de lu ayssi cum restauracio del bras engualment, e la operacio de lu es una.	"And concerning the various types of fractures that can occur to the two bones of the arm, restoration is made just as it is with dislocation of the arm, and its operation is one."
E si so trincatz dos osses ensemps, la camba es convertida a totas partidas.	"And if two bones are crushed at once, the joint becomes completely separated."
E si es trinquat le os pus subtil, la camba es convertida a las partidas Denant.	"And if only the thinner bone is broken, the joint remains somewhat displaced."
E si es trincat le os pus gros, atrobas aquel dejos, e es de aquelas causas que no so a tu ameguadas.	"And if the larger bone is broken alone, it causes immediate paralysis, which is one of the causes that are not amendable."
E aprop aministra extencio e equacio e liguacio de las astelas segon aquel engualment.	"And appropriate extension and equination and ligamentation of the fragments should be applied according to that dislocation."
Mays empero cove, si la fractura de la camba es laja havent motas satagias, que la extencio sia mendre e pus leugiera, e alleuja am la tua vertut.	"But nevertheless, if a fracture of the joint is displaced having many fragments, care should be taken to make the extension gentle and lighter, and aided by your virtue."
E en la camba es alcuna causa de operacio sobre le bras, e es quan tu engualas las stelhas e que comples tota la tieua operacio, lahoras tu prendras pessas de fustz de pi le qual es pausat dejos las cauzas las quals so pausades en solies, e so faytas eyssament de brancas de palma; aligeys de aquelas a las quals es petita groceza, e no sia ges de las manudas, e sia la longuesa de aquelas segon la longuesa de la camba, e del denol entro al pus dejos.	"And in case of operation on the joint of the arm, this is when you dislocate the fragments and complete all your operation, then you will take pieces of wood from pine that are prepared beforehand for those causes which are placed below, and they should be made equally of branches of palm; choose those that are slender, not thick ones, and their length according to the length of the joint, and place them from the front to behind."
E aprop envolopa sobre quascuna drap en doas envolucios segon la longitut de lu, e pausa la una sobre la partida de la camba de la una part e l’autra del autra part, e sian del denol entro al pus bas loc del pe.	"And appropriately wrap around each splint in two layers according to its length, and place one on the fracture of the joint on one side and the other on the other side, and they should be placed from front to back on the thigh of the leg."
E aprop lias las doas stelhas en tres locs de doas extremitatz e al mieg loc, quar am aquesta strectura la camba es prohibida de clinar a la partida dextra e sinistra, e sta per bona stacio.	"And appropriately fasten the two splints in three places on both extremities and in the middle, for with this arrangement the joint is prevented from bending to the right or left, and it remains in good position."
E ja es aministrat un brasset de fust segon la longuesa de la camba; e sia pausada en lu la camba per so que conserve aquel de movement.	"And now a splint of wood according to the length of the joint has been applied; and the joint should be placed upon it so that it retains some movement."
E majorment cove que tu fassas aquo en fractura, e quan am aquela es plagua propriament.	"But particularly when you do this in fractures, especially when there is proper alignment."
E aprop considera en quascun jorn la camba e studia am aquel per derier studi, e tu le guardes de apostema e de imflacio o de autres causas semblantz; e cum accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, lahoras opausa te a lu am aquo que cove entro que sia sanat.	"And appropriately examine the joint every day and study it carefully to ensure that you guard against inflammation or infection or other similar causes. And if any of these occurs, then you should apply what is necessary in order for it to be healed."
Capitol .xvii.	"Chapter XVII."
De la fractura del talo e dels osses del pe e dels ditz.	"Of the fracture of the ankle and bones of the foot."
Al talo no accideys fractura de tot; mays als osses del pe accideys fractura alcunas veguadas; e als ditz del pe pauc accideys fractura, e no accideys a lor sino atricio en las mes de disposicio.	"No ankle fracture happened at all; sometimes fractures happen on the foot bones; few foot toes have fractures happening, and they don't cause any trouble in their position."
E si als osses del pe endeve fractura e vezes aquels osses esser elevatz sobre si entre lor, lahoras le malaute pause le sieu pe sobre la terra preparat ayssi cum anant.	"And if the foot bones have fractures and those bones are sometimes elevated above each other, then the patient places their foot on the ground prepared in such a way as to walk."
E aprop pausa la un pe sobre aquo que es elevat de aquels osses, e aprop calca aquels, e prem, e engualha aquels entro que torno en los locs.	"And he presses one foot onto what is elevated by those bones, and presses on them, squeezing and twisting around the joints."
E aprop pausa emplastre e stopa desus, e pausa dejos le ventre del pe una petita taula a la qual sian dos caps plas.	"And then they apply plaster and bandages on top of it, and place a small board with two flat heads on the front of the foot."
E aprop strenh aquela am le pe am strectura descent, pus que tu has envolopada aquela am draps e am autres causes de las quals indigeys.	"And then they strengthen that bandage with downward traction, because you have wrapped it around with cloth and other causes as needed."
E cum a lu passan tres dias o quatre, lahoras tu deslia le liament, quar tu atrobaras les osses engualatz, o sian trincatz o sian dislocatz, e la operacio en aquels es ayssi co coneysses.	"And when three or four days have passed, then you untie the bandage, because you will find the bones twisted together, either crushed or displaced, and the operation on them is performed in this way:
Mays si alcus ditz son trincatz, lahoras restaura aquels, e enguala aquels ayssi cum yeu e recomtat a tu en la restauracio dels ditz de la ma.	"If some teeth are clenched, then restore those, align them thus with glue and stitch them back into place as I have shown you in the restoration of these hands."
E aprop pausa al dit trincat stela segon la longitut del dit, e sia pus lada de lu un pauc; e aprop dejos le pe aquesta taula la qual e a tu recomtada, e strenh aquela am strictura decent.	"And then apply pressure on the bitten finger according to its length, and place it slightly lower than this table that I have shown you earlier, and stretch it with moderate tension."
Mays si aquo que es trincat dels osses so dos o tres o mays, lahoras tu pausa sobre quascun dit astela de la sua quantitat envolopada en drap leon, e strenh la taula en le pus bas del pe, e sia stant sobre la un dels caps de la taula foro le ventre del pe per que la tengua am bona retencio.	"But if what is bitten of the bones are two or three or more, then you apply pressure on each finger according to its quantity wrapped in linen cloth, stretch the table towards the bottom of the foot, and stand it upright so that one of its ends rests on the belly of the foot for better retention."
E es convenient a tu que no oblides que no consideres totas las causas las quals que e ditas a tu en las autras fracturas dels accidentz que havem dit; e opausa te a tot accident am aquo que cove.	"And remember not to forget that you should not consider all the causes mentioned to you in other fractures of accidents, and apply what is necessary according to each accident."
Capitol .xviii.	Chapter xviii
De fractura del conh de la femna e del os del pentenilh e de la vergua del home.	On the fracture of the hip bone of a woman and the pubic bone and penis bone of a man.
Quan le conh de la femna es trincat, lahoras fay aquela ceser en cezela cayrada, e aprop enclina aquela a la partida del dos un petit, e sia tenguda detras.	When the hip bone of a woman is fractured, then make that cease in this way: wrap it in a bandage, incline it at the junction of both sides slightly, and hold it behind.
E aprop la matrona umpla le conh de coto, e sia fayt en le conh de lu ayssi cum spera; e aprop la femna sia concutida, e eleva le dos de lu petit a petit, quar tot aquo es fora-getat entro que sia denant la partida del conh ayssi cum spera e l’os trincat retorna.	And moreover the midwife presses the hip bone from behind, and it is done on the hip bone in this way as I have said earlier; and also the woman is tilted backwards, and raises her buttocks little by little, for all this is forgotten until it is before the junction of the hip bones as I have said earlier and the fractured bone returns.
E aprop pausa pulvils sobre le dos de lu, e quan vol urinar remaugua le coto am facilitat e aprop urine, e reduzeys e retorna aquel segon la manieyra segon la qual mezist aquel al comensament, e aprop retorne al sieu pulvil primier.	And moreover powder is applied on the buttocks, and when she wants to urinate, she moves her hip with ease and then urinates, and reduces and returns it according to the manner in which she placed it at the beginning, and again applies the first powder.
E fassa ayssi per vii dias o enviro aquels, quar aquel es restaurat.	And do this for seven days or so until that is restored.
E si voles, pren una vezica de ovela e strenh sobre le trauc de lu una canula de canavera; e entromet tota la vesica en le conh de lu, e aprop ensuffla en la canula am vertut entro que la vesica sia imflada dedintz le conh, quar la fractura retorna.	And if you wish, take a bladder of a sheep and stretch it over the fracture of the hip with a reed pipe; and insert all the bladder into the hip bone, and blow through the reed pipe with force until the bladder is inflated within the hip bone, for the fracture returns.
E aprop sia umplida de coto e estia per alcus dias segon que havem recomtat, entro que sia sanat.	And moreover it should be wrapped in cotton and kept for some days according to what we have recommended until it is healed.
E quan le os del pentenil de home o de femna es trincat, lahoras aministra en la restauracio e agulacio de lu aquo que havem recomtat en l’os del anca.	And when the pubic bone of a man or woman is fractured, then for its restoration and splinting, do what we have recommended for the hip bone.
E aquo que es dreyt no es occultat en aquestas fracturas proprinquas e que pauc endeveno, majorment ad aquel al qual es alcun studi e us e enten aquest meu libre mot; quar aquela fractura significa a tu en las majors disposicios via dreyturiera en la restauracio e en la strictura de lu, e donc enten be.	And what is true is not hidden in these fractures near the groin which cause little inconvenience, especially to that person who has some study and use and understands this my book; for that fracture indicates to you in the greatest positions how truly it can be restored and reduced, and therefore understand well.
Mays en la vergua del home quan es trincada, pren guarguamela de auca, e met la vergua en aquela; e aprop pausa sobre lu envolucio de drap, e sia envolopada, e aprop sia layssada per tres dias o enviro aquels, e sia sanada.	But in the case of a fractured penis of a man, take a guarguamela (a type of bandage) made of wool, and put it around the penis; and then apply over it a wrapping of cloth, and let it be wrapped up, and then let it lie for three days or so until it is healed.
Capitol .xix.	Chapter XIX
De restauracio de fractura dels osses quan es am plagua.	On the restoration of fractures of bones when they are out of place.
Convenient es ad aquel al qual accideys fractura am plagua, e majorment si le os es gran ayssi cum es le os de la cuoyssa o de l’adjutori, o semblant ad aquel, que tu te cuoytes e fleubotomes aquel tantost si las condicios de fleubotomia a tu o testifican ayssi cum desus havem dit.	"It is suitable for one who has suffered a fracture with profuse bleeding, especially if the bone is large, such as those in the thigh or arm. Quickly perform phlebotomy if the conditions are favorable."
E si la plagua eflueys sanc, lahoras cove que tu te coytes a la retencio de lu enayssi que tu polverizes sobre lu zegi trissat, si a tu autra causa no es present.	"If the bleeding is profuse and red, then you must use retention to prevent it from flowing further. If there are other causes, treat those as well."
E aprop comensa restaurar la fractura en aquel meteys dia, e no prolongues aquo, si no accideys apostema.	"Therefore begin restoring the fracture on that same day, and do not delay this if no inflammation occurs."
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras tu layssa la restauracio de lu entro al ix dia, entro que sia cedat le apostema, e no apropinques a lu en le tertz dia e·l iiii de tot, quar tu faras accidir mals accidentz.	"But if inflammation occurs, then delay the reduction until the seventh day, allowing the inflammation to subside. Do not approach it on the third or fourth day, as you will cause harm."
Mays si le os trencat es eminent sobre la codena descubert, lahoras cove que te perforses reduzir aquel e engualar aquel am las tuas mas am facilitat e am pauca extencio.	"But if the bone sticks out above the skin, then you should perform reduction with ease and minimal traction."
Mays si extencio no es a tu preparada e la equacio de lu am las tieuas mas, lahoras tu reduzeys aquel am las tuas mas am aquest sturment; e es sturment le qual es fayt de ferr, la longitut del qual es de vii ditz o de viii e la latitut del qual es segon la quantitat de la plagua; e per aquo es necessari al metge que prengua de aquels tres o quatre segon la quantitat que indigeys ad aquo en la curacio en tota specia de fractura.	"But if you are not prepared for traction and cannot reduce it with your hands alone, then use this instrument. It is made of iron, with a length of seven or eight digits and a width according to the amount of bleeding. Therefore, it is necessary for the physician to have three or four of these on hand, according to what is needed in all types of fractures."
E sia redon, e sia en lu pauca groceza per so que no sia doblat deves la comprecio sobre aquel en la hora de la operacio.	"And once it is reduced, apply a splint with gentle compression to prevent it from becoming displaced during the operation."
E sia de aguda extremitat al qual sia marge en las sieuas extremitatz; e sia le desus de lu a grossetut tendent, e de la maytat de lu entro a las partidas.	"And if the extremity is sharp and has a border on its sides, then its upper part should be thicker than its lower part, and its middle should have a greater thickness."
E aquesta es la forma de lu:	"This is how it looks:"
E es nompnat en grec “labre volentz atelarem”, so es paleta pauca.	"And it is called in Greek 'Labre Volentz Atelarem', which means roughly 'stone of pain'."
Per que cove que sia pausada la extremitat de lu acuda elevada sobre la extremitat del os eminent.	"Why must the end of the limb be raised above the prominence of the bone?"
E inpelleys aquel en una veguada entro que retorne le os, e sia engualat am alcuna equacio.	"And pull it back in such a way that the bone returns to its place, and is covered with some padding."
E donc esforsa te engualar las extremitatz de la fractura entre lor, e si la extremitat de lu trencada es subtil, e no pren aquela le sturment per bona axcepcio, lahoras cove que tu inscidas la extremitat de aquel os entro que l’insturment haja poder de aquo.	"And then force the ends of the fracture to come together, and if one end is too thin to grasp with the instrument, it is necessary for you to insert a small instrument between them so that it can grasp onto that bone."
Mays si no podes reduzir le os de tot am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras enscideys aquel am aquo que coveneys a lu dels inscizoris les quals havem ditz; o serra aquel am una de las serras en qualque manieyra sia a tu possible.	"But if you cannot reduce the bone with what has been recommended here, then cut it with whatever tool you have available among those that we have mentioned; or saw it with one of the saws in whichever way seems most feasible to you."
E aprop ratz aquel que roman en le os de asperitat e de scorsas menudas.	"And also scrape away any roughness and small splinters remaining on the bone."
E cum le os es reduzit, e aprop la reduccio le malaute atroba dolor vehement ledent, lahoras sapias que le os no es retornat al sieu loc natural; e adonc fay aquo quar tu confereyses al malaute gran juvament.	"And when the bone is reduced and during its reduction the patient feels very severe pain, know that the bone has not returned to its natural place; therefore do this, so that you may give great relief to the patient."
Cum es complida la tua restauracio la qual fas al os, e lahoras submergeys drap en vi stiptic negre, e propriament si es en estiu, e no pauses sobre la plagua cerot ni autre causa en la qual sia oli, per so que no fassa en lu accidir poyredura e corropcio.	"When your restoration of the bone is complete, then wrap it in a cloth soaked in black stiptic wine, especially if it is summer time, and do not let any oil or other substance come into contact with it, so that putrefaction and corruption may not occur later."
E aprop aministra stelas en la hora del tieu compliment de la restauracio de l’os, e layssa la plagua descuberta enayssi que inscidas le trauc am forfexs e uses de envolucios segon la quantitat de la plagua.	"And also administer bandages at the time of completion of the bone restoration, and leave the dressing uncovered in such a way that you may insert the splint with forceps and use wrappings according to the quantity of the dressing."
E guarda te am tota cautela que no strenhas la plagua am la fractura, quar motas veguadas an fayt aquo les fols metges, e fero accidir sobre les sieus malautes mort o malautia corrodent o zuthement, so es sania.	"And be very careful that you do not stretch the dressing over the fracture, for many times foolish doctors have done this and caused death or corrupting illness or swelling in their patients, which is not good."
E si la tieua strictura leugiera, molli, diversa de la strictura de las autras fracturas.	"And if your bandage is light, soft, and different from the bandages of other fractures."
E si la plagua es gran o es plagua mala, e temes sobre aquel alcus accidentz mals les quals havem recomtatz, e atrobas dolor en le loc, lahoras no cove que pauses sobre aquel astelas, mays fay ad aquel envolucio de draps durs en loc de stelas e strenh lu am aquelas.	"And if the dressing is large or is a bad dressing, and you fear that some of those unfortunate accidents which we have mentioned may occur on it, and you find pain in that place, then do not rely on bandages, but make a wrapping of hard cloths there instead of bandages and stretch it with them."
E cum aprop un dia o dos vezes ja la plagua comensar, que en lu sia engendrat brac, lahoras tu osta desus le drap le qual havias pausat sobre aquel am vi, e aprop aministra calguas, enguentz am les quals de nostra constuma es que mediquem las plaguas, ayssi cum enguentz tetrafarmacon e semblantz ad aquel.	"And when after one or two days the dressing begins to grow warm in that place, then you remove from there the cloth which you had put on it with wine, and apply cataplasms, such as those by which we usually treat dressings, like a cataplasm of treacle and similar ones."
E conveneys a tu que deslias le liament e considera la plagua en quascun dia mati e vespre entro que sia consolidada e fermada, e cove que·l membre sia preparat en tal manieyra que la poyredura corra de lu a las partidas dejos am facilitat.	"And it is advisable for you to loosen the bandage and examine the dressing every day morning and evening until it is consolidated and firm, and the member should be prepared in such a way that putrefaction may flow from there to the parts below with ease."
si a la plagua passan motz dias, e no es consolidada ni es abscindit de lu le brac, lahoras sapias que aqui so satagias de las petitas per que cove enquieras la plagua am tenta.	"If many days pass and the dressing is not consolidated nor separated from the warmth, then you should know that here are the beginnings of gangrene, therefore you must examine the dressing with caution."
E de aquelas satagias aquelas que so separadas remau e extratz, aquelas que de lor no so separadas e pongen le membre e fan accidir dolor, perforsa te a inscidir aquelas segon que a tu aquo es possibla.	"And those gangrenous parts which are separated and removed you should cut away, but those which are not separated and cause the member to swell and cause pain, you should pierce according to what is possible for you."
E si accideys a la plagua zuchem o eluchen, so es stiomenios, o autra specia de corrupcio e de putrefaccio, lahoras cove que pauses a quada un de aquels am aquo que conveneys a lu de la curacio del qual es precedida narracio en le sieu capitol.	"And if something like chyme or ichor occurs in the dressing, then it is stoimenia or some other species of corruption and putrefaction, therefore you should apply one of those which are mentioned here in its chapter regarding the cure of that."
E de aquo en le qual cove que stia lo mieu sermo e tu fassas present la tua pessa: quan os gros es trincat, emineys sobre le membre ayssi cum le os de la coyssa e del ajutori e semblantz ad aquels dels membres grans, e que no presumas atraccio de lu, ni la extraccio de lu quar motas veguadas accideys per aquo la mort; habantz layssa aquel entro que poyresca, quar fort leu cayra per si aprop xx dias o xxx; e lahoras cura la plagua si a tu es vist, e si no layssa aquela.	"And regarding that in which I should speak better and you make your own judgment: when the bone is crushed, do not presume traction of it, nor extraction of it because many times death has occurred because of this; let putrefaction take its course there, for strong flux will come by itself after about 20 or 30 days; and then treat the dressing if you can see it, and if not leave it alone."
Capitol .xx.	"Chapter XX."
De la curacio de nodacio que accideys en le vestigi de alcuna fractura.	"On the treatment of inflammation that occurs in the region of some fracture."
Motas veguadas accideys aquesta nodacio en le vestigi de sanacio de fractura, e majorment que es prop de las juncturas, e es orrasada per lu la figura del membre; e fort leu prohibeys le membre de la sua operacio natural.	Many times this condition occurs during the healing process of a fracture, especially near joints. It is identified by the distortion of the limb's shape. And it often prevents the limb from its natural operation.
Adonc considera si la nodacio es recent e aministra en aquela medicinas que han stipticat ayssi co es aloen, e enses, e mira, e sercacollo, e acrassia, e semblantz ad aquels; enayssi que prenguas de aquela alcunas o totas, e comfesiys aquelas am vi stiptic, o am album de huou, o am vi agre, e pausa aquela sobre la nodacio en estopa, e constringeys aquelas sobre lu per bona constriccio.	Then consider whether the swelling is recent and administer those medications that have astringent properties like aloevera, ensens, myrrh, and acacia. Use them generously and mix them with either egg albumen, white vinegar or sour wine. Then place this mixture over the swelling wrapped in linen, applying pressure with a firm bandage.
E leyssa extrictura que no deslies aquela per motz dias; e aprop deslia aquela e itera autra, entro que sia remauguda la nodacio; o strenh sobre aquela lamina de plom descentment, quar plom ha proprietat de remaure tot aquo que es imflat en les membres.	And let the bandage remain in place for several days without removing it; and gradually remove it when the swelling has subsided. Or apply over it a lead plate descended from above because lead has the property to reduce all inflammation in limbs.
Mays si nodacio ja es en peyra convertida e streyta es e nessessitat provoca a ostar aquela coytadament, e lahoras scindeys aquela per la partida pus sobirana de lu, e inscideys la superfluitat e eminent, o ratz aquela am alcus rezoris entro que sia remauguda; e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	But if the swelling has already turned into bone and is causing pain, then it must be cut open carefully, and make an incision along the natural crease of the limb, excising any excess flesh or bony protuberance. Then rinse it with warm water until it is healed. And dress it accordingly until it is completely healed.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter XXI
De restauracio de fractura quan es restaurada e aprop aquo roman le membre subtil e freul no segon la sieua natura.	On the restoration of fractures when they are healed, but if the limb remains weak and does not align naturally
Quan fractura de os es restaurada, e aprop aquo roman le membre subtil e freul, lahoras aquo no es fayt sino per motas causas: de las quals la una es multitut de solucio del liament e de la liguacio de lu fayta no segon que cove; o per superfluitat de strictura dels liamentz entro que·l nutriment sia prohibit correr al membre; o per multitut de embrocaccio superflua; o per movement superfluent no en la sua hora; o per pauquesa de sanc en le cors del malaute e per debelitat de lu.	When a bone fracture has healed, but the limb remains weak and crooked, it is usually due to one of several causes: either too much dissolution of the ligaments and tissues around the fracture site so that they do not heal properly; or excess tightening of the ligaments preventing adequate nourishment from reaching the limb; or too much embrocation applied to the area; or excessive movement before the bone has fully healed; or lack of blood circulation in the body due to weakness or debility.
E curacio de aquo es dar a mengar al malaute e far le cor de lu tendre entro que·l sanc sia multiplicat en lu; e aministra banh; e entromet gaug e leticia sobre lu.	And the treatment for this is to ensure the patient receives proper nutrition in order to increase blood circulation and strengthen their body. Apply warm baths, and massage gently with gentle movements to stimulate healing and promote alignment of the limb.
E aprop pausa pegua sobre le membre, per so que la pegua atire a lu mot nutriment, o continua embrocacio de lu am aygua tebeza, entro que·l nutriment corr e retorne a la sua figura natural.	And apply gentle traction to the limb using a splint in order to draw more nourishment to it. Or continue applying warm compresses with hot water to promote healing and restore alignment to its natural state.
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter XXII
De curacio dels osses trincatz quan so restauratz tortuozament e prohibeys la operacio de lor de aquo que cove.	"Regarding the treatment of crushed bones when they have been restored crookedly, prohibit their operation in such manner."
Quan accideys al membre ja restaurat aprop la sanacio de lu de tortuositat e eminencia al os trincat e nodacio, e es per aquo fededa de forma del membre, mays empero le membre no es prohibit de la sieua operacio natural, lahora no cove que tu recipias la paraula de aquel que exsistima aquel membre sia de novel trincat.	"When it happens to a member already restored near its healing time from being twisted and prominent at the crushed bone's nodule, although the member is not fededa in shape but still allows its natural operation, you should not receive the word of anyone who asserts that such member is newly crushed."
Mays ja so statz motz fols metges e restauradors les quals han fayt aquo en nostra tera; e aquesta operacio es mot vituperable perduzent a gran temor le senhal de la qual es mortal.	"But already many foolish doctors and healers have done this in our land, and this operation is greatly to be blamed for it brings great fear along with its mortal sign."
Mays si claudicacio e nodacio son recentz, lahoras cove que sian enbrocatz am aygua tebeza en la qual so coytas erbas mollificantz, ayssi cum son fuelas de altea e razitz de lu, e mellilot, e semblantz ad aquels; e sia fayt a lu emplastre am emplastre mollificatio ayssi cum dyallaquilon ben fayt; o que sia preza mucillage de razit de altea e sia contucida am gray de gualina o am oli de cirami, e sia emplastrat am aquel; o que sian prezes figuas grassas e sian trissadas am fems de colom, e semblantz ad aquels de las medicinas que son nompnadas amermans consolidacio.	"But if the limpness and nodule are recent, then they should be wrapped in warm water with softening herbs such as marshmallow roots and rosemary leaves, mallows, and similar ones; and a plaster of mollifying ointment should be made thus with dill well-made, or mucilage of marshmallow root should be pressed with grease of goose or oil of cypress and applied therewith; or fatty figs should be pressed with pigeon's dung and similar to those medicines called amulets for consolidation."
E alcunas vetz es dissolvuda am assidua fricacio leugiera que sia am las mas humidas, e sia administrat movement del membre a tota partida en totas horas.	"And sometimes they are dissolved with frequent gentle friction that should be done with the moistest ones, and then the member should be moved in all parts at every hour."
Mays si tortuositat ja es anada denant e es fayta fort e convertida es en peyra e provocada es necessitat a curacio de lu am ferr, lahoras cove que sia le pus desus cecsat e la continuacio del os sia dissolvut, e sia inscidit aquo que superflueys de nodacio de aquel meteys am le os am inscissoris subtils, e sia aministrada facilitat en aquel am sollicitut e studi.	"But if the twistedness is already advanced and has become hard and converted into bone, and there is necessity for its cure with iron, then it should be cut away from above and the continuity of the bone should be dissolved, and what is superfluous of the nodule of that member with the bone should be cut away with subtle scissors, and facilitation should be administered in that one with care and study."
Capitol .xxiii.	Chapter XXIII
De sermo en dislocacio.	Of speech concerning dislocation.
Dislocacio es eyssiment de alcuna de las juncturas del sieu loc, per que es prohibida de movement, e es orrezada la figura del membre, e fa venir sobre le malaute dolors e lesios grans.	Dislocation is the displacement of some of the joints of the body, which causes restricted movement and deformity of the limb, resulting in great pain and injury.
Donc quan accideys ad alcu dislocacio, lahoras cove tantost perforsar que sia reduzit, e no tarde aquela reduzir, quar si es tardada, le loc es apostemat e fort leu am aquo es fayta dificil la reduccio de dislocaccio.	Therefore when some dislocation occurs, it is necessary to promptly reduce it, and not delay its reduction, for if it is delayed, the joint becomes inflamed and hard, making the reduction of the dislocation difficult.
E per aysso no cove que sia maugut ni stendut en la hora de la apostemacio, quar motas veguadas fa venir spasme e dolors ledentz.	And therefore it should not be moved nor stretched at the time of inflammation, for many times it causes spasm and intense pain.
Mays quan aquo accideys, lahoras cove que tu te coytes a la flaubotomia del malaute, e aprop sia layssat entro que repause le apostema; e aprop le membre sia embrocat am aygua cauda e oli, e aprop sia reduzit am facilitat.	But when this occurs, it is necessary that you quickly apply a poultice to the affected area and allow it to rest until the inflammation has subsided. Then the limb should be wrapped with hot water and oil, and gently reduced.
E tot membre sia curat am aquo del qual la rememoracio vindra en son loc.	And all members should be treated with that of which the memory comes into its place.
E yeu ja e ordenatz les capitols de dislocacio segon que es precedit en fractura; de la partida del cos pus sobirana entro a la partida pus dejos.	And I have already arranged the chapters on dislocation according to what has been said about fractures, from the most elevated part of the body down to the most inferior.
Capitol .xxiiii.	Chapter XXIV.
De curacio de dislocacio de la mandibula dejos.	"Treatment of dislocation of the jaw."
So dislocadas las doas mandibulas si no tart; e la dislocacio de amdos es fayta segon una de dos manieyras: que o son remaugudas de lurs locs per pauca remocio, e so mollificadas un petit; o so dislocadas per entiera dislocacio e complida, entro que sian mollificadas a la partida de la junctura entro que corro saliva del malaute e que no puesca tenir aquela ni puesca claure la sua boca, e la lengua de lu sia envolopada en sa paraula.	"If both jaws are dislocated, they must be reduced; the dislocation of both occurs in one of two ways: either they have been moved slightly from their sockets and softened a little; or they have been completely dislocated, so that they are mollified at the point of articulation, when saliva flows from the patient's mouth and he cannot open nor close his mouth, with his tongue wrapped in his cheek."
Mays quan la dislocacio de lu es pauca, lahoras en las majors disposicios retorna per si an pauca causa.	"When the dislocation is slight, it often returns to its place on its own without any cause."
Mays si la dislocacio es entiera e complida, lahoras cove que sia administrada reduccio de lu leugierament, e no sia tardada de tot.	"If the dislocation is complete and full, it is necessary that reduction be administered gently, and not delayed at all."
E es que·l ministre tengua le cap del malaute, e entrometa lo metge le dit pous de la una sieua ma en la razit de la dislocacio de la mandibula dedintz la boca de lu, si la dislocacio es de la una part; o que entrometa les sieus dos pouzes ensemps, si la dislocacio es de doas partz, e les autres ditz de las mas de lu sian defora am les quals enguale; e comanda al malaute que cesse las suas mandibulas e absolva aquelas anar de quascuna partida; e le metge engualhe la mandibula e enpellisca la mandibula entro que retorne al sieu loc.	"And let the minister hold the patient's head, and insert his thumb or both thumbs into the jaw joint inside the mouth if the dislocation is on one side; or that he insert both thumbs together if the dislocation is on both sides, and keep the other fingers outside with which he engages; and command the patient to close his jaws and stop them from moving from each part; and the doctor gently pushes the jaw back into its place."
E si dificil es la reducio de lu, e majorment si amdos las mandibulas so essemps dislocadas, lahoras aministra evoporacio am aygua cauda e oli, entro que sia fayta leugiera la reduccio de amdos e no tardes la reduccio de amdos de tot, ayssi quo havem dit.	"And if the reduction is difficult, especially if both jaws are dislocated at once, then evaporation with hot water and oil should be administered, so that the reduction may be made more easily and not delayed at all, as we have said."
E donc cum retornam e so engualadas, e es clausa la boca del malaute e no es mollificada, lahoras pausa sobre aquelas polvils de drap am cerot, e sia fayt de cera e oli rozat; e aprop sia liat am facilitat am liamens mols.	"And then when the reduction has been made and the jaws have been closed, and the patient's mouth is not softened, powdered cloth with wax should be placed over it, which is made of wax and rose oil; and let it be tied gently with soft linen."
E sia le dormir del malaute sobre le sieu dos, e·l cap de lu sia stant entre dos aurelhes, per so que no maugue aquel a la partida dreyta ni a la sinistra; e no li fassas per forsa masteguar alcuna causa; habans la sieua vianda sia forbicio leon, entro que quan las dolors sian remaugudas e las mandibulas so nozadas, lahoras maugue aquo que vol.	"And let the patient sleep on his back, and let his head be supported between two pillows, so that he does not move it to the right or left; and do not force him to swallow anything at first; but let his food be liquid gruel, until when the pains have subsided and the jaws are healed, then let him eat what he wishes."
E aquo sia aministrat am facilita, e no trebalhe sobre la apercio de la boca deves la comestio e beure e ocitatio, entro que la mandibula sia nozada e sanada.	"And this should be administered gently, and not worked upon the opening of the mouth during eating and drinking and laughing, until the jaw is healed."
E si es dificil la reduccio de duas mandibulas quan so dislocadas en alcuna hora e no so convertidas als lors locs, lahoras motas veguadas accideysso febres e soda assidua, e fort leu es alerguat le ventre del malaute, e fort leu e vomeys colera pura.	"And if the reduction of two jaws is difficult when they are dislocated at any time and do not return to their places, then often vomiting occurs with fever and continuous thirst, and sometimes the abdomen of the patient becomes swollen, and there may also be pure colic."
E quan tu vezes aquo, lahoras sapias que es perdicio; e motas veguadas mor aquel al qual accideys aquo en x dias.	"And when this happens, then know that it is a fatal condition; and often the patient dies within ten days."
Capitol .xxv.	"Chapter XXV."
De reduccio de la dislocacio de la furcula e de la extremitat del muscle.	"On the reduction of dislocation of the clavicle and its extremity."
Furcula no es dislocada del latz dedintz per la sua continuacio am le pietz; e alcunas veguadas es dislocada a la partida defora, e aquo es declarat al sentiment.	"The furcula is not dislocated from the inside due to its connection with the chest wall; however, sometimes it may be dislocated externally, which can be felt."
E la restauracio de lu es que·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu dos e extenda les sieus brasses.	"The restoration of it is that the patient lies on their back and extends their arms."
E aprop coarta le loc am la tua palma am fort coartacio, quar ela retornara.	Then press the area with your palm using firm pressure, for it will return.
E aprop pausa sobre aquela emplastre e pulvils e strenh aquela.	Then pause over that plaster and powders and strengthen that.
Mays la extremitat de aquel que siec le coyde e·s continuat am aquel, no es dislocada en alcun dia; lahoras cove que sia reduzida e engualhada segon que havem dit e segon que es a tu aparelhat.	If the end of that which seizes the vein does not continue with it, then it is not displaced in any way; therefore it is necessary to reduce and align it according to what we have said and according to what you have prepared.
E aprop pausa sobre aquela emplastre, e pulvils, e extrictura, e comanda al malaute adherir a trenquilitat e a repaus entro que sia sanat.	Then pause over that plaster, powders, and bandage, and command the patient to adhere to tranquility and rest until they are healed.
E am aquesta meteyssa curacio es reduzida la extremita del muscle quan es separada del sieu loc.	With this treatment, the end of the muscle is reduced when it is separated from its place.
Capitol .xxvi.	Chapter xxvi
De la reduccio de la dislocacio del muscle.	Of the reduction of the dislocation of the muscle.
Sapias que·l muscle no es dislocat sino segon tres manieras, de las quals es la una que sia dislocat a la partida del titillic a la partida dejos.	Know that the muscle is not dislocated except in three ways, one of which is that it is dislocated at the beginning of the titillation on the left side.
E la segonda es que sia dislocat a la partida desus del muscle, e aquo es fayt tart; e no es dislocat a las partidas detras per la spalla; e no es dislocat a las partidas denant per les nervis.	And the second is that it is dislocated at the beginning above the muscle, and that is rare; and it is not dislocated at the back parts by the shoulder; and it is not dislocated at the front parts by the nerves.
E majorment es dislocat e defora eyssit a las partidas dejos deves le titillic, e majorment en aquels dels quals las carns son paucas, leugierament es dislocat; mays en aquels en les quals so motas carns, es eyssit fora am dificultat.	And mostly it is dislocated and exits at the left parts above the titillation, and more easily in those of whom the flesh is little, but in those with much flesh, it exits out with difficulty.
E fort leu accideys ad alcus homes percussio o cazement, e le muscle de lu es apostemat de apostema caut, e es cujat per aquo que ja sia dislocat.	And sometimes, especially for some men struck by blow or fall, the muscle becomes inflamed with an incurable abscess, and it is crushed by that which is already dislocated.
Adonc cove que tu sproes aquo entro que estias sobre-sertetut de lu, e lahoras procesiscas en la curacio de lu.	Therefore, you should proceed in this manner until you are sure about it, and afterwards proceed with its treatment.
E es conoguda la dislocacio de lu quan es a las partidas dejos deves le titillic; per so que distingescas entre le muscle dislocat e·l muscle sa, quar tu atrobas entre aquels diversitat manifesta; e atrobas en le cap del muscle concavitat e dejos le titillic deves le tocament del cap del muscle ayssi quo un huou, e al malaute no pot redusir la sua ma a la sieua aurelha, ni maure aquela per totz movementz.	And the dislocation of it is known when it is at the left parts above the titillation; for this reason you can distinguish between the dislocated muscle and the sound one, because there is a manifest diversity between them. You find in the head of the muscle a concavity on the left side of the titillation, and you touch the head of the muscle like this, as if it were a goose egg, and the patient cannot bring his hand to his ear, nor move that at all by any movement.
Si es dislocat deves le pietz o ensus, e tu lahoras atrobas manifest tocament, e no es amaguat.	If it is dislocated below or above, and you afterwards find a manifest touch, it will not be hidden.
E de aquesta dislocacio es fayta leugiera reduccio quan es fresca e le malaute es enfant.	And from this dislocation, easy reduction is made when it is fresh and the patient is a child.
E la reduccio de lu es que·l ministre eleva la ma de lu a las partidas desus; e aprop pause les tieus pouses dejos le titillic de lu, e eleva la junctura am fortaleza en sus al sieu loc, e·l ministre eleva la ma de lu, e extenda aquela en sus; e aprop pausa aquela dejos quar ela retorna leugierament.	"To reduce it, the minister raises the patient's hand above their head. Then place your feet on either side of the patient's genitals. Next, raise the joint with strength to its original position, and then the minister raises the patient's arm and extends it upwards."
Mays si per aquo que havem dit no retorna, e so del comensament que accidic la dislocacio, motz dias, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia banhat en aygua cauda e sia aministrada enbrocacio que mollifique e liniesca ayssi cum si so coytz razitz de altea, e fenugrec, e melillot en aygua, e sia administrada.	"If it does not return (the limb), then, from the beginning when the dislocation occurred, several days or even hours may have passed. Therefore, the patient should be bathed in warm water and rubbed with an ointment that is moisturizing and soothing, such as one made from ground aloe vera, fenugreek seeds, and marsh mallow root in water."
E aprop le malaute sia ressupinat sobre le sieu dos e sia pausat dejos le titillic de lu espera de lana que sia engual entre levitat e strictura, e aprop le metge pause le sieu talo sobre la spera, e eleva le cap del muscle am vertut, e atire la ma del malaute per que no sia mauguda a las partidas dejos, e autre ministre tengua le cap del malaute, que no sia maugut a las partidas dejos, quar aquela tantost retorna al sieu loc.	"And then the patient should be propped up on their back and placed on either side of the testicles waiting for it to regain its normal position between elevated and constricted. And then the doctor places his foot on the sphere (a ball or globe) and lifts the head of the muscle with force, pulling the patient's arm so that it is not moved from its position. Another assistant should hold the patient's head so that it is not moved from its place as the limb soon returns to its proper location."
E si voles, reduzeys aquel segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu fassas esser prezent un home le qual sia pus lonc que·l malaute, e estia de la part de aquel latz, e entrometa le sieu muscle dejos le titillic del malaute e eleve le titillic de lu a las partidas desus entro que·l malaute sia suspendut en ayre, e autre ministre tire la ma del malaute de las partidas dejos del sieu ventre.	"And if you wish, you can reduce it in this manner: have a man present who is taller than the patient. He should stand on the side of the limb that is longer and insert his muscle between the patient's testicles and elevate them upwards while the patient is suspended in air. Another assistant should pull the patient's arm down towards their belly."
Mays si le malaute es leugier, lahoras cove que am lu que autre causa sia suspenduda, per so que grave aquel, quar la dislocacio retorna tantost.	"But if the patient is lighter, it is necessary that they are suspended by something else (besides their arm), otherwise the dislocation will quickly return."
E es reduzit eysament segon autra manieyra: e es que sia ficat en terra un fust lonc le cap del qual sia redon de figura, ayssi cum pilo de mortier, que no sia gros ni subtil, e aprop sia pausat dejos le malaute; pus que so pausatz sobre·l cap del fust draps leons, e·l malaute sia stant segon la longitut del fust, e aprop sia extenduda la ma de lu a las partidas dejos del autra part; e sia extendut le cos de lu del autre part am fortaleza, quar la junctura retorna al sieu loc am velocitat.	"And it can be reduced in the same way: place on the ground a long pole with a round head like a pestle that is not too thick or thin. Then place the patient on top of it. Cover the top of the pole with soft cloths and have the patient stand along the length of the pole, stretching their arm out to the other side. Stretch the body on the other side with force because the joint will quickly return to its proper location."
E si es dificil reduccio de lu per totas las causas que havem ditas, lahoras usa de aquesta cura: e es que tu prenguas un fust la quantitat del qual sia en le lonc de dos brasses, e latitut de aquel sia de quatre ditz, e la grossetut de lu sia aleujat en le preon del tittilic segon aquesta forma:	"And if the reduction is difficult due to all the causes mentioned above, then use this treatment: take a pole that is two arms' length long and four fingers wide. The thickness of it should be equal to the length of the thumb and place it between the testicles in this way:"
E aprop sobre le cap redon sian liatz drap leons per so que·l fust no ledesca le malaute.	"And then place soft cloths on top of the round head of the pole so that it does not hurt the patient."
E aprop sia pausat dejos le titillic del malaute, e sia extenduda la ma o le bras sobre·l fust entro a las partidas dejos, e sia liat le fust sobre le adjutori e le bras e la extremitat de la ma.	"And then place the pole on top of the patient's testicles. Extend their arm or leg over the pole towards the other side and bind the pole to the assistant's arms and the end of the extended limb."
Aprop sia pausat le bras sobre un scalo de scala segon la latitut, e la ma sia extenduda a las partidas dejos, e l’autre cos sia suspendut de l’autre part, quar la junctura intra tantost.	"And then place the arm on a ladder according to its width. Extend the hand towards the other side and suspend the other body on the other side because the joint will soon enter."
E cum le intrament de lu es complit segon quascuna maniera que es a tu possibla, e lahoras cove que tu pauses dejos le titillic spera de lana de engual quantitat; e aprop pauza emplastre perparat de polvera de moli am enses e album de huou sobre tot le muscle, ayssi quo es revolvut desus, e aprop strenh dejos le titillic am strictura decent; e le liament sia revolvut sobre le emplastre, e la ma de lu sia annectida al col de lu, e sia leyssat, e no sia mauguda la ma de lu per vii dias.	"And when the joint is fully reduced according to any possible method, then place a pad made of wool of equal quantity over the testicles. Then apply a plaster prepared from powdered millet with honey and egg whites all over the muscle as it is turned upwards. Then bind it decently around the testicles. Wrap the bandage over the plaster and tie the patient's hand to their neck, leaving it untied for seven days without moving their arm."
E cove que sia pausada la vianda del malaute pauca, entro que·l membre sia confortat, quar es pus leugier a la sanacio de lu.	"And the patient should be given little food until the limb is strengthened because it will then be easier to heal."
E aprop la vianda sia donada major aprop vii o v e sia exercitat un movement; e donc si es fermat e no es mollificat, lahoras ja es sanat.	"And then give more food after seven or eight days and have the limb exercised. And when it is firm and not softened, then it is healed."
Mays si la junctura es dislocada motas veguadas per humiditat que accideys a lu o per autra causa, lahoras cove que en aquela sia administrat cauteri am tres traucs, segon que denant es dit en le capitol de cauteri.	"But if the joint is frequently dislocated due to humidity that occurs in it or for another cause, then cauterization should be administered with three incisions as mentioned earlier in the chapter on cautery."
E si tot aysso es fayt e aprop vii dias es desliat le liament e la junctura no es fermada, e le emplastre e la strictura son reduzitz sobre lu alcunas veguadas, e no es fermada e catz e no pot elevar aquel bras a las partidas desus, lahoras sapias que·ls nervis de lu, les quals so al cap del muscle, ja so inscizes o extendutz o mollificatz, e sapia que la junctura nul temps no sira ficada en loc sieu.	"And even if all of that is done and after seven days the bandage is removed but the joint is not firm, and the plaster and binding are reapplied several times but it is still not firm and caught and cannot raise that arm upwards, then know that the nerves at the head of the muscle have been injured or stretched or softened, and know that the joint will never be put back in its proper place."
De la dislocacio de aquela qu’es fayta deves le pietz e la mamilha o las partidas detras, la reduccio es fayta am impulcio e extencio am las mas, entro que retorne.	"Regarding the dislocation of that [the elbow], it occurs in the pit of the arm and the nipple or behind the shoulder blade. The reduction is done with pressure and extension using the hands until it returns."
E sia administrada en aquela l’autra strictura, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	"And apply another bandage to it [the elbow] and treat it until it heals."
E si accideys aprop la sanacio gravitat en le membre e tarditat en le movement de lu, lahoras le malaute uze de banh motas veguadas entro que aquela gravitat sia alleujada e que retorne a la natura de lu primiera.	"And if gravity occurs in the limb and slowness of movement during its healing, then the patient should use baths frequently until that heaviness is alleviated and it returns to its original nature."
Capitol .xxvii.	"Chapter XXVII."
De curacio de dislocacio del coyde.	"On the treatment of dislocation of the hip."
Sapias que la junctura del coyde es dislocada am difficultat e semblantment retorna am difficultat; e aquela es dislocada a totas partidas, e majorment a la partida denant a la partida detras, e la dislocacio de lu no es amaguada a tu quar es cazent dejos le vezement o dejos le tocament segon qualque figura sia dislocat, e quan ajustes le coyde disloguat am le sa, aquo es a tu declarat manifestament, quar la junctura es concavada e no pot doblar le bras, ni tocar am aquel le sieu muscle.	"You should know that the hip joint is dislocated with difficulty and returns with difficulty; and one that is dislocated cannot be reduced without great pain, especially if it is dislocated in front or behind. The dislocation of the hip is not noticeable until the patient tries to walk or touch their knee according to which position it was dislocated in, and when you reduce the dislocated hip joint with its socket, that will be made clear to you manifestly, because the joint is concave and cannot bend the leg nor touch one's own muscle."
E cove que·t coytes, e reduzescas la dislocacio tantost denant que vengua a lu apostema caut, quar si ve a lu apostema caut, dificil es la reduccio de lu, e fort leu no es sanat de tot; e majorment quan es a las partidas detras, quar pus mala es de totas las autras specias de dislocacio, e de major dolor, e motas veguadas deyssen am aquela la mort.	"And you should reduce it and reduce the dislocation as soon as possible before an abscess forms; for if an abscess forms, the reduction becomes difficult, and often it is not healed completely. And especially when it is dislocated in back positions, because among all other species of dislocation this one is the worst, causing much pain, and many times death ensues from that."
E la restauracio de lu, quan es aquela que es possibla reduzir, es que la ma de lu sia extenduda am doas mas, e le bras de lu sia expandut, e las mas del metge sian sobre le coyde e dejos lu, e el empellisca la junctura am les pouzes de las suas mas ensemps, o am la razit de la sua palma entro que torne en son loc.	"And the reduction of it, when it is possible to reduce it, consists in extending the limb with two hands and abducting the leg; then place your hands on the hip joint and push it back into its socket with the pressure of both palms together or with the palm of your hand turned inward so that it returns to its proper position."
Mays si la dislocacio es a las partidas denant, lahoras retorna ayssi que dobla la ma am la sua ma, entro que percuta le coyde am la razit de la sua palma.	"But if the dislocation is in front positions, then return it thus by flexing the limb with your hand upon it until it impacts the hip joint with the palm of your hand."
E si la dislocacio no obezeys a la reduccio, lahoras aministra vehement extencio e mot fort.	"And if the dislocation does not yield to reduction, then apply vigorous extension and great force."
E es que dos ministres extendan le bras, e tenguan aquel eyssament dos ministres per so que no sia remaugut deves la extencio.	"And it is that two assistants should extend the limb, and hold it firmly in place with two hands so that it is not removed during extension."
E aprop sia revolvut le bras deves tota part, pus que es envolopat drap doblat lonc sobre la ma de lu, o liament.	"And then it should be rotated towards all parts because a long folded bandage is wrapped around the hand of the limb or the limb itself."
E quant le metge toca la junctura am la sua ma, unte aquela am alcun oli per so que aquo sia aquelas causas las quals ajudan en lubricitat de la junctura am facilitat; e aprop empellesca la junctura am empulcio vehement entro que retorne.	"And when the physician touches the joint with his hand, he should grease it with some oil so that it may facilitate those causes which help in the lubricity of the joint. And then push the joint back vigorously until it returns."
E aprop la reduccio de lu cove que sia pausat sobre aquela empastre en le qual sia stipticitat e excequacio am album de huou, e sia extrenhut am strictura descent, e·l bras sia suspendut del col, e sia layssat per alcus dias.	"And then the reduction of it should be kept upon that support where there is stability and elevation with album of wool, and it should be extended with a descent suspension and the limb suspended from the neck for some days."
E aprop sia desliat; e donc si la junctura es formada en le sieu loc, lahoras tu deslia le liament de lu e layssa aquela.	"And then let it be untied; but if the joint is formed in its proper place, then you may untie the bandage from it and leave it alone."
E si vezas la junctura no be strenher, lahoras tu itera le emplastre e·l liament, e layssa aquela per alcus dias entro que sia extrenhuda; e aprop deslia aquela.	"But if you see that the joint is not strong, then apply the compress and bandage again and leave them on for some days until it is extended. And then untie it."
Mays si accideys a lu gravitat aprop la reduccio de la junctura, e la disposicio de lu es en movement, lahoras aministra humectacio en banh e fricacio subtil, e comprecio, entro que sia aleujat; o pausa sobre la junctura aleliati, so es coyssa de moto grassa; e aprop sia liada, e layssa aquela sobre le os le dia e la nueyt.	"But if gravity is against the reduction of the joint and the position of the limb is in motion, then apply moistening with bath and gentle friction and pressure until it is alleviated. Or place it on elevated support so that it may be a thing of moving fat. And then bind it and leave it alone over the bone day and night."
E aprop osta aquela, e met aquel en banh; e quan suza, lahoras tu fregua la junctura am fricacio temprada, e aprop itera sobre aquela aleliati, so es ronhonal de moto, una veguada, e la segonda, e la .iii.a.,	"And then remove that and put him in a bath; and when he is warm, then rub the joint with gentle friction, and then place it on elevated support so that it may be a thing of motion once again, twice, thrice."
am intrament de banh, entro que sia linit.	"and repeatedly bathe it until it becomes limber."
E si voles, pausa sobre aquela fenda de vaca humida e scalfada am boder e stren sobre aquel; e fay aquo alcunas veguadas, quar aquela es humida e reduzeys a la sua disposicio.	"And if you wish, place it on a moistened and scraped cowhide fold and press upon it. And do this several times until that becomes moistened and reduces to its proper position."
Capitol .xxviii.	"Chapter XXVIII"
De curacio de dislocacio de malassen, so es de la junctura que es entre·l bras e la ma.	Of the treatment of dislocation of the wrist, which is the joint between the arm and the hand.
Malassen de la ma alcunas vetz es deslocada, e la reduccio de la dislocacio de lu es leugiera, e·l contrari es de las autras juncturas, mays empero cove que sia velocitat en la reduccio de lu en la hora en la qual es deslocada, denant que le loc sia apostemat o que accida en lu apostema caut.	"Sometimes the wrist is dislocated and its reduction is easy, whereas the opposite is true for other joints. However, care should be taken to reduce it quickly in the moment that it occurs, before inflammation sets in or any swelling forms."
E la reduccio de la dislocacio de lu es que tu pauses la junctura de la ma del malaute sobre una taula e le ministre extenda la ma de aquel, e le metge pause la sua ma o o la sua palma sobre la iminencia de la junctura, e empellisca aquela entro que retorne al sieu loc.	"And the reduction of the dislocation is that you place the wrist of the patient on a table and an assistant extends the hand of the patient. Then the physician places his hand or palm over the prominence of the joint and presses it until it returns to its proper position."
Mays empero cove que sia considerat si la palma ja es ostada al ventre de la ma, lahoras le malaute pause le dos de la sua ma sobre una taula deves la extencio e la reduccio; e si la dislocacio es precedent deves le dos de la ma, lahoras sia la posicio de la ma de aquel intrinicequement sobre la taula, per so que la ma del metge caja sobre aquela iminencia de la junctura.	"But it is important to consider whether the palm has already been dislocated onto the front of the hand. If it has, then the patient should place the back of their hand on a table for extension and reduction. But if the dislocation is anterior to the back of the hand, then the position of the patient's hand should be intricately placed on the table so that the palm of the physician may fit over the prominence of the joint."
E donc si retorna tantost, bon es; e sino, lahoras strenh aquela am empastre cedant le apostema e layssa aquel; e no iteres aquo, quar sino, no soferta ni no podes sobre la reduccio de lu pus que passan a lu dias.	"And then if it returns immediately, that is good. But if not, then apply pressure with a compress to reduce the swelling and leave it alone. And do not repeat this, because if not done carefully, you will not be able to succeed in reducing it after some days have passed."
Mays empero la junctura roman segon la sua tortuositat; e no notz al malaute alcuna causa, sino que la ma es mollificada e no pot strenher alcuna causa; lahoras sapias que les nervis son trincatz o trissatz, e lahoras no es engen en lu sino que sia strenhuda am cauteri prop le cazament de lu e fort leu aquo confereys alcuna causa.	"But the joint becomes stiff according to its tortuousness; and do not inform the patient of any cause, but simply tell him that his hand is softened and cannot strengthen for any reason. Then you know that the nerves are compressed or torn, and then there will be no improvement in it unless it is strengthened with caustic applied near its attachment and rubbed gently with some cause."
Donc cum malassem es retornada, lahoras pausa sobre lu empastre le qual havem recomtat, e sia layssat e strenhut per v dias; e aprop sia desliat e sia layssat e la ma de lu sia excercitada.	"So when the dislocation has returned, then apply the compress which we have recommended and leave it on for five days. And then untie it and let it rest and exercise the hand of it."
Mays si le movement de lu es ostat e accideys en lu alcuna gravitat, lahoras leniys aquela am aygua cauda e am fricacio alcunas veguadas, entro que sia alleujat.	"But if the motion of that is lost and there is some gravity in it, then lenify it with cold water and gentle friction several times until it is alleviated."
Capitol .xxix.	"Chapter XXIX"
De la curacio de dislocacio dels ditz.	Of the treatment of dislocation of the toes.
Alcunas veguadas so dislocatz les ditz a tota partida.	Sometimes the toes are completely dislocated.
E quan es dislocat alcun dit de aquels al dos de la palma o al ventre de lu, lahoras sten le dit e impelleys la dislocacio de lu am les tieus pouses, entro que retorne.	"And when one of those toes is dislocated to the back or front of it, then grasp that toe and press upon its dislocation with your thumbs until it returns."
E aprop sostenta le cap del dit, e suspen aquel deves la part a la qual es dislocat, e layssa aquel per dos dias.	"And then support the head of the toe, suspend it over the part where it is dislocated and leave it for two days."
E aprop suspen aquel e exten aquel entro que dreyt sia engualhat en aquel sieu dia.	"And then suspend that and extend it until the day is finished."
E quan sira noyt, lia aquel segon aquela narracio, e no cesses desliar aquel en le dia e exercitar am movement, e lia aquel en la noyt; e fay aquo per alcus dias entro que sia streyt.	"And when night comes, bind that according to this description and do not cease loosening it in the day and exercising it with motion. And bind it at night for several days until it is straight."
E fay semblant am aquo, si es dislocat al ventre de la ma, e lia aquel ad aquela partida e fay am aquo la tieua primiera operacio, entro que sia sanat.	"And do the same in this way if it is dislocated to the front of the hand, and bind it at that angle and do your first operation with it until it is healed."
E semblantment fay am aquo quan es dislocat a las autres partidas.	"And similarly do this when it is dislocated to other parts."
Capitol .xxx.	"Chapter XXX"
De la curacio de dislocacio dels spondils del dos.	Of the treatment of dislocation of the spinal vertebrae.
Quan accideys ad alcun dels spondils del dos o del col dislocacio complida, e so remaugutz motz spondils de lors locs, lahoras en aquela no es curacio, quar la mort se coyta al malaute.	"When complete dislocation occurs in any of the spinal vertebrae or those of the neck, which are removed from their proper positions, then there is no treatment for that because death will overtake the patient."
E senhal de aquo es que la egestio del malaute es fora-eyssida ses voluntat, e no pot retenir aquela; e motas veguadas so mollificatz alcus membres de lu o doas cambas de lu o dos brasses de lu, o un de aquels; o es remaugut un spondil de son loc, quar motas veguadas es remaugut e motas veguadas es fayta la remocio de aquels a quatre partidas.	"And the sign of that is that the evacuation of the patient occurs involuntarily without his being able to retain it. And many times some members of him or both legs of him or both arms of him are paralyzed, or one of those. Or else one vertebra has been removed from its position because often times such removal has occurred and likewise the dislocation of them has happened in all four directions."
Donc aquela ja es remauguda a las partidas detras e es nompnada gelbozitat.	"So that is already removed to the posterior direction and is called paralysis."
Mays la curacio de lu es que lahoras consideras si la gelbozitat accidey de puerissia, quar lahoras en aquela no es curacio ni de aquela no es sanacio de tot.	"But the treatment of it is that you should then consider whether the paralysis has occurred from birth because in that case there is neither treatment nor healing for it."
Mays en aquela que ve per cazement o per percussio o per semblant ad aquels, ja diyssero les Antics las manieras de curacio am sermo prolixs, del qual lo mays retorna am profieyt; mays yeu ja e abreujat de aquel del qual lo pauc escusa del trop de lu, per la mieua propinquitat a la entencio mieua exposicio, am la qual he aquo expausat et format ex instrument divers de aquel am le qual mostrero aquo e espausero aquel.	"However, in the manner that it comes by chance or by percussion or similarly, as was explained by the Ancients with lengthy speeches, which return mostly in vain; yet I have abbreviated that of which little excused the excess of it, due to my proximity to my intended exposition, with which this has been explained and formed from diverse instruments."
E dic que en gelbosita que accideys de la partida denant en le pietz, no es engen ni sanacio de aquela; e semblantment en aquela que es fayta a dos latz.	"I say that in the case of jaundice that occurs from the division beforehand on the side, it is not beneficial nor healing for that one; and similarly that which is done to both sides."
E de aquelas no es curada sino aquela que accideys en le dos propriament am aquo que yeu recomti.	"And among these, only that one is cured which occurs properly in the back, with what I recount here."
E es que·l malaute sia extendut sobre la sua cara sobre pug engual prop de paret, e sia extendut dejos lu esturment molh per so que no sia lidit le pietz de lu.	"And it is that if the disease extends over its surface near a wall, and is extended from below up to where the tool touches it, then the stone will not be harmed."
E aprop un fust dreyt sia pausat, ficat en la terra en la extremitat del pug entorn le cap de lu, e autra fust en aviro les pes de lu en l’autra extremitat del pueg.	"And properly a straight beam should be placed, set on the ground at the end of the stone near its head, and another beam laid across its feet at the other end of the stone."
E·l ministre tengua le fust, e no sia fermat en fossa; e autre ministre tengua l’autre segon aquela forma.	"And the servant should hold the beam, and not be held in a hole; and another servant should hold the other one according to that form."
E aprop envolopa sobre le cap del malaute e dejos les titillic liamen leon ferm; e exten la extremitat del liamel al fust le qual es deves le cap de lu, e lia aquel en lu; e aprop strenh l’autre liament sobre las ancas de lu les denols de lu, e deves las cambas de lu; e aprop ajusta totz les liamentz e lia aquels en l’autre fust le qual es deves les pes de lu.	"And properly wrap the head of the stone and below its titlings firmly with a rope; extend the end of the rope to the beam that is above the head of it, and tie it there; and also stretch the other rope over the haunches of the stone on both sides of it, and place it under the curves of it; and properly adjust all the ropes and tie them to the other beam that is above the feet of it."
E aprop le ministre cascu extenda le liament a la partida del fust, e no sian remaugutz les dos fustz e les liamentz dels sieus locs en les quals son ficatz, mays empero no so fermatz ayssi cum havem dit.	"And properly each servant should extend the rope at the departure of the beam, and the two beams and ropes of their places in which they are set should not be moved, but nevertheless not fastened as we have said."
E le metge pause las suas palmas sobre le spondil am fortaleza entro que retorne, o que pause sobre aquela una taula, e aprop que ajuste sobre la taula les sieus pes entro que retorne.	"And the doctor should place his palms on the stone with firmness while it returns, or if he places them on that one table, then properly adjusts his feet on the table while it returns."
Mays si no retorna per aquesta forma, lahoras pren una taula de la qual la latitut o la longitut sia en aviro de tres brassas, e cava en la paret de la qual havem dit que es prop le malaute un loc en le qual intre la extremitat de la taula.	"But if it does not return by this method, then take a plank whose width or length is about three brazas, and dig in the wall that we have said is near the stone a place in which the end of the plank can be inserted."
E aprop pausa la maytat de la taula sobre le spondilh, e·l metge pause les sieus pes sobre l’autre extremitat, e estrenha be entro que le spondil sia coartat e que retorne al sieu loc.	"And properly place the middle of the plank on the stone, and the doctor places his weight on the other end, and stretches well so that the stone is constricted and returns to its place."
E si tu voles, obre am torn le qual es revolvut am la ma; e es que tu fiques en terra deves le cap del malaute en le derier del pug dos fustz, la longitut dels quals sia d’un bras, e deves le cap de lu en le derier del pug eyssament dos fustz; e sia la longitut que es entre quascun fust un palm, e ja es fayt en quascun fust trauc en le qual corr torn, e quascun sia mot fermat en terra per so que no sia maugut.	"And if you wish, turn the stone that has revolved with your hand; and if you place yourself on the ground near the head of the stone in the rear of the two beams, the length of which is one braza, and similarly place yourself at the head of it behind the two beams; and let the distance between each beam be a palm, and already each beam is drawn in the one that returns, and each should be firmly fixed on the ground so that it is not moved."
E sia mes un fust redon en le qual es le torn, e sia revolvut en les dos traucs dels dos fustz.	"And let there also be one round beam on which the stone turns, and let it be turned in the two tracks of the two beams."
E en la extremitat de lu es un trauc en le qual es format le fust, la longueza del qual es un palm am aquo que es revolvut; e en les dos autres fustz es semblant de aquel.	"And at its end is a track in which the beam is fitted, the length of which is a palm and a half when it is turned; and the other two beams are similar to this one."
E aprop strenh les liamentz que has streyt en le pietz del malaute en le trau le qual es deves le cap de lu, e les liamentz que has streyts en las coyssas de lu en le torn le qual es deves les pes de lu.	"And properly stretch the ropes that you have stretched in the stone of the stone at the track that is above its head, and the ropes that you have stretched on its sides at the turn that is under its feet."
E aprop deves quascun torn e stia un ministre que torssa le torn am la sua ma, e le metge engualhe le spondil segon que havem dit.	"And properly place one servant near each turn who twists the beam with his hand, and the doctor guides the stone as we have said."
E aquesta es la forma del torn:	"And this is the manner of turning:"
E aprop pus que le spondil es retornat, e le loc es engualhat, lahoras cove que pauses empastre exciccatiu am album de huou, e aprop estopa; e aprop pause sobre le empastre astela de taula de la qual la latitut sia de tres ditz o enviro aquels, e la longitut de lu sia quantitat que prengua le loc de la gelbositat, e sobre la partida del spondil sa.	"And then when the stone has returned and the place is cleared, then you should put plaster with album of egg white and also cotton; and properly place it on the plaster as on a table whose width is about three fingers or somewhat more, and its length is the quantity that takes the place of the concavity, and at the departure of the stone."
E aprop sia liat am liament le qual havem dit, e uze le malaute de nutriment subtil entro que sia sanat.	"And properly let it be bound with the bandage that we have mentioned, and use the stone for nourishment until it is healed."
E si roman alcuna iminencia en le loc en la fi de la sanacio, lahoras cove que sian aministradas medicinas que moilifico e liniscan am aministracio de la taula per lonc temps, la qual havem recomtada; e ja es aministrada en aquel loc lamina de plom.	"And if there remains some tenderness in the place at the end of healing, then it is necessary to administer medicines that soften and clean with administration of the table for a long time, which we have recommended; and already a lead plate is administered in that place."
E alcunas veguadas accideys imminencia en le derier dels spondils del dos, e es cujat per aquela dislocacio; e es aquel os le qual ja imineys per que no cove que sia fayta prosompcio a lu am aquesta medicina, quar fort leu fara a tu accidir mort.	"And sometimes tenderness occurs in the back of the two buttocks and it is cured by that dislocation; and this bone already inclines towards breaking because it should not be opened with this medicine, for strong labor will cause you to die."
Capitol .xxxi.	"Chapter LXXXI."
De curacio de anca dislocada.	"Of the cure of a dislocated hip."
Sapias que la junctura del ancha e la junctura del muscle no endeve sino dislocacio tant solament, e no accideys ad aquelas aquo que accideys a las autras juncturas de petita remocio e concavitat.	"You should know that the joint of the hip and the joint of the muscle only endures dislocation alone, and it does not happen to these as it happens to other joints with little movement and concavity."
E la junctura de la ancha es dislocada segon quatre manieyras, quar es dislocada a las partidas dedintz, o a las partidas defora, o a las partidas denant, o a las partidas detras.	"And the joint of the hip is dislocated in four ways: because it is dislocated at its inner parts, or at its outer parts, or at its front parts, or at its rear parts."
E majorment es dislocada a las partidas dedintz, e pauc a las partidas denant o a las partidas detras.	"And more often it is dislocated at its inner parts, and less so at its front parts or its rear parts."
E senhal de la dislocacio de lu a las partidas de dintz es quar, quan tu ajustas la camba del malaute sana am la malaute, es pus longua e·l denolh es pus heminent que de la sana, e·l malaute no pot doblar le sieu pe deves le lenguonar, e es le loc que siec le lengonar apostemat de apostema caut, per so que·l cap de la coyssa ja es pervengut aqui.	"The sign of dislocation at its inner parts is that when you press the healthy buttock against the sick one, it becomes longer and the anus appears more prominent than in the healthy one; and the sick one cannot bend his knee downwards, and the place where the knee touches is hot with red inflammation due to a bruise, because the head of the bone has already come here."
E·l senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio es a las partidas defora, es que les accidentz de lu so contraris ad aquest accident.	"The sign for that one in whom dislocation occurs at its outer parts is that his accidents are contrary to this accident."
E senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio a las partidas denant es quar expan la camba sieua segon compliment, mays empero no dobla aquela ses dolor que es en le denol, e si se perforsa ad anar e no pot sobre aquo a las partidas denant; e la urina de lu es retenguda e l’engonar de lu es apostemat, e deves la ambulacio de lu sobre le talo.	"The sign for that one in whom dislocation occurs at its front parts is that he extends his buttock completely but does not bend it without pain that is in the anus; and if he tries to walk he cannot do so at the front parts; and his urine is retained and his abdomen is inflamed; and his walking is done on tiptoe."
E senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio a las partidas detras es que no expande le denol, ni no puesca doblar aquel denant que doble le engonar, e la camba de lu es pus breva que l’autra, e l’engonar es mollificat, e·l cap de la coyssa es deves aquel loc.	"The sign for that one in whom dislocation occurs at its rear parts is that he does not extend his anus and cannot bend it forwards, but only backwards; and his buttock appears shorter than the other one, and the abdomen is softened; and the head of the bone is near that place."
Mays reduccio de las specias de aquesta dislocacio es que tu consideras, lahoras, si la dislocacio es vetusta et antiqua, que ja es anticada am le havent aquela aprop tu aministras reduccio de lu e roman segon la sua disposicio, lahoras no es en aquela curacio de tot; e adonc no cove que en aquela sia fayta prosompcio.	"But the reduction of the kinds of this dislocation is that you should consider whether the dislocation is old and ancient, which has already happened with its being in such a state; then you administer reduction according to its disposition, but if it is not in that cure; and therefore no opening should be made at that time."
Mays en aquel del qual la dislocacio es recent, e es una de las quatre specias de dislocacio, lahoras te coyta ad aquo que volvas la junctura e extendas aquela a las partidas dedintz e a las partidas defora, e mau aquela a la dextra e sinistra, quar fort leu retorna e no indigeys de autra cura.	"But in that one whose dislocation is recent and is one of the four kinds of dislocation, you should strive to return the joint, extend it at its inner parts and outer parts, and move it to the right and left; because strong labor returns it and there is no need for another cure."
Mays, si no retorna en aquesta manieyra, lahoras cove que tu prepares ministre fort e extendas la camba de lu de la partida pus dejos, o am las suas mas, o am liament lo qual es liat sobre la camba desus le denol; e autre ministre extenda la ma de aquel desus enayssi que meta las suas mas dejos les titillics de lu; e aprop strenha am liament leon sobre la razit de la coyssa, e tengua autre ministre ters le extremitat del liament.	"But if it does not return in this manner, then you should prepare a strong lever and extend the buttock of that side, or with its mass, or with a band which is tied above the anus; and another assistant extends his hand over it in such a way that he places his hands behind the thigh; and you yourself pull strongly with a band over the bone of the thing; and another assistant holds the end of the band."
E sia extencio de lu o de la partida dedintz a l’angonar a la partida de la furcula, o de la partida detras a la partida del dos.	"The extension of his or her leg from within to the angle at the shoulder blade, or from behind to the point of the elbow."
E sia la extencio de totz aquels en una veguada entro que·l malaute sia elevat am le sieu cos de terra e que romangua pendent.	"And all this should be done in one go while the patient is lying on their back with their head hanging down."
E aquesta specia de extencio es specia cominal a totas quatre.	"And this type of extension is specific to each of the four."
E donc si la dislocacio retorna am aquo que havem dit, sira bo; e sino, lahoras es necessari a tota specia aquo que dire de la propria curacio.	"If the dislocation returns as we have said, it will be good. Otherwise, now is necessary for each type of this what to say about its own treatment."
En la reduccio de lu propria, quan es dislocada, e la dislocacio es a las partidas dedintz, cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre le sieu latz sa; e aprop pausa les liamentz sobre la razit de la coyssa en aquel loc le qual entre le cap de la coyssa e·l loc que es dejos le langonar; e aprop exten le liament en sus de la part del angonar a la pus auta partida de la furcula.	"In the reduction of the leg itself, when it is dislocated and the dislocation is on the inner side, the patient should be made to sit up on their left side; then apply pressure on the ligaments over the ridge of the hip in that place where between the head of the hip and the place that is next to the angle of the shoulder blade."
E aprop autre ministre fort prengua les brasses de lu, e amerme le loc gros de la coyssa malaute e extenda a las partidas deforo per extencio vehement, quar aquela retorna en le sieu loc.	"And then another should strongly seize the leg of him or her, and firmly hold the thick part of the diseased hip, extending it forcibly outward, for that will return to its place."
E aquesta specia es de pus leugiera curacio am la qual aquest membre es reduzit que las autres specias.	"And this method is one of easier treatment whereby this member is reduced than the other methods."
Mays si es excusat sobre tu e no obezeys al entrament am aquesta specia de curacio de tot, lahoras cove que sian liatz les dos pes del malaute ensemps am liament fort, leugier, sobre amdos les talos e amdos les denols.	"But if this does not succeed at once and you do not obey the entrance with this method of treatment for all, then both feet of the patient should be lifted together with a strong, light lien over both ankles and calves."
E sia la longitut de quascun de son par la quantitat de quatre ditz, e sia la camba malaute extenduda mays que l’autre per quantitat de dos ditz.	"And let the length of each be about four fingers, and let the limb of the patient be extended more than the other by two fingers."
E aprop le malaute sia suspendut sobre le cap del fust, e que sia en la mayso; e sia la longitut de lu de la terra la quantitat de dos brasses.	"And then the patient should be suspended from the top of the pillar and let him or her hang downwards, with his or her leg hanging down to the ground about two cubits."
E aprop comanda a un jove fort que minuesca le cap de la coyssa, e sia suspendut am le malaute autre jove, e l’autre jove minuent la coysa am fortaleza empellesca, quar la junctura retorna al sieu loc am velocitat.	"And then command one strong youth to seize the head of the hip, and let him or her hang together with the patient; and another youth push the hip with great force, for the joint will return to its place with speed."
Mays en la reducio propria, quan es dislocacio a la partida defora, cove que·l malaute jaga sobre pug segon que havem recomtat en le havent gelbozitat; e sia strenhut le liament sobre la camba malauta propriament e sobre le pietz de lu.	"But in the reduction itself, when there is dislocation on the outer side, the patient should lie down on his or her back according to what we have recommended in the case of gibbosity; and let the lien be stretched over the diseased limb properly and over the foot of it."
E aprop dos fustz sian pausatz, la un als pes de lu, e l’autre al cap; e aprop sian pausatz fustz ajustatz al mieg del pueg ficat sobre·l qual draps humitz sian envolopatz, per so que·l malaute no sia dampnajat per que·l fust sia entre las coyssas de lu, per que deves la extencio a las partidas dejos no sia atirat.	"And then two pillars should be placed, one at the foot and the other at the head; and another pillar should be fitted into the middle of the gap, covered with damp cloths, so that the patient may not be injured by the pillar being between his or her thighs, for thus the extension to the joints will not be hindered."
E aprop quascun ministre extenda a la sua part, e·l metge am la sua ma enguala la reduccio segon l’art.	"And then each minister should extend his or her part, and the doctor with his hand equalize the reduction according to the art."
Donc, si obezeys a revercio, sira bo grandament; e sino, pausa sobre aquela diligentment e ayssi quo havem dit en gelbozitat per aquela engualment.	"So if you succeed in this way, it will be well done; and if not, pause diligently on that and do thus as we have said in gibbosity for its equalization."
Mays cove que·l malaute jagua sobre les sieus latz sa quetament.	"But the patient should lie down on his or her left side quietly."
E quan la dislocacio es a las partidas denant, lahoras cove que la camba sia extenduda leugierament, e es segon aquesta meteyssa narracio sobre pueg; e le metge pause la palma de la sua ma dreyta sobre·l langonar malaute, e aprop coarte aquel am l’autra ma, e am aquela coartacio pausa aquel extendut a las partidas dejos a la partida del denol.	"But when the dislocation is on the front parts, then the limb should be extended lightly, and this is according to the method described above on the elbow; and the doctor places the palm of his right hand on the knee of the patient, and soon after catches that with the other hand, and with that catching extends it at the joints to the ankle."
E si la dislocacio es a las partidas detras, lahoras no cove que·l malaute sia extendut a las partidas dejos, e es elevat sobre la terra; habantz cove que sia pausat sobre causa dura, ayssi cum cove le eyssament si l’ancha de lu es dislocada a las partidas defora, segon aquo que havem dit del jasement de lu sobre dos anchas; e es sobre la sua cara e les liamentz sian extendutz, segon que havem dit, no ha guayre.	"But if the dislocation is on the back parts, then the patient need not be extended at the joints, but should be elevated from the ground. Then it will be necessary to place him or her on a hard couch, as it would be in the case of a dislocated shoulder according to what we have said about the setting up of two shoulders; and he or she lies on his or her face with the lien extended thus."
E cove que sia aministrada compressio am taula sobre le loc al qual yeys la junctura.	"And compression should be administered with a board over the place where the joint is located."
Donc cum la reducio es complida segon que cove — e·l senhal de la reduccio de lu no es amaguat a tu, e es que tu extendas del malaute doas cambas, e quan tu vezes aquelas enguals e le malaute extrenh la sieua camba e expandeys aquela ses excusacio, lahoras sapias que·l membre segon que cove es retornat — e lahoras tu ajusta doas coyssas e pausa empastre e extrenh am benda ayssi que la ancha no sia mauguda en alcuna de las partidas; e adheresca le malaute a repaus per tres dias o per quatre.	Therefore, once the reduction is completed as it should be - and the sign of the reduction of that member is not hidden from you, which is that you stretch both thighs of the patient, and when you do those movements and the patient extends their thigh and expands that side without excuse, then you know that the member has been returned as it should; then you adjust both sides and place a compress and extend with a bandage so that nothing be hidden in any of the parts; and have the patient rest for three days or four.
E aprop deslia le liament e l’empastre, e compara la una camba am l’autra.	And afterwards release the ligament and the compress, and compare one thigh with the other.
Lahoras, si vezas aquelas enguals en vustament, lahoras sapias que la dislocacio ja es fermada, e adonc layssa le malaute anar.	Then if you see those movements in truth, then you know that the dislocation is already fixed, and at that point let the patient go.
E si vezas alcuna causa de mollificacio, lahoras tu retorna e emplastra aquel, e extrenh aquel segon la tua primiera strectura, e layssa aquel en tres dias.	And if you see any cause of softening, then return and plaster that member again, and stretch it according to your first method, and leave it for three days.
E aprop deslia aquel, e fay aquel tardar en ambulacio sobre quascu per alcus dias, entro que sia confortat.	And afterwards release that member, and have the patient walk on crutches for a few days until they are strengthened.
Capitol .xxxii.	Chapter XXXII
De curacio de dislocacio del denolh.	On the treatment of dislocation of the knee joint
Le denolh es dislocat segon tres manieyras, quar es dislocat a las partidas defora, e a las partidas dedintz, e a las partidas dejos mays a las partidas detras; e a las partidas denant no es dislocat.	The knee joint is dislocated in three ways: it can be dislocated at the outside parts, inside parts, and behind parts; but it cannot be dislocated at the front parts.
E le senhal de dislocacio de lu es que comandes al malaute que aplique la sua camba am la coyssa; lahoras sapias que·l denol es dislocat.	The sign of dislocation of it is that when you command the patient to apply their thigh against their shinbone, then you know that the knee joint is dislocated.
E la restauracio de totas las manieyras de lu es que fassas cezer le malaute dreyt, enayssi que ja extenda la sieua camba, si pot sobre aquo; adherir le tieu dos a la cara de lu, e pausa le pe de lu entre les tieus pes; e aprop fay adherir le denol de lu am las tuas palmas, e rete aquelas entre les tieus ditz sobre le denolh de lu am fortaleza, e autre ministre extenda le sieu pe entro que·l denol retorne a son loc.	And the reduction of all kinds of it is that you make the patient lie on their right side, so that they can extend their thigh if possible; then place your two hands against the joint, and place the sole of your foot between their feet; next press the knee joint with the palms of your hands and hold it there firmly with both your hands while another assistant extends the patient's leg until the knee joint returns to its proper position.
E senhal de reddicio de lu es que la sua camba adharesca am la coyssa am levitat no-laboroza.	The sign of reduction of it is that when the thigh adheres to the shinbone with ease and without labor.
E aprop emplastra aquel e fay adhirir la camba am la coyssa, e aprop lia aquelas emsemps am una benda per tres dias o per quatre, e aprop deslia aquelas.	And afterwards plaster it and have the thigh adhere to the shinbone; next bind those together with a bandage for three or four days, and then release them.
E no uze le malaute de ambulacio per alcus dias, entro que sia sanat e cofortat.	And do not allow the patient to walk for some days until they are healed and strengthened.
Mays si la reduccio de lu a tu es excusada, lahoras aministra fort extencio am liamentz dels quals en la curacio de la hancha precedit narracio.	But if reduction of it cannot be done by you, then apply strong extension with splints, as in the treatment of dislocation of the hip joint previously described.
Capitol .xxxiii.	Chapter XXXIII.
De la curacio de la dislocacio del talo.	"Of the treatment of ankle dislocation."
Le talo alcunas veguadas es remaugut per petita remocio, e alcunas veguadas es dislocat segon compliment, e la dislocacio de lu es fayta o a las partidas dedintz o a las partidas deforo.	"Sometimes the ankle is merely sprained by minor trauma, and sometimes it becomes dislocated completely, in which case the dislocation occurs either inward or outward."
E le senhal de la dislocacio de lu es que vezes le talo imflat procedent a la partida a la qual es dislocat.	"And the sign of ankle dislocation is that sometimes the ankle swells at the joint from which it has become dislocated."
Mays la curacio de la remocio de lu es de leugiera reddicio, e es que sia extendut am facilitat am las mas e sia engualhat entro que retorne.	"The treatment of an ankle sprain is relatively easy: the foot should be extended with ease and its movements restricted until it returns."
Mays en la curacio de lu quan es dislocat segon compliment, cove que fasses cezer le malaute dreyt, e tengua aquel un ministre fort e valent de la partida detras del dos de aquel en le mieg loc de lu.	"However, in the treatment of a completely dislocated ankle, you must firmly grasp the patient's foot and have a strong servant hold the joint behind them at the midpoint of the leg."
E aprop te tu am la tieua ma dreyta le pe de la pus sobirana part, e am la tua ma sinistra de la part pus dejos del pe en le loc de la cavilha.	"And place your right hand with your thumb above the top of the foot and your left hand below it at the level of the heel."
E aprop atira le pe a tu am la tua ma dreyta, e aprop am la sinistra per dos veguadas, e aprop exten am la sinistra; e empelleys le pietz del pe am la dreyta deves la camba ses trebalh.	"And pull the foot towards you with your right hand while pressing twice with your left hand, and then extend it with your left hand, pushing the sole of the foot up with your right hand without twisting."
E fay aquo doas veguadas segon que havem comtat.	"And perform this maneuver twice as we have described."
E aprop empelleys le pietz del pe a la camba la tersa veguada, e tu es a la cavilha.	"And finally push the sole of the foot up on the third attempt, and you will be at the heel."
Donc si retorna en una veguada o en dos segon aquesta manieyra, e si vezes le pe engualhat, es bo; e sino, lahoras sobre lu itera la operacio, quar aquel retorna.	If this procedure is repeated once or twice more, and if the foot becomes swollen, then that's good. Otherwise, repeat the operation because that one has returned.
Mays si a tu es prohibida la reduccio de lu am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras fay jaser le malaute sobre le sieu dos sobre terra, e estrenh un paysel mot en terra fermat, e que caja entre las coyssas de lu, e tu ja has envolopat sobre lu drap per so que no ledesca le malaute.	But if you are prohibited from reducing the hernia with what has been mentioned above, then have the patient lie on their side on the ground, and place a small stone between their thighs, ensuring it is firmly placed. Then quickly cover them with cloth so that the patient does not slip.
E aprop le ministre de lu tengua las suas coyssas, e aprop autre ministre extenda le pe am las suas mas o am liament que lie sobre le col del pe; e aprop extenda aquel quascun ministre contre extencio del sieu par, e le payssel sia extant entre las coyssas del malaute retinent aquel, per so que·l cos de lu no sia atirat a las partidas dejos deves la sua extencio.	And the minister of the thighs should hold them in place, and another minister should extend the leg with their hands or some linen placed on the top of the thigh. And each minister should stand in such a way that they can fully extend their side, and the small stone should be held between the patient's thighs to prevent the body from being pulled towards its sides during the extension.
E aprop le metge enguala la dislocacio am las sieuas mas, e autre ministre tengua la coyssa sana a las partidas dejos, quar la dislocacio retorna am la facilitat.	"The doctor then reduces the dislocation with his hands, while another attendant holds the healthy limb in place, for the dislocation returns easily."
E donc cum retorna la dislocacio e es declarada a tu la sanetat de la reduccio de lu, lahoras pausa emplastre e extrenh aquela am liamentz fortment, e ligua le pe am liament a la camba.	"And once the dislocation has returned and declared to be in good health from its reduction, plaster is then applied and strengthened with bandages, and the foot is tied to the bed."
E cove que temes o te guardes dels nervis les quals so detras sobre le talo, per que le liament sobre aquel no sia vehement e leda aquel fortment.	"And be careful or guard against touching the nerves which are behind the heel bone, for they not press on it too vigorously."
E aprop layssa aquel per dos dias o per tres; e si le liament es mollificat, extrenh aquel.	"And then leave that for two or three days. And if the bandage becomes moistened, change it."
E aprop deslia aquel en le ters dia o en le quart, e prohibeys le malaute de anament per xl dias.	"Then remove the splint on the third or fourth day, and prohibit walking for forty days."
Mays si es forsat de anar denant aquel spazi, no es fayta segurtat que la dislocacio no sia sobre lu dissolvuda e corrumpuda, e aprop aquo que no recipia curacio.	"But if it is necessary to walk during that period, there is danger that the dislocation will not remain firm and may be corrupted, so that it will receive no cure."
E si accideys a lu apostema caut, lahoras cove que tu aministre en la cedacio de lu aquo en lo qual precedic la nostra narracio, en autre loc de curacio e de embrocacio, entro que sia remauguda.	"And if an ulcer should form from the cautery, then you should apply to it the same treatment as described earlier in this narrative, until it is healed."
Capitol .xxxiiii.	Chapter XXXIV.
De curacio de dislocacio dels ditz dels pes.	"On the Treatment of Dislocations of the Ankles"
Cove que aquel qu’es dislocat sia engualhat am pauca extencio ses trebal; e aquo que no es dificil, abantz es leugier.	"The one who has been dislocated should be gently stretched without struggle."
Mays si la dislocacio es en alcus nozes del dos del pe, lahoras cove que fassas cezer le malaute le sieu pe sobre loc engual de la terra o sobre taula, e sia estant ayssi cum si anava.	"If the dislocation is in some bones of the lower back, you should then make the patient lie on their stomach on the ground or on a table."
E aprop tu sta de pes, e pausa le tieu pe sobre aquo que imineys de las juncturas, e aprop calca aquel am le tieu pe am vertut entro que retorne, e que vejas aquel ja engualhat e no aparesca en le loc eminencia.	"And then place your hands on the patient's back at the joint area and press down with force until it pops back into place. Ensure that it has been repositioned correctly."
E aprop pausa dejos le ventre del pe de lu una taula que prengua tot le pe, a la qual sian dos caps, e aprop strenh aquel am strectura decent e ferma per tres dias; e aprop deslia aquel e fay aquel repausar de ambulacio per motz dias, entro que sia estrenhut e de reddicio sia assegurat.	"Then place the patient's stomach on a table that can support their entire weight. Place two pillows under them and keep them immobilized with a firm but gentle stretch for three days. Then remove the restraints and allow the patient to rest from walking for a few more days until they have regained strength."
Capitol .xxxv.	Capítulo XXXV
De las specias de dislocacio que sian faytas am plagua o am fractura o am quascuna ensemps.	"Chapter XXXV. Of the different types of dislocation that occur with fracture or breakage, or both at once."
Quan accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, e tu te perforssas en la curacio de aquela e en la restauracio de lu, motas veguadas succezeys la mort.	"When one of those causes occurs and you attempt to treat it and restore the patient, many times death will ensue."
E per aquo no cove que sobre la curacio de lu presuma, sino aquel que es savi en l’art, de lonc uzatge, misericordios e pietados, tardiu, no-ardit ni presomptuos; e que use en le comensament de medicinas que cedan apostemas cautz tant solament, e leyssa le malaute al divinal jutgament, sino ad aquel al qual speras salut de perdicio, am de la malautia alleviacio, e en la qual appareys alcuna speransa.	"And therefore one should not presume to undertake the treatment of such cases, but only someone who is skilled in the art, experienced, compassionate and merciful, careful, not hasty or arrogant. And at the beginning of treatment, one should use medicines that only draw out corrupted humors, and leave the patient to the divine judgment, hoping for recovery rather than perdition, with alleviation of the illness and some hope of success."
E adonc esforsa te tantost far de lu la reduccio en le comensament de la causa, denant que endevengua apostema caut.	"And therefore, as soon as possible after the onset of the cause, make an effort to reduce the dislocation before a corrupted ulcer forms."
E adonc si le membre retorna segon que volem, lahoras aministra regiment le qual ceda apostema caut e cura la plagua am aquo que conveneys a lu dels enguentz desiccatius.	"And if the member returns as desired, then apply treatment that will draw out corrupted humors and heal the wound with suitable remedies for dried-out flesh."
E si dislocacio es am fractura e accideys en le os satagias separadas, lahoras tu perforsa le stement de lor, e fay en aquo so que havem dit en las malautias simplas de aquo que es precedit en les locz de aquels.	"And if dislocation occurs with fracture and the bone fragments are separated, then attempt to reduce them, following what has been said previously about simple fractures in those locations."
E guarda e esquiva segon la tua vertut aquel del intrament en las vias de temor segon que a tu es precedida la mia predicacio; quar aquo es milhor a tu deves le tieu Creator, e mays permanent a la tua gloria, e mays saludos al tieu cos verays aquels en le tieu temps.	"And guard and avoid entering the paths of fear according to your ability, as I have previously commanded you; for this is better for you than anything else that you owe to your Creator, more enduring to your glory, and healthier for your true self in your time."
Ayssi fineysso las paraulas de Albucasim perfieytament de las quals Dieus ne sia benezeyt.	"So endeth the words of Albucasis, may God bless them."
Amen.	"Amen."
