Ayssi comensan las paraulas de Albucasim .	"Thus begin the words of Albucasis."
O, filhs, pus yeu he a vos complit aquest libre, le qual es le derier de la sciencia de medicina, per le compliment de lu so consequit la fi en lu, e per las exposicios de lu, e per las declaracios de lu, es a mi vist que yeu complesca aquel a vos am aquest tractat, le qual es partida de la operacio am ma, so es cyrurgia.	"O sons, since I have completed for you this book, which is the last of the science of medicine, through its completion it has reached its end, and through its explanations and declarations, it seems to me that I complete that for you with this treatise, which concerns manual operation, that is surgery."
Quar la operacio am ma es prostrada en nostre regio e en nostre temps de tot privada, entro que fort leu peric la sciencia de lu, e le vistigi de lu es ostat; e no romasero de lu sino alcunas petitas descripcios en les libres dels Antics, les quals mudero las mas e endevenc ad aquels error e heyssitacio entro que son clausas las entencios de lu e es elonguada la forsa de lu e l’art.	For the manual operation is proscribed in our region and in our time completely prohibited, so that very few people know its science, and its traces are obliterated; and nothing remains of it but some small descriptions in the books of the Ancients, which have been altered by their hands and rendered obscure those intentions and elongated its strength and art."
E es vist a mi que yeu vivifique aquela am ordenacio de aquest tractat en aquela segon la via de exposicio e de declaracio e de abreviacio; e per que vengua am las formas dels ferramentz de cautheri e dels autres instrumentz de la obra cum sia per addicio de la declaracio, e per preparacio de lu, la qual causa es necessaria.	"It seems to me that I should revive this with an arrangement of this treatise according to the way of exposition and declaration and abbreviation; and also to include the forms of the instruments of cautery and other tools for the work, both by addition to the declaration and for preparation thereof, which is necessary."
Mays la causa per la qual no es atrobat bo artifex am la sieua ma en aquest nostre temps, es quar la art de medicina es longua, e que cove le sieu actor denant aquo esser excercitat en la sciencia de anotomia la qual recontec Gualia entro que sapia les juvament dels membres e las formas de aquels, e la conjunctio e la separacio de lor; e haia la conoyssensa dels osses, dels nervis e dels lacertz, e·l nombre de aquels, e la egrecio de lor; e de las venas pulsatils e de las quietas, e dels locs del eyssiment de lor.	"But the reason why there is not found a good artisan with his hands in our time is because the art of medicine is long, and its practitioner must beforehand be exercised in the science of anatomy, which Galen held to be necessary so that he might know the uses of the members and their forms, their conjunctions and separations; and have knowledge of bones, nerves and sinews, their number and arrangement; and of the pulsating veins and quiet ones, and their places of exit."
E per aquo ditz Ypocras que am u nom es mot, mays en l’obra petit, e majorment en la art de la ma.	"And for this reason Hippocrates said that with few words, but greater effect, especially in the art of manual operation."
Mays nos ja avem dit de aquel en l’introit de aquest libre; quar qui no es scient aquo que li avem dit de anotomia, no es evacuat que no caia en error per la qual siran mortz les homes, ayssi cum yeu he vist trops de aquels, quar alscus son formatz en esta sciencia e gettan se de aquela ses sciencia e ses experiment.	"But we have already said in the introduction of this book that whoever is not skilled in what we have said about anatomy will surely fall into error and cause the death of many people, as I have seen too many do. For some are formed in this science but cast themselves from it without its knowledge and experience."
Quar yeu vi un metge folh e enperit aver incidit un apostema escrophilos en le colh de una femna, e incidic alcunas arterias del colh per que fluic gran sanc entro que la femna cazec morta entre las mas de lu.	"For I saw a foolish and inexperienced doctor cut an escrophulous boil on the neck of a woman, and cut some arteries in her neck so that much blood flowed out, causing the woman to die suddenly."
E vi un autre metge que pres que el traguera una peyra d’un home le qual avia procesit en sa etat, e la peyra era gran, e venguet a lu e trayssec aquela peyra am un tros de la vesiqua, per que aquel home al tertz dia es mort.	"And I saw another doctor who took it upon himself to remove a stone from a man who was in that condition, and the stone was large. He came to him and removed that stone with a piece of the bladder, causing that man to die on the third day."
E yeu ja apelat fuy a estrayre aquela, e vi que per la grandesa de la peyra e per la disposicio del malaute conogui subre lu que morira.	"And I had already predicted that he would die, and I saw that because of the size of the stone and the disposition of the illness, I knew beforehand that he would die."
E vi un autre metge le qual prenia stipendic de un duc de nostra terra per cyrurgia, e endeven a un crastrat negre le qual era deves lu fractura en la coyssa de lu; e perparec le metge am la sua ignorancia, estrayssec la fractura, sobre la plagua, am pulvinas e astelas am forta strectura, e no layssec a la plagua espiracio.	"And I saw another doctor who took payment of two gold coins from our land to perform surgery. He undertook the case of a blacksmith whose thighbone was fractured. The doctor, through his ignorance, extracted the fracture above the wound with pillows and splints with great force, not allowing the wound any breathing space."
E aprop le desliet segons los sieus desiriers, e aprop le relieg, e aprop le leyssec per alcus jorns e comandec que nos deslies le liament; e estec ayssi entro que la coyssa e·l pe foro apostematz, e pervenguet a perdicio.	"And he bound it according to his desires and bound it tightly and left it like that for some days. Then he commanded that the bandages be loosened, and thus he caused the thighbone and the bone of the leg to become infected, resulting in ruin."
E yeu fuy apelat a lu, e aparelhegui a desliar le liament, e conseguida es tranquilitat e enayssi amermet de sas dolors.	"And I was called to him, and I prepared to loosen the bandages, and thus tranquility ensued and he felt less pain."
Mays empero ja corrupcio era confermada en le membre, per que no pogui refrenar aquela, e no cessec perambular la corrupcio en le membre entro que·l malaute peric.	"But nevertheless the corruption was already confirmed in the limb, so that I could not stop it, and the corruption continued to spread throughout the limb until the patient perished."
E vi un autre metge le qual perforec un apostema cancros, e fo ulcerat aprop alscus dias, entro que foc magnificada la malicia de lu am lo senhor de lu.	"And I saw another doctor who perforated a cancerous boil. It became ulcerated after so many days that the evil of it was magnified with its lord."
La qual causa es quar le cranc caut es pur de humor melencolic, lahoras no cove que pervengua a lu am ferr de tot, sino que sia an membre le qual suffertes que de tot fos hostat.	"The reason for this is that the cancerous boil is caused by black bile. Therefore it should not be cauterized with iron throughout, but only on the member which suffers from it."
E per aquo, filhs, necessari es a vos que la operacio am ma sia devisada en dos devesios: so es en operacio a lu qual es associada salut, e en obra am la qual es perilh en las majors disposicios.	"And therefore, my children, it is necessary for you that the operation with the hand be divided into two parts: one part is the operation which is associated with health, and another part is the operation in which there is danger in most dispositions."
E yeu ja he exsitat aquo en tot loc de aquest libre en le qual venc opperacio en la qual es error e temor; per que necessari es a vos que guardetz aquo e layssetz aquel, per que les folhs no atrobo via a parlar e a vos desonestar.	"And I have already explained this in every place of this book where operation is mentioned that there is error and fear. Therefore it is necessary for you to guard this and let go of that, so that foolish people do not find a way to speak against you."
E donc prenetz las vostras armas am sollicitut e am proteccio de Dieu , e les vostres malautes am falicitat e am fermetat.	"And therefore take your weapons with diligence and protection of God, and your illnesses with patience and constancy."
E usatz de la milhor via per la gracia de Dieu perdusent a salut e a lausabla successio, e laysatz las malautias terriblas de difficil sanacio, e ostatz las vostras armas de aquo que vos fa temer, per so que ysitatio en vostra fe e en le vostre nom no vos evasisca: quar mays es remanent a la vostra gloria, e pus aut en le mon e en derier a las vostras sanctitatz.	"And use the best way through the grace of God to obtain health and successful outcome, and leave behind terrible illnesses that are difficult to cure. Cast aside your weapons from what causes you fear, so that your faith in yourself and in your name may not fail: for more remains to your glory, both here and thereafter in your sanctity."
Gualia ja diyssec en alcunas sieuas monicios:	"Because he had already said in some of his commentaries:"
“No mediquetz malautia mala, per so que mals metges no siatz nompnatz”.	"No doctorize evil illnesses, lest you be named bad doctors."
E yeu ja he devesit aquest libre segontz tres capitols.	"And I have already divided this book according to three chapters."
Comensa la divisio del libre, e primier de la primieyra partida.	"The division of the book begins, and first of the first part:"
Le primier capitol ordenat del cap entro·s pes, en las formas dels instrumentz e en les ferrementz dels cauteris, e de aquo que necessari es en la opperacio.	"The first chapter ordered concerning the head, about the forms of instruments and the irons for cauterization, and what is necessary in surgery."
La divisio de la segonda partida.	"The division of the second part:"
Le segon capitol, de siccio e perforacio, e de ventosas, e de plaguas, e de extractio de sagetas e de semblantz ad aquelas, tot capitolat e ordenat de las formas dels instrumentz.	"The second chapter, about setting and perforation, and bloodletting, and wounds, and extraction of arrows and similar objects, all ordered with the forms of instruments."
Divisio de la tersa partida.	"Division of the third part:"
Le tertz capitol, de restauracio e de dislocacio, e de curacio de torcio e de semblantz ad aquels; capitol ordenat del cap entro·s pes, e de las formas dels instrumentz.	"The third chapter, about reduction and dislocation, and the cure of wryneck and similar ailments; chapter ordered concerning the head, with the forms of instruments."
De cauteri am foc e am medicina aguda e rememoracio de la opperacio.	"Of cauterization with fire and with acute medicine, and remembrance of surgery."
Am aquel comensa le tractat de tot le libre.	"And with this begins the treatise of the whole book."
Cove que yeu digua la qualitat dels juvamentz de aquel cauteri e dels noccumentz de lu, e en qual compleccio sia prohibit cauteri.	"It is necessary for me to say what kind of wounds are suitable for that cauterization and what kinds are unsuitable, and in which condition cauterization is prohibited."
Donc dic que·l sermo de la qualitat del juvament de cauteri e del noccument de lu es sermo lonc e prolixs, e subtil per sciensa, e secret amaguat; e ja de lu a parlat gran multitut de savis, e de lu se son desacordatz, et a mi abasta un petit dels sermons de lor, temen perlonguacio.	"Therefore I say that the discourse on the quality of wounds suitable for cauterization and those unsuitable is long and prolix, subtle in science and secret, and many wise men have spoken about it and they are not agreed among themselves, and it suffices me to mention a little bit of their discourses due to length."
E donc dic que cauteri comfereys a tota compleccio universalment la qual es am materia o ses materia, exceptat dos compleccios, las quals son compleccios caudas ses materia .	"And therefore I say that cauterization is beneficial universally in all conditions, whether with matter or without matter, except for two conditions which are conditions of the head without matter."
En la compleccio cauda e secca am materia se desecordero; quar alcus dyssero que cauteri es juvatiu ad aquela, e les autres dyssero le contrari de aquel, que cauteri no es convenient en malautia la qual es per qualiditat e per siccitat, quar natura del foc es qualiditat e siccitat, e enconvenient es que malautia cauda e secca am aquo que es caut e sec sia sanada.	"The disease of the tail and skin with dry matter is disordered; some said that cauterization is helpful for this, while others said the opposite, that cauterization is not suitable for a condition caused by heat and dryness, as fire's nature is heat and dryness, thus it is inconvenient for such a condition to be treated with something hot and dry."
E diysec aquel que ditz le contrari de aquel, que per cauteri es fayt juvament en tota malautia cauda e secca que ve en les cors dels homes, quar quan tu comparas le cors de home e las humiditatz de lu a la compleccio del foc, atrobas le cors de home freg.	"And the one who said the opposite of that stated that cauterization brings benefit to all dry and hot conditions found in men's bodies, for when you compare the body of man and its humidity with the nature of fire, they are very similar."
E yeu dic per le sermo de aquel, que esperiment aquo ja a mi alscunas vetz a descubert.	"I say according to that person's words, I have experienced this myself on several occasions."
Mays empero no cove que vengua sobre aquo aquel que ja es exproat e excersitat en le capitol de cauteri per derier exercici, e a conogut la diversitat de la compleccio dels homes e la disposicio de las malautias en lor meteyssas, e las causas de aquelas, e·ls accidentz de lor, e l’espasi del temps de aquelas.	"But it is not necessary for him to come back to this topic, since it has already been discussed and practiced in the chapter on cauterization, after considering the diversity of human complexions, the dispositions of diseases according to their mixtures, their causes, accidents, and duration."
Mays en las autras compleccios, no es sobre vos temor, e majorment en las malautias fregas e humidas, quar ja totz les metges se son acordatz sobre aquels, e no so desecordatz en le juvament am cauteri en aquelas.	"But in other complexions, there is no fear for you, especially in hot and humid diseases, since all physicians agree about those and are not discordant regarding the benefit of cauterization in those."
E sapiatz, filhs, que del secret de curacio per cauteri am foc e de la bontat de lu, so sobre cauteri am medicina comburent, es quar le foc es simple, la accio del qual no perven sino al membre le qual es cauterizat e no notz al autre membre am lu ajustat sino am petit nocument.	"And know, my sons, that regarding the secret of curing with cauterization using fire and its goodness, it is about cauterization with burning medicine, because fire is simple, and its action does not reach any member other than the one being cauterized unless through a small injury."
Mays la accio de medicina comburent perven ad aquel en les membres le qual de lu alunhat, e fort leu fa venir en le membre malautia de dificil sanacio e fort leu ausit.	"But the action of burning medicine reaches those members which are near it, and often it brings difficult-to-cure diseases to them, and also easily causes them."
Mays le foc, per la sua sublimitat e de la sua substancia bontat, no fa aquo sino que superfluisca E ja es a nos conogut per experiment e per longitut de servitut de studi am l’art sobre le veritat de las causas; e per aquo yeu so excusat de la longitut del sermo E si no fos que no es legut al mieu libre en aquest pausero a vos secret amaguat am le foc, e la qualitat de la operacio de lu en les cors e de la sieua expulcio per la qual expellis las malautias, am sermo philosophic demostratiu, le qual siria acuit en las vostras pessas.	"But because of its sublimity and the goodness of its substance, fire does not do this but only superfluously. And we are already acquainted with this through experiment and the length of service in studying this art according to the truth of causes; therefore, I am excused from speaking at length about it. And if it were not that my book has not yet been read in this place, I would hide from you this secret concerning fire and the quality of its operation on bodies and its expulsion through which it expels diseases, demonstrated philosophically, which would sharpen your intellects."
E sapiatz, filhs, que els se desacordan del temps en le qual es convenient far cauteri e pausan le milhor temps de primaveyra.	"And know, my sons, that they disagree about the time when it is appropriate to perform cauterization, and most of them consider the best time to be in spring."
E yeu dic que cauteri es convenient en tot temps, per so que le nocument per le temps accident es submergit en le juvament de aquo que am le cauteri es atirat, e majorment si le cauteri es per dolors o de dolors necessaries, fortz e fistinas, las quals no suffertan tarditat per so que es temut de aquelas que vengua malicia, que es major que petit nocument entrant per lo temps.	"And I say that cauterization is appropriate at all times, because the harm that occurs accidentally from time is submerged in the benefit of what is attracted by cauterization, and especially if the cauterization is for pains or necessary purposes, strong and persistent ones which cannot tolerate delay because it is feared that some evil may come upon them, which is greater than a little accidental harm."
E aysso no catz en vostras pessas, o, filhs, aquo no estiman sino le poble vulguar e les fols metges, so es que ad aquela malautia que es sanada per cauteri no es redicio tot temps, e pausan aquel consequen.	"And do not think this in your minds, my sons, because only the common people and foolish physicians estimate that regarding that disease which is cured by cauterization there is recovery at all times, and they place it second."
E la causa no es ges ayssi quo els cuydan per aquo, quar cauteri no es sino en loc de medicina la qual altera la compleccio e esicca las humiditatz las quals son causa per que veno las dolors.	"And the cause is not as they think because of this, for cauterization is only a substitute for medicine which alters the complexion and dries up the humidity which is the cause of pains."
Mays empero cauteri superflueys sobre la medicina per volicitat de la sua valitut e vertut de la sua operacio e grandesa del sieu senhor.	"But nevertheless, cauterization is superfluous beyond medicine because of the vehemence of its power and virtue in its operation, and the greatness of its lord."
E es possible que la sua malautia retorne en alcuna hora del temps, segon la compleccio del malaute e la locacio de la sua malautia, e la vertut de lu, e aquo que es preparat en le cors de lu de la agreguacio de las superfluitatz en lu, e aquo que es pervengut a lu en la sua acquisicio en viandas e semblantz de aquelas causas; sino que la malautia en la qual sia aministrat cauteri sia malautia subtil en membre de paucas superfluitatz e humiditatz, ayssi cum cauteri de dent per dolor e semblantz ad aquel, possible es que en lu no retorne aquela dolor, mays aquo se fa en petitz.	"And it is possible that the disease returns at some time during life, depending on the complexion of the patient and the location of the disease, the power of cauterization, and what has been prepared in the body from the aggregation of superfluities in it, and what has been received by it in its acquisition through foods and similar causes; but the disease to which cauterization is administered will be a subtle one in a member with few superfluities and humidities, such as cauterization for toothache or similar ones, it is possible that the pain does not return again, except perhaps in small ways."
E mays sermo vulgar es que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina, e es sermo dreyturier, no ad aquo que els entendo en lu, quar els crezo que no es curacio que aprofieyta am medicina ni am autra causa aprop cauteri.	"And the common saying is that cauterization is the last resort of medicine, and this saying is more true than they understand it because they believe that there is no cure that profits by medicine nor by any other cause before cauterization."
E la causa es en contrari de aquo; e la entencio que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina no es sino quan administram las manieyras de curacio en alcunas malautias, e aquelas medicinas no conferieysso, e aprop en la fi de la causa aministra hom cauteri, e aprofieyta ad aquela.	"And the cause is contrary to this; and the intention that cauterization is the last resort of medicine is only when the methods of cure in certain diseases are administered and those medicines do not confer anything useful, and then cauterization is administered at the end of the disease, and it profits from that."
E lahoras de aqui cat16 que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina, no segon la entencio la qual entendo les vulgars e trops dels fols metges.	"And from here on, know that cauterization is the last resort of medicine, not according to the intention which the vulgar and most foolish physicians understand."
E diyssero les antics que cauteri am aur es milhor que cauteri am ferr, e no diyssero aquo sino per la equalitat del aur e sublimitat de la sua sustancia.	"And they said that cauterization with gold is better than cauterization with iron, and they did not say this except for the equality of gold and the sublimity of its substance."
E diyssero que le loc de cauteri no fa brac, cum aquo no sia absolutament vertat, quar yeu ja he aquo proat e he atrobat que aquel no fa aquo sino en alcus cors ses les autres, e cauteri am aquel es bo e milhor que am ferr ayssi quo els diyssero; mays empero quan tu fas cauteri am foc am de aur, no es a tu declarat, quar es egnit segon la quantitat que tu vols per la rugor de l’aur, e quar prepara a recebre freg; e si ajustas sobre lu ignicio se fon l’aur per le foc, e caso en le foc alcunas laminas per que le artifex catz per la occupacio de aquel.	"And they said that the place of cauterization does not make a scar, which is absolutely false because I have proved and found out that this does not happen except in some bodies without others, and cauterization with it is good and better than with iron as they said; but when you cauterize with fire using gold, it is not declared to you because the gold melts according to the quantity that you want due to the heat of the gold, and prepares itself to receive rubbing; and if you adjust it onto the ignition, the gold will melt in the fire, and some sheets are burned in the fire by the occupation of that."
E per aquo es fayt cauteri am ferr deves nos pus leugerament e pus propdanament a rectitut de operacio.	"And for this reason, cauterization with iron must be done more gently and more prudently than cauterization with gold in order to maintain its operation."
E yeu ja he ordenat aquest capitol en le cauteri segon capitols, et he ordenat aquels del cap entro les pes, per so que aleugo le demandant aquo que vol de lu.	"And I have already ordered this chapter on cauterization according to chapters, and have placed those concerning the head within the chapter on the feet, for later reference if you want something from it."
De cauteri de dolor de cap per frigiditat e humiditat.	"On cauterization of headache due to coldness and humidity."
Le capitol primier.	"First Chapter."
Aquesta cauterizacio confereys a la humiditat e frigiditat sobre le servel accident de la qual so doas causas, so es causa de soda e multitut de flux raumatic, apelat corissa, del cap a las partidas dels huelhs e de las aurelhas fluent, e multitut de dormir, e de dolor de dentz e del guolayro, e universalment de tota malautia que ve per fregiditat, ayssi cum paraliticament, sodo e apoplexio, e semblantz en aquelas malautias.	"This cauterization confers upon the moist and cold nature of the servant, whose two causes are soddenness and excess of phlegm flowing downwards from the head to the parts of the eyes and ears, causing copious discharge, drowsiness, toothache, and pain in the throat. Universally, it is beneficial for all diseases that arise from coldness, such as paralysis, apoplexy, and similar conditions."
La forma de aquesta cauterizacio es aquesta, que primieyrament comandes al malaute que sia evacuat am medicina lacsativa le cap mondificant, per tres o per quatre nueytz, segon que exhigeys la vertut del malaute e la edat de lu e la sua costuma.	"The procedure for this cauterization is as follows: First, order the patient to evacuate the head using a laxative medicine for three or four nights, depending on the severity of their condition, age, and usual habits."
E aprop comanda li que raza le sieu cap am razor, e aprop fay aquel sezer entre las tuas mas sobre una banca cayrada e que pause las suas mas sobre le pietz sieu.	"Then order him to shave his head with a razor. Then have him sit on a well-prepared bench and place his feet upon a stone."
E aprop pausa la razit de la tua palma aprop le pous sobre la razit del nas entre les huels sieus.	"And then place the blade of your palm upon the bridge of his nose between his eyebrows."
Mays empero, cum le tieu dit del mieg loc es pervengut, signa aquel loc am tenta, e aprop igneys le cauteri olivar del qual aquesta es la forma:	"Yet, once your finger has reached the middle point, mark that spot with ink, and immediately light the olive-oil cautery of which this is the form:"
E aprop pausa aquel sobre le loc senhat am tenta, a manieyra que descent, am la qual la tieua ma sia constrengida petit a petit, e tu revolveys aquel.	"And then place that (cautery) upon the marked spot in such a manner that it descends slowly, thus pressing your hand down little by little, and you turn it."
E aprop leva la tua ma leugerament e reguarda le loc, e si veses ja del os esser descubert alcuna quantitat del cap, ayssi cum la quantitat de gra de errs, lahoras eleva la tua ma, e si no torno la tua ma am aquel ferr, am autre de aquel, si es enfrigidat, entro que sia vist del os aquo que yeu he dit a tu.	"And then raise your hand lightly and look at the spot, and if you see that some amount of bone has already been exposed, like the size of a grain of millet, then raise your hand, but if not, turn your hand with another iron one until you can see what I said."
E aprop pren un petit de sal e disolveys aquel sobre le loc e leyssa aquel per tres jorns.	"And then take some salt and dissolve it over the spot and leave it for three days."
E aprop pausa sobre lu coto enbegut en boder e leyssa aquel sobre lu entro que sia destrusida la scara del foc.	"Then place (the cautery) on the edge of the wound and leave it until the burn scar has healed."
E aprop cura le loc am anguent tetrafarmacon entro que sia sanat.	"And then dress the wound with Tetrafarmakon until it is healed."
E ja diyssero que quant la plagua roman uberta, tant mielhs geta le brac, per que es milhor e mays juvatiu.	"And as they said, when the plague has broken out, so much better it casts forth the arm, for that is preferable and more beneficial."
E diyssero alcus de lor que sia cauterizada la codena entro al os, e sia tengut le cauteri entro que sia adhurida alcuna partida de la specitut del os.	"And some of them said that the tendon should be cauterized up to the bone and that the cautery should be held until some part of the bone's substance is adherent."
E aprop sia ras aquo que es adhust del os, e aprop sia curat.	"And then scrape away what has adhered to the bone, and then dress it."
E diyssero autres que am lo cauteri pervengua al derier, entro que enprema en le os forta enprecio entro que le os caga, e aquesta es la forma de alphecati petit:	"And others say that with the cautery it reaches the bone, before pressing upon it strongly until the bone crackles, and this is the form of small Alphabetic."
E estiman de aquel loc expiran la vapors del cap.	"It is believed that in that place the vapors of the head expire."
E sia tenguda la plagua uberta per lonc temps, e aprop sia curada entro que sia consolidada.	"And let the wound be kept open for a long time until it is consolidated and properly cured."
Mays a mi no so vistas aquestas doas specias de cauteri de tot, sino en alcus homes segon via de temor; e layssa aquel, deves mi, milhor es am salut, quan es; quar le cap es develitat per solucio de continuitat de lu ayssi cum havem testificat en les autres membres, e majorment quan le cap del malaute es de freul natura.	"However, I have not seen these two kinds of cauteries done on everyone, but only on some men out of fear; and that one, indeed, it seems to me better with health, if they are so; for the head is divelled by dissolution of continuity like other members, especially when the patient's head is naturally frail."
E la specia de cauteri primieyra es mays salva e milhor deves mi; e de aquela husi e am aquela obra am salut.	"And the first kind of cautery is safer and better in my opinion; with that one, indeed, it is healthful for that wound."
Capitol segon.	"Chapter two."
Del cauteri del cap.	"Of the cautery of the head."
Quan en tot le cap accideys dolor cronica e longua e aquo es en le malaute prolonguat, e usa de gerras e de cochias e de capipurges e de emplaustres e de guatz e de cadels e de gualinas e de semblantz, e majorment si ja es cauterizat am un cautere le qual recontam e no aprofieyta a lu deguna de aquelas causas, lahoras considera quar si le cap del malaute es de fort creacio en la sua natura; e no es freul et atroba mot gran freg, lahoras aquel cauterisa am autra cauteri dejos aquel un pauc.	"When there is chronic and prolonged pain in the whole head and this is prolonged in the illness, and there are used ointments and poultices and bandages and plasters and gum and cadals and guanins and similar things, and especially if it has already been cauterized with one cautery which does not help because of those causes, then consider whether the head of the patient is strong by nature; and it is not frail nor much weakened, then that cauterize him with another cautery near to that one a little."
E aprop cauterisa aquel sobre le corn del sieu cap am cauteri entro que la codena es partida.	"And properly he cauterizes him over the horn of his head with an entrance cautery where the vein is parted."
Incisa la codena e sia descuberta del os la quantitat la qual havem recontat e cauteriza aquel am un cauteri en la partida deriera del cap en le loc le qual es apelat vas, — e es aquel loc en le qual es pausada ventosa.	"Cut the vein and uncover it from the bone the quantity which we have mentioned and cauterize him with a cautery in the last part of the head where it is called 'vaz' — and that place where the cupping glass is placed."
Et alleuja la tua ma en aysso, e no descobras le os, quar le malaute per aquo atroba mot gran dolor diversa de la dolor de totz les autres cauteris del cap.	"And lift up your hand here, and do not uncover the bone, for the illness through this causes much greater pain than all other cauteries of the head."
E yeu diyre aquest cauteri en son loc, quar cove que·l cauteri am le qual so cauterisatz les corns del cap e le occiput es pus subtil cauteri que aquel am le qual es cauterisat le mieg loc del cap; e aquesta es la forma de lu.	"And I say this cautery in its place, for it is necessary to cauterize with the cautery with which you cauterize the horns of the head and the occupit more subtly than that with which you cauterize the middle part of the head; and this is its form."
Capitol ters.	"Chapter three."
De cauterisacio de emigranea no-antiqua.	"Of cautery for non-ancient migraine."
Quan endeve en la partida del cap dolor sodo, o es stenduda dolor entro al uelh, sia evacuat am medicinas le cap mondificantz, e sia aministrada l’autra curacio, la qual yeu he dita en las devesios de las malautias; e tot no aprofieyta, lahoras cauterisacio en lu es en dos manieyras: o cauterisacio am medicina acuta comburent, o am ferr.	"When sudden pain is felt in the part of the head or a prolonged pain within the ear, let it be evacuated with medicines that clarify the head, and let the other treatment which I have mentioned in the previous sections be administered; and if this does not help, then cautery in it can be done in two ways: either cauterization with an acute burning medicine or with iron."
Mays cauteri am medicina comburent es que tu prenguas una dolsa de alh, e escorgas aquela e abcindas las extremitatz de lu de amdos les caps.	"More properly cautery with a burning medicine is that you take a dose of aloe and heat it up and remove the ends from both its heads."
E aprop incideys le loc de la dolor en la templa am una lanceta lada entro que sia en lu feyt loc dejos la codena, entro que sia occultada.	"And properly you incise the place of the pain in the temple with a sharp lancet where it is near the vein but hidden."
E aprop strenh sobre lu am stopada per descent constreccio, e layssa aquel per le spazi de tres horas; e aprop deslia le e tratz le alh, e laysa la plagua per dos o per tres jorn, e aprop pausa sobre lu coto submergit en boder entro que le loc fassa brac.	"And properly you press on it with a tight bandage due to continuous constriction and leave it for the space of three hours; and properly remove the bandage and take out the aloe, and leave the wound open for two or three days, and properly apply wet compresses around the wound until the place becomes suppurated."
E aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia sanat.	"And properly cure him with an ointment until he is healed."
E si tu voys, fe aquo am alcunas medicinas comburentz las quals yeu he scriutas en le douse tractat de medicinas comburentz.	"And if you wish, do this with some burning medicines which I have written about in the second treatise on burning medicines."
Mays la cauterisacio am ferr segon aquesta manieyra: igneys per cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma:	"But the cautery with iron is done in this way: heat up a cautery of the following shape:"
e es apelat claus clavilhs, quar le cap de lu es ayssi cum forma de clavel en le qual es alcuna curvitat, e·n le mieg loc de lu es eminensia petita.	"The condition is called closed nails because its head appears like the shape of a nail with some curvature, and in the middle there is an elevation."
E aprop pausa sobre loc de la dolor, e rete la tua ma — per que no sia adhurida la arceria la qual es dejos — e revol le ferr petit a petit am velocitat.	"And then place your hand over the painful area, keeping it still so that the bowels are not disturbed, and gently and gradually pull out the small arrow."
E si la quantitat de lu que es adhurida per la specitut de la codena ayssi quo la maytat de lu, e elava la tua ma per so que la arteria no sia adhurida la qual es dejos, per so que no vengua flux de sanc.	"And if the amount of it that is attached by the stickiness of the flesh is so great that most of it cannot be removed, raise your hand for fear that the artery which is nearby may also be torn, so that blood does not flow."
E aprop enbibeys coto en aygua de sal e pausa aquel sobre le loc, e layssa aquel per tres dias; e aprop pausa coto mulhat am boder, e aprop cura am enguent entro que sia sanat.	"And then soak cotton in salt water and place it over the area, leaving it there for three days. Then change the cotton with fresh one daily until it is healed."
E si voys, cauterisa am la extremitat del cutellari segon cauteri, e guarda te de incisio de arteria en aquesta emigranea propriament no-antiqua.	"And if you wish to cauterize, cauterize the extremity of the wound according to your method of cautery, taking care not to incision an artery in this migraine-like but non-migraine condition."
Capitol quart.	Chapter Four
De cauterizacio d’emigranea antiqua.	Of the cauterization of ancient migraine.
Quan tu curas emigranea am aquo que havem dit de la curacio precedent, e aquo que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias, e no aprofieyta la curacio, e vezes per la malautia que no abasta a lu aquo que havem dit del primier cauteri am medicina o del cauteri am foc, lahoras cove que tu igniscas le cauteri cutellar entro que sia albificat, pus que significas sobre le loc de la dolor am linha de longuesa de la qual sia la maytat del dit, o quays aquel; e depausa la tua ma per una veguada e strenh aquela entro incidiscas la arceria e pervengua entro al os.	When you are treating migraine according to what has been said about the previous cure and the divisions of illnesses, but the treatment is not effective, and sometimes because the illness does not respond to what has been said about the first cautery with medicine or fire cautery, then it becomes necessary for you to burn the cautery knife on that spot until it glows red, marking the location of the pain with a line of length equal to the greatest width of the said spot or crossing that; and then wait for a while before pressing it down firmly so as to incise the artery and cause blood to flow into the mouth.
Empero necessari es a tu que guardes de la continuacio de la mandibula, la qual es mauguda deves la masticacio, e que le lacert no sia adhurit e le nervi le qual mau aquela, e que no s’endevengua espasme.	Nevertheless, it is necessary for you to guard against damaging the continuity of the jawbone, which is moved by chewing, and that the cartilage is not adhered and that the nerves which move it are not affected, and that no spasm occurs.
E si es sobre la custodia e cautela de flux de sanc de l’arteria que es abciza, quar en la abcizio de lu es temor, e majorment ad aquel le qual ignora aquo que fa e no es studios e esproat; e layssa la operacio en lu al comensament.	And if it is about the care and caution of blood flow from the artery that is being cauterized, for there is fear in its cautery, especially for those who do not know what they are doing and are not studied or practiced, then leave the operation at the beginning.
E yeu vindre am rememoracio del regiment de flux de sanc accident de la arceria segon la sieua manieyra, en le sieu loc de aquest libre.	And I come with remembrance of the regimen for accidental blood flow from the artery according to its manner, in its place in this book.
E si veses de aquesta malautia que no abaste aquest cauteri e veses le cors del malaute tollerable, cauteriza aquel en le mieg loc del cap ayssi cum havem recontat, e cura la plagua entro que sia sanada.	And if you see this illness not abating with this cautery and see the patient's condition tolerable, then cauterize that spot in the middle of the head as we have told, and cure the wound until it is healed.
E si voys, aministra le cauteri le qual havem dit en le capitol de streccio de arceria am cauteri havent dos cotels, e es milhor cauterizacio aquesta e mays conferent.	And if you wish, administer the cautery that we have mentioned in the chapter on the division of artery with cautery having two edges, for this is better cautery and more effective.
Capitol .v.	Chapter Five
De cauterisacio de las dolors de aurelhas.	Of the cauterization of ear pains.
Quan en la aurelha ve dolor per freg e es curat am causas lacsativas e am l’autra curacio la qual he dita en la divisio, e no es remauguda la dolor, lahoras igneys le cauteri, e es aquest le qual ha nom puncta, del qual aquesta es la forma:	When pain in the ear occurs due to heat and is treated with laxatives and other remedies mentioned earlier, but the pain persists, then apply cautery, which is called "puncta," and this is how it is done
E aprop puncta aprop la ignicio, e sia menat al enviro de tota la aurelha ayssi cum roda es revolguda, o en le circuit de quascuna essemps si la dolor es en quascuna.	And puncture around the ignition, moving it around the entire ear like a wheel turning, or in circles around each point if the pain is localized.
Alonga te am le cauteri de la razit de la aurelha pauc a pauc pus que aias senhat le loc am tenta.	Gradually apply the cautery to the root of the ear, pressing gently until you sense that it has reached the painful area
E si le cauteri de detz puntz en tota aurelha, e quays aquela, e aprop cura les locz entro que sian sanatz.	And if cauterization is applied at multiple points around the entire ear, then cover it and apply treatment to any affected areas until they heal
Capitol .vi.	Chapter VI
De cauterizacio de turtura.	On cautery for quinsy (peritonsillar abscess).
Turtura la qual es curada e am cauterizacio no es sino de las specias las quals veno per flecma, segon que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias.	Quinsy that is treated with cautery is only of the type that comes from a swelling (abscess), as we have mentioned in our divisions of diseases.
Esquiva cauterizacio de la specia que endeve per siccacio o per spasme del nervi.	Cautery should be avoided in cases where quinsy occurs due to dryness or spasm of the nerve.
Quan tu curas aquela specia de turtura am jerras e capipurgi e guarguarismes, e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas le malaute am tres cauteris: la i deves la razit de la aurelha, e·l segon un petit dejos le sieu templar, e le ters deves la conjunccio de doas labias.	When treating that type of quinsy with herbs and other remedies without success, then you must cauterize the disease with three applications: one at the root of the ear, another a little below the cheekbone, and the third at the junction of the two lips.
E pausa lo tieu cauteri per le contrari de la partida malauta, quar mollificacio no ve sino en la partida que apar sana.	And apply your cautery according to the opposite of the affected part, because softening occurs only in the area that appears healed.
E la forma de cauterisacio es que cauterizas aquel am le cauteri en le dreyt de la extremitat de la aurelha pus sobirana un petit sobre le corn del cap, e en le templar autre, la longuesa del qual sia segon la longitut del dit pous, e depausa la tua ma am cauteri entro que sia comburida la quantitat de la maytat de la specitut de la codena.	And the method of cautery is to cauterize that area with the cautery on the right side of the tip of the ear, just above the horn of the head, and on the cheekbone below it, whose length should be according to the length of a finger. Then press your hand with the cautery until the quantity of heat sufficient for the thickness of the swelling has burned through
E aquesta es la forma del cauteri, e es specia del cutellari, la forma del qual es denant mesa.	And this is the method of cautery, and it is a specific treatment for quinsy, as described previously.
Mays empero pus subtil es que aquel un pauc ayssi co vesas; e cove que cotel en lu de superflua groceza un pauc.	But more subtly, this can also be seen in the following way: remove any excess roughness with scissors.
E aprop cura le loc am aquo que es denant procezit entro que sia sanat.	And then treat the affected area with the appropriate medicine until it is healed.
Capitol .vii.	Capítulo VII
De cauterizacio de apoplextia antiqua.	"On cautery of ancient stroke."
Quan apoplextia es antiquada e curas aquela am aquo que havem dit e no confereys la tua medicacio e le malaute no ha febre, lahoras cauteriza aquel am quatre cauteris: sobre totz les corn del sieu cap; e am cauteri e le mieg loc del cap, ayssi cum havem dit; e am cauteri en le coguot.	"When the stroke is ancient and cured with what we have said, and your medication does not help, and the illness has no fever, then cauterize that with four cauteries: on all the horns of his head; and one cautery in the middle of the head, as we have said; and one cautery in the throat."
E la manieyra del cauteri es fayta segon que es desus dit.	"And the manner of cauterization is done according to what has been said above."
E ja es cauterizat sobre la boca del estomac; e es mays derier; e aprop sia curat am aquo que procezeys.	"Then it should be cauterized over the mouth of the stomach; and it is worse if delayed; and therefore, let it be treated with what proceeds."
Capitol .viii.	Chapter VIII
De cauterizacio de obblivio fayta per flacma.	"On cautery for oblivation caused by inflammation."
Cove que sian donatz al malaute en le comensament jerras grans e pilulas le servel mondificantz.	"Give the patient at the beginning large jars and pills of servile earth clarifying."
E aprop ras le cap tot del malaute e pausa sus le coguot de lu emplaustre de cetre descrit en le tractat dels emplastres.	"And then shave the entire head of the patient and place on the throat this plaster of centaury described in the treatise of plasters."
E pausa aquel alcunas veguadas, quar aquel es manieyra de cauteri.	"And leave that on for a few days, because that is the manner of cautery."
E fay aquo segon aquel meteys orde le qual ja he dit.	"And do this according to the order I have already described."
E donc si per aqueles sanat bo es; e sino, lahoras fay a lu tres cauteris en la deriera partida de sieu cap, les quals sian deysendentz de la partida pus sobirana del cap entro a la partida pus dejos del col.	If these remedies heal him well, and if not, then make three cauteries on the last part of his head, descending from the highest part of the head to the lowest part of the neck.
E pausa entre quascun cauteri la grossetut del dit, e aprop cura lo cauteri am aquo que es procedit.	And pause between each cautery the size of your finger, and quickly cure the burn with whatever is at hand.
Mays si tu vos addicio e le malaute es aquo tollerant, lahoras fay a lu cauteri en le mieg loc; e si voys major addicio, lahora cauteriza aquel sobre les dos corns.	If you add more, and the patient can tolerate it, then apply cautery in the middle area; if you wish to cause greater addition, then cauterize that upon both corners.
Aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat; e sia le cauteri olivar segon la forma denant donat.	Once cured, close up that which was opened; and the cautery should be olive-shaped according to the form given beforehand.
Capitol .ix.	Chapter IX
De cauterisacio de parazili e de mollificacio de tot le cors.	On cauterization of paralysis and softening of the whole body.
Cove que tu procesiscas en mondificacio del cap am jerras e am aquo que havem dit; e aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap, e am cauteri sobre totz les corns del cap, e am cauteri sobre la deriera partida de lu, e am tres cauteris sobre les spondils del col.	First, proceed with the softening of the head as we have said; then shave the patient's head and apply a cautery in the middle of their head, another on all four corners of the head, another at the back part of it, and three cauteries on the spinal column of the neck.
E si es necessari en la malautia de mollificacio del cors de trops aquel e les malautes tollerantz e la malautia es fort, lahoras cauteriza aquel am quatre cauteris sobre les spondils del dos, e dererament am cauteri entro que sia comborit de la codena mot de lu, e aleva la tieua ma.	And if it is necessary to soften the body in cases of excess and the patients can tolerate it, and the disease is strong, then apply four cauteries on the spinal column of the back, and afterwards apply a cautery at the point where the nape of the neck meets the spine, raising the patient's head up.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat, e aquest sia cauteri olivar.	And once cured, close up that which was opened with an olive-shaped cautery.
Capitol .x.	Chapter X
De cauterisacio de epilemcia.	On cauterization for epilepsy
No es cauterizat le epilemtic sino aquella epilemcia es per flecma.	One does not cauterize the epileptic person unless the epilepsy is due to a phlegm.
E donc cove que mondifiques le cervel de lu al comensament de lu am yeras e am l’autra curacio la qual havem dicta en la divisio quan le malaute es gran e es tollerant la exceperacio de las medicinas.	And therefore, one should soften the brain of that person at the beginning with herbs and with the other cure which we have mentioned in the division when the patient is great and can tolerate the exception of medicines.
E si es enfant le qual no sufferte las medicinas, lahoras aministra guarguarissmes e mastiguatoris le servel mondifican, denant aquo per motz dias, am bonifficacio de las viandas.	And if it is a child who does not tolerate medicines, then administer purgatives and chewing herbs to soften the brain, beforehand for several days, with moderation in food.
E aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop cauteriza aquel am un cauteri en le mieg loc del cap segon la manieyra precedent, e am autre cauteri en le occiput de lu, e sobre quascun corn del cap sieu cauterisa.	And then shave the head of the patient and apply a cautery in the middle of the head according to the manner previously mentioned, and another cautery on the back of the head, and cauterize each corner of the head.
E si le malaute es fort e es tollerant, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteris les quals he ditz, en havent paraliticament e mollificacio del cors sobre les spondils del col e les spondils del dos.	And if the patient is strong and can tolerate it, then apply the cauteries which have been mentioned, having first paralyzed and softened the body on the spinal column of the neck and the spinal column of the back.
E sia cauteri olivar segon qu’es precedit.	And let an olive-shaped cautery be applied as has been previously described.
Mays si le malaute es enfant, lahoras pausa cauteri subtil segon aquesta manieyra.	But if the patient is a child, then apply a subtle cautery in this manner:
Capitol .xi.	"Chapter XI."
De cauterizacio de melencolia.	"On cauterizing melancholy."
Quan las causas de melencolia so humiditatz corrompudas e flacma gros, lahoras cauteriza aquel am les cauteris les quals havem ditz en le havent paralisi.	When the causes of melancholy are corrupted humidity and thick phlegm, then cauterize that area with those cauteries which we have mentioned previously for paralysis.
E si la causa de melencolia es superfluitat declinant a melencolia, e le cors del malaute es humit, lahoras da ha beure aquo que mundifica le cervel de lu segon aquo que ha precedut en la divisio.	And if the cause of melancholy is declining superfetation leading to melancholy and the patient's body is humid, then they should drink water that cleanses the brain according to what has been stated earlier in this division.
E aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop fay tortora decentment fayta de li sobre le cercle, e aprop depausa aquela en le mieg loc del cap.	Also shave the patient's head and make a poultice of dill, applied decently around the circumference, and also apply another on the middle of the head.
E le malaute sia sesent cayrat, e sia tengut de tota partida.	And let the patient be seated, and let them be held from all parts.
E aprop pausa liniment; et es pus digne de boder antic de ovelhas.	Also apply a liniment; afterwards it is fitting to bind on a lamb's wool belly-band.
E escalfa aquel sobre le foc per calefaccio temprada per mesura, le qual le dit sufferta quan es mes en lu.	And warm that (i.e., the poultice) over the fire with gentle heat for measure, which said patient should suffer while it is in place.
E aprop vuo’ aquel en le mieg loc del cap de lu en le cercle, e leysa lu entro que sia enfregidat.	And then remove that from the middle of the head and lay it on the circumference, allowing it to cool within until it becomes cold.
E fay aquo am le malaute en tota semmana una veguada, am le autre regiment de lu bo entro que sia sanat; o si vols, cauteriza aquel fazen petitz puntz segon lo mays de lu, sino que tenguas la ma am un cauteri ayssi ordenat: aquesta es specia de cauteri la qual humecta le cervel am equalitat.	And do this for the patient once every week until the boil is healed; or if you wish, cauterize that area with small punctures according to the most of the boil, taking care not to burn yourself while holding a cautery arranged in such a way: this is called "cautery that moistens the brain evenly."
E aprop pausa aquel coto enbegut en boder o en grays de gualina.	And then apply that cloth dipped in either border or egg white.
Capitol .xii.	**Chapter XII.**
De cauterisacio de aygua descendent en le huel.	On the cauterization of descending water in the head
Quan a tu es declarat le comensament de aygua en le huel per les senhals les quals yeu he ditz en la divisio, lahoras comensa e dona en beure al malaute aquo que mondifique le cap de lu, e guarda aquel de totas humiditatz.	When it is declared to you that water has begun to descend into the head through the signs which I have stated earlier in this division, then begin and give the patient to drink that which cleanses the head of him, and protect him from all humidity.
E fay aquel suzar en banh en degu per alcus jorns.	And make him suck on a sponge dipped in warm water for several days.
E aprop comanda a lu que raza le sieu cap, e cauteriza aquel am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap; e aprop cauteriza aquel am dos cauteris sobre dos templas si es le comensament de ysement de aygua en dos huels, o de la un latz si es comensamen de l’aygua en un huel.	And then command him to raise his head, and cauterize that with a cautery in the middle of the head; and then cauterize it with two cauteries on both temples if it is the beginning of descent of water into both heads, or on one side if it is the beginning of the descent of water into one head.
Incideys am cauteri totas las venas e arcerias las quals so dejos la codena; e sian les cauteris en aquela lonh en la latitut de las templas.	Incise with a cautery all the veins and arteries which are below the nape; and let the cauteries be at that distance in the latitude of the temples.
E guarda te de fluxs de sanc quan es cauterizat; e si veses de lu fluxs de sanc, osta le am alcuna medicina, la qual es a tu possible.	And take care of fluxes of blood when cauterizing; and if you see any flux of blood, stop it with some medicine which is within your power.
E yeu vindre am savieza la qual es en extraccio de arcerias e am abscizio de aquelas e cautela de fluxs de sanc.	And I will come with skill in the extraction of arteries and in the ablation of those and in the care of fluxes of blood.
E alcunas vetz es cauterizat en le cervitz dejos dos osses am dos cauteris dererament produzitz.	And sometimes it is cauterized in the nape below two bones with two cauteries inserted deeply.
Capitol .xiii.	**Chapter XIII.**
De cauterizacio de lacrimas antiquas.	"On cauterization of old tears."
Quan lacrimas dels huels so antiquas assuduament e per las venas e arterias las quals so en le loc manifest del cap defora e es verificat que aquo es superfluitatz frejas flecmatiquas, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteri le qual havem recontat en le capitol de comensament de aygua cazent en les huels, e am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap e am dos cauteris en la cervitz dejos dos templas, e am dos cauteris en la cervitz dejos dos osses.	"When tears of the eyes are old and abundant due to veins and arteries in the area near the head being visible and it is confirmed that this is a superfluous fluid discharge, then cauterize with cautery as described at the beginning concerning hot water pouring into the eyes, and cauterize in the middle of the head and on both temples, and cauterize on both sides of the neck bones."
E si indigeyses de addicio, lahoras cauteriza aquel en tot latz de la coa del huel sobre la extremitat del sobrecilh am petit cauteri.	"And if necessary, cauterize also on all sides of the eye socket at the end of the eyebrow with a small cautery."
Capitol .xiiii.	"Chapter XIV."
De cauterizacio de fetor de nas.	"On cauterization of nose odor."
Quan tu medicas aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no aprofieyta la tua medicacio, lahoras tu aparelha e dona en beure al malaute las cochias per tres noytz; e aprop ras le cap de lu, e cauteriza le am cauteri migier am cauteri olivar.	"When you treat this with what we have said in the division and it does not improve, then prepare and give the patient cochlearia to drink for three nights. Then scrape the head clean, and cauterize him with a mixture of cautery oil."
E aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri clavelh am dos cauteris sobre les dos sobrecilhs dejos les cabels un petit.	"And also cauterize him with clove cautery on both eyebrows above the hair, each one small."
E guarda te de la arceria que no incindas aquela.	"And be careful not to burn it with the cautery."
E del cauteri clavilh aquesta es la forma.	"And this is how you make the clove cautery:"
Capitol .xv.	"Chapter XV."
De cauteri de mollificacio de palpebras dels huels.	"On cautery for softening of eyelids."
Quan la palpebra del huel es mollificada per malautia o per humiditat, lahoras cauteriza aquela palpebre1 am un cauteri am aquest cauteri lunar; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	"If the eyelid is softened due to illness or moisture, then cauterize that eyelid with a cautery made of this composition:"
E si vos, cauteriza aquel sobre les dos sobrecils un petit am dos cauteris en tota partida, e sian elonguatz de las timporas.	"And if you do, cauterize the same over both eyebrows a little with two cauteries on each side, extending them towards the temples."
E sia la longitut de quascun cauteri segon la quantitat del sobrecil.	"And let the length of each cautery be according to the quantity of the eyebrow."
E no premas trop la tua ma am le cauteri, mays segon la quantitat que la tersa partida de la palpebre sia adhurida.	"Don't press too hard with your hand on the cautery, but just enough to make the third part of the eyelid adhere."
Capitol .xvi.	"Chapter XVI."
De cauteri de la palpebre del huel quan les pels so convertitz a las partidas dedintz e punho le huel.	"On cauterizing the eyelid when the hairs turn towards the inside and hurt the eye:"
Quan les pels del huel son convertitz a las partidas dedintz ayssi que pungo le huel, cauteri en aquels es segon dos manieyras, quar cauteri o es am fer o es am medicina comburent.	"When the hairs of the eyelid turn inward so that they hurt the eye, cauterize them in one of two ways: either with fire or with a burning medicine."
Si am cauteri de lu am foc, comanda al malaute denant aquo que leyse les sieus pels ayssi cum aquels les quals les mundan, entro que sian prolonguatz e engualhatz; e si punho aquel deves le lor naysement, lahoras tu strenh les huels de lu am una benda per so que no sia maugut entro que·ls pels sian nascutz.	"If you cauterize with fire, tell the patient beforehand to pluck out his hairs like those that are plucked for depilation, before they become long and curly. And if it hurts him at their origin, then cover his eyes with a bandage so that he is not annoyed until the hairs have grown."
Donc cum siran nascutz e engualhatz, lahoras pausa le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop senha sobre la palpebre dels huels de lu am tenta, am senhal le qual sia segon la figura de fulha de merta, e sia le comensament del senhal prop dels pels.	"Then, when they have grown and become long and curly, pause the head of the patient in its place, and carefully place a cautery on the eyelid of his eye, shaped like a withered leaf. Let the beginning of the cautery be close to the hairs."
E aprop pausa coto enbegut en album de huou o en mucillatge de ptilli sobre le huel.	"And also pause cotton dipped in alum or pitch-plaster over the eye."
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu.	"Then ignite the cautery, of which this is the form:"
E aprop cauteriza sobre la figura la qual as senhada, petit a petit, em motas veguadas, entro que sia comburida la superficia de la codena la qual es ayssi cum fuelha de mirta, tota aparent propriament.	"And then cauterize along the figure that you have marked out little by little with many glances, until the surface of the ridge which is like a myrtle leaf is entirely apparent."
E senhal de sanetat de la tieua obra es que tu vegus la palpebre de l’huel ja esser contrayta e·ls pels de lu esser elevatz deves la punctura del huel.	"And the sign of a good cautery is that you see the eyelid contract and its hairs raised above the puncture of the eye."
E donc eleva la tua ma e laysa aquel per tres jorns, e aprop pausa sobre lu coto am boder entro que sia eredicada la scara.	"Then lift your hand up and leave it for three days. Afterwards place cotton with border on it until the scar is healed."
E aprop cura aquela am enguent entro que sia sanat.	"And then treat it with ointment until it is healed."
Mays si retorna per les pels alcuna causa aprop lor naysement e la palpebra es mollificada, lahoras fay autra vetz le cauteri sobre aquel tot ayssi cum avias fayt primieyrament.	"But if the hairs return for some reason at their origin and the eyelid is softened again, then perform the cautery again on that same spot just as you had done initially."
Mays si les pels so en la palpebra dejos, lahoras cauterisa aquela entro que sia elevada al sieu loc natural e sia engualhat e que les pels no punhan le huelh.	"But if the hairs grow on the eyelid again, then cauterize that until they are raised to their natural place and become long and curly, so that they do not hurt the eye."
Mays le cauteri am medicina comburent aquest es que comandes al malaute que leyse les pels entro que sian prolonguatz e engualhatz, e aprop sia fayta de carta de drap la forma de fuelha de mirtra.	"But when using a burning medicine for cauterizing, this is what you should do: tell the patient to pluck out his hairs until they are long and curly. Then make a paper form like a myrtle leaf from thin cloth."
E aprop pren de sabo conogut e de caus viva ana unc. i, o quays aquo, e aprop mescle3 aquelas causas be, e fay aquo am festinacio per so que no sia enfregidat; e aprop expandeys de aquo sobre la carta la qual es fayta ayssi cum forma de fulha de mirtra, e pausa aquel sobre la un huel od amdos; e pausa dejos le huel coto enbegut en album de huou, e el cap del malaute sia en le tieu se.	"And then take some known soap and live sulphur, one dram of each. Mix them well together, and quickly make a paste so that it does not cool down. Then spread this paste over the paper which has been made in the shape of a myrtle leaf, and place it on the eye or both eyes. Place cotton dipped in alum on the eye, and keep the head of the patient steady."
E pausa le dit sobre le medicina e prem aquela un petit e no la mauguas entro que lo malaute senta la mordicacio de la medicina, quar mordicacio es en lu ayssi cum de foc.	"And then place your finger on the medicine and press it gently without hurting until the patient feels the bite of the medicine, because its bite is like that of fire."
E donc cum percevera aquo que el atrobo mordicacio, lahoras leyssa la medicina e mau aquela am le tieu dit; donc cum cessa la mordicacio, lahoras remau la medicina he lava le huel am aygua; e lahoras considera si vezes la palpebra ja es levada ayssi cum es lavada deves la costriccio am foc o am incisio, quar lahoras esta be; e si no torna sobre aquela de la medicina sobre le loc en le qual no ha empremut la medicina e no se denigra entro que sia engualhada la tua operacio e sia contrayt le huel.	"And then when the patient feels that he has been bitten, remove the medicine and wipe it with your finger; then, when the bite ceases, remove the medicine and wash the eye with water. Then observe if sometimes the eyelid is raised like it is washed by the contraction of fire or by cutting, because now would be a good time to do so. And if not, place the medicine again on the spot where the medicine has not previously been applied, without staining until the hairs are burned and the eye contracts."
E aprop pausa sobre lu coto am boder entro que sia eradicada la codena de la adhustio, e aprop cura aquel am enguent deafinicon o am autre entro que sia sanat.	"And then place cotton with border on it until the ridge of the adhesion is healed. Then treat it with ointment made from definitio or with another one until it is healed."
E es necessari a tu, deves la tua operacio que guardes am pervigil diligencia que en le huel no caia re de la medicina, e si la palpebre aprop alscus dias es mollificada e alcuna causa dels pels punh en le huel, lahoras itera la tua medicina sobre aquel loc le qual de la palpebre es mollificat, e propriamen ayssi quo as fayt al comensament, e aprop enaviro lu entro que sia sanat.	"And in your operation you must guard with constant vigilance that nothing from the medicine falls into the eye. And if the eyelid becomes softened after several days and some hairs hurt the eye again, then repeat your medicine on that spot where the eyelid is softened, and especially do it just as you did at the beginning, until it is healed."
E aquesta es la forma de fuelha de mirtra.	"And this is the form of a myrtle leaf:"
E sapias que les huels dels homes son diversificatz segon la magnitut e la parvitat, e donc segon aquo es fayta la tua contraccio.	"And know that the eyes of men are diversified according to their size and smallness, therefore you must make your contraction accordingly."
E no sira amaguada la via de rectetut ad aquel al qual es studi en aquesta art.	"And do not hide the way of rectitude from those who study this art."
Capitol .xvii.	"Chapter XVII"
De cauterizacio de fistula que es en le lacrimal de l’huel.	Of cauterizing fistula that is in the lachrymal canal of the eye.
Quan tu curas fistula am aquo que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas aquela segon aquesta manieyra: comanda al malaute que pause le cap sieu en le tieu se, e tengua le cap de lu alcun ministre entre las tieuas mas en tal manieyra que no sia maugut ni agitat am le sieu cap.	When you treat a fistula according to what was said in the divisions of illnesses and your treatment does not succeed, then you should cauterize it in this manner: Command the patient to place their head on their right side, and hold their head firmly with some minister's hands between yours, so that it is neither moved nor agitated by their head.
E aprop pausa coto enfus en album de huou o en mucellage de ptilli sobre le huel de lu.	And appropriately place a bandage of wool or gauze on the wound on their buttocks.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma:	And thus it is cauterized, the form of which is:
le qual sia conquau, ayssi cum es forma de cana o de pena de voltor, de la una extremitat am la qual es fayta lo cauteri.	It should be heated like this, like a pipe or a vulture's feather at one end with which the cautery is made.
E si voys, sia penetrant entro a la autra extremitat.	And if you wish, it may penetrate somewhat into the other extremity.
E si vols sia sort ayssi cum tenta.	And if you wish, let it come out like this, like a tent.
Mays empero aquel que es concau es milhor a la tieua obra.	But nevertheless, that which is heated is better for your work.
E aprop prem la fistula si es uberta, e tra de lu sania et exsicca aquela.	And then press the fistula if it is open, and draw out and dry it with spongy material
E si no es uberta, lahoras obre aquela e extratz la poyredura de lu.	And if it is not open, then cut it open and draw out the pus from there.
E aprop pausa sobre lu le cauteri le qual sia be ignit, e te am aquel la tieua ma un petit deves le cauteri del huel a la partida del nas, per so que no erre la tua ma o le malaute sia enquietat, e lahoras pausa le cauteri en le grays del huel e corrompas aquel.	And then apply the cautery which has been well heated to it, and you must have your hand near that place but a little way away from the opening of the anus, so that neither your hand nor the patient is burned, and then apply the cautery on the edge of the wound and burn it there.
E donc si al comensament del tieu cauteri perve entro al os, bo es; e sino, lahoras itera le cauteri una veguada o dos, si mestiers era; e layssa aquel ayssi per tres jorns, e aprop pausa sobre aquel coto am boder e enviro lu am enguent exsiccatiu entro que sia sanat.	And therefore if at the beginning of your cautery it goes into the bone, that is good. But if not, then repeat the cautery once or twice if necessary; and leave it like that for three days, and then apply it again with a bandage and surround it with dry ointment until it is healed.
Mays si eran passatz xi dias e no es sanat, lahoras pausa sobre lu medicina aguda corrosiva entro que l’os sia descubert e sia ras segon que conveneys en le sieu capitol.	But if after eleven days it has not healed, then apply a sharp corrosive medicine there until the bone is exposed and it may be scraped according to what is appropriate in that chapter.
E es autra manieyra de cauteri de fistula la qual alscus primiers diysero: enten al loc de la fistula e fen aquela e aprop pausa en aquela fissura camaen subtil del qual es la forma de lu: E fon en aquela la quantitat de i unc de plom fundut; e te la tua ma am camaem am bona retencio, e no sia maugut le malaute per so que le plom fundut no pervengua al huel de aquel; e cove que pausas sobre le huel del malaute coto enfus en album de huou o en aygua, quar plom adhureys le loc de la fistula e sana aquela per sanacio meravilhora.	And there is another method of cauterizing a fistula which some first said: enter the opening of the fistula and make it wider and then insert into that fissure a thin rod like this one, which has the shape of it. And on to that put as much melted lead as you wish; and with your hand press it gently on to the wound so that the patient is not harmed, lest the melted lead should reach the anus of the patient; and cover the wound with a cloth dipped in albumen of egg or water, because the lead adheres to the place of the fistula and heals it by wonderful healing.
E si la fistula es sanada am aquo que havem dit del cauteri e de la curacio, bo es; e sino, lahoras es necessari aministrar trauc del nas e reduzir la fistula al cors del nas segon que vindra en son loc propri.	And if the fistula is healed with what we have said about cauterizing and curing it, that is good. But if not, then it is necessary to administer a trepanation of the nose and reduce the fistula into the cavity of the nose according to what will be coming in its proper place.
Capitol .xviii.	Chapter XVIII
De cauterizacio de la fendedura des potz.	**On cauterizing the fissure of the buttocks.**
Motas veguadas accideysso fissuras en las labias, e majorment en las labias dels enfantz.	Fissures occur quite frequently in the buttocks, but more commonly in infants' buttocks.
Donc cum tu curas aquelas fissuras am aquo que nos havem dit en las divisios e no aprofieyta la tua cura, lahoras igneys le cauteri petit cutellar segon aquesta forma que s’ensiec:	When you treat those fissures with what we have said in the sections and it does not profit your treatment, then heat the small knife-like cautery according to this method that is shown.
E sia la conquavitat de lu segon la subtilitat de cotella.	And let its concavity be made according to the subtlety of a needle.
Aprop pausa aquel init cuytadament en aquelas fissuras entro que·l cauteri pervengua al preon de las fissuras.	Approach gently with that knife into those fissures until the cautery reaches the bottom of the fissures
E aprop cura aquel am cerotz entro que sia sanat.	And then cure it with cerate until it is healed
Capitol .xix.	Chapter XIX
De cauterizacio de fistula en la boca.	Of the cauterization of a fistula in the mouth
Quan en la razit de uvula o en le paladar o en las razitz de las dentz endeve apostema e aprop fa brac, e aprop es rompuda, e aprop es antiquada, e corr brac e es fayta fistula, e aprop tu curas aquela e no aprofieyta a curacio, lahoras cove que tu igniscas cauteri segon la quantitat que sia receubuda en la fistula, e aprop met aquel ignit en le trauc de la fistola, e te la tua ma entro que pervengua le ferr ignit al preon de lu, e al derier de lu fazen aysso una veguada o dos; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que nos havem dit de la curacio entro que sia sanat.	When an abscess forms on the uvula or on the palate or on the roots of teeth, and it bursts open, and becomes old, and much fluid comes out, and a fistula is formed, and if you treat that and it does not improve, then you should heat cautery according to the size that has been received in the fistula, and put that heated iron into the opening of the fistula, and insert your hand until the hot iron reaches the bottom of it, and do this once or twice; and then cure it with what we have said about treatment until it is healed
E donc si la sania es abscindita e es sanat, bo es; e sino, lahoras es necessari de descubrir le loc e hostar le os corrumput segon que vindra en son capitol.	And if the healing is severed and it heals, that is good. And if not, then it is necessary to discover the place and remove the rotted bone according to what will come in its chapter
Capitol .xx.	De cauterizacio de fistola en la carca o en las naris.
De cauterisacio de las dentz e de mollificacio de las angivas.	"Cauterization of teeth and softening of veins."
Quan las angivas son mollificadas per humiditat e las dentz son maugudas, e curas aquelas am medicinas e no confereys, lahoras pausa le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop igneys le cauteri la forma del qual vindra aprop aysso, enayssi que tu pauses la quanula sobre la dent e entromet en aquela le cauteri ignit festinantment, e te la tieua ma un petit entro que·l malaute cente la calor del foc a la razit de la dent esser pervenguda.	"When veins are softened by moisture and teeth are painful, and treatments with medications do not confer, then you place the patient's head in your lap, and immediately bring the cautery iron here, so that you place the coal on the tooth and quickly insert it, taking care to keep your hand a little away so that the patient feels the heat of the fire reaching the root of the tooth."
E aprop leva la tua ma, e aprop itera le cauteri alcunas veguadas segon que vols.	"And then remove your hand, and repeat the cautery several times according to what you wish."
E aprop le malaute huompla la sua boca de aygua de sal e tengua aquela per una hora, e pueys stupa aquela, quar la dent mauguda es fermada e la gengiva mollificada es strenguda e la humiditat corrompuda es exsiccada.	"And then the patient rinses their mouth with salt water and holds it for an hour, and afterwards spits it out, because the painful tooth is cauterized and the softened gum is strengthened and the moisture corrupted is dried."
Capitol .xxi.	"Chapter XXII."
De cauterisacio de dolor de dent.	"On the cautery of toothache."
Quan dolor de dent es per fregiditat, o en lu es freg o verm, o no comfereys la curacio am medicina, lahoras cauteri en aquela es segon dos manieyras: o cauteri am boder de vacas, o cauteri am foc.	"When toothache is due to coldness, or there is rot or worm inside it, or if the cure with medicine does not confer, then cautery in that one is performed in two ways: either by cauterizing with a red-hot iron rod, or by cauterizing with fire."
Cauteri am boder es que tu prenguas boder de vacas e bulhas aquel en culhe de ferr , e aprop pren coto e envolopa le sobre la extremitat de la tenta, e aprop enmergeys aquel am boder bulhit, e pausa aquel sobre la dent dolorosa festinantment entro que sia enfregidat.	"Cautery with an iron rod is done by taking a red-hot iron rod and quickly placing it on the tooth that hurts, making sure not to burn the tongue or lips."
E aprop itera aquela alcunas veguadas entro que la vertut del foc pervengua a la razit de la dentz.	"And repeat this several times until the heat reaches the root of the teeth."
E si voys, submergeys lana o coto en le boder desus dit, e pausa aquel sobre la dent dolent, e pausa sobre aquel ferr ignit entro que·l ferr pervengua al preon de la conquavitat de la dent.	"And if you wish, you can also dip wool or cotton into the iron rod mentioned above and place it on the painful tooth, then place the hot iron onto the wool until the heat reaches the hollow of the tooth."
Mays empero la cauterizacio am foc es que tu atendas a la quannula de eram o de ferr, e sia en le cor de lu alcuna grocesa e la acuitat del foc no pervengua a la boca del malaute.	"But if you choose to perform the cautery with fire, you must wait until the coal or iron is red-hot and has reached its full heat without burning the patient's mouth."
E aprop igneys le cauteri la forma del qual vindra, e pausa aquel sobre la dent e te la tua ma entro que·l cauteri sia enfregidat; e fay aquo alcunas veguadas quar la dolor sira remauguda o en aquel dia o en l’autre dia.	"And then you ignite the coal or iron and place it on the tooth according to its shape, holding it there with your hand until it has cooled down; do this several times in a row until the pain disappears, either that day or the next."
E cove que per empressio de aquel cauteri que·l malaute umpla la sieua boca de bon boder e tengua aquel per una hora e aprop scupa le; e aquesta es la forma del cauteri.	"And it is necessary that after this cautery, the patient should fill their mouth with good salt water and hold it for an hour, then spit it out. And this is how the cautery is done."
E cauteriza am qual que tu voys extremittat segon que a tu es possible.	"And cauterize whichever tooth you wish according to what is possible for you."
E aquesta es la forma de la cannula:	"And this is how the cautery is performed:"
Capitol .xxii.	"Chapter XXII."
De cauterizacio de extrophulos.	"On the cauterization of external hernias."
Quan extrophulos so de flecma e de humors fregas e no so hobedientz a digistio per medicinas e tu voys la digistio de aquelas leugerament, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri conquau la forma del qual es aquesta seguen, havent dos extremitatz hubertas per que yesca le fum deves le cauteri per l’autra extremitat, e pausa aquel ignit sobre aquel apostema una veguada, e autre si indigeyses de aquel, entro que pervengua al preon del apostema.	"When hernias are caused by mucus and humors and are not obedient to digestion despite medications and you want to promote digestion of those gently, then you ignite the cautery in this way: having two ends opened so that smoke can exit through one end, place that ignited cautery on that lump once or more times until it reaches the center of the lump."
E si l’apostema es pauca, lahoras pausa le cauteri segon la quantitat del apostema, e aprop leyssa le per tres jorns e pausa sobre lu coto enfus en boder entro que sia remaugut aquo que·l foc ha comburit.	"And if the lump is small, then apply the cautery according to its size, and leave it for three days, applying it on the border of the wound until what the fire has burned is removed."
E aprop cura aquel am enguent e tentas e draps entro que sia sanat.	"Then cleanse that wound with bandages and dressings until it heals."
E la forma de la cannula o deu cauteri a tal es comveyter.	"And the shape of the cautery tip for such use is as follows:"
Capitol .xxiii.	Chapter XXII.
De cauterizacio de rauquiera de votz e de constriccio de ale.	"Concerning the cauterization of vocal cords and the correction of hoarseness."
Quan las humiditatz veno sobre le quanal del pulmo, e majorment quan aquo es am fregiditat de compleccio, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia evacuat al comensament am medicinas laxativas, e aprop cauteriza aquel deves la razit del golayro en le loc depremegut.	"When humidity affects the canal of the lung, especially when it is accompanied by coldness of complexion, then at the beginning, medicinal laxatives should be used to evacuate the illness. Then apply a cautery on both sides of the larynx in the depressed area."
E guarda te que no pervenguas am le cauteri al golayro ni no comburas de la codena de lu sino un pauc.	"And be careful not to reach the larynx with the cautery nor burn too much of the cord, but only a little bit."
E cauteriza aquel am autra cauteri deves la junctura del col en le derier espondil de lu.	"And apply another cautery on both sides at the junction of the neck and the last cervical vertebra."
E·l cauteri de lu sia clavilh sego la maniera precedent.	"And apply the cautery as described above."
E aprop cura aquel am aquo que es precedit entro que sia sanat.	"Then cleanse it with what was prescribed earlier until it heals."
Capitol .xxiiii.	Chapter XXIV.
De cauterizacio de malautia del pulmo e de tos.	"On cauterization of disease of the lung and cough."
Quan tos e malautia de pulmo so de humiditatz fregas e le malaute no ha febre ni tisic e es malautia antiqua, lahoras cauterisa aquel am dos cauteris sobre la furcula en les locz depremegutz leontz e buoytz; e am autra cauteri en le mieg loc del pietz entre dos mamillos; e sia le cauteri clavilh segon la forma precedent.	"When cough and lung disease are due to dampness and heat, and there is no fever or sputum, the cauterization is performed with two cauteries on the furcula in the hollow of the throat and upper chest; and another cautery in the middle of the chest between the two breasts; and the cauteries should be made according to the previous shape."
E si vols, sia la tua cauterizacio punctan am le cauteri que es apelat puncta, la forma del qual precedeys en la ponctacio de dolor de aurelhas.	"And if you wish, let your cautery be punctate with the cautery called a puncture, of which the shape is shown in the punctuation for earache."
E sian puntz entro cays ad aquels; e aprop cura aquel am aquo meteys que es precedit entro que sia sanat.	"And when points are entered between the skin and those (organs); and accordingly cure that with water as previously stated which is to be healed."
E ya sia le cauteri haventz tres ramps quar cauterizacio es am aquel: am una veguada podes far tres cauteris segon aquesta forma:	"And when cauteries have three branches, because cautery is made with this one: once you can make three cauteries according to this shape:"
Capitol .xxv.	Chapter .xxv
De cauterizacio de titillic que es le cap del ajutori.	Of cautery for tickling that is the head of the helper.
Quan le cap del ajutori es dislocat per causa de humiditatz lubricas e no es fermat en la hora del sieu retornament deves la sua dislocacio entro que sia a lu aquo costuma de retornar, e aprop per un petit movement es deslocat ayssi que s’endeve, ayssi cum nos havem testificat, lahoras cove que primieyrament redusiscas la dislocacio, e aprop le malaute sia reversat sobre le sieu dos o sobre le latz sa; e aprop eleva la codena la qual es en la partida dedintz del citillic a las partidas desus am les ditz de la tua ma sinistra, si la junctura es dislocada a las partidas dedintz.	When the head of the helper is dislocated due to slippery dampness and does not remain firm at the time of its return, you should reduce its dislocation so that it can return to its usual position, using a small movement. Then, apply traction with your left hand on the back of the neck, where the joint of the head joins the cervical vertebrae, if the joint is dislocated posteriorly.
E aprop igneys le cauteri havent dos caps; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And then ignite the cautery having two heads; and this is its shape:
E aprop cauteriza la codena entro que penetre aquela entro al autre latz; e vindra la figura de cauterizacio lahoras de iv caps cauteris.	And then cauterize the neck so that it penetrates that joint into the other side. And here is the figure of cautery at that time, with four cauteries.
e so aquel subtils segon la quantitat de tenta; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	and so that subtle one according to the quantity of tent; and this is its shape:
E alcunas veguadas es ajustat segon aquest comte i per que son les cauteris .viii.	And sometimes it is adjusted according to this count, for there are eight cauteries.
E aprop pausa sobre le cauteri porys cuytz am sal, e aprop fay adherir le malaute a trenquilitat, e lo membre no sia maugut per alcun temps entro que sia confortat.	And then pause upon the cautery and pour on it a little salt, and let the limb rest quietly without being moved for some time until it is comforted.
E si la dislocacio es a las partidas desus e tart es fayt aquo, lahoras cauteriza sobre le muscle am cauteri clavilh o am motz cauteris puntan, quar la junctura es confermada e la humiditat es romauguda e le malaute es sanat.	And if the dislocation is anteriorly placed and this has been done, then cauterize over the muscle with a claw-shaped cautery or with pointed cauteries, because the joint is confirmed and the dampness is removed and the limb is healed.
Capitol .xxvi.	Chapter .xxvi
De cauterizacio del stomac.	Of cautery for the stomach.
Quan veno en l’estomac freg e motas humiditatz entro que aquel extrazo de la sua compleccio e so multiplicatz raumases a lu, e si tu continuas las manieyras de curacio e no confereyso, lahoras cove que le malaute sia sobre le sieu dos ressupinat, e extenda las suas mas e las suas coysas, e aprop cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris: an un cauteri dejos le pietz per la quantitat d’un dit am cauteri clavilh, e am dos cauteris dejos del dos costatz del cauteri, entro que vengua la figura de cauteri triangulada; e elonga entre els que no sian ajustatz que faran poyredura.	When there is heat and abundant dampness in the stomach that exceeds its capacity and causes pain, if you continue with careless treatments without confirming it, then it should be placed on its back, arms and legs extended, and cauterize it with three cauteries: one on the left side of the pit of the stomach, about the size of a finger joint with a claw-shaped cautery, and two others on either side of the pit of the cautery, so that they form a triangular figure; extend those that are not adjusted to prevent burning.
E si la profunditat del cauteri la quantitat de les dos terses de la grocesa de la codena.	And if the depth of the cautery is equal to two-thirds of the thickness of the neck
E sia la figura del cauteri segon aquesta forma ses addicio, E si vols, cauteriza am gran cauteri en le mieg loc del estomac segon aquesta forma; et aquest sia un cauteri segon la forma de cercle segon aquesta forma:	And this is the figure of the cautery according to this form without addition. If you wish, cauterize with a large cautery in the middle of the stomach according to this form:
E sia cauterizat l’estomac punctan ad aquel que de aquest cauteri es spaventat: e es que tu senhes sobre l’estomac punt segon la quantitat que voles am tenta, e aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri en les puntz; e aprop cura aquel am la curacio qu’es precedita entro que sia sanat.	"Burn the stomach with cautery for one who is frightened by this cautery: and you should prick on the stomach as much as you want with a tent, then cauterize those points with cautery; and then treat them with the treatment that preceded until they are healed."
Capitol .xxvii.	"Chapter XXVII"
De cauterizacio del fietge fret.	"About cauterization of the liver."
Quan endeve en le fietge dolor per fregiditat o per humiditat o per grossa ventositat entro que de la sieua normal compleccio sia getat per egressio superflua, e es curat le malaute am aquo que havem dit e no comfereys, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sua cervitz, e senhes am tenta tres cauteris segon aquesta forma et aquesta quantitat meteyssa sobre le fietge dejos dels ipocondres, la hon perve le decubit de home.	"When there is pain in the liver due to coldness or humidity or excessive windiness such that its normal consistency has been altered by excess exit, and the illness is cured with what we have said and not otherwise, then it should be treated on the back of the neck, pricking three cauteries according to this form and this amount measured on the left side of the liver from the hypochondrium, where the man lies on his right side."
E sia l’espazi le qual es entre quascun cauteri segon la grossetut del dit, e sia le cauteri segon la longitut del cors dreyta.	"And let the space between each cautery be according to the thickness of the finger, and let the cauteries be according to the length of the right side of the body."
E no compremas la tua am le cauteri mot.	"Don't put your hand on the cautery while it's hot."
E si la quantitat de aquo que es adhurit la quantitat de la maytat de la specitut de la codena, e no y sia pus ajustat; e si le malaute stant sobre les pes de lu; e si no es estant, lahoras sia jassent, le qual ja ha extendudas las suas coysas, e eleve les sieus brasses.	"And if the amount of cautery is equal to the amount of the thickness of the spine, and it is not adjusted; and if the illness persists on the side of its weight; and if it does not persist, then let him lie down, having extended his legs, and raise his arms."
E es aquesta la forma del cauteri:	"And this is the form of the cautery:"
E a tu es possible que cauterizes aquestz cauteris am cauteri cutellar, quan es am tu subtilitat e prudencia en l’art.	"And you can cauterize these cauteries with a cautery spoon if you have skill and caution in this art."
E guarda te que trop no procesiscas en la cauterizacio, e sia adhurida la specitut de tota la codena per que sia adhurit tot le cors e pervengua entro als budels, quar la codena aqui es subtil; e sapias aquo.	"And be careful that you do not proceed recklessly in the cautery, and let the spine be heated throughout so that the whole body is heated and reaches the vessels, for here the spine is subtle; know this."
Capitol .xxviii.	"Chapter XXVIII."
De perforacio de apostema del fietge am cauteri.	"On the perforation of an abscess of the liver with a cautery."
Quan endeve excitura o apostema en le fietge e voles saber si aquel apostema es en le carn del fietge o en la tunica de lu, lahoras si es en la carn del fietge, le malaute atrobo gravitat e dolor ses acuitat.	When an ulcer or abscess appears in the liver and you want to know if that abscess is within the flesh of the liver or under its membrane, then if it is in the flesh of the liver, the patient feels heavy pain with sharpness.
E si es en la tunica del fietge, am la dolor es acuitat gran e vezes que ja afatiguatz les metges la cura de lu.	And if it is under the membrane of the liver, then the pain is very sharp and sometimes even baffles doctors in its treatment.
Donc cove que·l malaute sia enversat sobre la sieua cervit; e aprop senha le loc de l’apostema am tenta; e aprop igneys le cauteri le quel es asemblat a rag, la forma del qual a precedit en l’autra pagina.	Therefore, you should turn the patient onto their side; and carefully find the location of the abscess with touch; and then apply the cauterizing iron which resembles wool, the shape of which is described in the previous page.
E cauteriza am aquel i cauteri entro que tota la codena sia comborida, entro que pervengua al ciphac, entro qu’en yesca sania.	And cauterize it with that iron until the entire chain is burned through, until it reaches the cyst, until it emits healthy sparks.
E aprop cura aquel per curacio dels autres apostemas entro que sia sanat.	And also treat this by treating other abscesses until it is healed.
E no cove que de aquesta forma de cauteri use sino aquel del qual le estudi en l’art de medicina es prolonguat, e en las mas del qual motas malautias an conogut; mays aquest am esperiment alcunas veguadas sia ardit sobre aquesta operacio, mays empero leyssa aquela deves nos, e es miels.	"And one should not use this cautery method unless that person has prolonged their studies in the art of medicine and knows many illnesses by experience; although they may have tried it a few times, let them leave it to those who deserve to do so, for it is better."
Capitol .xxix.	The twenty-ninth chapter
De cauterizacio de plauresi.	Of cautery for pleasure.
Diyssero les antics cauteri de las razitz de aristologia a plauresi frega segon aquesta manieyra esser fazedor, e es aquest que tu prenguas de las razitz de aristologia longa secca una razit pun longua que es trobada, e sia de la grossetut del dit.	They say that the ancient cauteries for pleasure were made in this manner: take a long, dry twig of aristolochia and make a punch with it, as thick as your finger.
E aprop submergeys aquela en oli e eysen aquela al foc, e aprop cauteriza per un cauteri en aquel loc le qual es entre la continuacio de la furcula am le col; e am dos cauteris petitz dejos guidazi, un pauc declinans a la partida que es dejus la barba, e am dos cauteris en aquo que es declinant entre la quinta costa e la cizena, declinant un pauc a las partidas detras; e am autre cauteri en le mieg loc del pietz; et am autre sobre l’estomac, et am tres cauteris de las partidas detras; et am un cauteri en aquel loc le qual es entre las dos spallas, e am dos cauteris dels dos latz del pietz, dejos le cauteri le qual es entre doas spallas.	And then immerse it in oil and heat it at the fire, and cauterize with one cautery in that place which is between the continuation of the furcula with the neck; and with two small cauteries diagonally, one a little inclined towards the right side of the beard, and with two cauteries declining between the fifth rib and the armpit, inclining a little backwards; and with another cautery in the middle place of the belly; and with another on the stomach; and with three cauteries on the back parts; and with one cautery between the two buttocks; and with two cauteries on both sides of the belly, left the cautery which is between the two buttocks.
E no cove que compremas la tua ma am le cauteri, ans sia en le manifest de la codena en obra.	And thou needest not hold thy hand with the cautery, but it should be manifestly done by the cord in work.
E ja diyssero alscus antics que so alscus dels homes les quals uson de cauteri de ferr semblant a ray e igneysso aquel, e meto aquel en aquel loc le qual es entre las costas, entro que pervenguam am aquel ad aquel apostema e sia foragetada sania, ayssi cum havem dit en l’apostema del fietge.	And they say that the ancients said that this is the way of men who use cauteries of iron like rays and heat it in that place which is between the ribs until you reach to that aposteme and let it burn soundly, as we have said in the aposteme of the liver.
Mays en aquesta perforacio am cauteri no es ses temor, quar hu mor tantost ho accideys en le loc fistula a la qual no es sanacio.	But in this perforation with cautery there is fear, for many die at once when it happens in the place of the fistula which does not heal.
Capitol .xxx.	**Chapter 30.**
De la cauterizacio de la melsa.	Of the cauterization of the womb.
Quan tu curas la malautia de la melsa am aquo que havem dit de la curacio en la divisio e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cauteri en lu es segon tres manieras, las quals totas son dreyturieras, de las quals la una es que fassas tres cauteris o quatre linhan segon la longitut de la melsa segon la figura dels cauteris del fietge, la figura dels quals ha precedit.	When thou dost cure the disease of the womb with that which we have said concerning its treatment and division and if thou findest not that it helps, then cauterize in three ways, all of which are correct, one of them being to make three or four cauteries along the length of the womb according to its figure, just like those for the liver.
E sia entre quascun cauteri la grossetut d’un dit o un pauc mes, e la manieyra del cauteri sia la manieyra la qual havem dita en le cauteri del fietge engualment.	And let each cautery be as thick as a finger or a little more, and the manner of making the cauteries should be the same that we have said for those of the liver.
E no compremas la tua ma am le cauteri; e le malaute sia eves sobre lo sieu dos.	And thou needest not hold thy hand with the cautery, but let the disease be well above its two lips.
E es autra manieyra de cauterizar, so es que tu igniscas le cauteri haventz dos vertimentz, la qual causa havem dita en le capitol de dislocacio del muscle, e elava la codena la qual es en le endreyt de la melsa la hon perve le jazer del malaute sinistre.	And there is another manner of cauterizing, which is that thou shouldst heat the cautery having two vents, as we have said in the chapter on dislocation of the muscle, and elevate the cord which is towards the womb where the seat of the disease is located on the left side.
E sia la tua elevacio am la qual elevas la codena segon la longuesa del cors, per que sian faytz cauteris segon la latitut del cos.	And let thy elevation be such that thou dost elevate the cord along the length of the body so that cauteries may be made according to the breadth of the body.
E aprop entromet les dos vernimentz, ignitz mot, en aquel entro que am aquels penetres la codena de la autra part.	And having entered both vents, insert them, burning much, into that through which thou dost penetrate the cord on the other side.
E aprop extrayt le cauteri; e donc son faytz quatre cauteris.	And then extract the cautery; and thus are made four cauteries.
E si voys, cauteriza am cauteri havent tres vernimentz.	And if thou wishest, thou mayst cauterize with a cautery having three vents.
E aprop tu cura le cauteri pus que aia laysat de getar brac per trops jorns, quar mays es comferent que las autras causas precedentz en la curacio.	And then thou shouldst cure the cauteries, since it has left of burning for many days, because it is more effective than other causes that we have mentioned in treatment.
Capitol .xxxi.	**Chapter 31.**
De cauterizacio de ydropici.	Of cauterization of hydrocele.
Cauteri no catz en ydropici sino en alcinte3 propriament.	Cauteries are not put in a hydrocele except in certain cases properly.
Quan tu curas le ydropic am las manieyras de curacio las quals havem ditas en la divisio e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que aquel cauterizes am quatre cauteris en le cercuit del embelic e am un cauteri sobre l’estomac, e am autre cauteri sobre le fietge, e am autre cauteri sobre la melsa, e am dos cauteris entre les spondils del dos, e un cauteri en lo dreyt del pietz, e am autre cauteri sobre l’estomac.	When thou dost cure the hydrocele with those ways of treatment that we have said in its division and if thou findest not that it helps, then thou shouldst cauterize with four cauteries around the navel and with one cautery on the stomach, and another cautery on the liver, and another cautery on the womb, and two cauteries between the vertebrae of the back, and one cautery on the right side of the foot, and another cautery on the stomach.
E la quantitat de la profunditat del cauteri sia propdana a la spicitut de la codena.	And let the quantity of the depth of the cauteries be proportioned to the thickness of the cord.
E aprop layssa le cauteri ubert per so que gete brac per lonc temps.	And then let the cautery remain inserted until it has burned for a long time.
E no evacuas le malaute de curacio aprop le cauteri am aquo que cove per que sian agreguadas a lu doas entencios, e sira festinada a lu am ajutori sanacio.	And thou shouldst not remove the disease from treatment immediately after the cautery with that which is necessary in order that two intentions may be added to it and healing may be hastened with its help.
La forma del cauteri am lo qual es cauterizat lo ventre sia clavilh segon que la forma de aquel es desus precedent, e es aquel am le qual es cauterizat le dos sia olivar segon qu’es precedent a la sua forma.	The form of the cautery with which the belly is cauterized should be like a small club as we have said above regarding its shape, and that with which the back is cauterized should be olive-shaped as we have said previously regarding its shape.
Capitol .xxxii.	**Chapter 32.**
De cauterizacio de pes e de las coyssas.	Cauterization of feet and thighs
Quan les pes so apostematz en ydropitz e so repletz de aygua sitrina, cove que cauterisas les pes sobre le dos del pe in nocrati aquo que es entre le auricular e le anular, e eleva la tua ma am le cauteri e no torses aquel; e aprop eleva la tua ma, e no retornes aquela de tot, quar l’aygua satrina rezuda.	When the feet are swollen in dropsy and full of serous fluid, you should cauterize them on the back of the foot between the heel and ankle, raise your hand with the cautery and do not twist it; then raise your hand again and return the cautery completely, for serous fluid will exude.
Es le cauteri segon aquesta forma: E aprop fay sobre las doas coyssas dos cauteris, e en quascuna coysa sia feyt cauteri am la extremitat del cauteri cutellar.	The cautery is made in this way: Then make two cauteries on both thighs, and on each thigh there should be made a cautery with the tip of the cautery shaped like a small knife.
E sia le cauteri segon la longitut de la coyssa: i dejos le denolh e l’autre jos le mieg loc de la coyssa; e sobre quascuna coyssa dos cauteris.	The cautery should be made along the length of the thigh, one below the kneecap and the other below the middle of the thigh; and on each thigh there should be two cauteries.
E layssa la plagua uberta ses curacio per lonc temps per so que alcuna aygua resuda de lu.	Leave the wound uncovered until it is healed, so that no fluid accumulates from it.
E aprop cura le am aquelas causas las quals havem ditas.	Then treat according to the causes which have been mentioned [above].
Capitol .xxxiii.	Chapter XXXIII
De cauterizacio de cos de ventre.	Of the cautery of the body for abdominal pain.
Quan cos de ventre es per freg e per humiditat entro que debelice las vertutz, so es la vertut digestiva e retentiva, las quals so en l’estomac e en les budels, e es curat aquo am las manieyras de curacio e no confereys, e vezes le malaute suffertan cauteri de vertut exhiberant, lahoras cauteriza aquel am gran cauteri sobre le sieu stomac segon que a precedit en la cauterizacio del estomac, am le cauteri del cercle e am quatre cauteris en le cercuit del embelic subtils, am cauteri clavilh subtil; e am cauteri sobre le alcatin sobre alozis gran, o am dos cauteris.	When abdominal pain is due to friction and moisture within that debilitates the organs, such as digestion and retention, which are located in the stomach and intestines, it should be treated with the methods of treatment described earlier [in this work], without any addition. Sometimes, however, patients suffering from this condition may require cautery for the exhibition of their virtue. Therefore, cauterize them on their stomach with a large cautery according to what has been described previously regarding the cautery of the stomach, using a circular cautery and four subtle cauteries around the navel with a pointed cautery; and cauterize also above the bladder with a large cautery or two cauteries.
E si vezes las humiditatz exhuberants e le malaute aquo tollerant, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre le pentenilh e sobre les budels, e fort leu ajustant dos cauteris sobre l’estomac e prop dels inguonas, quar es curacio perficent de juvament de la qual no erras.	And if the excessive moisture and illness are tolerated by the patient, then cauterize them on the penis and above the intestines, and place two cauteries closely together on the stomach near the groin, for this is a perfect cure from which there can be no error.
Capitol .xxxiv.	Chapter XXXIV
De cauterizacio de emorroydas antiquas.	"On the cauterization of ancient hemorrhoids."
Quan so en la natura derier emorroydas antiquas o una de humors grossas fregas o de humiditatz corrompudas, e son curadas am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no confereys la tieua curacio, lahoras cauterisa am tres cauteris sobre le pus dejos spondilh del dos petit e petit triangular, e am cauteri desus le ombelic cays per dos ditz.	"When they are in the last stage of ancient hemorrhoids or one of them is rubbed by thick humors or corrupted humidity, and they are cured with what has been said in the division and their cure does not conform, then cauterize them with three cauteries over the pus on both sides of the small triangle, and with a cautery above the navel through two such."
E si doptas que l’estomac de lu sia enfregidat e la vianda de lu no sia degerida, e la cara de lu vezes apostemada, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre l’estomac am gran cauteri segon que es precedit; e am un cauteri sobre fietge, e am autre cauteri sobre la melsa de lu am cauteri clavilh, e leyssa le cauteri per alcun temps ubert, e aprop cura lu entro que sia sanat.	"And if you think that the stomach of the patient is cold and their food is not digested, and their face appears pale and yellowish, then cauterize it on the stomach with a large cautery according to what has been stated before; and with one cautery on the liver, and with another cautery on the lower abdomen with a pointed cautery, leaving the cautery there for some time until the interior is healed."
Capitol .xxxv.	"Chapter XXXV."
De cauterizacio de atheyl aprop la abscizio de lor.	**On cauterizing hemorrhoids near an abscess of theirs.**
Quan tu abscindes atheyl, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri que es asemblat a ray.	When you amputate arteries, then you ignite the cautery that is assembled like a ray.
Aprop entremet aquel ignit en aquel atheyl abscis, e ultima la tieua ma entro que pervengua le cauteri al orifici de la vena de la qual ve la sanc.	Insert this ignited cautery into that artery you have cut off and bring your hand close to it until the cautery reaches the opening of the vein from which blood flows.
E fay aquo una vetz o doas, quar si achieyl son trops, lahoras cauteriza quascun de lor segon que havem recontat, e aprop cura aquels am aquo que confereys a lor dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And do this once or twice, for if the arteries are too many, then cauterize each of them according to what we have described, and apply cure to those that you bind afterwards until they heal.
E si cauterizas am gran cauteri sobre alquatin, es mays derier en juvament.	And if you cauterize with a large cautery over some area, it will cause more harm than good.
Capitol .xxxvi.	Chapter XXXVI
De cauterizacio de fistolas que son faytas en la natura derie en las partidas de lu.	On the cauterization of fistulas that are naturally present in the parts of the groin.
Quan la natura no obeziys a la obra la qual havem recomtada en son loc, e·l pacient es espaventat per aquo, sia sanat am cauteri.	When nature does not follow the treatment that we have recommended for it, and the patient is frightened by this, then it should be healed with cautery.
Donc quan ad alcun ve fistola en la natura derier, e es antiquada, corro sania de lu e humiditatz corrompudas, e donc aquo que es pus digne que cove es que proes aquela am tenta subtil, e aprop conoys la quantitat de la profunditat de lu am la devant dita tenta.	Therefore, when there is some vein fistula in the groin naturally present and it is old, corrupted with corrupt matter and humidity, then it is more appropriate to treat that with a thin probe, and thus know the quantity and depth of it with the aforementioned probe.
Aprop igneys le cauteri que es semblant a ray.	Then ignite the cautery which resembles a ray.
E aprop met aquel cauteri ignit en aquesta fistula, e segon la quantitat en la qual intrec la tenta.	And then insert that ignited cautery into this fistula, according to the quantity in which the probe entered it.
E itera sobre aquela le cauteri entro que sian comburitz aquels cors corrumputz tost una veguada o dos o tres, segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	And repeat this cautery until those corrupt bodies are burned up entirely once or twice or three times, according to the quantity of your necessity.
E guarda te de combustio de nervi e de vena; o si fistula va al cors de la vesica o al cors del budel, lahoras guarda te de totz aquels locz; e no fassas aquo sino quan la fistula es en loc carnos e cogitas que no es penetrant.	And beware of burning the nerves and veins. If the fistula goes into the body of the bladder or the body of the intestine, then you should be careful with all those places; and do not do this unless the fistula is in a fleshy place and you think that it is not penetrating.
E aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat.	And then dress the wound until it heals.
E si le loc es sigillat, e so abscindidas de lu las materias, e roman ayssi per lonc temps, lahoras sapias que ja es curat entierament.	And if the wound is sealed, and its matter has been cut off from it, and it remains like that for a long time, then you should know that it is entirely healed.
E si las materias no so de lu ostadas, lahoras sapias que es penetrant o en le preon de lu os corromput, o cays aquo de aquelas causas de las quals vindra rememoracio en son loc.	And if the matter is not taken away from it, then you should know that it is penetrating or that there is some corruption in its front or that it is due to those causes which will be remembered in their place.
Capitol .xxxvii.	Chapter 37
De cauterizacio dels ronhos.	Of the cauterization of running sores
Quan en les ronhos endeve dolor per freg o per grossa ventozitat, e per aysso le coyt del malaute es amermat, lahoras cove que cauterizes aquel sobre les ronhos am cauteri sobre quascun ronho am cauteri clavilh del qual precesic la rememoracio.	When in the running sores there is pain from friction or rough windiness, and because of this the course of the illness has worsened, then you should cauterize that over the sores with a cautery on each sore with a needle-shaped one, about which there will be mention.
E fort leu cauterizam am le segon un petit dejos, per que vindran tres cauteris liniatz, e donc siran mays deriers en juvament.	And use a strong cautery with the second one a little bit later, so that three cauteries in succession follow each other, and thus they will be more lasting in their effect.
Capitol .xxxviii.	Chapter 38
De cauterizacio de la vesica.	"Of cauterization of the bladder."
Quan accideys en la vesica debelitat e mollificacio per freg e per humiditatz ayssi que·l malaute la urina no retengua, lahoras cauteriza aquel en la partida pus dejos sobre la vesiqua, la hon comensan les pels del pentenilh, e cauteriza am un cauteri en la partida dreyta, e am autre en la senestra de lu.	"When the bladder suffers debilitation and softening due to friction and moisture such that the patient cannot retain urine, then cauterize it at the opening where the pubic hair begins, cauterizing on the right side with one cautery iron, and on the left side with another."
E sia la longitut de quascun cauteri segon la cantitat dels not del pous; e cauteriza aquel am cauteri en la partida pus bassa del dos, o am dos cauteris si es necessitat.	"And let each cautery iron be of a length according to the number of hairs at the entrance; and cauterize thus at the lower part of the pubic hair, using one or two cauteries as needed."
E sia cauteri clavilh segon que es procesit.	"Let it be an awl-shaped cautery."
Capitol .xxxix.	"Chapter XXXIX."
De cauterizacio de la mayra.	"The cauterization of the uterus."
Quan veno en la mayra freg e humiditatz, e per aysso es prohibida enpreignacio, e son corrompudas las mestruas de lu, e es tardada la provocacio de lor, e accideys dolor deves le haveniment de lor, lahoras cove que·l loc sia cauterizat am tres cauteris en le circuit del ombelic, ayssi cum havem dit en le cauteri de la vesica; e am cauteri sobre le loc pus dejos del dos, o am dos cauteris, e sia le cauteri clavilh.	"When friction and moisture come to the uterus causing it to be unsuitable for conception, corrupting its menses, delaying their onset, and causing pain at their time of appearance, then let the area be cauterized with three awl-shaped cauteries around the navel, as mentioned in the cautery of the bladder, and also cauterize on the lower part of the pubic hair with one or two cauteries."
Capitol .xl.	"Chapter XL."
De cauterizacio de la dislocacio de l’anqua.	"The cauterization for dislocation of urine."
Quan humiditatz moucozas so efundudas a la partida de la anqua, e so faytas causas del yssiment del sieu loc, e senhal de lu es que la coyssa es prolonguada sobre l’autre quan so comparadas entre lor.	"When moist humors are discharged from the urethra causing its displacement and the cause of this is not apparent externally, a sign of which is that one part appears prolonged over another when they are compared together."
E le loc de la dislocacio es atrobat en lu quays boyt.	"The location of the dislocation can be found in the lower belly."
Adonc cove que cauterizas le malaute sobre la partida de la anqua de lu am cauteri a sercle semblant, pus que tu auras senhat am tenta en le cercuit de la partida ayssi cum es revolguda, e per so que la partida caia el mieg loc del cercle.	"Then you should cauterize the disease on the opening of the urethra with a circular cautery around it, after first indicating with a probe the circumference of its opening as it is turned. Thus let the opening fall in the middle of the circle."
E sia le cauteri del qual precedit la forma en la cauterizacio del estomac.	"And let the cautery be of such size and shape as to fit that used in cauterizing the stomach."
E si aquest cauteri no es a tu present, lahoras cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris am cauteri olivar gran.	"And if this cautery is not at hand, then cauterize with three olive-shaped cauteries of large size."
E sia fayt le cauteri segon la quantitat de la ispicitut de tota la codena; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	"And let the cautery be made according to the quantity and extent of the inflammation along the entire length of the urethra, and afterwards cure the area until it heals."
Capitol .xli.	"Chapter XLI."
De cauterizacio de la vena sciatica.	"Regarding cauterization of the sciatic vein."
Quan dolor ve en la partida de anqua, e so causa de lu freg et humiditatz, le malaute es curat am aquo que havem dit e no confereys, e aquo es antiquat, lahoras cove que tu lacses le malaute de humors grosses am pillulas fetidas o am pillulas artificials o semblantz; e aprop cauteriza aquel.	"When pain occurs at the opening of the urethra caused by friction and moisture, if the disease is not cured by what we have said and has become chronic, then you should remove it with fetid pills or artificial ones resembling them; and afterwards cauterize it."
E la manieyra del cauteri en aquela es segon dos manieyras: o cauteri am medicinas comburentz, o cauteri am foc.	"And the manner of cautery in this case is according to two methods: either cauterize with burning medicines or cauterize with fire."
Sira segon dos manieyras scientas, de las quals es la una que cauterizes aquel sobre la partida de l’ancha de lu am tres cauteris triangulatz segon aquesta forma; e fay am aquels bona profunditat.	"There are two known methods for this: one of which is to cauterize the area around the opening of the urethra with three triangular cauteries according to this shape, and let them be well penetrating."
E sia le spazi le qual es entre cascun cauteri la quantitat de la grossitut del dit e si le cauteri olivar o gran.	"And let the space between each cautery be equal to the thickness of a finger; if olive-shaped or large cauteries are used."
Mays alcunas veguadas sia le cauteri sobre le mieg loc sobre le cap de l’anquan per que son quatre cauteris.	"But sometimes it may be necessary to place one cautery on the middle point above the opening of the urethra, making a total of four cauteries."
E si vols, cauteriza am le cercle del qual es precesida la forma en la cauterizacio de la dislocacio de l’anqua, la i que sia cercle continent e comburey la ispicitut de tota la codena.	"And if you wish to do so, cauterize with the circle of which the form is prescribed in the cautery for dislocation of urine, making sure it is a continuous circle and burns the inflammation along the entire length."
E aquesta es la manieyra de cauteri in ciatiqua quan dolor es adherent al anqua e no es estenduda entro a la coyssa.	"This is the method of cautery for sciatica when pain is adherent to the urethra and does not extend within the testicle."
Mays si es estenduda entro a la coyssa, lahoras cauteriza aquel am dos cauteris sobre la coyssa sobre le loc al qual envireys le malaute que es la dolor; e am un cauteri sobre la cavilha per quatre ditz un pauc deves la part cilvestra.	"But if it extends within the testicle, then cauterize that area with two cauteries on the testicle above the point where you feel the pain, and one cautery on the thigh about four fingerbreadths below the right side."
E si le cauteri cutellar, e sia la profunditat del cauteri segon la quantitat de la ispicitut de la codena.	"And if using a cutting cautery, let the depth of the cautery be according to the quantity of inflammation along the length of the urethra."
E si le malaute envireys que la dolor es estenduda entro al loc prop les ditz des pes, lahoras cauteriza aquel aqui on envireys am cauteri per tres puntz o quatre o mays si indigeys de aquel.	"And if you find that the pain extends to the area around the said testicles, then cauterize there where you feel it with three, four, or more cauteries as needed."
E si le malaute envireys dolor esser dejos le donolh ves la coyssa, lahoras cauteriza aquel aqui am un cauteri cutellar.	"And if you find that the pain is felt behind the testicle, then cauterize there with one cutting cautery."
E guarda te en tota cauterizacio que no ultimes am le cauteri en tant que comburas nervi o gran arceria, e que per aquo a tu es sobre le malaute mal noccument o contraccio.	"And in all cauteries be careful not to burn nerves or large arteries with the cautery, for if you do so, you will cause harm or contraction to the affected area."
E yeu ja e vist un e autre de aquels les quals cauterizero sobre la cavilha e ultimero en la cauterizacio, e la cama foc inflada entro que la tumor aconseguit lo pe, e foc perforat e corromput tot le pe.	"I have seen some people who cauterized on the thigh and burned too deeply in their cautery, causing the limb to swell up to the knee, with gangrene setting in and destroying all the flesh."
E aprop accidic fort solucio de ventre, e aprop aquo la mort.	"And afterwards, apply a strong solution of vinegar, and then death will ensue."
E si la dolor es en dos partidas ensemps cauteriza quascuna segon aquesta manieyra.	"And if the pain is in two places at once, cauterize each one according to this method."
E diysero les savis alcus en la cauterizacio de anqua cauteri del qual aquesta es la manieyra: fay semblant a cercle de ferr del qual le cercuit sia la maytat de un palm; e sia deves le sieu orrifici segon la grossesa de un os de datil o mens un pauc.	"And some wise men have said concerning the cautery of urine, that it should resemble an iron ring whose circumference is about a palm in length; and it should be placed on its edge according to the thickness of a date stone or less."
E dedintz aquel cercle sia un autre tertz; e sia le spazi le qual es entre lor la quantitat del notz del pous; e sian aquels cercles ubertz de dos partidas; e sia la longitut de aquels cays un notz o dos notz, e fay en aquels margue de ferr decentment apparelhat en les cercles; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	"And within that circle there should be another third one; and the space between them should be equal to the thickness of a knuckle; and those circles should be open at two points; and their length should be one or two knuckles, and they should have decently sharpened edges made of iron in these circles; and this is their form:"
Aprop sia ignit en le foc entro que s’enrogesisca e gete scintillas, e aprop sia pausat sobre la partida del anqua, le malaute colcat sobre le latz sa.	"And first it should be heated in the fire until it becomes red-hot and emits sparks, and then it should be placed on the opening of the urethra with the diseased side facing down."
E donc cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris redontz en una veguada.	"And then cauterize that area with three red-hot cauteries at once."
E aprop layssa aquel per tres jorns; aprop emplastre aquel am boder e layssa la plagua uberta per trops dias; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	"And afterwards leave it alone for three days; then plaster it with a poultice and allow the wound to remain open for too many days; and cure it with ointment until it is healed."
Diys Albucasis : o, filhs, de aquesta specia de cauteri pauc havem usat per la terror del reguardament de lu, e per aquo que paucs havem trobatz les quals reguardan sobre lu.	"Albucasis says: 'O son, concerning this type of cautery we have used it little because of the fear of disfiguring it, and therefore we have found few who regard it.'"
Mays dels bos cauteris a lu qui les sufferta, et atroba am aquel le loc de lu.	"But the good cauteries are those which are well endured by the patient, and are found on that part."
Mays cauteri am medicinas adhurentz es que tu fassas dos cercles haventz armula perforada en la qual deyssen le guaffo de la porta de ferr; sia la longuitut de la paretz en la nauteza de lor sian dos nozes o quays aquels.	"But cauteries with adherent medicines are those which you should make two circles having a hole pierced in each of them through which the hot metal from the fire is poured; let the thickness of their walls be equal to two knuckles or somewhat less."
E si le spazi le qual es entre quascu la quantitat de la grossitut del dit; e sian ubertz dejos e desus, e sian que contenguan se entre lor segon aquesta forma:	"And let the space between them be equal to the thickness of a finger; and they should be open on both sides and above, and should contain this form between them:"
E aprop pausa sobre la partida de la anqua le malaut jasent sobre le latz sa, e comprem la tua ma sobre la partida de la anqua; e aprop pren de aygua cauda e fon la entre dos cercles, e la qualiditat de aquela sia am le foc petit a petit, e te aquela per la quantitat de una hora, e sufferta le malaute la mordicacio e la adhustio de lu — quar aquel atrobo mordicacio ayssi cum de foc — entro que cesse la mordicacio.	"And then place it on the opening of the urethra with the diseased side facing down, and compress your hand over the opening of the urethra; and then take some boiling water and pour it between the two circles, and heat that gradually with fire until you have done so for about an hour, allowing the patient to endure its burning sensation and adhering power — for that has a biting effect like fire — until the burning ceases."
E aprop eleva la tua ma am le instrument et abstergeys l’aygua cauda de tota la anqua am aygua dousa.	"And then raise your hand with the instrument, and wash away all the boiling water from the urethra with warm water."
E aprop leyssa aquel per tres jorns e pausa sobre aquel boder entro que sia la negror de la adhustio remauguda, e leyssa aquo per alcus jorns, e correra de lu poyredura; aquest es derier en juvament.	"And then leave it alone for three days and apply a poultice to it until the blackness of adhesion is gone, leaving it alone for some days, and afterwards apply a linseed oil dressing; this is the last stage of treatment."
E aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	"And then cure it with ointment until it is healed."
E si la dolor es extenduda entro la coyssa o la camba, fay a lu estatua en lu que contengua aygua segon que es feyt en la anqua engualment.	"And if the pain extends to the scrotum or thigh, make him sit in hot water bath according to what is done for a urinary catheter."
E aquesta es la manieyra de aygua cauda, e yeu ja he scrit aquela en le tractat de la rectificacio de medicinas.	"And this is the method of cupping, which I have already written about in my treatise on the correction of medicines."
Recipe de alcali e de caus no extinta de amdos ana partida una, e trissa les e pausa en una ola nova de la qual la partida dejos sia perforada per un petit trauc, segon la quantitat que intre en lu ray.	"Take equal parts of alkali and unslaked lime, mix them together, grind them finely, and place them in a new earthenware pot with a small hole pierced in the bottom according to the amount that will enter it."
E pausa dejos le fons de la ola autra ola enveyriada, e gete sobre aquel alcali e caus viva de aygua doussa la qual cobra aquels per un dit, e pus que tu compremes aquels am la tieua ma per bona compressio, e leyssa la hola que deyssenda de lu aygua aguda en la partida dejos a la ola enveyriada.	"And place another inverted pot on top of the alkali and lime, then pour sweet water into it until it reaches about one finger's width above those materials. Then press them together with your thumb using good compression, allowing only the water from the upper pot to drip down through the hole in the bottom of the lower pot."
E aprop ajusta tota aquela aygua, e geta la sobre autra caus viva e autre alcali renovelatz, quar aquela lahoras sira de mot forta acuitat, la qual es aministrada en motas operacios de medicina e en cauterizacio dels autres membres, quar operacio fa de foc.	"And afterwards adjust all that water, and pour it onto fresh lime and new alkali, because at this point it will have very strong caustic power, which is administered in many medical operations and in cauterizations of other members, as it is an operation involving fire."
E so de las medicinas alcunas am las quals es cauterizat ancha, ayssi cum tezizic e mel anacrat e caus am sabo enayssi que sian mesclatz.	"And thus some medications are used for cauterizing wide areas, such as those made with turmeric and honey mixed together with lime soap."
E Gualia recontet de un home dels antics la operacio e la curacio am la qual es curada dolor de anqua e de vena sciatica, e magnifiquet mot be esser de aquel, e diys que no hac necessitat de autra curacio, e quar es sanat per una veguada ayssi cum recomtec, quar fort leu aquel intrec en banh e eysic ja sa d’aquel.	"And Galen recounts an operation and cure with which he cured pain in the ankle and sciatica of the thigh, and highly praises it, saying that no other treatment is necessary for it. For it is healed by a single application, as he recounts, because that mixture enters the bath and exercises its effect."
Et es que sia pres de certarragi vert, e si no es atrobat vert, sia presa figua recent; e mot sia trissada am un pauc de grays e sia pausat sus la anqua en la qual es la dolor, o en la coyssa, o en la camba, e sia liat.	"And if purslane juice is not available, then fresh fig juice should be taken. It should be well ground with a little salt and placed on the ankle where there is pain, or on the thigh, or on the hip, and wrapped up."
E sia layssat per la cantitat de tres horas o per la quantitat que·l malaute centa cedacio de la adhustio.	"And it should be left in place for a period of three hours, or until the affected area shows signs of softening due to the application."
E aprop met aquel en banh e donc quan le cors de lu sia enrozat, entromet aquel en le sol, quar la dolor cessa e es sanat.	"And then put that plaster on a bath, and when the body has become warm, immerse it in the sun, because the pain ceases and is healed."
E sapias que no cove que alcu use de cauteri am aquestas medicinas sino aprop la evacuacio del cors.	"And know that one should not use cautery with these medications unless it is necessary for the evacuation of the body."
Mays ja Escorides diysec que quan am fenda de cabra la vena stretica es cauterizada, aprofieyra a lu mo be; e sia le cauteri am lu segon aquesta manieyra: sia presa lana e sia enbeguda en oli antic, e sia pausat entre le pous del pe e entre le fossil.	"But Dioscorides says that when the thigh vein is cauterized with goat's beard, it should be done well; and the cautery should be done in this manner: take wool, impregnate it with old oil, and place it between the pouches of the knee and behind the heel."
E aprop pren fenda de cabra secca e emflasma aquela am foc entro que sia fayta carbo; e aprop pausa lu sobre la lana e leysa la entro que sia estengida.	"And then take dry goat's beard, inflame it with fire until it becomes charcoal, and place it on the wool, wrapping it up until it is well extended."
E aprop itera aquo, e no cessas far aquo entro que·l scintiment de la mordicacio pervengua entro al anqua e repausa la dolor.	"And repeat this process until you feel that the sensation of pain has reached the ankle, and then remove the cautery, and the pain will be gone."
Et aquesta manieyra de cauteri es apelat cauteri de vaquas.	"And this manner of cautery is called cautery of goats."
Capitol .xlii.	"Chapter XLII."
De cauterizacio de dolor de dos.	"Of cauterizing pain in the hip."
Alcunas veguadas dolor es en le dos per tropas causas, cum per cazement o per percucio o per superflua evacuacio, e per causas ad aquelas semblantz, per infusio de materia frega e humida.	"Some pains in the back are caused by various factors, such as by a blow or a fall or by excessive evacuation, and by similar causes due to the infiltration of moist and humid material."
E cauteri no catz sino en aquesta sola specia la qual es fayta per efusio de materia frega.	"And cautery is applied only in this single case where it occurs as a result of an effusion of hot material."
Donc cove, aprop evacuacio del malaute am pillulas fitidas e am semblant a lor, que sian faytas sobre·l dos en le qual es la dolor tres linhas segon la latitut de lu, pus que senhas am tentha en quascuna linha v cauteris o mays, segon la quantitat que ve de la tolleransa del malaute e de la vertut de lu.	"Therefore, after evacuating the pain with pills such as those mentioned earlier, which should be placed on the affected area in three lines according to its width, cauterize each line once or more depending on the severity of the pain and the strength of the cautery."
E sia fayta cauterizacio am cauteri de punt.	"And the cautery should be done with a pointed cautery."
E si vols, cauteriza am tres cauteris o am quatre am cauteri clavilh medial segon aquesta forma:	"If you wish, cauterize it with three or four cauteries using a blunt-tipped cautery in this manner:"
Capitol .xliii.	"Chapter XLIII."
De cauterizacio al comensament de gilbositat.	"Of cauterizing the beginning of jaundice."
Motas veguadas endeve aquesta malautia als petitz enfantz; e senhal del comensament de lu en les enfantz es que accideys sobre lor estrectura en le ale eves la elevacio e·l movement.	"Very often this condition occurs in young children, and the sign of its onset in children is that they become yellowish around the eyes and have difficulty raising them."
E atrobas en le derier espondil del dos e dels notz de lu que ja comensa a sobremontar sobre les autres spondils.	"And you will notice this on the last thoracic vertebra of the back, where it begins to stick out above the others."
E donc quan tu vezes aquo e voles prohibir, lahoras cauterisa aquel am cauteri que sia cercle segon aquesta forma:	"Therefore, when you see this and wish to prevent it, cauterize that area with a ring-shaped cautery in this manner:"
que prengua le cauteri sobre tota partida del spondilh engualment.	"That the cautery should be placed evenly over the entire surface of the vertebra."
E si vols, cauteriza en le circuit del spondilh am le cauteri de punt dos linhas o tres.	"If you wish, cauterize around the perimeter of the vertebra with a pointed cautery twice or three times."
E sian les puntz propdas entre lor.	"And let the points be close together."
E aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat am aquo que havem dit.	"And then care for the area until it is healed using what we have said."
Mays guarda que cauteri no sia administrat en gelbositat que sia fayta per spasme de nervi.	"But beware that cautery should not be used in cases of jaundice caused by spasm of the nerves."
Capitol .xliv.	"Chapter XLIV."
De cauterizacio de podagra e de dolor de juncturas.	"On the cautery of gout and joint pain."
Quan dolor de juncturas son faytas per humors fregas les quals so enfundutz a quascun membre del cors, lahoras quan veno dolors en los pes, de costuma dels metges es que aquo apelen podragua propriament.	"When joint pains are caused by hot humors that accumulate in each limb of the body, then when pain comes on the feet, it is usually called gout properly by doctors."
E donc cum es curada podagra de causa frega am manieyra de cura e no so remaugudas las dolors, lahoras las remau cauteri.	"And therefore to cure gout caused by heat with a cautery method and the pain is not removed, then cauterization should be used."
E es que tu cauterizas aquel aprop evacuacio en le circuit de la junctura del pe am motz cauteris.	"Then cauterize near evacuation in the circuit of the joint of the foot with hot irons."
E sia cauteri olivar del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	"And let it be an olive-oil cautery, of which this is the form:"
E si es necessitat que puntz sia fayt sobre la fassia del pe, lahoras fay am cauteri de punt.	"If it is necessary to make a puncture on the fascia of the foot, then do so with a cautery needle."
E si las dolors pujan entro als denolhs o a las autras juncturas, e aquo motas vetz s’endeve, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre quascun donolh am tres cauteris o quatre de tota partida am aquest cauteri olivar.	"And if the pains go into the joints or to other joints, and this is done many times, then cauterize there on each pain with three or four cauteries altogether with this olive-oil cautery."
E si motz cauteris que aquestz cauteris sian a tu necessaris, lahoras cauteriza aquel e no premas trop la tua ma am le cauteri abans, sia tant solament enviro la specitut de la codena.	"And if many cauteries are necessary for this, then cauterize there and do not press too hard with your hand on the cautery before, but only around the circumference of the joint."
E si las dolors pugan entro al donolh e·l dos, lahoras aministra le cauteri le qual havem dit en le sieu capitol.	"And if the pains go into the joint and the two sides, then administer the cautery which we have mentioned in its chapter."
E si las dolors so en las mas tant solament, e es apelada suagra, lahoras puncta en le circuit dels focils ayssi cum se revolvo, puncta en aquels dos linhas.	"And if the pains are only on one side and it is called "suagra", then puncture in the circuit of the tendons thus as they turn, puncturing in those two lines."
E si reman de las dolors en les ditz, lahoras puncta en le cercuit dels focils sobre quascun notz e sobre la pinche de la ma.	"And if pains remain there, then puncture in the circuit of the tendons on each knot and on the palm of the hand."
E si las dolors pugan aprop alscus jorns als coydes o als muscles, lahoras cauteriza les quascus de tota part dels ajutoris.	"And if the pains go near to these joints to the knees or to the muscles, then cauterize those on each side of the helpers."
E no evacuas le malaute de bon regiment e de recepcio de medicinas, quar si es fayt bon regiment e flacma es evacuada am aquest cauteri sira sanat, Dieus ajudan.	"And do not evacuate the illness by good regimen and reception of medicines, for if it is done with good regimen and the matter is evacuated with this cautery alone, then it will heal, God helping."
Capitol .xlv.	"Chapter XLIV."
De cauterizacio de rompeduras.	Of cauterization of fractures.
Quan endeve rompedura en les angonars e diysendo les budels denant l’atela al genetiu, e aquo es comensan de aprop, lahoras cove que tu mandas al malaute layssar la sua comestio en le sieu dia e que use de causas leniens per so que la fenda deyssenda del sieu ventre.	"When a fracture occurs in the joints and bowels breaking before the anus of the genitals, and this begins to approach, then you must order the patient to leave his food for that day and to use soft foods so that the opening from his belly may relax."
E aprop segua le malaute entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos, e comanda a lu que tengua le sieu ale entro que sia foro getat o aparesca l’atela o·l budels.	"And then follow the patient between your hands on his back and command him to hold his breath so that his anus may be opened or appear."
E aprop retorna aquel am les tieus ditz e senha am tenta la ruptura sobre le os del pentenilh am senhal la extremitat del qual sia semblant a la maytat de cercle a las subiranas partidas del cors.	"And then return with your hands and search for the fracture on the bone of the pelvis with its extremity resembling half of a circle near the divided parts of the body."
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	"And then prepare the cautery of which this is the shape:"
entro que sia mot rog e gete cintilhas.	"Until it becomes moist and glistens."
E aprop reduzeys le budel o l’atela a la sua conquavitat, e aprop pause la sua ma sobre le loc per so que le budel no yesqua.	"And then reduce the intestine or hernia to its cavity, and place your hand over the area to prevent it from coming out."
E tu ja has ubert entre las coyssas del malaute e dejos lu as pausat un coyssi, et autre servent sia sus las cambas de lu, e autre sus le pietz de lu, le qual tengua las suas mas.	"Then you have opened the space between the patient's thighs and placed a cushion under them, another servant on their legs, another on their chest who holds their hands."
E aprop pausa le cauteri sobre aquel senhal am la tua ma am cauteri stan dreyt, e te aquel entro que am lu consieguas le os del pentenilh entro al mieg del duiduni; e itera am aquel autra veguada si a tu aquel no has conseguit en la primieyra veguada entro al os.	"And then place the cautery on that spot with your right hand holding the cautery, and follow that intestine until it joins the os penis in the middle of the scrotum; repeat this process again if you have not yet achieved success."
E observa saviament del ysiment del budel en la hora de la tua cauterizacio, que no comburas aquel budel per so que sobre le malaute no vengua in mort o autre gran malicia.	"And carefully observe the movement of the intestine during your cautery operation, ensuring that you do not burn it, lest great harm or death come to the patient."
E sapias que quan tu am le cauteri no atenhas le os, no confereys la tua operacio.	"And know that if you cannot grasp the bone with the cautery, your operation is not complete."
E cove que·l cauteri dels enfants sia subtil segon le gran e la mesura de lor.	"And it is necessary that the cautery for children be subtle according to their size and measure."
E aprop cura le loc del cauteri per tres dias am boder entro que sia remauguda la scara del foc.	"And then treat the wound with clean water for three days until the burn scar has healed."
E aprop cura aquel am les autres enguentz entro que sia sanat.	"Then treat it with other remedies until it is healed."
E le malaute sia jasent sobre le sieu dos per xl dias entro que sia sigillat le loc e la plagua.	"And the patient should lie on their back for forty days until the wound is sealed and the plague has passed."
E cove que pauses le nutriment de lu segon la longitut del temps de la curacio de lu le qual le linesca le ventre de lu, e que le budel no yesca fora deves le esforsament de guerir.	"And it is necessary to regulate the patient's diet according to the duration of their treatment, which will empty their stomach and prevent the intestines from protruding due to their efforts to recover."
E aprop quan se vol levar aprop xl dias, lahoras aministra liament decentment fayt, e tengua aquel per autres xl jorns.	"And then when it is time to get up after forty days, food should be administered gradually and cautiously for another forty days."
E sia mermat de trebalh e de replecio de vianda e de beure, e de votz vehementz, quar quan usa de aquest regiment de sanacio entiera sira sanat.	"And he should avoid hard work, excessive food and drink, and loud shouting, for if one follows this entire regimen of healing, they will be healed."
E yeu diyre la curacio de las rupturas en las autras partidas del ventre, e so al comensament, e vols que no treguan, lahoras cauterisa la ruptura d’aquel am cauteri redon segon la quantitat de lu, e sia aquo que es exhurit de la codena ayssi cum la tersa partida de lu; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit, e no es ajustat.	"And now I will discuss the treatment of ruptures in other parts of the abdomen. If such a rupture occurs suddenly and you wish it not to progress, then cauterize it with a round cautery according to its quantity, and it should be as wide as the third part of the intestine. Then treat it with water as we have said."
E ja diyssero alcus primiers que ruptura sia cauterizada am cauteri triangular segon aquesta forma, pus que es senhada am tenta:	"And some authorities say that such ruptures should be cauterized with a triangular cautery shaped thus, because they are pointed:"
e es pausada linha que eys per la latitut en le latz pus sobira de la ruptura, e autra linha al desus; e depausa la tua ma am un cauteri clavilh, mays le primier cauteri es pus leugier e milhor.	"And it is necessary to place a line that runs along the latitude on the side of the chest below the rupture, and another line above; then place your hand with a pointed cautery, but use the first cautery lightly."
Capitol .xlvi.	"The Forty-Sixth Chapter"
De cauterizacio de torcio.	"Of cauterization of twisted thread."
Quan endeve en alscus membres per cazement o per percussio dolor e persevera aquela dolor per lonc temps e no comfereys al u curacio am medicinas, lahoras cove que cauterizes am cauteri de punt.	"When pain occurs in the upper limbs due to fracture or percussion and persists for a long time without being relieved by treatment with medicines, then it is necessary to cauterize with a pointed cautery."
E sia le cauteri de tot membre segon la magnitut e la parvitat de lu, e vertut e develitat de lu, e locacio de torcio e dolor de lu.	"And the cautery should be of the appropriate size for the member according to its magnitude and smallness, strength and weakness, location of the twist and severity of the pain."
Donc si·s sanat per le primier cauteri, bo es; e sino, lahoras itera sobre lu le cauteri; quar de costuma de aquelas dolors es que sian punctatz de membre ad aquel membre le qual apropinque al u, per que cove que consieguas aquels am cauteri entro que·l malaute sia sanat.	"Therefore if it is healed by the first cautery, that's good. But if not, then apply the cautery again; for these kinds of pains often result from injury to a member near where the pain occurs, so it is necessary to treat those with cautery until the illness is healed."
Capitol .xlvii.	"The Forty-Seventh Chapter"
De cauterizacio de lepra.	"Of cauterization for leprosy."
Les lebros alcunas veguadas am cauteri per mot gran juvament, e magerment si la specia de lepra que es fayta per putrefaccio de flacma e de melencolia.	"Some lepers are occasionally cauterized with little benefit, but if the species of leprosy is caused by putrefaction of phlegm and melancholy, then caution is advised."
E donc cum tu vols cauterizar aquel, considera si la lepra es comussan e as aquela curada am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no deysen, ni esta, e temes sobre le malaute que la corrupcio comprehenda tot le cors de lu e tota la compleccio de lu, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre le cap am v cauteris: am un en le mieg loc del cap, e am le segon pus dejos de lu, eves le front a la fi dels cabels; e amdos sobre dos corns; e am un detras, sobre la nuca o servitz.	"And therefore, when you wish to cauterize someone with leprosy, consider whether it is contagious and if not, then proceed as described in the division above. However, be cautious about the illness so that corruption does not spread throughout their body and entire complexion. Therefore, cauterize them on the head with five cauteries: one in the middle of the head, another below it towards the forehead at the end of the hair; two on both horns; and one behind on the nape or back of the neck."
E ultima la tua ma am le cauteri un pauc entro que emprema en le os una petita empressio, e de lu sian deslocadas las scorsas, per so que la expiracio de grossas vapors sia alleujada de lu; e cauteriza sobre la melsa segon que es precesit.	"Lastly, press your hand on the cauteries a little bit until they imprint on the bone with a slight impression, and remove them quickly so that the scabs are dislodged, in order to alleviate heavy vapors exhaling from it. And cauterize the navel according to what is necessary."
E si la lepra es ja expanduda sobre le malaute e apar manifestament, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas aquel am aquels cauteris les quals havem ditz en le cap; e am cauteri sobre la extremitat del nas, e am dos cauteris sobre las doas maysselas, e am dos cauteris sobre dos spondils del col, e am vi cauteris sobre les spondils del dos, e am un gran sobre les spondils prop de la coeta, e un sobre la cotea , e am dos sobre las anquas, e am un sobre quascuna anqua, e am dos sobre les donols e un sobre quascun donolh, e am dos sobre les coydes, e am dos sobre les muscles, e am dos las teneretutz del sieu pietz; e cauteriza aquel sobre totas las juncturas dels ditz de las mas e dels pes, e sobre quascun talon dels sieus pes, e sobre les foscils de las suas mas.	"And if the leprosy has already spread over the person and appears manifestly, then you must cauterize them with those cauteries which we have mentioned for the head; and with cauteries on the tip of the nose, and two cauteries on each cheekbone, and two cauteries on each shoulder blade, and six cauteries on each vertebra of the back, and one large one on the vertebrae near the tailbone, and one on the tailbone itself, and two on each ankle, and one on each heel, and two on the knees, and one on each kneecap, and two on each elbow, and two on each wrist. And cauterize them on all the joints of those limbs and feet, and on each toe, and on the hollows of their palms."
E guarda te dels nervis les quals so sobre le talo que no comburas aquels.	"And beware of cauterizing the nerves which lie over the heel, lest you burn them."
E alcunas veguadas es cauterizat am un cauteri sobre le os del pentenilh e am autre sobre la boca del stomac, e autre sobre le fietge.	"Sometimes it is cauterized with one cautery on the breastbone and another over the mouth of the stomach, and yet another on the liver."
E sapias que quant mays ajustas cauteris, tant es mays juvatiu e mays conferent; e sapias que le malaute no ha en le cauteri dolor, ayssi cum han les sas, per so quar le cors de lu ja es stupefayt.	"And know that the more closely you apply cauteries, the greater the benefit and effectiveness. And know that the illness does not feel pain from the cautery, just as it feels no pain itself, because its body is already numb."
E cove que les cauteris sian grans o paucs segon les membres e las juncturas segon que es precedit de las specias dels ferramentz.	"And ensure that the cauteries are large or small according to the limbs and joints as described in the specifics of the instruments."
E aprop cura le cauteri am farina de errs coyta am mel e am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	"Also, take care to dress the cautery with powdered earth mixed with honey and with other dressings until it is healed."
Capitol .xlviii.	"Chapter XLVIII"
De cauterizacio de stupor.	"On the cauterization of stupor."
Quan alcun membre es stabozit o adormit e es curat am medicinas, olis e emplastres, e no es sanat, lahoras tu cauteriza aquel membre stabozit am cauteris segon que merita la grandesa del membre o la parvitat de lu.	"When some limb is paralyzed or numb and has been treated with medications, oils, and plasters but is not healed, then cauterize that paralyzed limb with cauteries according to its size."
E sia lo tieu cauteri intrant la ispicitut de la codena un pauc.	"And let your cautery enter the thickness of the skin a little bit."
E aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia sanat.	"Then dress it with ointment until it is healed."
E alscunas veguadas es cauterizada alcuna stupor le qual endeve a las mas e als pes, e als spondils del dos e ves le eysiment dels nervis les quals mavon aquel membre, e es remauguda la stupor.	"Sometimes, certain paralysis which affects the arms and legs, backbones, or any other limb is cauterized near the emergence of the nerves that cause that limb's paralysis, and the paralysis disappears."
Mays no prusuma sobre aquo sino aquel que es savi en la anotomia dels membre e de la egressio dels nervis tot le cors moventz.	"But let not anyone presume to do this except someone who is knowledgeable in the anatomy of limbs and the emergence of nerves throughout the entire moving body."
Capitol .xlix.	"Chapter XLIX"
De cauterizacio de albaras que es morfea.	"On branding of eyebrows that is disfiguring."
Quan albaras es antiqua e no comfereys a lu alcu dels enguentz de medicina, lahoras tu cauteriza sobre aquela am cauteri preon un pauc segon la quantitat de la specitut de la codena entro que sia remauguda la blancor e la color de lu, e la color de lu sia mudada.	"When eyebrows are ancient and do not conform to the customs of medicine, then you should brand them with a cautery a little according to the quantity of the specificity of the area that has been removed from their whiteness and color until it changes."
E aprop cura aquel am farina de errs e de lentilhas am oli rozat e am folhas de arnagrosa, e am sanc de colomba o am sanc de yronda, da cascuna sia una partida e totas sian mescladas, e aprop sia linit un drap e sus le loc sia pausat entro que sia sanat.	"And properly cure it with ground iris and lentils mixed with rose oil and fig leaves, and dove's blood or hen's blood, each one part of each, and all are mixed together. And properly a cloth should be placed on the location and paused until it is healed."
Capitol .l.	".I."
De cauterizacio de cranc.	"On branding of the crab."
Quan canser es comensan e vols aquel ostar, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteri de cercle en le circuit de lu ayssi cum es revolgut.	"When cancer begins and you wish to remove it, then brand it with a circular cautery in the circuit around it as it is rotated."
E diysero les savis que sia cauterizat am lo derier cauteri en le mieg loc; mays a mi no es vist aquo, quar temi que sia ulcerat, e yeu ja e vist aquo alcunas veguadas.	"And the wise say that it should be branded with the last cautery in the middle place; but this does not seem right to me, because I fear that it will become ulcerated, and I have seen this some few times."
E es pus dreyturier que sia cauterizat en le circuit de lu am cercle ayssi cum avem dit, o am motz cauteris.	"And it is more upright that it should be branded in the circuit around it with a circle as we have said, or with many cauteries."
Capitol .li.	".LII."
De cauterizacio de adubilati.	"On branding of hemorrhoids."
Quan alcun adubilati es tardat en maturacio, e aysso es per la superfluitat fazen aquela, o per etat del malaute, quar es vielh en decrepitat, de pauc sanc, o per le temps, e tu vols festinar en la maturacio de adubilati; lahoras cauteriza en le circuit de lu am motz cauteris petitz punctan; e aprop leyssa aquela quar ela fastinara en maturacio.	"When some hemorrhoids are delayed in maturation, and this is due to the superfluity present there, or due to the state of illness because it is old and decrepit, with little blood, or due to the time, and you wish to speed up the maturation of hemorrhoids; then brand around it with many small puncturing cauteries. And properly leave that alone until it matures."
Mays si tu vols la perforacio de lu am cauteri, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu: e depausa aquel en le mieg loc de adubilati entro que penetre la codena.	"But if you wish the perforation of it with a cautery, then heat the cautery of which this is the shape: and pause that in the middle place of hemorrhoids until the chain penetrates."
E si le cauteri en aquel loc que es pus dejos, per so que le cors del brac sia alleujat; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	"And if the cautery is placed in that location which is further away, so that the body of the arm may be relieved; and properly cure it until it is healed."
Capitol .lii.	".LIII."
De cauterizacio de corrodent.	"On branding of eroding areas."
Corrodent es corrupcio ambulant en le membre, la qual corrodeys aquel ayssi cum a foc comedent lenha secca.	"Eroding is wandering corruption in the limb, which erodes it just as dry wood is consumed by fire."
Donc si vezes aquel corrodent en loc le qual sufferte cauteri am foc, lahoras tu igneys cauteris clavils motz paucs, e grans segon que es convenent en aquel loc en le qual es corrodent.	"Therefore, if you wish to cauterize with fire the place where a burning sensation is felt, then heat iron nails, both small and large according to what is suitable for that location."
E aprop cauteriza aquel de tota partida entro que erradiques tota la corrosio e no romangua alcuna causa de lu.	"And in doing so, cauterize the entire affected area until you have eradicated all corrosion and no cause remains."
E aprop leyssa aquel per tres dias, e pausa sobre les locs cauterizats solpre trissat am oli mesclat entro que las scaras sian totas eradicadas e tota la corrupcio.	"Then let it rest for three days, and apply only oiled cloth over the cauterized areas until all scabs are eradicated and all corruption has healed."
E aprop cura aquel am enguentz carn engendrantz.	"And then treat it with new, fresh flesh."
Mays si aprop tres dias vezes que la carn nasca sana en la qual no es corrupcio, bo es; mays sino, lahoras itera le cauteri sobre aquo que es romas en les locs corrumputz.	If after three days the flesh appears healthy where there was no corruption, that is good; but if not, then repeat the cautery on what remains in the corrupted areas.
E corrodent es medicat alcunas vetz am medicina aguda, quar aquela es meza en loc de cauteri.	Sometimes corrosion is treated with medicine acutely because it acts like a cauterization.
Mays empero cauteri am foc es de pus leugier juvament.	However, cautery with fire is more gently helpful.
E yeu ja e dit la curacio de lu am medicina aguda en la divisio, e donc pren aquela quan de lu auras endegencia.	I have already said about the cure of it by acute medicine in the division, therefore take that when you begin to heal from it.
Capitol .liii.	Chapter LIII
De cauterizacio de claus e dels autres semblants.	About cautery of fistulas and other similar things.
Motas veguadas endeve a las partidas dejos del pe malautia que s’apela clau, e es causa grossa, fentrada, la qual ladeys le pe; e cauteri en aquels es segon dos manieyras, so es cauteri am foc e cauteri am aygua cauda.	Very often in the parts of the body called a fistula appears, which is a thick, inflamed thing that harms the flesh. Cautery for these is done in two ways: either by fire or boiling water.
Mays cauteri am foc es que igniscas le cauteri concau semblant a pena de voltor, le qual sia feyt de ferr segon la quantitat la qual contengua le clau de tota partida, e sia de subtils marguas.	But cautery by fire is done thus: heat the cautery tool resembling a chicken feather pen, which should be made of iron according to the size that contains the entire fistula. It should have thin edges.
E aprop pausa aquel ignit sobre le clau, e aprop revolveys la tua ma am le cauteri en le circuit del clau entro que·l cauteri pervengua a la profunditat del clau.	Then pause that heated tool on the fistula and slowly rotate your hand with the cautery around the fistula until it reaches the depth of the fistula.
E leyssa aquel per tres dias entro que comense getar brac.	Leave it for three days until it begins to heal.
E aprop emplastre aquel am malvas salvatges trissadas am sal, e leyssa le emplastre sobre aquel per una nuoyt, quar aquel sira eradicat de las suas razitz.	Then apply a plaster made of wild mallow leaves crushed with salt and leave it on overnight because it will draw out the inflammation from its roots.
E aprop cura le loc am enguent de carn generatiu entro que sia sanat.	Then treat the area with a salve made from animal fat until it is healed.
E si so no-convertitz, e motas veguadas accideysso en la superficia del cors, majorment en las mas e les pes, lahoras cove que tu aministres en aquels cauteri am aygua, e es que prenguas una quannula de eram o de ferr o de pena de voltor, e pausa aquela sobre le clau; e aprop geta en la quanula de aygua cauda pauca cantitat, e rete la tua ma, e tu revolveys aquela am compressio de la tua ma de tot, e sia enpremut le marge de la canula en la razit del clau, e atrobara la aygua cauda via al preon de la razit del cau; e espera le malaute un pauc la mordicacio de l’aygua cauda per una hora, e aprop remau aquela, quar le clau am las suas razitz sira erredicat.	And if it is not converted, and these often happen on the surface of the body, mainly on the breasts and legs, then you must administer cautery with boiling water thus: take a cannula made of bronze, iron or chicken feather pen and place it on the fistula. Then fill the cannula with a little boiling water and hold your hand steady, pressing the edge of the cannula into the root of the fistula so that the boiling water flows into the front of the fistula's root. Wait for about an hour until the pain from the boiling water has subsided, then remove it because the fistula with its roots will be eradicated.
E ayssi fe am aquels la i aprop l’autre entro que venguas sobre totz les quals de lor so en le cors.	Do this to all of them until they are completely healed on the body.
E aprop cura aquels pus que las razitz dels claus so erradicadas am aquo dels enguentz les quals la carn ve engenran.	Then treat those pustules where the roots of the fistulas have been eradicated with ointments that promote flesh growth.
Capitol .liiii.	Chapter 54
De cauterizacio de tremor.	Of cautery for trembling.
Quan endeve ad alcu tremor per freg en le nervi o per febre de causa frega, o per autra causa semblant, lahoras cove que tu cauterises aquel am quatre cauteris o am v sobre les spondils del dos, entre quascun spondilh am un cauteri; e am cauteri en le pietz de lu, e sobre l‘estomac de lu, am cauteri olivar.	When someone has trembling due to a chill in the nerves or fever caused by coldness or similar cause, then you should cauterize them with four cauteries or five placed on the vertebrae of the back between each one; and also place a cautery on their foot and another on their stomach using an olive-sized cautery.
E la tremor de lu se repausa e festina la sanetat de la malautia frega.	And his trembling will cease and hasten the healing of the cold illness.
Capitol .lv.	Chapter 55
De cauterizacio de albati accidentz al cors.	Of cautery for accidental wounds on the body
Quan en le cors so espellitz albati, e so pustulas fendas las quals so feytas de materias grossas corruptas; donc cove al comensament cum apareyso, que sia cauterizat sobre tot cap de la fistola am cauteri subtil am fustz de mirt, la extremitat del qual es estenduda am foc; o am razitz de erestologia longua; o am cauteri lentecular.	When there are accidental wounds on the body and they are pustules with broken openings that have been made from corrupted materials, then at first appearance it is necessary to cauterize the head of the fistula with a small cautery made from myrtle wood whose tip has been heated in fire; or with long tongs; or with a lenticular cautery.
E alscunas veguadas es cauteri ademamil al comensament de la sua expulcio segon aquesta manieyra; e no so cregudas, e es disrumpuda la superfluitat fazens aquels, et sana de aquels.	And afterwards it should be cauterized daily at the beginning of its expulsion in this manner; and they will not grow larger, but rather the superfluity will be broken up and they will heal from them.
Mays empero cove que aquo sia fayt aprop evacuacio am fleubotomia.	But it is necessary that this should also be done after evacuation by phlebotomy
Capitol lvi.	Chapter 56
De cauterizacio de fluex de sanc accident per incisio de arceria.	Of cautery for accidental fluxes of blood through incisions made with an arrow.
Tropas veguadas endeve fluex de arceria que es inciza deves la plagua la qual endeve deforo, o deves la incizio de apostemas o cauteri del membre, e alor semblantz, e es dificil remaura aquel.	Many times blood flows abundantly from wounds made by arrows that are stuck deep or from the incision of boils or cauteries on the member where it seems appropriate, and it is difficult to stop them.
Donc cum accideys ad alcu aquo, lahoras tu·t coyta am la tua ma a l’orrifici de la arceria, e pausa sobre aquel le tieu dit endic estrenh aquel motas veguadas entro que sia ostat le fluex del sanc dejos le tieu dit, e que non yesqua.	Therefore, when such a thing happens to someone, then quickly with your hand cover the orifice of the arrow and press on it so that sometimes between you may hold it so that the flow of blood ceases from under your finger and does not seep through.
E aprop pausa en le foc les cauteris olivars paucs e grantz, per nombre motz, e exsuffla sobre aquels entro que sian mot ignitz.	And then place in the fire olive-sized cauteries both small and large, many in number, and blow on them until they are sufficiently heated.
E aprop pren de aquels un petit o un gran segon le loc e la plagua en la qual es rompuda la arteria, sobre aquela vena festinantment pus que auras remaugut le tieu dit, e te le cauteri entro que sia abcindit e restreyt aquel sanc.	And then quickly take one of those small or large ones according to the place and depth where the artery is broken, and apply it to that vein immediately after you have removed your finger, and hold it there until the blood has stopped flowing.
E si le sanc es expellit de l’orrifici de la arteria quan tu remaues le tieu dit e extringeys le cauteri, lahoras pren la un autre cauteri coytadament dels cauteris les quals en le foc son preparatz, e donc no cesses fer aquo un aprop autre entro que le sanc sia restrengit.	And if blood is still being expelled from the orifice of the artery when you remove your finger and apply the cautery, then quickly take another one heated in the fire and continue doing so until the blood has stopped flowing.
E guarda te que no comburas le nervi que aqui es, e que vengua sobre le malaute autra malicia.	And make sure that you do not burn the nerve nearby, lest you cause further harm to the patient's condition.
E sapias que quan de l’arteria flueys sanc, lahoras no es possible en aquels restrenge la sanc, e majorment quan l’arteria es gran, si no am una de quatre manieyras: o am cauteri ayssi quo dit havem, o am extraccio quan no es extrayta, quar quan es extrayta las extremitatz de lu miels son comburidas e es restreyt le sanc, o que sia liat am fiel o am liament per fort strectura, o que sian pausadas sobre lu medicinas de las quals la vertut es restringir la sanc; e sian strengudas am pulvinar am costriccio decent.	And know that when blood flows from an artery, it is not possible to stop the bleeding except by four methods: either with a cautery as described above, or by extraction if it cannot be extracted, because when it is extracted the ends of the vessel are burned and the bleeding stops, or by tying it with a thread or bandage with strong tension, or by applying medicines whose virtue is to stop bleeding and then compressing them with a suitable poultice.
Mays aquel que aministra restriccio decent de lu am liament e am strictura am draps o per posicio de causas comburentz e de semblantz, no comfereys sino tart.	But whoever applies restriction too tightly with a thread and bandage or uses causes that burn or similar methods does nothing but harm.
Mays si aquo endeve ad alcu e no sia le metge present ni medicina, lahoras obre am pausament del dit indic sobre le orrifici de aquela vena ayssi cum havem dit, e entenda a la gran costreccio de lu entro que le sanc sia ostat de la sobirana partida de la plagua, e sobre la arceria le dit no sia remaugut; e de sobre la arceria sia aspergit am aygua frega de mot gran fregiditat entro que·l sanc sia congilat e engrossat; e mays cossire en que ha de cauteri o de medicina necessitat.	But if such a thing happens to someone and there is no physician present or medicine, then quickly press your index finger over the orifice of that vein as described above, and hold it with great tension so that the blood stops flowing from the top of the wound, and do not remove your finger from the arrow; and pour cold water on the arrow until the blood congeals and thickens. And make sure to determine if there is a need for cautery or medicine.
Comensa la segonda partida.	Begin the second part
De incisio e perforacio e ventozas e de fleubotomia e de plaguas e de lor semblants.	Of incision, perforation, venesection and cupping, of wounds and their similar affections
Aquestas son paraulas de Albucazis.	These are words from Al-Bukhaisi
Ja havem dit en le primier capitol tota malautia en la qual cauteri am foc es convenient e am medicina comburent, e las occasios e las causas de lu, e les instrumentz en aquels necessaris am las formas dels cauteris; e he ordenatz les capitols de la subiranetat del cap entro als pes.	We have already said in the first chapter all the diseases in which cautery with fire is appropriate and those in which medicine that burns is necessary, as well as the occasions and causes of them, and the instruments needed for them in their various forms. And we have arranged the chapters from the head to the feet in order.
E yeu procesire en aquest capitol per aquela meteysa guisa, per que sia alliujat lo querent aquo, lahoras sobre aquo que aura demandat.	And now I will proceed in this chapter in the same manner, so that whoever seeks it may find what he has asked for.
E denant que yeu comense aquo, cove, fils, que aprenguatz que en aquest capitol es per terror aquo que es en le capitol primier de cauterizacio.	And before I begin this, note that in this chapter there is repetition of what was said in the first chapter on cautery.
E per aquo que cove que sia en lu gran cautela, quar en la operacio la qual es en aquest capitol motas veguadas catz evacuacio la qual es am sanc am le qual esta la vida deves la aspersio de la vena o incisio sobre l’apostema o apercio de exsitura o puracio de la plagua o extraccio de sageta o incizio de peyra e a lor semblantz.	And because it is necessary to be very cautious in the operations described in this chapter, many of which involve evacuation with blood which carries life when there is aspiration of the vein or incision over an abscess or opening of an ulcer or purification of the wound or extraction of an arrowhead or incision of a stone and their similar affections.
E de totz aquels so acompanhatz temor e tremor e en le mas de lor catz la mort.	And most of these operations are accompanied by fear and trembling, and many of them often result in death.
E yeu amonesti vos que sobre vos no caia aquo en le qual es esitacio, quar alcunas veguadas cazo deves vos manieyras de homes am manieyras motas de malautias.	And I warn you not to fall into something that is dangerous, for sometimes one may encounter people with many bad habits who have many illnesses.
E de lor es alcu que s’irays am la sua malautia e es leugiera deves lu la mort, e aysso per la vehemensia de aquo que troba de sa malautia, e per longuesa de la malautia de lu, e am la malautia es paor la qual significa mort.	"Among them are those who leave with their illness and find death easier than life, because of the severity of their illness, its duration, and they fear death which signifies this illness."
E de aquels es le qual dona a tu son aver e ditta, tu esperant am aquel sanetat, e la sieua malautia es perniciosa.	"He who gives you his wealth and says to you 'wait until he is healthy', his illness is harmful."
E donc no cove que tu consentas en aquel que ve a vos del qual es aquesta manieyra; e la vostra cautela sia major que covesitat e la vostra rapacitat; e no presumatz alcuna causa sobre aquo sino aprop sciencia certa la qual virifica aquo deves vos, e al qual perve successio lausabla.	"And therefore you should not consent to that one who comes to you with this manner; and your caution should be greater than greed, and your rapacity; and do not presume any cause on this matter except proper certain knowledge which verifies it for you, and to whom there is a commendable success."
E usatz en la curacio de totz vostres malautes de pronosticacio e indicacio de lu al qual es salut convertida, quar en aquel es a vos ajutori sobre adquisicio de fama e de memoria, de lausor e de gloria.	"And use in the treatment of all your illnesses prognosis and indication of him to whom health is converted, for in that one you have help in acquiring fame and memory, praise and glory."
O, filhs, Dieus en vos spire le sieu entendement e no oste a vos direccio e proteccio, quar aquo es en la sua ma.	"O, sons, God breathes His understanding into you and does not remove from you direction and protection, for this is in His hand."
E yeu e ordenat aquest capitol distingent per capitols segon que precedit en le capitol de cauteris, de la cura del cap entro als pes, per que sia a vos alleujat aquo que demandatz de aquo e del qual havetz necessitat.	"And I have ordered this chapter distinguishing by chapters according to what preceded in the chapter of cauteries, about the treatment of the head within the feet, so that it may be easy for you what you request from this and of which you have need."
Capitol primier.	"Chapter One."
De la curacio de aygua la qual es contenguda en le cap dels enfantz.	"Of the treatment of water contained in the head of children."
Sapias que aquesta malautia motas veguadas endeve als enfantz deves le enfantament e quan la noyrissa estrenh le cap del enfant ses livitat.	"Know that this illness often happens to children during childbirth and when the midwife squeezes the head of the child without gentleness."
E alcunas veguadas endeve per causa amaguada la qual no es saubuda.	"And sometimes it happens for a hidden cause which is not known."
Mays yeu no vi aquesta malautia sino en les enfantz; e a totz aquels les quals yeu vi se coytec la mort, e per ayssi es a mi vist layssada obra en aquels.	"But I have not seen this illness except in children; and all those whom I saw were cured of death, and thus it seemed to me that it was an easy task in them."
E yeu e vist que un enfant le cap del qual era d’aygua omplit, e·l cap de lu era totjorn ayssi magnificat entro que ceser no podia sobre si meteys per la grandesa del sieu cap, e mays que la humiditat fe aucmentada entro que foc mort.	"And I have seen that the head of one child was filled with water, and his head was so enlarged that he could not cease on himself because of the greatness of his head, and more than moisture increased until he died."
E aquesta humiditat o es agreguada entre la codena e l’os, o es agreguada dejos le os sobre le ciphac.	"And this moisture is aggregated between the nape of the neck and the bone, or it is aggregated on top of the bone over the fontanelle."
Quar la operacio en aquel si la humiditat es entre la codena e l’os e le apostema es pauc, lahoras cove que tu fendas en le mieg loc del cap am una fissura en la latitut, e sia la longitut de la fissura cays dos notz entro que corra la humiditat, e aquesta es la forma del spatum:	"For the operation in that case if the moisture is between the nape of the neck and the bone and the abscess is small, then you should make an incision in the middle of the head with a scalpel in the latitude, and let the length of the incision be about two fingerbreadths so that the moisture may flow out, and this is the shape of the spatula:"
E donc si la humiditat es mays augmentada e l’apostema es major, lahoras son aqui dos fissuras segon aquesta manieyra:	"And then if the moisture has increased more and the abscess is larger, then here are two incisions according to this manner:"
E si la humiditat es dejos le os, senhal de lu es que tu vezes la comissuras del cap ubertas de tota partida e l’aygua es spremuda quan tu compremes aquela am la tieua ma a las partidas dedintz e no es aquo a tu amaguat.	"And if the moisture is on top of the bone, the sign of it is that you see the sutures of the head opened from all parts and the water squeezed when you press there with your hand on the gaps inside and not on the outside."
Cove que tu fendas en le mieg loc del cap am tres fissuras segon aquesta manieyra:	"It is necessary that you make three incisions in the middle of the head according to this manner:"
e aprop la inscizio extratz ne tota la humiditat; e aprop strenh las fissuras am draps e plumassols; e aprop enbroca aquo de sobre am vi e oli entro al quint dia, e aprop deslia le liament e cura la plagua am tentas e enguentz, e strenh le cap am equalitat; e mange le malaute am vianda secca de pauca humiditat entro que·l membre sia confortat e sanat.	"and near the incision remove all the moisture; and near press the incisions with cloths and feathers; and near on the fifth day bore it from above with wine and oil, and near untie the bandage and cure the wound with tentas and ointments, and press the head evenly; and let the sick person eat dry food of little moisture until the member is comforted and healed."
E es autra manieyra de incisio, que consideras hon apar la magnitut del apostema e la colleccio de l’aygua, quar alcunas veguadas es mays en le occipicii, o en la partida denant, o en la destra, o en la sinistra; e donc aten am la incizio on appar le apostema e la replecio de l’aygua, e fen aquo segon que a tu es miels possible.	"And this is another manner of incision, which you consider where the magnitude of the abscess appears and the collection of water, for sometimes it is more in the occiput, or at the forehead, or on the right side, or on the left side; and therefore make an incision where the abscess and the fullness of water appear, and do this according to what you find easiest."
Et observa que no inscindas la arteria e endevengua flueys de sanc e mora le malaute per aquel flux de sanc am evacuacio de humiditat.	"And observe that you should not cut into the artery and thus cause a flow of blood, which will aggravate the illness through this flow of blood with evacuation of moisture."
Capitol .ii.	"Chapter II."
De inscisio de las arterias las quals so aprop las aurelhas, apeladas hilasseysse.	"Of the incision of the arteries that are near the ears, called hilassees."
Capitol segon.	"Chapter Second."
Quan endeveno ad alcu catars o raumas als huelhs o al pietz, e es antiquat aquo, e no confereys en aquo la curacio de las medicinas, lahoras la deriera curacio en aquest es incizio de aquelas dos arterias.	"When it happens that some cataracts or tumors appear in the eyes or on the face, and they are old, and the cure of medicines does not help there, then the last cure in this is the incision of those two arteries."
E donc cove quan tu vols inscidir aquelas que le malaute raza lo sieu cap, e aprop fregua le loc am drap aspre per so que aparan las arcerias, e aprop sia strengut le col del malaute am alcu drap; e aprop considera on polsa la vena; e les locs de quascuna sobre les locs les quals so aprop las aurelhas depremutz, e tant se occultan sino en alcus homes.	"And therefore when you want to incise those that the illness has reached its head, and near rub the place with rough cloth so that the arteries appear, and near press the neck of the sick person with some cloth; and consider where the vein pulsates; and the places of each one above the places which are near the ears pressed down, and they are hidden unless in some men."
E aprop senha sobre la arceria am tenta, e aprop inscideys quascuna am le spatum de quascuna partida agut am inscizio pervenient entro al os, e sia aquo per la latitut del cap.	"And near mark with a thread above the artery, and near incise each one with the spatula of each parted acutely with incision arriving to the bone, and let it be done in the latitude of the head."
E si vols, entromet le spatum dejos la arteria e trenqua aquala a las inciden a las partidas desus.	"And if you wish, insert the spatula from above the artery and cut that one at its divisions above."
E sia la longitut de la inscizio cays dos ditz ajustatz, quar quan alcuna vena es inscizida le sanc es eyssit am egressio pulsatil, le qual saut deforo per saut frequent.	"And let the length of the incision be about two fingerbreadths, for when some vein is incised blood will issue with pulsating exit, which flows freely by frequent flow."
Mays si la arceria no apareys al cintiment, lahoras cove que tu mesures de la aurelha la quantitat del spazi de tres ditz, e aprop senha am tenta, e fen entro al os.	"But if the artery does not appear to your knowledge, then you should measure from the ear the quantity of space for three fingers' breadths, and mark with a thread, and do this arriving to the bone."
E aquo que cove getar del sanc es quantitat de vi unc., e fort leu ne geta de lu mays o mens, e tot aquo es segon la quantitat la qual appareys de la vertut del malaute e de la replecio de la arceria de lu.	"And that which is necessary to remove of the blood is one pint quantity, and sometimes more or less, and all this is according to the quantity that appears of the force of the illness and the fullness of the artery of it."
E aprop considera la plagua, e donc si reman sobre le os alcuna causa del ciphac, lahoras inscindys aquo per so que no endevengua apostema caut.	"And near consider the wound, and therefore if there remains on the bone some cause of the cicatrix, then incise that in order that it does not become a hard abscess."
E aprop strenh la plagua am plumassols e am liamentz de drap de li, e aprop cura aquela am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	"And near press the wound with feathers and bandages of linen cloth, and near cure that with ointments until it is healed."
Capitol .iii.	"Chapter III."
De extraccio de las arcerias las quals so en las templas.	"Of the extraction of the arteries which are in the temples."
Quan ad alcu accideys emigranea antiqua o catertz agutz, per humiditatz agrimonials e per qualiditat en les lacertz des templas, o sodo antiqua vehement e semblantz ad aquels, e es medicat am las manieyras de curacio de medicina e aquo no comfereys, lahoras nos hem sproatz en aquestas malautias extraccio de las arcerias en les templas, o cauterizacio de aquelas ayssi cum havem mostrat.	"When there occurs some ancient migraine or sharp cataract due to humoral heat and quality in the membranes of the temples, or so it is ancient and vehement and seems like them, and it is medicated with the manners of cure of medicine but does not help, therefore we have here a remedy for these illnesses which is extraction of the arteries in the temples, or cauterization of those as we have shown."
E la manieyra de la operacio e extracio de aquelas es que·l malaute raza les pels les quals son en les templas; e entenda a la arceria apparent en le templar quar ela es a tu mostrada per le sieu pols, e·s occultada sino en paucs homes per vehemencia de freg.	"And the manner of the operation and extraction of those is that the sick person has the hairs which are on the temples removed; and understand where the artery appears in the temple because it is shown to you by its pulsation, and it is hidden except in few men due to force of rubbing."
E si a tu es occultada, lahoras le col del malaute sia strengut am alcun drap; e aprop fregua le loc am un drap aspre o evapora le loc am aygua cauda entro que aparesca a tu la arceria manifestament.	"And if it is hidden to you, then press the neck of the sick person with some cloth; and near rub the place with a rough cloth or evaporate the place with hot water until the artery appears clearly to you."
E lahoras tu pren le spatum del qual aquesta es la forma:	"And therefore you take the spatula of which this is the form:"
E aprop tu scorja la codena am aquel am facilitat entro que pervenguas a la arceria; e aprop geta en lu onti e extratz aquela a las partidas sobiranas entro que extraguas aquela de la codena e descobras aquela de las tunicas las quals so dejos aquela, de tota partida.	"Then carefully remove the chain with ease until you reach the joint; then throw it on and extract that which is above until you extract that from the chain and uncover those tunics which are left behind, from every part."
Mays si la arteria es subtil, lahoras envolveys aquela am la extremitat del oncii, e aprop inscindeys de aquela una partida segon la quantitat per la qual sian alonguadas las extremitatz de lu e sian contraytas, e no endevindra flux de sanc, quar si no so inscididas no pujara le sanc de tot.	"If the artery is slender, then you should wrap it with the extremity of the thread and then cut through it a portion according to how much its extremities are elongated and contracted, otherwise there will be no blood flow."
E aprop evacua del sanc de vi unc. entro a tres.	"And then remove about one to three ounces of blood."
E si la arceria es gran, lahoras cove que tu lies aquela en dos locs am fiel dopble fort de ceda o am cordas a lonc, e no coyte a lu putrefaccio denant la consolidacio de la plagua e endevengua flux de sanc.	"If the artery is large, then you should tie it in two places with strong double threads or long cords to prevent its decay before the wound solidifies and ensure blood flow."
E aprop incideys la superfluitat la qual es entre dos liamentz; e fay aquo en aquela hora o aprop autra ora.	"And then cut through any excess that is between two ligaments, and do this at that hour or another suitable time."
E si vols, cauteriza aquela am cauteri entro al os am cauteri cutellar entro que sian incididas las extramitatz de lu, e stara en loc de aquela meteyssa obra.	"And if you wish, cauterize it with a cautery iron between the incisions of its extremities, and this will serve as that operation."
E es milhor obra sino que·l malaute aia febre o es de escalfada compleccio; quar cauteri es de aquelas causas que ajudan a las humiditatz finidoras, e donc es milhor en juvament.	"It is better to perform this operation if the patient has fever or is of hot complexion; for cauterization helps to reduce excessive moisture and therefore is more beneficial in such cases."
E cove aprop la extraccio de las arcerias que huomplas le loc de coto antic, e sian pausatz sobre lu polvils decentement fayt, e aprop sia curat am medicinas seccas fazen naysser la carn e am calguas entro que sia sanat.	"And after the extraction of the arteries that have grown into the wound site and are covered with decently fitting poultices, it should be treated with dry medicines to promote granulation and healing with bandages until it is fully healed."
E si mentre obres autra veguada endeventa flux de sanc de la arceria, lahora tu te coyta a restrenger aquel sanc, o am cauteri, o que omplas le loc de coto, e strenh la tua ma entro que sia restreyt le sanc.	"And if while performing this operation there is bleeding from the artery again, then you should stop that blood flow either by ligation with thread or cauterization using a hot iron. Then press your hand on the wound site until the bleeding stops."
E si deguna causa de aquelas no es a tu present, lahoras pausa le tieu dit sobre le loc entro que·l sanc sia congilat, e enbroca le loc am aygua de vehement fregiditat entro que la acuitat repausa, e sia strengut segon que cove.	"If for any reason the bleeding does not stop, then press your finger on the wound site until the bleeding stops. Then irrigate the wound with cold water to relieve inflammation and dress it as necessary."
E aquo que es pus leugier en extraccio de arceria es que tu cauterizes la vena am aquest cauteri haventz dos cotels, pus que tu has senhat les dos locs am tenta, e depausa quascus, mot ignitz, entro que pervenguan al os e inscindan la vena en dos locs, per so que sia elonguat aquo que es entre las extremitatz de lu, quar no son consolidadas de tot am aquest cauteri.	"The easiest way to extract an artery is by cauterizing the vein with a hot iron that has two points, after you have marked both ends of it with your finger. Then insert the cautery gently between them until it reaches and incises the vein in two places so that what remains between its extremities can be elongated as they are not yet fully consolidated."
E aquesta es la forma del cauteri:	"And this is the shape of the cautery:"
E sia la acuitat dels dos cotels esemps.	"And let the sharpness of the two points be equal."
Mays empero si so mendres acuitat que dos cotels es milhor, quar si so agudas cum dos cotels propera a quascuna freg, e no enscideysso la carn am velocitat.	"However, if the points are too sharp, two cotton swabs would be better. For if they are very pointed like two cotton swabs, they will quickly prick each humor without cutting the flesh."
Donc cum en aquels es alcuna grossitut, es tenguda la calor del foc en aquels e la carn es abscindida leugierament.	"Therefore, when there is some thickness involved, heat from the fire is applied to that area and the flesh is cut gently."
E aquesta obra es milhor en tota obra e pus leugiera.	"This work is better than any other and is also easier."
E sia le spazi le qual es entre dos cotels la quantitat de la grossesa del dit.	"And let there be a space between two ribs equal to the thickness of a finger."
Capitol quart.	Here's the second sentence: "The fourth chapter".
De la cura de cors de lagremas agudas e aciduas dels huels.	"On the treatment of acute and chronic eye pain."
Quan so lagremas aciduas, e es le cors de aquelas venas las quals so sobre le test del cap deforo, e no comfereys en aquo alcuna causa de la curacio de medicina, e vezes la cara del malaute ja enrogesir e sent en le sieu front deambulacio ayssi cum si era deambulacio de formiguas, e·ls huels de aquel so extenuatz, humitz enayssi que ja les pels de lor son conodutz, e las parpelas so scalfadas per la acuitat de las lacrimas, les antics agro mesties en la curacio de aquelas de aquesta operacio, e nompnero aquela curacio am spassa.	"When there are acute eye pains, and it is the course of those veins which are above the head that is affected, and there is no apparent cause for this medical condition, sometimes the face becomes reddened and the patient feels a crawling sensation on their forehead as if ants were walking on it; and the eyelids become thin and swollen with moisture so that the lashes stick together, and the corners of the eyes are scaled by the acidity of the tears. The ancient physicians had remedies for this condition, but they do not use them anymore."
E es que tu comandas al malaute rayre les pels les quals son en le sieu front, e aprop inscideys en le front tres fissuras engualment distans segon la longitut del front.	"And it is also appropriate to command the patient to raise the eyelids which are on their forehead, and then incise three fissures equally spaced according to the length of the forehead."
E si’ la longitut de la fissura cays dos ditz: la una fissura sia engualment distant a la longitut del nas en le mieg loc del front, e la segonda segon la longitut un petit del movement dels lacertz les quals so en le lacrimal, e la tersa del autre part.	"And if the length of the incision is uncertain, then one can consider it equally distant from the length of the nose at the middle of the forehead; and the second according to the length slightly above the movement of the lacrimal glands which are in the eye socket; and the third on the other side."
E guarda te de la incizio de las arcerias las quals so en dos latz, e elongua la tua ma de la continuacio de amdos las mandibulas.	"And be careful not to cut the arteries which are on both sides (of the head), and stretch out your hand from the continuation of both jaws."
E si’ l’espazi de quascuna inscizio la quantitat de tres ditz ajustatz.	"And if the space for each incision is equal to three fingers' breadths adjusted."
E si’ a tu una pessa d’espongua apparelhada o draps seccatz motz am les quals exsiccas le sanc.	If you have a sponge of sponges or dry cloths moistened with which to dry the blood.
E aprop entremet le spatum de dos agudas extremitatz, del qual aquesta es la forma de la inscisio de lu:	Then insert the scissors into two acute ends
que es de la partida des templas entro a la segonda inscizio.	that are from the division of the temples to the second incision.
Exxcorja am aquel tota la codena la qual es entre dos incizios am le ciphac le qual es sobre le os, e aprop fay aquo de la inscizio migera entro a la segonda inscisio.	Excise with this all the chain that is between two incisions with the scalpel which is over the bone, and then do the middle incision between the second incision.
E aprop stratz ne aquest spatum e entromet en la primieyra inscizio autra vetz un autre instrument le qual es apelat cutellar, agut de una part e del autre no agut.	Then place this scalpel and insert it into the first incision again with another tool called a knife, sharp on one side and not sharp on the other.
E pausa le latz de aquel agut deves la carn annexa deves la codena, e le latz de lu leon dintz le os, e empelley aquel entro que pervengua a la fissura migera, e abscindeys am aquel totz les vaysels que descendo del cap als huels.	And pause the blade of that sharp side near the attached flesh to the chain, and on the other side within the bone, and employ it so as to reach the middle fissure, and cut with it all the vessels descending from the head to the ears.
Mays que sia continuada la inscizio ad aquo appar de la codena, e aprop fay aquo en la fissura migana entro al autra fissura.	But ensure that the incision continues until you reach the chain, and then do this in the middle fissure between one fissure and another.
E pus que corr del sanc quantitat engual, exprem les locs de las pessas del sanc congilat.	And as blood flows in great quantity, express the places where the clots of blood gather.
E aprop pausa en quascuna fissura calgua de coto vielh, e pausa sobre aquels polvils enbegutz en vi e oli e vi agre, e vegas que no endevengua apostema caut.	Then pause in each fissure carefully with cotton wool dipped in wine and oil and vinegar, and ensure that there is not a dry cautery.
E en le tertz dia deslia le liament e aministra gran enfusio de aygua cauda o tebeza, e aprop cura aquo am enguent bazilicon am oli rozat e autres entro que las plaguas sian sanadas.	And on the third day untie the ligature and administer a large infusion of cold water or tea, and then dress it with basilicon salve mixed with rose oil and other medicines so that the wounds heal well.
Capitol .v.	Chapter V
De la cura de lagramas per catartz e als huels descendentz de las partidas dedintz del cap.	On the treatment of ear infections and descending hearing problems from parts inside the head.
Quan ad alcu veno catartz agutz e continuantz, e vezes les huels del malaute extenuatz petitz, e ja le reguardament de lor es debelitat, e las palpebras ulceradas e de lor cazo les pels, e en le preon del cap es dolor aguda ledent e extrenutacio consequent, lahoras sapias per aquestz accidentz que las materias e catartz no veno sino de motas venas de las partidas dedintz procedent.	When there comes a sharp and continuous earache, sometimes the ears of the sick become small and shriveled, and the examination of them is impaired, and the eyelids ulcerated and their hairs fallen out, and in the forehead there is acute pain and subsequent extrusion, you should know that these materials and catarrh come only from small veins proceeding from inside parts.
E la milhor curacio en aquels es aquesta: que comandes al malaute que raza lo sieu front, e aprop inscideys en aquel una fissura al mieg loc del front, un petit per la latitut (e comensa am la fissura del templar senestre entro al dextre templar; e sia inscisio entro al os; e eslongua la tua ma dels lacertz del templas lesquals son maugutz deves la mastigacio), entro que sia le os descubert.	And the best treatment for these cases is this: command the sick person to raise his forehead, and then make an incision in that place in the middle of the forehead, about half an inch long along its length (beginning with the left temple between the right temple; and let the incision be within the bone; and stretch your hand out from the muscles of the temples which are attached to the jaws), until the bone is uncovered.
Exsicca tot le sanc am espongua o am drap secc e aprop repleys entre las doas labias de la fissura am coto vielh o am draps de li.	Then dry up all the blood with a sponge or dry cloth, and then fill in between the two lips of the incision with cotton wool or linen.
E aprop estrenh desus am polvils enbegutz en vi e oli per so que no endevengua apostema caut.	Then stretch above it with powders dipped in wine and oil so that there is not a dry cautery.
E quan deslias aquo e veses que l’apostema ja es diminuit, lahoras cove que fregua le os entro que comensa en lu nayser carn, e aprop cura aquel am regiment exsiccatiu le qual fassa neysser la carn, ayssi cum si tu prenes de farina de froment dos partidas e de colofania quatre partidas e mescla o, e de lor sia fayt emplastre e sia aministrat en aquestas plaguas a de la carn nativitat.	And when you remove this and see that the aposteme has diminished, then it is necessary to scrape the bone where it begins with naked flesh, and then dress it with a drying ointment which makes the flesh dry up, as if you take two parts of wheat flour and four parts of colophony and mix them together, and make a plaster from them and apply it to these wounds on the bare flesh.
Capitol .vi.	Chapter VI
De la cura de aquo que catz en las aurelhas.	From the treatment of that which falls into the ears.
Tota causa que catz en las aurelhas es una de quatre specias, quar o es peyra mineral o causa semblant a peyra, ayssi cum ferr e veyre, o es de planta ayssi cum ceze o fava, o es causa fluxtibla ayssi cum aygua e vi agre e a lor semblantz, o alcuna bestia.	Every cause that falls into the ears is of four kinds: either it is mineral stone or similar to stone, like iron and copper; or it is from a plant such as chickpeas or broad beans; or it is a fluid cause like water, vinegar, or their like; or some kind of creature.
E donc quan peyra catz en l’aurelha o autra causa semblant de aquelas causas que no ajustan ne creysso en l’aurelha, e pausa la aurelha al solelh, e si vezes la peyra, lahoras distilla en aquela alcuna causa de oli violat o sizami, e aprop aministra la extraccio de lu, e fay le stornudar am condizi, e oppila las nars deve le aveniment de stornutacio.	When a stone enters the ear or another similar cause that does not fit nor grow within the ear, pause the ear to the sun, and if the stone grows, then distill upon that some cause of violet oil or saffron, and immediately administer extraction of it, make him sneeze with condition, and close his nose during the event of sneezing.
E aprop pausa en le circuit de la aurelha alscunas pessas de drap o lana, e dextendas la aurelha a las partidas desus, quar motas veguadas es foro-getada am aquestas causas.	And immediately pause on the circuit of the ear with some pieces of cloth or wool, stretching the ear upwards, for many times it has been forgotten with these causes.
E si no n’es getada, lahoras aministra extraccio de lu am le instrument apelat gesti epicicarios subtil del qual aquesta es la forma:	And if it is not gotten, then immediately administer extraction of it with the instrument called gesture epicicarios subtil, of which this is its form:
E si es foro-getada am gesti, bo es; e sino, lahoras aministra la extraccio de lu am onci subtil de pauca duplicacio.	And if it is forgotten with gesture, then good! And otherwise, immediately administer extraction of it with a subtle hook of little duplication.
E donc si no es foro-getada per aquo, lahoras fay una canula de aram e entromet la extremitat de la canula en le trauc de la aurelha e claus a l’enviro de la canula am cera e am oli mollificada per so que no sia ubert sino la canula.	And therefore if it is not gotten by this, then immediately make a cannula of brass and insert the extremity of the cannula into the track of the ear and close around the cannula with wax and softened oil so that nothing escapes but the cannula.
E aprop extratz am le tieu vent am fort atraccio, quar tropas veguadas cum aquo que havem recontat.	And immediately extract with little wind with strong attraction, for many times it has been counted with this that we have told about.
Mays si no es foro-getada en aquesta manieyra, lahoras pren de halka alumbat o de vecz aparelhat am le qual son preses les ausels una patita quantitat, e pausa aquel en la extremitat de ray, e aprop envolopa sobre aquel coto decentment pausat.	But if it is not gotten in this manner, then immediately take of halka alumbat or sometimes prepared with which the chickens are caught by taking a small quantity of it, and place that on the extremity of the ray, and immediately wrap over that gently placed.
E aprop entromet aquel en le trauc de la aurelha am facilitat, e aprop excicca la aurelha de la humiditat.	And immediately insert that into the track of the ear with facility, and immediately remove the ear from the humidity.
E donc si no es foro-getada am totas las causas las quals havem recontadas, lahoras tu coyta a talhar aquela denant que endevengua apostema caut o espasme.	And therefore if it is not gotten with all the causes which we have told about, then you can try to cut that before it becomes an aposteme caut or spasm.
E la manieyra de talhar aquela es que tu al comensament sancnes le malaute de la vena sephasica e extratz del sanc segon la mannieyra de la vertut de lu, e aprop fay aquel cezer entre las tuas mas e converteys l’aurelha a las partidas desus, e fen am petita fissura en la razit de la aurelha deves lo greys de lu en le loc be premegut de lu.	And the manner of cutting that is: first sanctify the illness of the vein sephasica and extract from it according to the manner of its virtue, and then make a cut between your thumbs and convert the ear towards its parts above, and end with a small fissure in the root of the ear, putting grease into the place well pressed.
E sia la fissura de figura lunar entro que pervengua a la peyra, e, la peyra atrobada, osta aquela si podes am instrumentz apropriatz; e aprop cos la fissura en aquela hora am velocitat, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	And let the fissure be of lunar figure until it reaches the ear bone, and when the ear bone is hardened, remove that if you can with appropriate instruments; and immediately close the fissure in that hour with speed, and cure it until it is healed.
E si la causa cazent en la aurelha es un dels gras que creysso e so inflatz, lahoras aministra la curacio e la extraccio de lu; mays si no obezeys a tu ad eyssiment, lahoras tu pren spatum teune subtil segon aquesta forma:	And if the cause in the ear is one of those warts that grow and swell up, then immediately administer the cure and extraction of it; but if it does not obey your attempt, then you take a subtle, thin spatula according to this form:
e aministra am aquel la abscizio de aquel gra lo qual es cazut en l’aurelha.	and use that for the excision of that wart which is fallen in the ear.
E no fassas aquo quan cogitas que aquel ja es humectat per la vapor del aurelha, e pausa aquel en motas pessas, e prop extratz ne aquelas am les oncis o am gesti subtil, o ab inscizio ayssi co dit havem, quar es alleujada la extraccio de lu.	And do not do this when you think that it is already moistened by the vapor of the ear, and place it in many pieces, and immediately extract those with tweezers or with subtle gesture, or with incision as we have said, for the extraction of it is eased.
Mays en l’aygua la qual es intrada en l’aurelha cove que·l malaute use de sternutacio am condizi al comensament, e omple la sieua aurelha am alcu coto vielh, e jagua sobre aquela aurelha en la qual es l’aygua, e si per aquo es foro-getada, bo es; e sino, lahoras pren tropas peyras teunas e leons segon la longitut del dit, e calfa aquelas en le foc un pauc, e le pacient entrometa una de aquelas en le trauc de la sua aurelha e saute sobre la un pe sieu de aquela partida e percussia am una autra peyra sobre la peyra la qual es dintz la aurelha.	But the water that enters into the ear must cause sneezing at the beginning, and fill its ear with a little cotton, and press gently over that ear in which there is water, and if it is forgotten by this, then it is good; but if not, then take thin pebbles and stones according to the length of the finger, heat them on the fire a bit, and the patient should insert one of those into the track of his ear and shake with another one on one side of that part and strike with another stone on the one which is inside the ear.
Donc no cesse aquo am peyra entro que tota l’aygua sia foro-getada.	Therefore do not stop this until all the water is removed.
E ja l’aygua sira foro-getada enayssi que tu prenguas de papier o de gonc i, e met la una extremetat de lu en l’aurelha e estendas l’autre extremitat am foc entro que sia comburit le may de lu.	And if the water is still not removed in this way, then you take some paper or gauze and put one extremity of it into the ear and extend the other extremity with fire until most of it is burned.
E prop met i autre gonc e fay aquo tantas veguadas entro que tota l’aygua sia foro-getada, e stratz aquel am canula ayssi co desus es dit de la peyra extrasadora.	And then put in another gauze and do this several times until all the water is removed, and close it with a cannula as we have said above of the extracting pebble.
Mays en la extraccio de bestia intrant en aquela aurelha, si es a petit cos, ayssi piussa e a lu semblant, cura aquel ayssi cum havem dit en la divisio; mays si es de gran cos la qual causa apar al sen del vezement, lahoras aministra la extraccio de lu am gesti e oncis, e la causa de lu es pus leugiera de totas las autras causas que cazo en l’aurelha.	But in the extraction of beast entering that ear, if it is a small thing, then press and leave it there, cure it as we have said in the division; but if it is of great size which causes pain at the time of hearing, then immediately extract it with gesture and tweezers, for the cause of it is easier than all other causes that happen to the ear.
Mays en la extraccio de verm engendrat en la aurelha, quan tu curas aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e en le tractat de distillacios e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu reguardes la aurelha al solelh.	But in the extraction of worm generated in the ear, when you cure it with what we have said in the division and in the treatise of distillations and your cure does not succeed, then you must examine the ear by the sunlight.
E donc si apar aqui alcuna causa dels verms, lahoras extratz aquel am gesti o am onci subtils, mays si no apar deguna causa, lahoras pren una canula dejos streyta e desus ampla de la qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And then if you see any cause of worms here, immediately extract it with gesture or with subtle tweezers, but if you do not see any cause, then take a cannula of this shape:
E entromet la extremitat subtil en la aurelha segon la quantitat la qual suffertar puesca le malaute; e aprop sucgeys am aquela per succio fort, e fay aquo motas veguadas, entro que totz les verms sian foro-gitatz.	And insert the subtle extremity into the ear according to the quantity that it can withstand; and immediately suck with it by strong suction, and do this many times until all the worms are removed.
Mays si no obezeysso a tu al ayssiment, lahoras tu opila e claus en le circuit de la canula am cera ayssi cum havem dit; lahoras aministre distillacios las quals han ja esproadas les antics en la curacio dels verms, e atrobaras aquo en le tractat de distillacios.	But if it does not obey your attempt, then you fill and close the circuit of the cannula with wax as we have said; then immediately administer distillation which has already been spoken of before in the cure of worms, and you will find this in the treatise of distillations.
E sia la tua efusio am la qual efundas les olis medicinas en la aurelha am aquest strument del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And let your effusion be with which you pour medicinal oils into the ear with this instrument, of which this is the shape:
E fay aquela de argent o de eram, dejos streyt, en le qual sia un petit trauc, e am pla desus.	And make it of silver or brass, narrow on one side and having a small track, and flat above.
E donc sia cum empellent a que es en la conquavitat de la canula de continent aqui on sira necessari.	Therefore let there be something that pushes what is in the concavity of the cannula, which will be necessary here.
E si vols, pren le ray e envolveys en la extremitat de lu decentment coto, e aprop gieta oli en la concavitat del auziment, o suc de alcuna herba, o aquo que vols de aquestas medicinas en la canula — e aquela es en la aurelha —, e aprop entromet le ray am coto desus e exprem am la tua ma aquel am compressio temprada de lu entro que l’oli sia expellit en la concavitat del auziment e le malaute senta le oli dedintz.	And if you wish, take the ray and wrap it decently with cotton at its extremity, and then put oil in the concavity of the instrument, or juice of some herb, or whatever medicine you want in the cannula — which is in the ear — and then insert the ray with cotton above and press gently with your hand so that the oil may be expelled into the concavity of the instrument and the patient feels the oil inside.
E aquo que sia enfundut en la aurelha sia ja scalfat am foc un petit.	And whatever is poured into the ear should already be scaled on the fire a little.
E guarda te que la causa la qual distillaras en l’aurelha no sia trop frega, quar las medicinas de aurelha no suffertan aquo.	And be sure that the cause which you distill in the ear is not too hot, for medicinals of the ear do not withstand this.
Capitol .vii.	Chapter VII
De curacio de opilacio de aurelhas.	Of the cure of blockage of ears.
Alcunas veguadas alcus enfantz yeysso dels ventres de lors mayres no-perforatz, e aquo ja accideys en alcus homes, opilacio en le meat de la aurelha per plagua o per carn nada en aquela; e aquesta opilacio alcunas veguadas es fayta en le preon del trau de la aurelha la qual no consiec le vezement, e alcunas veguadas es en las partidas defora.	Some children sometimes exit from the wombs of their mothers unperforated, and this happened to some men, opacity in the meat of the ear for plague or for flesh not there; and this opacity is sometimes made in the front of the track of the ear which does not consec the view, and sometimes it is in the parts outside.
E aquela que accideys en le preon de lu, la qual no comprehen le vezement, es en las majors disposicios de dificil sanacio.	And that which happened in his face, which cannot be understood by sight, is in the most difficult conditions of healing.
E en aquela en qual consegueys le vezement, cove que tu pauses la aurelha del malaute al solelh e reguarda en aquela.	But in that one where it can be seen, you must hold the ear of the patient to the sun and look at it.
E donc si vezes oppulacio apparent, obre aquela am espatum subtil del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And therefore if sometimes opacity appears, open with a subtle spatula whose this is the form of it
Si’ la extremitat de lu en la qual sia petita la latitut, del qual la una partida sia aguda e l’autra no; e le spatum sia de dos latz leon per so que no fassa lizio al aurelha.	If its extremity where the width is small, one part of which is sharp and the other not; and the spatula be of two lion sides for that it does not make damage to the ear.
E donc si la opilacio es per carn nascuda en la aurelha o en le meat de lu, lahoras te aquela am oncis subtils e incidiys aquela vehement facilitat entro que sia ostada tota la carn.	And therefore if the opacity is for flesh born in the ear or in its meat, then you must use with fine scissors and cut that very easily inside where all the flesh has remained.
E si opilacio es en le preon de la aurelha, lahoras pren ray subtil leon e escalfa aquel am foc un pauc, e aprop met aquel en le meat de l’aurelha.	And if opacity is in the front of the ear, then take a thin needle of gold and heat it a little on fire, and apply that gently into the meat of the ear.
E donc si as scentit oppulacio am aquo que le malaute atroba am facilitat, per gravetat de ausir, esforsa la oppressio de lu am facilitat; e guarda te que no plagues les nervis del aurelha.	And therefore if you find opacity with that which the patient finds with ease, for gravity of hearing, force the oppression of it with ease; and beware that you do not plague the nerves of the ear.
E aprop pausa en l’aurelha drap de li segon la quantitat del ample del trauc lo qual tu as envolvutz en l’enguent egipciac; e fay aquo per alcus jorns entro que sias segur de la consolidacio de la plagua; o que prenguas qualgua e enfon aquela en ayguaros e pulveriza sobre lu segi trissat e usa de lu; e si vezes la aurelha ja esser apostemada, lahoras cove que tu estraguas la qualgua e permutes aquela am autra qualgua la qual tu envoloparas en cerot que sia fayt am oli rozat, entro que sia le apostema caut cedat; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And then apply a dressing to the ear according to the quantity of the width of the track which you have involved in Egyptian ointment; and do this for several days until you are sure of the consolidation of the wound; or that you take some cotton and put it into warm water and pulverize over it with rosewater and use it; and if sometimes the ear is already apostematous, then you must change the cotton and replace it with another one which you will wrap in cerate made with raw oil until the apostema be cauterized; and then cure that until it is healed.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc, lahoras submergeys esponga o drap en aygua frega e pausa sobre la aurelha, e usa del autra curacio la qual restrengeys le flux del sanc, la qual es dita en le tractat de distillacio.	But if bleeding occurs, then immerse a sponge or cloth in cold water and apply it to the ear, and use the other cure which restrains the flow of blood, which is called in the treatise on distillation.
Capitol .viii.	Chapter VIII
De cura de athezil le qual endeveno a las palpebras.	Of the care of inflammation that happens in the eyelids.
Athezil les quals endeveno a las paupebras dels huels alcuna veguada so humitz, alscunas veguadas son secs.	"When moisture accumulates on the eyelids of the eyes, sometimes they are dry."
Donc cove que tu tenguas aquels am tenhalhas o am onci, e inscindas aquels am espatum de las suas razitz, e aprop pausa sobre les locs segi trissat.	Therefore you must have those tongs or forceps, and separate the threads from their roots, and carefully pause over the locations as indicated.
Mays si dolor am flux de sanc veno, lahoras tu cauteriza aquels am cauteri lanticular subtil.	But if pain comes with bleeding, then you should cauterize it with an antiseptic cautery.
E la milhor cauterizacio es aprop las inscizios e tropas veguadas retornam quan reman alcuna causa de sas razitz; e quan so cauterizadas am foc, aquelas razitz son comburidas e no retornan.	And the best cauterization is near the incisions and wounds that often return when there remains some cause of their roots; and when they are cauterized with fire, those roots are burned and do not return.
Capitol .ix.	Chapter ix
Cura de grandeyssa que veno a las palpebras dels huels.	Treatment for swelling that comes to the eyelids of the eyes.
Motas veguadas endeve en las palpebras dels huels alcuna causa la qual es asemblada a grandissa en sa fortalicia e duricia, e per so grandissia es apelada.	Many times it happens in the eyelids of the eyes that some cause arises which resembles hardness and toughness, and for this reason it is called swelling.
E es agreguacio de humiditat grossa en la palpebra dejos e desus.	And it is an accumulation of thick moisture in the lower eyelid and above.
Donc la opperacio en lor es que consideras lahoras si la grandissia es procedent en lu en aquo que apar de la palpebra e es mauguda a tota partida; e la causa de lu es leugiera.	Therefore, their operation is to consider whether the size of it appears from under the eyelid and grows throughout its entirety; and the cause of this is lightness.
Donc fen sobre aquela am fissura per la latitut, e aprop escorga aquela de tota partida am facilitat entro que evasesca, e aprop suspen aquela am onci e abscindeys aquela.	Then make an incision along that fissure for its length and carefully examine the entire partition with ease within what evacuates, and then suspend it with forceps and cut it off.
Mays si a tu no es apparelhada la incizio de lu si no pus que penetras la palpebra am inscizio pauc a pauc, lahoras aquo no notz en deguna causa.	But if you are unable to make the incision properly without penetrating the eyelid bit by bit, then this has no cause.
E si la figura es gran, lahoras tu l’ajusta am sutura; e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	And if the figure is large, then adjust it with suture; and care for it until it heals.
E si es pauca, a tu no sobrevindra mal per aquela quar l’anguent de lu restaura aquela e encarna.	But if it's small, you won't suffer much from that because the ointment of it restores it and heals it quickly
E si la grandissia es declinant a las partidas dedintz de la palpebra deves la superficia dedintz, lahoras evesa la palpebra e suspen la grandissia am onci, otra que tu indigescas de incizio, e prem aquela de tota part, e si la palpebra per inscizio es alonguada, aquo no notz en deguna causa.	And if the size declines towards the inner parts of the eyelid, then expose the surface inside. Then ever the eyelid and suspend the size with forceps, otherwise you will need to make an incision. Press it throughout its entirety, and if the eyelid is lengthened by incision, then this has no cause.
E aprop la incizio, lava le huel am aygua salada; e cura le loc am aquo que encarna entro que sia sanat.	And after the incision, wash the wound with salted water; and care for the place with what heals it quickly until it is healed.
Capitol .x.	Chapter X
De la cura axcirnah en la palpebra desus del huel.	Of the cure of the inflammation in the eyelid above the wound.
Axcirnath es grays le qual es engendrat en las tunicas de la palpebra desus, e majorment endeve als enfantz, agrava les huels de aquels et accideyso a lor catartz le mayti; e no podon reguardar la claror del solelh per aquo quar lagremas se coytan ad aquels.	"Axcirnath is a disease that arises in the tunics of the eyelid and occurs more frequently in children. It inflames their eyes and causes tears to flow constantly; they are unable to gaze upon the brightness of the sun due to this."
E per so tu vezes aquels jaser sobre les lors caras tot temps, e sobre les lors caras dormen; e so a las palpebras de lor dejos les sobrecils humidas, las quals ja ha cuberta imflacio, e iminencia de accernac apparent es en l’uelh; e que quant tu premes le loc am les tieus ditz, tu centes accernac entro aquels.	"And thus these people constantly rub their faces and sleep with their faces covered. Their eyelids are moistened by tears which have swollen from inflammation, and the signs of approaching Accirnath are evident in the eye; and when you press your fingers on the aforementioned location, you feel a sensation of pulsation within it."
E alcuna manieyra de opperacio es en aquel que le malaute pausa le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop pausa drap de li e de lu fay calgua, e fay de lu cercle segon la quantitat la qual contena arthernach de tota partida, e aprop pausa aquel sobre aquela e prem am les tieus ditz de tota per que sia agreguat arcernac en le mieg del cercle, e aprop fen en le mieg de aquela humiditat am spatum inscident am fissura per la latitut, e la fissura no sia major que la fissura que es fayta en flaubotomia.	"And there is a certain manner of operation in this disease: the sick person holds their head upright and props it up with cloth. They also measure the circle around the eye according to the quantity of Accirnath present throughout, then place that over the affected area and press with one's fingers all around so that Accirnath collects in the middle of the circle. Then they make an incision in the middle of that moisture using a spatula incidentally along its width, ensuring that the incision is no wider than that made in phlebotomy."
Mays en le preon cove que tu fendas la codena tota entro que pervenguas ad arcernach, quar en las mays desposicios proceseys arcernach per fissura segon la forma de grayseza blanca.	"But remember to cut the entire cord in order to reach Accirnath, for in most cases it protrudes through the incision like a white-gray mass."
Donc extratz aquela am draps los quals tu as envolopatz entre les tieus ditz a las partidas deforo e revolv entre la ma dextra e sinistre entro que sia dispargut.	"Then extract that with cloths which you have wrapped between your fingers, twisting it back and forth between the right and left hand until it has disappeared."
E guarda te que no ajustes en la fissura per so que am le spatum no pervenguas al huel e ladescas aquel.	"And beware not to squeeze in the incision with the spatula lest you should reach the eye and damage it."
Mays si no apar a tu arternach en le comensament de la fissura, mays que tu ajustes en la fissura un petit am fecilitat entro que procesisca arternach; e aprop extratz aquela ayssi quo havem dit; e aprop submargeys draps de li en aygua e vi agre e pausa les sobre le loc e estrenh aquels am polvils.	If it does not appear to you at the beginning of the fracture, then you should insert a small bandage easily between so that it proceeds backward; and then extract that as we have said; and then submerge cloths in water with vinegar and place them on the area and bind them with powders.
E so alcus que trissan sal e pausan aquel en la conquavitat de la fissura per so que aquo que es remas de aquela humiditat.	And some who crush salt and apply it to the concavity of the fracture, in order that it may remain from that humidity.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And also cure it until it is healed.
Mays si accideys en le loc apostema caut, lahoras cura aquel am emplastres cedatils entro que sia sanat.	If an abscess forms at that spot, then treat it with cataplasms made of cedar until it heals.
Capitol .xi.	Capítulo xi
De manieyras de tactimi del huel.	On methods of examining the pulse.
Quan en las palpebras dels huels so natz pels ajustatz dejos les pels naturals e so antiquatz, lahoras aquels noso al huel e fan endevenir manieras de malautias ayssi cum lacrimas assiduas e mollificacio de palpebras e tela entro que aquo sia causa de destruccio del huel que s’apela tactinir del huel, e cura se en quatre manieyras: o per cauteri am foc; o am medicina acuta segon que denant es dit en le capitol de cauteri; o es fayt atactini per inscizio e sutura; o per cannas segon que yeu diyre.	When the eyelids of humans are swollen due to the growth of hair, then those who know about examining patients make inquiries about certain illnesses such as continuous tears and softening of the eyelids and tissue that may cause destruction of the eye, which is called pulsating of the eye, and it is cured in four ways: either by cauterization with fire; or with acute medicine, according to what was said earlier in the chapter on cautery; or it is treated by incision and suturing; or by means of tubes, as will be discussed.
E donc cove que tu pauses le cap del malaute en le tieu se; aprop converteys la palpebra del uelh am la tua ma sinistra, e si es convertida, bo es; e sino, entromet agulha en aquela en la qual sia fiel de la partida pus dejos de la palpebra, e fay penetrar la agulha am fiel desus, e aquo sia — prop del marge de la palpebra en le qual naysso les pels — prop dels pels, e tira le fiel a las partidas desus am la palpebra, e converteys aquela am le ray.	Therefore, first you should examine the head of the illness in its place; then turn over the eyelid of the eye with your left hand, and if it is turned over, that's good; but if not, insert a needle into that one through which pus was discharged earlier from under the eyelid, and make the needle penetrate with thread above, and this should be close to the edge of the eyelid where the hair grows, close to the hair, and pull the thread upwards with the eyelid turned over with your ray.
E aprop fen en la partida dedintz de la palpebra dejos les pels ajustatz am spatum inscidentz del lacrimal major entro al lacrimal mendre; e aprop extratz le fiel e pausa dejos la palpebra polvilhs petitz de coto o de drap, e aprop senha sobre la palpebra am tenta, e sia ayssi cum figura de fuelha de mirt.	Then go into the opening underneath the eyelid where the hair is attached with a spatula incident to the larger tear duct entering the smaller one; then extract the pus and remove it from under the eyelid with small cotton balls or cloth, and finally press on the eyelid with a tent made of soft leather, like this:
Mays empero cove que sia la figura segon la quantitat de helevacio de la palpebra, quar aquo ja es diversificat en les homes, quar de aquels es le quals indigeys que sia inscidit de la palpebra gran quantitat segon la quantitat per la qual la palpebra es mollificada.	"The shape of the incision should vary according to the amount of eyelid elevation, for this differs in men, and those who require a greater amount of skin removed should have it incised accordingly."
E aprop fen am le spatum sobre las doas linhas las quals has senhadas, e comensa del lacrimal major entro al lacrimal menor.	"And then open the incision with forceps along the two lines you have marked, starting from the greater lacrimal near to the lesser."
E si’ la tua fissura prop dels pels naturals ayssi cum es la grossetut del rey.	"And if your incision is close to the natural hairs, such as the thickness of a hair."
E aprop met le onci en un dels dos angles de la codena, e aprop excoria aquela tota, e aprop ajusta am la scitura las doas labias am gula o fiel de lana subtil, e abstergeys le sanc, e fay adherir aquo que superflueys dels fiels sobre dos sobrecils am alcunas causas enviscans, si voles far aquo, e sino, non cures.	And next, press the onion onto one of the two angles of the elbow, then scrape it clean, and then adjust with stitching the two lips with gut thread or fine wool thread, wipe away the blood, and make adhere what is superfluous from the threads over two incisions with some adhesive substance if you wish to do so, otherwise don't bother.
E aprop leyssa la sutura dels fiels entro a tres dias o quatre, e aprop cura aquo.	And next, remove the stitches of the threads inside after three or four days, and then care for it.
E si vols, layssa la plagua ses sutura, e cura aquela am aquo que exsicca e constrenh, quar la palpebra es alevada deves la sigillacio de la plagua e la agreguacio de lu; mays sutura es milor E donc aysso diysso les antics de taxanir.	And if you wish, leave the plague open without stitching it up, and care for it with something that dries and tightens, because the eyelid is raised due to the sealing of the plague and the aggregation of pus; but stitching is better. Therefore thus do I prescribe according to the ancient teachings on cauterizing.
Mays empero en lu sia sollicitut sobre le malaute, e es de bona operacio, e no es en lu temor.	But if there is solicitude about the illness and it is of good operation, and not due to fear.
E es autra manieyra en taxmir, e es que senhes sobre la palpebra figura ayssi cum fuelha de mirt, e aprop eleva la palpebra am tres uncis segreguatz e congreguatz segon aquesta forma:	And it is another manner of cauterizing, and it is that you place on the eyelid figured thus like the leaf of a myrtle tree, and next raise the eyelid with three incisions separated and arranged in this shape:
Mays si no es possible aquo, tener les uncis, e aquo no es engualhat, lahoras pren una agula en la qual haia fil e met aquela en le mieg de la figura, e entromet le autre fiel prop le lacrimal major, e·l fiel segon prop le lacrimal mendre, e ajusta entre les tieus ditz les fiels am equalitat, e aprop am aquels eleva la tua ma am elevacio engual, eleva tota la codena sobre la qual es senhat ayssi cum havem recomtat.	But if that is not possible, then take the incisions, and whatever is not engraved, then take a needle on which there is thread, and insert it into the middle of the figure, and the other thread near the greater lacrimal, and the second thread near the lesser lacrimal, and adjust between these two threads with equality, and next with those elevate your hand with an equal elevation, elevate all the chain upon which it is placed thus as we have recommended.
E aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And next adjust the two lips of the plague with stitching, and care for that area until it heals.
Mays si accideys apostema deves la tua inscizio o la tua fissura, seda aquel apostema am cerot e a lu semblantz, e am enguentz.	But if an aposteme occurs after your incision or fissure, cauterize that aposteme with a torch and its likeness, and with embers.
E alcunas veguadas endeve a la palpebra que·ls sieus pels sian convertitz, adonc cove que tu uses en aquela de aquo que havem dit de inscizio; mays sutura en quascus es mays artificial.	And sometimes it happens that the hairs of the eyelid are converted into themselves, therefore you should use in that case what we have said about incision; but suture where it is more convenient.
Ataxinir am cannas es segon aquesta forma:	To cauterize with candles, do it thus:
e es que tu convertas la palpebra e scindas la figura qu’es dedintz segon que he recontat; e aprop per art fay doas cannas o doas astelas subtils de las quals longitut sia segon la longitut de la palpebra e la latitut de lor sia mendra de la latitut del spatum.	And it is that you turn the eyelid and cut the figure which is beneath according to what has been said; and next by art make two candles or two slender torches of which the length should be according to the length of the eyelid, and their width less than the width of the spatula.
E tu ja has inscidit en las extremitatz de quascunas partidas, la on tenes les fils.	And you have already incised at both ends of each cut where you hold the threads.
Aprop agregua quascuna am subtilitat subre aquo que superflueys de la palpebra del huel, e constres las cannas de quascunas partidas am fort strictura, e layssa aquela per alcus jorns, quar la codena per la strictura morira e sira denegada e se poyrira entro que per si meteyssa cayra.	Next carefully apply each one with subtlety over that which is superfluous on the eyelid of the eye, and press the candles at both ends with a strong grip, and leave them like that for some days, because the chain will die by the tightening and it will dry up and fall inside where you inserted it.
Mays si es tardat, lahoras trenca la am las toroyras, e aprop cura la plagua entro que sia sanat.	But if it is delayed, then break them with the tongs, and next care for the wound until it heals.
Donc cum es solidada, la palpebra es elevada e les pels no pungo.	Therefore when it is healed, the eyelid will be elevated and the hairs will not tickle.
E aquesta es la forma de doas cannas las quals faras segon aquesta forma:	And this is how you make two candles according to this form:
e haia la quantitat de la longitut e de la latitut ni mays ni mens.	and have the quantity of length and width neither more nor less.
Capitol .xii.	Chapter XII
De elevacio de pels pungentz en le huel am agula quan le pel es dur.	Of elevation of tickling hairs on the eye when the hair is hard
Quan son pels no-naturals, durs e aspres e pungentz les huels, lahoras la operacio en lu es que tu prenguas agula subtil e pauses en aquela fiel de ceda subtil e leon, e aprop que tu ajustes las extremitatz de lu e nozes quascu en manieyra mot subtil.	When the hairs are not natural, hard and sharp and tickling the eyes, then the operation is to take a subtle needle and tie onto that thread of cedar wood and lion's hair, and next adjust both ends carefully one by one with great subtlety.
E sia la longitut dels fiels de quantitat de una palma.	And let the length of the threads be equal to the length of a palm.
E aprop tu compon2 autre fiel subtil dejos lu en breu, e nuza las extremitatz de aquel si tu·t vols.	Next take another subtle thread and tie it to that one in brief, and knot both ends if you wish.
E aprop pause le malaute le sieu cap en le tieu se, e sia prop del solelh per que la tua obra sia declarada, quar es operacio subtil e menuda.	Next hold the patient's head firmly with your left hand, and place it near the sun so that your work may be clear, because this operation is subtle and delicate.
E aprop intromet la agulha en la razit del pel ajustat la qual ha necessitat de engen, e fay aquela penetrar en la palpebra festinantment entro que extraguas aquela desus le pel natural.	Next insert the needle into the root of the hair that needs to be removed, and make it penetrate into the eyelid quickly until you extract it above the natural hair.
E aprop tire le pel entro desus e intromet aquel en alixati, e sian les pels un o dos o tres e no mays.	Next pull out the hair up above and insert that one into its place, and let there be one or two or three hairs, but not more.
E aprop tira la tua ma am aquel entro que·l pel sia fora-gitat am alixolati en la palpebra am le pel natural.	Next pull your hand with the hair so that it comes out together with the eyelid and the natural hair.
Mays si es atirat alixalati e non es gitat le pel, atiraras alixati a las partidas dejos am le fiel le qual tu has compost am aquela, entro qu’en sia gitat alixalati del trau sobira.	But if it is pulled together with the eyelid and the hair is not removed, then pull the eyelid towards you again with the thread that you have tied onto it, until the eyelid comes out of its place.
E vegas aquela am la visio del huel, quar lahoras tu gitaras alixati e lo fiel, e grotan quascu e clautz le huel, e laysse le claus per dos dias o tres, entro que·l pel adheresca al sieu loc e nasque sobre aquel bona carn.	Then examine it with the vision of the eye, because then you will remove the eyelid and the thread, and dress each one carefully and close the eye, and leave the dressing for two or three days until the hair adheres to its place and grows on good skin.
E si es mays breu le pel, lahoras tu ajusta un pel lonc dels pels naturals, e es elevat am aquel, o que·l leysses entro que sia alonguat aprop alcu spazi, e lehoras tu eleva aquel.	And if the hair is too short, then adjust one long natural hair and elevate it with that one, or let it grow until it reaches a certain space, and then elevate it.
Capitol .xiii.	Chapter XIII
De la cura de ehacratir la qual ve en la palpebra desus.	Of the treatment of ectropion which comes on top of the eyelid
Quan ve en le huel ehacratir, e es contraccio de la palpebra quan es contrayta en sus, o a dextra o a sinistra partida, per mala consolidacio de plagua o de seccio o de cauteri, e es apelada leporina, e aquesta ahercrati o es natural o accidental, e es fayta per consolidacio de plagua o de seccios o de cauteri, o per semblantz a lor malcuratz.	When ectropion comes on the eye, it is a contraction of the eyelid when it contracts upwards, either to the right or left side due to bad healing of a wound or section or cautery, and it is called "leporina," and this ectropion can be natural or accidental. It occurs because of healing of a wound or section or cautery, or due to similar misfortunes.
May la manieyra de la operacio en lu es que tu fendas aquela consolidacio e que separes las labias de lu, e pauses en lu en aquo que es entre aquelas una meca de drap de li, e ligues aquelas entro que sian sanadas.	The way to operate on it is to cut that contraction and separate the lips of it, and tie onto it a wick of linen cloth in what is between them, and bind them until they are healed.
E no cove que tu uses de curacio de lu de las causas las quals exsiccan, constrenho; quar si tu fas aquo retorna alixacratir pus mal que nulh temps no foc habantz.	And it is not necessary to use the treatment of it with causes that dry and constrict because if you do so, it will return to ectropion worse than before.
Usa en aquela de causas que mollifico ayssi cum es fenugrec, e embroca am la aygua en la qual son coytz altea e semensa de li, o enguent dyaquilon, le qual sia liquefayt am alcu dels olis, e submergeys en aquel la meca, e cura am aquel.	Use on it causes that soften it like fenugreek, and soak with water in which bitter almonds have been cooked and strained from it, or diacyl, which has been liquefied with some oils, and submerge the wick in that and treat it with it.
E lo tesaur de la tua curacio es que tu perforsses am tot engen que no sia consolidat segon la forma que foc al comensament.	And the treasury of your treatment is to perforate all that is not healed according to the form that was at the beginning.
E aquesta operacio la qual havem dita, no es sino alcuna rectificacio de ehalixacrati que no retorna la forma del loc segon que foc denant.	And this operation that we have described is only some correction of ectropion which does not return to its former place.
Capitol .xiiii.	Chapter XIV
De la cura de ehacrati le qual es fayt en la palpebra dejos.	Of the treatment of entropion which occurs on the lower eyelid
Aquesta alxacrati la qual es fayta en la palpebra dejos, la qual es nompnada vertadierament alxacrati; e es de lu alcuna natural, autra accidental.	This entropion which occurs on the lower eyelid is truly called entropion. It can be either natural or accidental.
Mays accidental es fayta per plagua o per scissura o per cauteri o per autres semblantz.	But accidental entropion is caused by wound, cut, cautery, or other similar things.
E la via de la operacio de lu es que tu prenguas una agula en la qual haga fil doble, e fiques aquela en la carn, e que la fassas passar del lacrimal de senestre entro al lacrimal dextre, entro que·l fil pervengua en las doas extremitatz de la carn.	And the way to operate on it is to take a needle with double thread and insert it into the skin, and make it pass from the left lacrimal to the right lacrimal until the thread reaches both ends of the skin.
E aprop exten la carn a las partidas desus am la agula e cus aquela am la agula, e inscideys am spatum ample.	Next extend the skin upwards with the needle and cut it with the needle, then incise with a broad scissors.
E donc si retorne la figura de la palpebre segon que cove, bo es; e sino, pren le ray e pausa aquel en la figura fenduda, e am aquel converteys la palpebra, e fen las doas fissuras en le latz de la palpebra dejos.	And then if the figure of the eyelid returns as it should be, that is good. But if not, take a thread and tie it in the cut figure, and with that turn the eyelid back, and make two stitches on the side of the lower eyelid.
E sian las extremitatz de las doas fissuras de dos angles de la inscizio, la qual has fayta entro que concurren, e sia de lor fayt angle entro que quan se congreguan sia fayta figura de lor.	And let the ends of the two stitches be at the two angles of the incision that you have made so that when they come together they form an angle and thus make the desired figure.
E aquesta figura es letra greca: la landa.	"And this figure is Greek letter: lambda."
E aprop osta la carn aquela per la quantitat que es le latz de lu agut dejos de lu, aquo que siec la palpebra.	"And then remove the flesh that much as the length of his wound has grown, so that the eyelid is secured."
E aprop ajusta las partz seperadas e cos aquelas am le fil de lana; e aprop cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit de las medicinas mollificativas e de las calguas entro que sia sanat.	"And then bring together the separated parts and stitch them with wool thread; and also treat them with what has been said about softening medicines and dressings until they are healed."
E si alxacrati endeve per fissura o sutura o cauteri, lahoras cove que tu fendas am fissura plana sobre les pels de la palpebra segon que es precedit.	"And if the eyelid is torn from a cut or suture or cautery, then you should make a flat incision on the skin of the eyelid as was previously described."
E aprop separa am la calgua entre doas labias segon que havem dit.	"And then separate with gauze between two lips as we have said."
En la suma del sermo de la cura de alxacrati quan es desus o dejos, que corra en lu operacio, segon que es preparat de la forma de alxacrati, e aquela es en forma de motas diversitatz.	"And in summary of the speech on the treatment of eyelids when they are dislocated or prolapsed, that it runs during the operation according to what has been prepared concerning the form of the eyelid, and this is in the shape of various mottled varieties."
E le artifexs savi totz temps prepara engen en quascuna manieyra la qual es possibla a lu entro que fassa retornar la figura a la forma natural, o prop de aquela, e aquel malaute segon que a lu conveneys de la operacio e dels strumentz en las majors disposicios.	"And the skilled artisan always prepares beforehand in every possible manner that is suitable to achieve the return of the figure to its natural form, or close to it, and that patient according to what is appropriate for the operation and the instruments in the best conditions."
Capitol .xv.	"Chapter XV."
De la adherencia de la palpebra am la conjunctiva o am la cornea.	"Of adhesion of the eyelid to the conjunctiva or to the cornea."
Quan accideys aquesta consolidacio a motz homes enayssi que sia solidada la palpebra pus desus am le album del huel, e sia prohibida de la facilitat del movement e de las suas obras naturals, donc cove que tu entrometas la extramitat del ray dejos la palpebra, e eleva en sus aquela, o exten aquela am le unci.	When such consolidation occurs in many men that the eyelid is solidified above with albumen of wool, and is prohibited from its facility of movement and natural works, therefore you must insert the extremity of a probe between the eyelid and lift it upwards, or extend it upwards with an awl.
E aprop tu inscideys la adherencia am spatum subtil, le qual no sia am acuitat de las inscisios, habantz obtus un petit per so que·l malaute no sia inquietat deves la operacio, e remau le spatum que no ledesca le huel am la sua acuitat.	Next, you should cut through the adhesion with a fine spatula, which is not sharp-pointed to avoid unnecessary incision, having blunted it slightly so that the patient is not disturbed by the operation. Then remove the spatula so that it does not accidentally injure the wool with its sharpness.
E sia la tua inscizio quays excorjan aquela adherencia am facilitat entro que sia retornada la palpebra segon la sua forma natural e que sia sanada tota la adherencia.	And your incision should be such that it easily removes that adhesion so that the eyelid returns to its natural form and all adhesion is healed.
E aprop tu met en le huel aygua salada am la qual tu laves; o distilla en lu de zunia dissolvut en l’aygua.	Next, you should put salt water into the wool with which you wash it; or dissolve in its place distilled water that has been dissolved in water.
E aprop separa entre la palpebra e l’huel am calgua de li, e pausa sobre le huel lana infuza en album de huou, e aprop le tertz jorn usa de causas consolidativas entro que sia sanat.	And then separate the eyelid from the wool with a small amount of water, and place on the wool lanolin infused in egg white, and on the third day use consolidating causes until it is healed.
Capitol .xvi.	Chapter XVI
De inscizio de ungla e de eminencia de carn dels lacrimals.	Of Incision of Toenail and Cyst of Caruncle of Lacrimal
Sapias que ungla es segon dos manieyras, quar o es nervosa, e es semblant a ciphac dur subtil; o es no-nervosa, semblant a humiditat blanca congilada, la qual quan ferr la toca, o es forsat aquela prendre am onci, es abscindida e le onci no es ficat en lu.	Know that a toenail has two forms:
E amdos las specias no comensan sino del lacrimal major entro que va petit a petit que cobre la vista e prohibeys le lum e·l movement de huel.	"And both species begin only from the larger lacrimal gland, slowly spreading until they cover sight and prohibit light and eye movement."
Mays la manieyra del obrar en la inscizio de lu es que·l malaute pause le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop obre les huels de lu, e eleva la palpebra am la tua ma, e aprop colligeys la ungla am onci de pauca duplicacio e exten aquela a las partidas desus.	"To perform the incision of it is necessary that the patient hold their head steady with the chin raised. Then open their eyelids and raise the upper lid with your thumb while using the nail of your index finger, slightly doubled over, to cut the skin at the corner of the eye."
E aprop pren una agula e entromet en aquela un pel de cavalh o de buou o de vaqua, o de semblantz, o de fiel fort, o duplica la extremitat de la agulha petit a petit e fica aquela en le mieg de la ungla, e penetra aquela am la agulha, e lia am fiel la ungla; e exten aquela a las partidas desus, e excorja am le pel le latz de la ungla lo qual siec la pupilla.	"And take a needle and insert it into that corner of horse or cowhide or calfskin or similar, or strong thread, doubling the tip of the needle bit by bit until it is in the middle of the nail. Then penetrate with the needle under the nail, and tie the thread around the nail; stretch it to the upper corners and remove the skin from the side of the nail that covers the pupil."
E ayssi tu sieguas aquela am le pel entro al derier de lu.	"And then you will follow that with the skin inside the eye."
E aprop tu inscideys le romanent en la razitz del lacrimal am spatum subtil o am petitas forfexs, e leysa la carn del lacrimal natural per so que per inscizio de aquela no endevengua fluxs de lagremas continuabla.	"And then you will cut the remnant of the lacrimal duct with fine scissors or forceps, and remove the tissue of the natural lacrimal passage so that cutting it does not cause continuous tearing."
E alscunas vetz la ungla am le sol onci estenduda o am fiel, ayssi co havem dit, e aprop sia excurjat am spatum leon del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	"And sometimes the nail with the thread stretched out or tied as we have said, and then you should remove it with fine forceps of which this is the shape:"
E guarda te que am le spatum no toques la tunica cornea e que avengua en lu ruptura, e que la pupilla sia perforada.	"And be careful not to touch the corneal epithelium with the forceps and that there is no rupture in it, and that the pupil is not perforated."
Aprop la inscizio geta en le huel un pauc de sal trissa o di cief fayt de siniar, e leyssa aquel entro al autre dia; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove entro que sia sanat.	"And then put a little salt water or drops of collyrium in the eye and leave it overnight; and then wash it with water that is suitable for healing."
E si la ungla no es nervoza e no podes metre la agulha, ni es ficada en aquela le onci, lahoras motas veguadas aquesta specia de ungla es curada am medicinas, e es sanada ayssi cum yeu e recomtat en la divisio.	"And if the nail is not nervous and you cannot put the needle in it or it does not remain stuck there, sometimes this type of nail is cured with medications, and it heals as you and I have discussed in the section on treatment."
E si tu vols inscindir aquela, lahoras tu obre le huel del malaute e pren spatum subtil leon de freul acuitat segon aquesta forma:	"And if you want to cut that nail, then open the eye of the patient and take fine forceps like this, with sharp tips like this:"
am subtilitat.	"with subtlety."
E si vezes que aquela es rarificada e es confugida e empren en aquela razit, lahoras distilla de la tua ora en le huel de cief fayt de siniar o am cief rog o am sal trissat, e opila le huel entro a l’autre dia.	"And if sometimes that nail is dried out and stuck in the corner of the eye, then distill drops of your saliva into the eye with a dropper or cotton wool soaked in siniar or rose water or salted water, and close the eye overnight."
E aprop itera sobre aquela la operacio entro que sia remaugut tot aquo que es de lu, sino que·l contrari apostema caut sia en le huel, quar lahoras tu leyssa aquela, e cura al comensament la apostema entro que sia sanat.	"And then repeat the operation until everything that is of the nail has been removed, otherwise the opposite could happen and an abscess could form in the eye. For if you leave it like that, cure the abscess at the beginning so that it heals."
E aprop itera la tua operacio sobre aquela am razo entro que sia sanat.	"And then repeat your operation on that with reason until it is healed."
La emenencia de la carn lacrimal, si notz en le huel per gran nocument, sia suspendut am onci; e inscideys aquela de aquela una partida, e no ultimes la inscizio per so que no inscidesqua fluxs de lagremas.	"The prominence of the lacrimal caruncle, if it is noticed in the eye causing great harm, should be suspended with a thread. And cut it with fine scissors or forceps, and do not cut all the way through so that there are no continuous tearing flows."
E aprop distilla en le lacrimal cief rog e fayt de siniar entro que sia sanat.	"And then apply rose water or drops of collyrium to the lacrimal sac until it is healed."
Capitol .xvii.	"**Chapter 17.**"
De inscizio de alguazardenic e de aquo que es nascut de carn ajustada en le huel.	**On Incision of a Pterygium and Removal of Adherent Epithelium from the Eye.**
Alcunas veguadas en les huels de alcus es nascuda carn roga, e es sobre-pausada entro que cobre la pupilla, o apropinqua o estrenh sobre las palpebras e fort leu comprem las palpebras a las partidas deforo e es assemblada a roza de balaustra.	"Sometimes, in the eyes of certain individuals, red flesh is born and it grows over the pupil, or approaches or presses upon the eyelids. Forcefully closing the eyelids towards their outer edges causes it to resemble a bunch of grapes."
Mays la operacio en lu es que·l malaute pausa le sieu cap en le tieu se; e aprop obre les huels de aquel e colligeys tota aquela carn am oncis convenientz ad aquo, e te aquo am una forcep o am cesti; e aprop inscindiys la carn el comensament entro que tot sia finit am le encisori, e guarda te del huel que no ledescas aquel deves la tua operacio.	"The operation on him is that the patient puts his head in this position; and thus opening their eyes of that one, collects all that flesh with suitable forceps or tweezers, and thus cutting through the beginning until everything is finished with scissors, be careful not to let any of it fall during your operation."
E sia la tua inscizio am la qual inscides aquelas o am espatum le qual nos havem recomtat en la inscizio de la ungla, o am petitas forfexs am las quals es colligit ascebel segon que vindra la forma de lu aprop aquest capitol.	"And your incision should be made with the one in which you cut that or with the spatula which we have recommended in the incision of the nail, or with small forceps according to what is appropriate for this chapter."
Donc cum es complida la tua inscizio e es remauguda tota aquela carn, lahoras omple le huel de sal trissa, o destilla en lu polvera roga e semblantz a lu de las medicinas corrossivas, e pausa sobre le huel deforo coto am album de huou entro que sia asegurat de apostema caut.	"Therefore, once your incision is complete and all that flesh has been removed, then fill the wound with crushed salt, or sprinkle on it powdered rust like medicines corrosives, and place over it a cloth soaked in egg white until assured of cauterization."
E si roman alcuna causa de alguardenici e es senhoragat sanc caut, e temes apostema caut, lahoras leyssa le huel e cura aquela apostema am aquo que ceda aquela apostema, e aprop itera sobre aquel am operacio entro que sia sanat, e semblantment fay en la carn ajustada la qual accideys en le huel de aquesta especia.	"And if there remains some cause of inflammation and is sent to be cauterized with fire, and you fear cauterization, then leave the wound alone and treat that cauterization with whatever helps it, and repeat this operation until it is healed, and do likewise with the flesh that has been adjusted in the wound of this type."
Mays empero tu cove que alienes tota curacio del huel freul per via natural o per via accidental, obran am ferr, e no metas la tua ma en alcuna de aquestas operacios entro que veges que aquel membre sia suffertant aquela operacio.	"But you must ensure that all care of the wound is avoided by any means, either naturally or accidentally, and do not put your hand in any of these operations until you see that that member has suffered that operation."
Capitol .xviii.	"Chapter XVIII."
De colleccio de sabel en le huel.	"Of the collection of pus from a wound."
Sabel so venas rogas las quals son testudas sobre le huel e prohibeysso al vesement la sua operacio, e develican le huel am longitut de dias.	"Pus comes out red which is thick and covers the wound and hinders its operation, and uncover the wound for many days."
Donc necessari es al comensament que tu consideres si le huel en le qual es sabel es fort e en lu no es autra malautia que sabel, lahoras tu colligeys aquel sabel.	"Therefore it is necessary at the beginning that you consider whether the wound in which pus appears is strong and whether there is not some other illness besides pus, then collect that pus."
E es que tu comandes al malaute que pause le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop suspen aquelas venas am un onci o am dos segon la tua prudencia; e sia aquel onci de subtil duplicacio segon aquesta forma:	"And have the patient hold his head down towards you and then suspend those veins with one or two ounces according to your judgment; and let that ounce be of subtle doublefold according to this form:"
o so dos oncis gradantment en un cos segon aquesta forma:	"or two ounces gradually in a body according to this form:"
E aprop sian colligidas aquelas venas am forses subtils, am subtilitat, e abstergeys le sanc hora aprop hora, entro que vegas aquelas venas esser remaugudas del huel e sian revolgudas.	"And then those veins should be collected with subtle forceps, with subtlety, and wipe away the blood little by little until you see that those veins are removed from the wound and turned back."
E guarda te que tu no ledes le huel am las extremitatz del spatum; e si’ la tua operacio en le miegjorn denant le solelh, e sias mot ferm en la tua operacio que no inscidas sino aquelas venas.	"And be careful that you do not cut the wound with the edges of the spatula. And if your operation is in the middle of the day before the sun, and if you are very firm in your operation, then only cut those veins."
E quan tu auras complitz, lahoras tu distilla en le huel cief vert o rog per que am sa acuitat corrodesca aquo que es remaugut del sabel.	"And when you have completed [the collection of pus], then apply to the wound chief vinegar or rogam for its sharpness to corrode what has been removed from the pus."
Mays si aquo no es a tu possible colligeys tot en aquela hora, e lahoras tu emplastra tot am aquo que cede la dolor de lu, e leyssa lu per alcus dias entro que sia sedada la dolor de lu e que sia asegurat de apostema caut.	"But if that is not possible for you to collect all in one time, then plaster everything with whatever relieves the pain of it and leave it alone for a few days until the pain is relieved and assured of cauterization."
E aprop itera sobre lu segon que la mateyssa manieyra entro que sia sanat.	"And then repeat on it according to what seems best to you until it is healed."
E aquesta es la forma de las forfexs:	"And this is the form of the forceps:"
Capitol .xix.	"Chapter XIX."
De reduccio de arizati al nas.	"Of the reduction of bleeding from the nose."
Quan tu curas arisati am cauteri o am medicina aguda comburent segon que es precedida la narracio de lu e no es sanat, lahoras no es engen en lu sino que fendas sobre le apostema deves la maturitat de lu, e que extraguas tota la humiditat la qual es en lu e·l poyre entro que sia descubert le os.	"When you treat bleeding from the nose with cautery or with burning medicine according to what has been previously narrated and it is not healed, then do not go into it except that you cut over the aposteme when it reaches maturity, and extract all the humidity that is in it and the pus until the bone is uncovered."
E donc cum es descubert le os e vezes en lu corrupcio o negror, lahoras tu ratz lu am un sturment del qual aquesta es la forma:	"And then when the bone is uncovered and there appears corruption or blackness in it, then scrape it with an instrument of which this is the form:"
E es nompnat de aspre cap, e sia feyt de fer indi, e sia le cap redon ayssi cum asir le qual sia fayt punctat per punctacio de lima o aliskalfati per punctacio subtil (ayssi cum es en la forma seguent).	"And it is named rough head and should be made of iron and the head should be round like this, pierced with a file or scalpel with subtle punctuation (as it is in the following form):"
E pausa aquel sobre le loc corrumput del os, e aprop revolveys aquel entre les tieus ditz, e prem la tua ma petit a petit entro que sapias que aquela corropcio es rasa.	"And pause that on the corrupted place of the bone, and then turn it between your fingers, and press your hand little by little until you know that that corruption is scraped."
E aquo sia fayt alcunas veguadas, e aprop restaura le loc am causas exsiccativas e stipticas.	"And do this several times, and then restore the place with drying and styptic causes."
Donc si·l loc es consolidat e es en lu nascuda bona carn e es abscindit le cors de la sania e roman per xl dias, e no es renovat e no es apostemat e no accideys en lu accident, lahoras tu sapias que es sanat.	"Therefore if the place is consolidated and good flesh has been born in it and the body of the ulcer has been cut off and it remains for forty days without being renewed and without aposteme and without accidental occurrence, then you know that it is healed."
E sino, lahoras no es en lu engen sino reduzir la fissura a la forma del nas, e segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu descuebras de segon os am ferr o am medicina acuta, e cum sira descubert le os, lahoras tu pren tribo segon aquesta forma:	"And if not, then do not go into it except to reduce the fissure to the form of the nose, and according to this manner: And that you uncover the bone with iron or with sharp medicine, and when the bone is uncovered, then take trocar according to this form:"
Sia la extramitat de lu ferr triangulada, e·l fust de lu sia prim extenuat entro a la extremitat ayssi cum vezes assi.	"The extremity of it should be triangular, and its shaft thinly narrowed towards the extremity like this."
E aprop pausa aquel sobre le os, e sia aquel prop del lacrimal; e alongua la tua ma un pauc del huel, e aprop revol la tua ma am le tribo entro que penetre tot le os, e aquel sente le malaute per asso que atroba vent yssir per so quan te la sua ma.	"And then pause that on the bone and let it be near the lacrimal; and lengthen your hand a little from the wound, and then turn your hand with the trocar until it penetrates all the bone, and you will feel the pain for as much as air goes out through it when you withdraw your hand."
Donc lahoras restaura le loc am medicinas stipticas exsiccantz ayssi cum t’e eyssenhat.	"Therefore then restore the place with styptic drying medicines like those which I have mentioned."
Donc cum nays la carn e·l loc es endurazit, lahoras la materia la qual effundia a las partidas deforo retorna al nas, donc aquo es pus leugier sobre le malaute.	"Therefore when the flesh has grown and the place has hardened, then that matter which flowed out of it returns to the nose. Therefore that is light pus on top of the pain."
Capitol .xx.	"Chapter XX."
De reduccio de la eminencia del huel.	"Of the reduction of the swelling of the wound."
Quan le huel emineys am la sua totalitat e no accideys en le vezement nocument ni diminuacio, lahoras cove que laxas le malaute, e aprop que·l segues, e aprop que pausas ventozas en le cervitz ses scarificacio e succa per bona succaccio; e aprop pausa sobre le huel liniment le qual sia fayt de acatra e aloe e enses e sarcocolla, e aprop strenh le emplaustre sobre le huel am motz polvils.	"When the wound swells with its entirety and no accidental occurrence of harmfulness or diminution occurs, then it is necessary to relieve the pain, and then follow this: And pause vents on the neck without scarification and suck well; And then pause on the wound with liniment which is made of acacia and aloe and sesame and sarcocolla, and then strengthen the plaster on the wound with many powders."
E la manieyra dels polvils es que prenguas draps de li leons motz, e quascun drap sia duplicat en quatre plecs; e fay de aquels motz.	"And the manner of the powders is that you take wool from a lion's mouth, and each piece should be doubled into four folds; and make them of those hairs."
E aprop pausa aquels la un sobre le autre segon la quantitat de la qual ha le huel necessitat.	"And then pause those one on top of the other according to the quantity which the wound requires."
E aprop strenh sobre aquels am drap dur am fort strictura; e itera las ventosas am succio ses scarificacio; e aprop osta las ventosas e leyssa le huel streyt le dia e la nueyt.	"And then strengthen on them with a hard cloth with strong compression; And then repeat the vents with suction without scarification; And then remove the vents and leave the wound tight during the day and night."
Mays si entretant le liguament es mollificat, lahoras cove que sia mot streyt.	"But if meanwhile the ligation is softened, then it must be tightened."
E aprop osta le liament aprop le dia e la nueyt ayssi cum havem dit.	"And then remove the bandage day and night as we have said."
E si vezes le huel ja esser redusit, bo es, e sino, lahoras itera le emplastre am les polvils e la strictura e las ventosas entro que sia sanat.	"And if the wound has already been reduced, that is good; but if not, then repeat the plaster with the powders and compression and vents until it is healed."
Capitol .xxi.	"Chapter XXI."
De la inscizio de la eminencia de la tunica uvea.	"Of the incision of the swelling of the tunic of the eye."
Quan endeve disrupcio en la tunica uvea, e aprop es eminent e procezeys fora las palpebras ayssi cum un gra de rasim, e es orrazada la forma de home per aquo, e vols aquo inscidir, lahoras la operacio en lu es ayssi cum havem recomtat, que tu entrometas la agula en la razitz de la uvea de la partida dejos en la partida desus, e aprop met la agula autra en la qual sia fil doble de la part del lacrimal, e fay aquela penetrar e leyssa la primieyra agula segon la sua disposicio; e aprop inscideys le loc del fiel doble e leva am aquel la partida de la uvea en le circuit de la agula, e strenh aquela mot.	"When there is disruption in the tunic of the eye and it swells up and protrudes outside the eyelids like a grain of mustard seed, and it becomes roughened like a man's shape due to that, and you want it incised, then the operation here is as we have recommended: That you insert the needle into the furrow of the eye from below towards above, and then insert another needle with doubled thread on the side of the lacrimal, and make that penetrate and leave the first needle according to its position; And then incise the place of the doubled thread and lift it up with that, lifting the piece of the eye tunic around the needle, and tighten it much."
E aprop extratz la agula e pausa sobre le huel lana infusa en album de huou e leyssa entro que cayha le fil am la uva.	"And then remove the needle and place it on wool infused in egg white, allowing the thread to fall with the wool."
E aprop cura le huel am aquo que conforte aquel entro que la plagua sia sanada.	"And then take care of the wound so that it may heal quickly."
E alcunas veguadas aduna de tota partida am cercle de drap entro le huel ajuste eminencia gran, e aprop sia perforat am le spatum subtil que vengua al preon del huel, e corra la humiditat albuginea, e descen le huel e intra tantost.	"And sometimes gather all parts with a circle of cloth around the wound, adjusted to its prominent edge, and then pierce it with a subtle spatula that reaches the depth of the wound, causing the whitish fluid to descend, and thus lower the wound."
E aprop strenh entro que sia sanat.	"And then let it heal quickly."
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter XXII.
De curacio de alconati.	On the treatment of styes.
Aquesta malautia que es apelada alconati no es sino sania la qual es ajustada en le huel semblant a aygua dessendent e no es aquela.	This condition called stye is nothing but a swelling that forms in the eyelid, like descending water and not like blood.
Mays la manieyra del obrar en ela es que fasses le malaute sezer sobre la sela aparelada e dreyta, e aprop pren le cap sieu en las tuas mas de doas partz e mau aquel entro que veias la sania pervenir a las partidas dejos, e aprop sia siccada e no descenda, e sia ostat le lum, e·l malaute veia las causas ayssi cum vezia.	However the method of treating it is as follows: Place the affected eye on a prepared seat and hold your head steady with both hands. When you see the swelling begin to form in the corners of the eyes, squeeze gently until the swelling stops and does not descend, then cover the light and keep watch over the condition as described above.
E si no descendra en jos, sapias que es aygua.	And if it does not descend downward, know that it is water.
Mays si no es preparat le descendement a la sania am aquo que havem dit, lahoras fay le malaute sezer entre las tuas mas e aprop pren spatum subtil e fen am aquel sobre le pannicol cernent un petit deves la continuacio de la conjunctiva am la tunica cornea en la corona (entro al loc vuet), entro que sia fora-getada la sania.	But if the swelling does not descend as described earlier, then press the affected eye between your hands and take a subtle spatula and pierce it gently on the skin surrounding a small area near the continuation of the conjunctiva with the tunic cornea at its crown (at the location shown), so that the swelling is expelled.
Donc cum es fora-getada, lahoras tu distilla en le huel aygua cauda en la qual has mesclat mel o aygua en la qual ja has bulit fenugrec e mel.	Then, once it has been expelled, immediately distill into the eye water that has been boiled with honey or water in which you have boiled fenugreek and honey.
E aprop sia curat am las autras causas entro que sia sanat.	And then it will be cured along with other causes until it is healed.
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter XXII.
De la curacio de la aygua descendent del huel.	On the treatment of watery discharge from the eye.
Ja havem dit las specias de la aygua en la divisio e qual conveneys a perforar am sermo declarant, lahoras aquel segon la sanetat.	We have previously discussed the types of water in division and which is suitable for piercing with clear explanation, so that one may follow according to health.
Lahoras cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute entre las tuas mas sobre un cayrat e lia le sieu huel sa, lu mot stringent.	Then you must put the patient between your thighs on a cushion and hold their head steady with both hands firmly.
E aprop pausa prop de la palpebra del sieu huel la tua ma senestra, si le huel en le qual es l’aygua es le huel senestra; o am la tua ma dreyta, si le huel es le dextre.	And properly place your left hand near the eyelid of their left eye if the water eye is on the left side; or with your right hand, if it's on the right side.
E aprop am la tua ma dextra pren almagda, si le huel es senestre; o am la tua ma senestra, si le huel es de dreyt.	And take tweezers in your right hand if the eye is left; or in your left hand, if it's right.
E aprop pausa la extremitat de almagda prop de la corona per la grossesa del ray en le album del huel de part del mendre lacrimal, e aprop enpelleys almagda am vertut e revol la tua ma am aquel.	And then place the tip of the tweezers near the edge of the cornea according to the thickness of the ray in the eye's white towards the inner corner of the eye, and gently press the tweezers with force while rotating your hand around it.
E aprop penetre en le album del huel e sentas que almagda ja es pervenguda a causa vueda.	And then penetrate into the white of the eye and make sure that the tweezers have reached the outer corner of the eye.
E cove que sia la masura del cami de almagda al preon la mesura del spazi le qual es de la pupilla entro a la fi de la negror, e es la corona del huel; quar tu veyras am aquel pupilla am la visio de l’huel per la clartat de la tunica cornea.	And ensure that the distance of the tweezers from its point is equal to the measurement of the space which is from the pupil to the end of the blackness, and this is the edge of the eye; for you will see the pupil with the vision of the eye through the clarity of the corneal tunic.
E aprop pausa almagda entro al loc en le qual es l’aygua, e aprop tu la atira en jos una veguada aprop autra, e donc si la aygua descen tantost, lahoras vetz le malaute aquo sobre le qual huebre la sua vista tantost, e almagda en le sieu huel.	And then place the tweezers into the location where the water is, and gently pull it down once or twice; and then if the water descends quickly, immediately relieve the pressure on that eye, and remove the tweezers from the eye.
E aprop repausa se un pauc; donc si la aygua es descenduda, lahoras tu depausa aquela autre veguada abantz que almagda ne sia getada.	And then pause for a moment; and if the water has descended, then gently remove the tweezers again making sure that they are not twisted.
E donc quan es sicada e no descen, lahoras tu extrat almagda am facilitat, e revol am aquel la tua ma pauc a pauc, e aprop dissolveys en l’aygua un petit de sal clara de gemma e am aquela lava le huel dedintz; e aprop pausa fora le huel coto o stopa o lana infusa en oli rozat e album de huou e ligua am aquo le huel sa.	And then when it's finished descending and not falling, gently remove the tweezers with ease, and rotate your hand around it little by little, and then dissolve a small amount of fine salt crystal in the water and wash the eye inside; and then place something outside the eye to stop or cover it with cotton wool soaked in rose oil and almond oil and tie it with that eye.
Mays nos e aquels que so de nostre temps pause sobre aquel comi trissat am album de huou.	But those of us from this time should pause over this commandment written with white almond oil.
E si no obezeys a tu almagda al intrament de l’huel per la sua duricia — quar es alcu dels homes del qual le huel es dur mot —, lahoras cove que prenguas le spatum le qual es nompnat alberid del qual aquesta es la forma:	And if you are unable to insert the tweezers into the eye due to its hardness - as is sometimes the case with some men whose eyes are very hard -, then you should take the spatula which is called an "alberti" and this is its shape:
E donc perfora am aquel aquela conjunctura, e no ultimes la tua ma en le trauc, e no es si no que fassas via ad almagda loc subtil.	And then pierce that conjunctiva with it, and do not push your hand through the passage, and if you cannot, make a way for the tweezers to reach its subtle place.
E aprop entromet almagda segon que havem dit.	And then insert the tweezers as we have said.
E deves le compliment de la tua obra, sia preparat al malaute dormitori descentment fayt en le qual dorma sobre le sieu dos en mayson tenebrosa, e sia prohibit de totz movementz .	And you should complete your work by preparing the patient to lie down comfortably and make them sleep in a dark room where they can lie on their back, without any movement allowed.
E pausa en la natura de lu aquo per que sia linida la sua natura, e no maugua le sieu cap a la partida dreyta ni senestra de tot.	And pause to observe the nature of that water so that its nature is pure and clear, and do not move their head to either the right or left side at all.
E sia le liament segon la sua disposicio entro al tertz dia.	And place the plaster according to its position on the third day.
E aprop deslia aquel en aquela maysso tenebrosa e exproha la freol vista, e fay li vezer alcunas causas, e aprop retorna le liament entro al dia .vii.	And then remove that one from that dark room and expose them to bright light, and show them some objects, and then return the plaster on the seventh day.
E no cove que fassas aquo en la hora de las curacios o tantost aprop la infusio.	And you should not do this during the time of cure or immediately after the infusion.
Habantz cove que tu alienes aquo per so quar la aygua puega leugierament per gran e vehement de reguardament.	However, it is necessary that you deviate from this because water can sometimes flow gently and strongly due to gravity.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras cove que deslias le huel denant le vii dia, e rectifica aquel am aquo que ceda apostema.	But if an abscess occurs suddenly, then you should remove the eye on the seventh day, and treat it with something that dissolves the abscess.
Lahoras tu absol la vista de lu e pausa sobre la cara de lu oral per le qual sia regit le vezement de lu dejos lu per alcus dias, lu existent en la mayszo tenebrosa.	Then remove the eye from there and pause to observe the face of its appearance for which it guides the movement of its gaze upwards and downwards, keeping it in a dark room for several days.
E aprop sia gitat de aquela mayzo gradantment e conversa8 en las suas causas.	And then gradually lead them out of that room and expose them to their causes.
E sapias que in alchatea no es excusat le discipol de visio alcunas veguadas, e lahoras tu sias ardit sobre la operacio.	Know that the apprentice of vision is not excused from seeing some things sometimes, and therefore you should be bold about the operation.
E ja es pervengut a nos de alcu de aquels les quals so al Artach , e alcu disse que fayt foc en al Ayrac magdaam perforat am le qual es succada la aygua.	And it has reached our time that some of those who are in the art of cataract have said that fire is made on a magnesium ribbon perforated with which water is sucked up.
Mays empero yeu non e vist degu en la nostra terra le qual haia perfeyt aquo, ni e aquo legit en alcu dels libres dels antics; e es possible que aquo sia novel.	But however, I have not seen anything like that in our land that has perfected this, nor is it written in any of the ancient books; and therefore it may be something new.
E aquestas so las formas de las specias de magdaan per que sia sobre aquelas aquel le qual ignora aquelas:	And these are the forms of the species of tweezers for those who do not know them:
E sian faytas de eram o de ferr propriament, e sian las extramitatz de lor am aquesta subtilitat triangulada, la extremitat aguda ayssi cum aquela es la forma.	"There are made of iron or of steel properly, and they are extended by their ends with this triangular subtlety, the extremity sharp thus as that is the form."
Capitol .xxiv.	"What follows is chapter twenty-four."
De la curacio de carn nada en le nas.	"Of the treatment of flesh torn in the nose."
Quan en le nas so nascudas carns diversas ajustadas de las quals es alcuna causa la qual es assemblada a scorpio de motz pes, o a polip peys; e aquesta malautia es apelada polipus quar es a semblansa de aquel peys representat.	"When in the nose there are born diverse pieces of flesh adhered together, which is some cause by which is assembled to scorpion of heavy weight, or to polyp fish; and this illness is called polypus because it resembles that fish's appearance."
E de lu es carn cancrosa, lapadea, de fusca color; e de lu es que es carn leon no de color fusca.	"And from it is cancerous flesh, gangrenous, of dark color; and from it is that it is lion's flesh not of dark color."
Donc en aquela que es en aquestas carns leon no fraudulenta ni cancroza, cove que fassas le malaute sezer entre las tuas mas e posat al solelh, e huebre las nars de lu, e picoys le tieu onci en aquelas carns.	"So in that which is in these lion's flesh not fraudulent nor cancerous, you should make the illness cease between your hands and put it in the sun, and heat the nose of it, and prick its tip often in those flesh."
E aprop extrat aquela a las partidas deforo, e aprop inscindeys aquo que has comprehendut de aquelas am spatum agut subtil de la una partida entro que sapias que tota la carn ja es ostada; que si roman de lu deguna causa de la qual la abscisio es possibla, lahoras tu ratz aquo am la un dels estrumentz subtils am facilitat entro que de lu romangua denguna causa.	"And properly extract that from the nostrils, and properly incise what you have comprehended of those with sharp spatula subtly from one part into where you knew that all flesh has been taken out; because if there remains thereof any cause by which the amputation is possible, therefore you cut it off with one of the subtle instruments easily into where there remained no cause."
Mays si senhoreja am sanc o accida apostema caut, lahoras tu pausa a lu aquo que cove; o es dels apostemas malignes, lahoras tu coyta e cauteriza aquel entro que sia abscindit sanc e sian ostadas las cavas totas.	"But if it becomes covered with blood or occurs apostema hot, therefore you put on it what is necessary; but if they are of the malignant apostemas, therefore you cut it out and cauterize that where it has been incised, and all cavities have been taken out."
E aprop sia getatz en le nas aprop la inscizio vi agre e aygua o vi.	"And properly put into the nose properly the incision with vinegar and water or wine."
Mays si le nas es ubert e de lu procezeys humiditat entro al palat, lahoras sapias que ja es sanat.	"But if the nose is open and from it proceeds humidity into the palate, therefore you know that it is healed."
Mays si la humiditat no penetra segon que cove, lahoras tu sapias que dedintz lu es carn nada en los pus sobiras osses de las nars als quals non es pervengut abscizio.	"But if the humidity does not penetrate as it should, therefore you know that within it is flesh that is nothing in the superfluous bones of the nose where no incision has reached."
Donc lahoras cove que entromitas fiel de li al qual sia alcuna grosseza, e nuza en lu motz nuzes, e pausa entre quascun nutz la quantitat del dit o mens, e engene le malaute e entromet una extremitat del fiel en le nars am lo ray o am autra causa la qual es a lu possibla.	"So therefore you should insert thread into it wherever there is any thickness, and twist in it twists, and pause between each twist the quantity of the finger or less, and generate the illness and insert one extremity of the thread into the nose with the wax or with another cause that is possible to it."
E pus que aquo aura fayt, que atire le sieu odorament entro que pervengua a las canals de las nars, e sia eyssit sobre le sieu golayro, quar tropas veguadas le semblant ad aquesta accio fan les enfantz a las scolas, e es leugiera causa ad aquel que ho vol far.	"And since that will have been done, let it draw its odor into where it reaches to the canals of the nose, and let it be exhausted over its throat, because often viewed similarly this action is made by the children in schools, and it is an easy cause for that who wants to do it."
E aprop pausa las dos extramitatz del fiel, una extremitat que iesca sobre le nas et l’autra que romangua en le nas, e aprop aministra serratura de carn am les nuzes que so en le fiel, e fay aquo entro que sapias que las carn ja so am les nuzes del fiel.	"And properly pause the two extremities of the thread, one extremity that comes out from the nose and the other that remains in the nose, and properly administer a lock of flesh with the twists that are on the thread, and do this until you know that the flesh is already with the twists of the thread."
E aprop extratz le fiel, e pausa en le nas aprop la abstraccio del sanc una calgua , e fay aquo per tres dias o mays entro que l’enguent corrodo tot aquo que es romas de las carns.	"And properly extract the thread, and pause in the nose properly the abstraction of the blood one time, and do this for three days or more until the corrupted ointment has corrupted all that remains of the flesh."
E aprop en la fi de la causa, pausa en le nas una canula de plom per alscus jorns entro que sia sanat.	"And properly at the end of the cause, pause in the nose a lead canula for several days until it is healed."
Mays si endigeys de curacio que exsique, usa de aquela.	"But if you need a cure that dries up, use that one."
E aquesta es la forma del instrument a capipurge fazedor am le qual son distillatz olis e medicinas en le nars:	"And this is the form of the instrument for nose purge maker with which oils and medicines are distilled into the nose:"
E fay aquo de argent o de eram, la qual sia semblant a una petita lampesa uberta, ayssi cum petita conqua, e le meat semblantment.	"And make it of silver or brass, which is similar to a small open lamp, like a small jug, and the mouth likewise."
E si vols, fay una canula clausa ayssi cum cana, e la cancula del estrument a capipurge fazedor e sia plana, descuberta; a la qual sia manubre en lo derier de lu, am le qual tenguas aquela quan escaufas en lu oli o aquo que tu vols dels sucs e de las causas suctiblas.	"And if you wish, make a closed canula like this, and the canula of the instrument for nose purge maker let it be flat, uncovered; at which you should hold that when you pour into it the oil or water that you want from the juices and from the suction causes."
E aquestz capipurgi es precios: recipe de enforbi de castor, de balayra blanc, de giengiebre, e piletre de safra, de pebre lonc, de escafragia, de epetum de spic ana unc. vi cumfizeys am suc de bleda e de caul, e sian faytas pillulas, e sia destemprada una pillula am aygua tebeza, e sia gitat en las nars del malaute jasent envers.	"And these are the purge makers: take of beaver grease, white wax, ginger, pepper long, saffron, black cumin seed six grains. Mix with juice of beet and coltsfoot, and make them into pills; and let one pill be dissolved in warm water, and it should be applied to the nose of the sick person."
Capitol .xxv.	"Chapter XXV."
De theyls natz en las extramitatz del nas.	"Of sneezes coming out from the extremities of the nose."
Motas veguadas es nat theyl en las extramitatz del nas, e es magnificat e omentat en alscus dias entro en que mot es leg le reguardament de lu.	"Many times is it sneezed from the extremities of the nose, and it is magnified and mentioned in these days within which much is spoken about its regard."
E per aquo cove que tu inscidas aquel en le comensament de la apparissio de lu, e erediques tot aquel.	"And therefore you should insert that at the beginning of its appearance, and eradicate all of it."
E aprop pausa sobre le loc o cauteri o medicina comburent la qual estia en loc de lu.	"And properly pause on the spot or cauterize or apply a burning medicine where it is located."
Mays si es tardada la sua inscizio entro que sia magnificat, lahoras considera si es lapificat, dur, de fusca color e de pauc sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel am ferr quar es apostema crancos; quar motas veguadas ad aquel que inscideys aquesta apostema endeve per lu granda malicia sobre aquel le qual aquel havia.	"But if its insertion is delayed until it becomes magnified, then consider whether it is indurated, hard, of dark color and little sensation, then do not touch that with iron because it is a cranious abscess; for many times he who incises this abscess dies from its great malice on him whom it had."
E si le apostema es de leon tocament e no es de fosca color, e vezes que inscizio es possibla en tot aquel, lahoras evacua le malaute e inscideys aquel senes temor, e cura le loc am aquo que exsique e costrenh entro que sia sanat.	"And if the abscess is of lion-like touch and not of dark color, and sometimes incision is possible in all of it, then evacuate the sick person and incise that without fear, and cure the spot with something that dries up and astringes until it is healed."
Capitol .xxvi.	"Chapter XXVI."
De sutura del nas e de las labias e de la aurelha quan la continuitat es dissolvuda per plagua o per semblantz.	"Of suture of the nose, lips and ear when continuity is dissolved by plague or by wounds."
Sapias que quan accideys solucio de continuitat en una de aquestas cartillages, pauc confereys en aquela operacio sino en alcus homes.	"You should know that when there occurs a solution of continuity in one of these cartilage membranes, you should not rely on that operation but rather on some men."
Donc cove, quan endeve ad alcu alcuna causa de aquelas, que consideres si es plagua fresca am le sieu sanc, e lahoras tu ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	"Therefore, when it happens to someone some cause of those, you should consider whether it is a fresh plague with its blood, and then join the two lips of the plague with suture, and properly cure that until it is healed."
E si las labias de solucio de continuitat so ja separadas, e quascuna es fayta sana, lahoras cove que tu excorjes quascuna partida de la sua codena apparent entro que n’iesca sanc.	"And if the lips of solution of continuity are already separated and each one is made healthy, then you should cut each edge of its apparent cord until there comes out blood."
E aprop ajusta las doas labias am sutura e strenh aquelas, e sobre aquelas pulveriza sanc de drago e enses trissat, e pausa sobre la polvera una pessa de emplaustra diafinicon, o de alcu autre dels emplastres consolidatius, e leyssa aquel liat per dos jorns o per tres, e aprop deslia aquel e permuta aquel emplaustre e leyssa aquel entro que·ls fiels per si sian abscinditz, e aprop cura am enguent entro que sia sanat.	"And properly join the two lips with suture and strengthen those, and over them sprinkle dragon's blood powder and enses three times, and pause over the powder a piece of plaster diafinicon or of some other consolidative plasters, and leave that bandage for two days or three; and properly untie it and change that plaster and leave it until its threads have separated by themselves, and properly cure with ointment until it is healed."
Mays la manieyra de la sutura es que tu agregues la solucio de continuitat o am agulhas ayssi cum havem recomtat en la sutura del ventre, o agregua la solucio de continuitat am fiel ayssi cum a tu e fayt saber.	"But the manner of suture is that you join the solution of continuity with needles as we have recommended in the suture of the belly, or join the solution of continuity with thread as you know how to do."
Capitol .xxvii.	"Chapter XXVII."
De extraccio de aquela causas que veno en las doas labias en las partidas dedintz.	"Regarding the removal of causes that appear on both lips inside the mouth."
Motas veguadas endeve a motz homes en las partidas dedintz de las suas labias alcus apostemas durs semblantz a gras de errs, e alscunas de lors son mendres e alcunas son majors.	"Very often indeed many men have warts inside the mouth on both sides of their lips which are hard like kernels of cherries, some of them being small and others large."
Donc cove que tu convertas las labias e fendas quascuna de aquelas duricias de tota part, e aprop la abscizio umpliscas le loc de sagi trissat entro que·l sanc sia restrengut, e aprop sia lavat am vi agre e sia curat le loc am aquo que es stipticitat, entro que sia sanat.	"You must turn over the lips and divide each of those hardnesses throughout, then perform excision, filling the place with saffron powder to restrict bleeding, then wash it with vinegar and treat the wound with an astringent water until healed."
Capitol .xxviii.	"Chapter 28."
De inscizio de la carn ajustada en las gengivas.	"Regarding the incision of attached skin in the gums."
Granre de veguadas nays sobre la gengiva carn ajustada la qual les antics apelero albulus, adonc cove que tu suspendas aquela am onci o que tenguas aquela am las forfecs e inscidas aquela deves la sua razit, e leyssas la sania correr o le sanc.	"Often there are tumors growing over attached gingival tissue which the ancients called albulus. Therefore, you should suspend it with a thread or hold it with forceps and incise it until its root is removed, letting the sanies run out and the blood flow."
E aprop pausa sobre le loc sagi trissat o autra polveras stipticas o excicativas.	"And afterward apply saffron powder or other styptic powders or caustic substances to the wound."
E si aquela carn retorna, lahoras inscideys aquela segundariament, e cauterisa aquela, quar aprop le cauteri no retornara.	"If that flesh returns, then cut it again and cauterize it afterward with a hot iron so that it will not return again."
Capitol .xxix.	"Chapter 29."
De razo de dentz am ferr.	"Regarding the cause of toothache."
Quan en la superficia de las dentz de las partidas dedintz e de las de foro e entre las gingivas so ajustadas escorsas aspras, legas, e alcunas veguadas son de nigradas e son faytas citrinas o vertz entro que a la gingiva ve per aquo corrupcio e son faytas las dentz legas.	"When there are rough, hard, yellowish, and sometimes blackish spots on the surfaces of teeth due to decay or between the gums where they are attached, it causes corruption which makes the gum swell and makes the teeth painful."
E donc cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute entre las tuas mas e pausar le cap de lu en le tieu se, e ratz las dents en las quals apareysso aquelas escorsas e causas semblantz arena entro que de lor no romangua deguna causa, e aquo fay de la negror e de la citrinitat e de las autras entro que sian mondificadas.	"Therefore you should first remove the cause of the pain between your molar teeth and cap the head of it in place with wax. Then rasp the teeth where those spots appear, making them smooth like sand so that none of their causes remain. This is done for blackness, yellowness, and other discolorations which need to be cleaned."
Donc si es ostat aquo que es en aquelas del comensament de la razio, bo es; e sino, lahoras tu itera la razio sobre aquelas al autra dia e al segon e al tertz entro que vengua al derier stament en aquo que tu vols.	"So if the first remedy does not suffice for those who are at the beginning of this cause, then you should repeat the remedy on another day and a second and third time until you come to the last statement which I want."
E sapias que las dentz han necessitat de motz rezoris de diversas formas e de motas figuras segon que es preparat a la tua operacio.	"And know that teeth require many different rasps of various shapes and figures according to how they are prepared for your operation."
E per so quar le razori am le qual la dent es raza de la partida dedintz es autre del razori am le qual es ras entre las dentz segon autras formas, e aquestas formas de razoris sian deves tu preparadas las quals veyras tantost:	"And therefore the rasp with which a molar tooth is scraped at its surface is different from that used to scrape between teeth in other ways. These forms of rasps should be prepared by you, as you shall soon see:"
Capitol .xxx.	"Chapter 30."
D’eradicacio de dentz.	"On the extraction of teeth."
Cove que tu cures la dent de la sua dolor am tot engen e tardes en tota eradicacio de lu, quar no es denguna causa que suplisqua la veguada de lu quan es eradicada, quar es sustancia sublima entro que es excusacio en la eradicacio de lu.	"You should cure the tooth that causes pain with all care and patience in every extraction of it because there is no cause that makes it necessary to delay its extraction since it is a sublime substance which must be removed by extraction."
Mays cove quan le malaute es forsat aquela dent eradicar, que fermament deves tu sia certificat quala es la dent dolent, quar motas veguadas la dolor descep le malaute e cuga que sia en dent sana, e tu eradicas aquela e aprop la dolor no cessa entro que la dent malauta e dolent sia eradicada, quar nos ja havem vist aquo per operacio dels barbies.	"But when the pain is such that a tooth must be extracted, you should firmly be certain which tooth is causing the pain because many times the pain seems to come from a healthy tooth and you extract it, but the pain does not cease until the painful and sick tooth is extracted, as we have seen by the operation of barbers."
Donc cum deves tu es sertificat qual es la dent dolent, e que o sabes be, lahoras cove que tu scarifiques en le circuit de la dent am spatum en le qual sia alcuna vertut, entro que sia dissolvut de la dent de la gingiva de tota partida, e aprop mau aquel am les tieus ditz, o am forfexs subtils al comensament petit a petit entro que aquela concucesquas.	"So when you are certain which tooth is causing the pain and know it well, then you should scarify around the tooth with a spatula having some virtue so that it dissolves the gum from the entire surface of the tooth, and then carefully grasp it with your fingers or with subtle forceps gradually until it is loosened."
E aprop alogua en lu fortz tenalhas grans per bona loquacio o estuptura fort, e pausa le cap del malaute entre les tieus denolhs que be le tengues que no·s maugua, e aprop tratz la dent segon rectitut en manieyra que no trenques aquela, ni al malaute major dolor no dones.	"And then place strong forceps with good craftsmanship or great strength and pause the head of the pain between your thumb and index finger so that you hold it well without hurting yourself. Then extract the tooth straightly in such a manner that you do not break it, nor cause greater pain to the patient."
E donc si no es foro-getat, lahoras pren un de aquels instrumentz, e met aquel dejos lu de tota part am facilitat e esforsa la remocio de lu ayssi que es feyt al comensament.	"And therefore if it is not forgotten, then take one of those instruments and place it on either side of the tooth with ease and force so that you move it as was done at the beginning."
Mays si la dent es trauquada o corrosa, lahoras cove que tu comples de drap aquel trauc e estrenguas aquel am la extremitat de ray subtil per so que no sia trinquada en la hora de la tua constriccio sobre aquela am tenalas.	"But if the tooth is broken or decayed, then you should fill that break with cloth and strengthen it with the end of a thin rod so that it does not become further broken at the time of your grasp on it with forceps."
E cove que tu obres exquesitament am scarificacio en le circuit de tota part de la gingiva e guarda mot la tua fortaleza que no trenques aquela e romangua partida de lu, e retorne sobre le malaute per la malicia que sia majo que la primieyra dolor de lu.	"And you should work carefully with the scarification around the entire gum area and guard your strength well so that you do not break or tear it, and return to the painful tooth because the pain will be greater than the first pain of it."
E guarda te que no fassas aquo que fan alscus ignorantz barbiers en lor fistinacio e audacia sobre la eradicacio de lor, ses que no aministran aquo que nos havem recomtat; quar motas veguadas fan venir sobre les homes malautias grans las quals son pus dificils que sian trinquadas, e las razitz de lor remaugudas totas, o alcunas de aquelas, o que extrayguas aquela am alcus osses de la mandigula ayssi cum motas veguadas havem testificat.	"And beware that you do not do what many ignorant and presumptuous barbers do in their haste and recklessness about the extraction of teeth without administering what we have recommended because many times they bring upon men great illnesses which are more difficult to treat than those caused by broken teeth, and they remove the roots entirely or some of them, or extract a tooth with some bones of the jawbone, as we have often witnessed."
E aprop la eradicacio de lu sia lavada la boca am vi caut o vi agre am sal.	"And then after the extraction of it, wash the mouth with warm water or vinegar with salt."
E si endeve fluxs de sanc per aysso, ayssi cum motas veguadas endeve, lahoras trissa alcuna quantitat de zegi e aspergeys sobre la plagua, e si no confereys aquel zegi, cauteriza.	"And if there are flows of blood after this, as often happens, then take some quantity of sage and sprinkle it over the wound, and if it does not suffice, cauterize."
La forma de las forceps e tenalas subtils am las quals es mauguda la dent al comensament sia de longua extramitat, de breu manubre e gros, per so que no sian doblatz quan am aquels deves obrar.	"The shape of the forceps and subtle forceps with which the tooth is grasped at the beginning should be of long extremity, short handle, and thick so that they do not bend when you work with them."
E sian ayssi cum vezes de gros manubre entro que quan estrenhas am aquelas no sian dobladas, sian breus extramitatz.	"And they should be shaped in such a way that their extremities are thick enough so that when grasped with them the tooth is not bent, but rather short at its end."
E sian faytas de ferr de India descentment faytas de dreytas extramitatz, e en las extramitatz de aquelas sian dentz de las quals las unas intron en las autras e estrenhan per constriccio descent fort, e alscunas veguadas las extramitatz de aquelas sian la forma del bec d’un auzel le qual ha nom ciconia, so es guanta, e son de fort constriccio.	"And they should be made of Indian iron, well-made with straight extremities. And on the extremities of those there should be teeth among which one enters into another and grasps by strong descent force. And sometimes the extremities of those are shaped like the beak of a bird called 'ciconia,' that is to say, it is hooked, and they are of great grasping power."
Capitol .xxxi.	"Chapter LXXXI."
De erradicacio de dentz e d‘estraccio dels osses de las mandibulas trincadas.	"Of the extraction of teeth and the breaking of the jawbones that are broken."
Quan deves la eradicacio de dent le qual es trinquat roman alcuna causa, lahoras cove que tu pauses sobre le loc coto am boder per un jorn o per dos entro que·l loc sia mollificat; e aprop entromet algesti o tenalhas las extramitatz de las quals so asembladas al bec de un auzel apelat ciconia o guanta, la forma de las forceps:	"When you must extract a tooth that is broken and some cause remains, then you should place yourself on the spot with a board for one or two days until the spot becomes softened. And then insert gentle pressure with forceps whose extremities are shaped like the beak of a bird called 'ciconia' or hooked, the shape of which is as follows:"
Las extramitatz de lor sian faytas dedintz ayssi cum lima o alfagi.	"The extremities of them should be made with teeth like a saw or chisel."
E si no obediys a tu a eyssiment am aquestas forceps o tenalas, lahoras cove que tu caves sobre la razit e descrobas tota la carn e entrometas le instrument le qual ha nom atali, so es palanca petita del qual la forma es aquesta:	"And if you do not succeed with this attempt using these forceps or forceps, then you should cut over the root and scrape away all the flesh and insert the instrument called 'atali,' which is a small lever of which the shape is as follows:"
E sia de breu extremitat grossa un petit, e no sia enbegut per so que no sia trinquat.	"And it should be short with a thick end, not bent so that it is not broken."
Donc si per aquo la razit es foro-getada, bo es; e sino, ajuda te am aquestz autres instrument dels quals aquestas son las formas: la forma del primier instrument es de triangulada extramitat en la qual sia alcuna grossesa:	"So if the root is removed by this, it is good. And if not, then help yourself with these other instruments of which these are the shapes:
La forma del segon instrument es que sia de triangulada e de pus subtil extremitat.	The shape of the second tool should be triangular with a very fine tip.
E ja so ajudatz am aquest instrument havent dos ramps del qual aquesta es la forma aprop la seguent:	And with this tool, having two branches, one is shaped as follows:
e am autres instrumentz les quals precidero en rasura de dentz; quar juvament es fayt am aquest instrument le qual es asemblat a onci gran, e aquesta es la forma:	"And there are other instruments which will be used for filing teeth. Help is done with this instrument, which resembles an iron comb."
de la triangulada extremitat torta o curta, la qual sia alcuna grossesa, e no sia enbegut per so que no sia trinquat.	"From the triangular-shaped end, twisted or shortened, which should have some thickness, and not be inserted too deeply to avoid injury."
E otra sapias que·ls instrumentz de las dentz motz so e semblantment les autres instruments.	"And you will also know that the tools for extracting teeth are similar to other instruments."
Mays le artifexs savi e subtil en l’art, atroba per si mateys segon aquo que a lu significa la operacio e las malautias diversas; quar son de las malautias a las quals les antics no diysero ni pausero propri instrument, per las formas de diversas specias.	"Yet the skilled and subtle artisan finds for himself, according to what is meant by the operation and various diseases; for there are diseases that ancient authors did not give or mention any proper instruments for, due to their varied forms."
Mays si es trinquat l’os de la mandibula o dels autres osses de la boca, o si poyreys, lahoras sia pes curat sobre aquel en son loc am aquo que es a lu convenient dels instrumentz e de las forceps las quals havem dit en la extraccio de las razitz de las dentz, e ajuda te am gesti del qual aquesta es la forma:	"If the bone of the jaw or other bones of the mouth is broken or pierced, then that part should be carefully treated with suitable instruments and forceps mentioned earlier for the extraction of dental roots. And this is how it is done:"
E sia en lu alcuna grosseza petit a petit, e sia instringida o tenguda am la boca per que no evasesca o fuga entro que l’os de tot sia foro-getat; e aprop restaura le loc am medicinas convenientz ad aquo.	"And gradually widen it a little at a time, and hold or keep it with the mouth so that it does not escape until all the bone is removed. And then restore the area with suitable medicines."
Mays si en l’os es petita poyredura, lahoras ratz aquel de aquela poyredura e de la sua negror, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	"Yet if there is a small perforation in the bone, then remove that part of the perforation and its blackness, and treat it until it is healed."
Capitol .xxxii.	"And Chapter XXXII:"
De la cura de las dentz eminentz sobre las autras.	"Concerning the treatment of prominent teeth above the others."
Quan las dentz so eminentz no segon lor cors natural per aquelas la forma es laga, e majorment quan endeve a las femnas, e majorment a las piuselas venerablas; donc cove que tu consideras: si dent es nada aprop autra dent, e no es possibla sarradura ni linament de lu, lahoras radica aquela; mays que no sia annexa am autra dent, lahoras tu inscideys aquela am aquest instrument del qual aquesta es la forma; e es semblant a morr de porc, e sia feyt de ferr de India de extramitat mot aguda.	"When teeth are prominent not according to their natural course, and especially when it concerns women, and most especially elderly women; therefore you should consider: if the tooth is not close enough to another tooth, and a filling or bonding is not possible, then extract that one. But if it is attached to another tooth, then cut that one with this instrument, which has the shape of a pig's snout, made of Indian steel with a very sharp tip."
E sia la tua inscizio am la qual inscideyses aquela en trops dias per la duricia de la dent, e que no sia comauguda autra de las dentz.	"And your incision should be made in three days, cutting that tooth without damaging any other teeth due to its hardness."
E si es dent eminent expausat a limadura, lahoras lima aquel am lima de ferr de India del qual aquesta es la forma:	"And if the prominent tooth is exposed at the gumline, then file it down with an Indian steel file that has this shape:"
E sia tot de ferr de India e·l margua eysament; e sia de motz menutz puntz ayssi cum lima am la qual son faytas agulhas, am la qual la dent sia limada pauc a pauc en motz dias am fecilitat, per so que no sia autra dent comauguda e caga.	"And it should be made entirely of Indian steel with sharp edges. And it has many fine points like those on a file with which the tooth is filed little by little over several days with ease, so that no other teeth are damaged or harmed."
E aprop lineys aquela en la fi, e ratz aquela am alscus razoris.	"And then polish it with pumice stone and scrape it with razor blades."
E si es dent del qual una partida es trinquada e lideys la lengua, lahoras cove que tu limescas aquel entro que l’aspretat de aquela fraccio sia ostada e engualhada, e sia aplenada per so que la lengua no ledesca ni la paraula no corrumpa.	"And if it is a tooth where one part is chipped and irritates the tongue, then you should file that part until its sharpness is smoothed out and flattened so that the tongue will not be harmed and speech will not be impaired."
Capitol .xxxiii.	"And Chapter XXXIII:"
De restauracio de dentz maugudas am fiel de aur o de argent.	"Concerning the restoration of damaged teeth with gold or silver foil."
Quan accideys a las dentz devant concussio e remossio per percussio o per cazament, e le malaute no pot strenher sobre aquo que manga, e tu has curat aquel am medicinas stipticas, e no ha valgut la tua curacio, lahoras per so que no cagan es engen en aquelas que sian strengudas am fiel de aur e no de argent, quar argent se fa vert e aprop se poyreys aprop alscus dias, mays aur nul temps no es mudat.	"When teeth are damaged due to concussion and removal by percussion or impact, and the patient cannot withstand food, and you have treated it with astringent medicines but your treatment has not helped; therefore, in order that they not be covered over again with silver foil which turns green and can fall off within several days, rather use gold foil which does not change at any time."
E sia le fiel en tal subtilitat e grocesa segon la quantitat que puesca entrar entre las dentz; e la forma de la reccio es que prenguas le fiel e pren lo doble de lu entre doas dentz sanas, e aprop que cresques am doas tortuositatz del fiel entre doas maugudas, o si’ una o motas, entro que pervengua la tela a la dent sana del autra partida.	"And the foil should be made of such fineness and thickness according to how much can fit between the teeth. The way to apply it is to take the foil and fold its double thickness between two healthy teeth, then twist its two ends between two damaged teeth or one if there are fewer, until the fabric reaches the healthy part of the other tooth."
E aprop itera le teyssiment entro a la partida de la qual comenciest, e strenh la tua ma am facilitat e savieza entro que no sia mauguda.	"And then repeat the application several times within the area where you began until your hand has strengthened with ease and skill so that nothing is damaged."
E sia la tua striccio am la qual strenhas le fiel deves las razitz de las dentz que no evasesca.	"And your string should be made of such thickness that it does not allow the foil to slip out."
E aprop inscindeys las extramitatz del fiel superfluens am las forceps o tosoyras, e agregua aquelas en quascun loc am gesti, e converteys aquelas e las occulta entre la dent sana e la dent mauguda, per so que no fassa lesio a la lengua.	"And then cut off the excess ends of the foil with forceps or scissors and tuck them into each location with gestures. Then bend it and hide it between the healthy tooth and the damaged one so that there is no injury to the tongue."
E aprop leyssa aquela ayssi streyta cum roman.	"And then leave it as tight as possible with cement."
Mays si es desliada o rumpuda, strenh aquela o aquelas am autra fiel en tal manieyra en tot son temps.	"But if it becomes loose or broken, reinforce it again or those with other foil in this manner at all times."
E aquesta es la forma de las dentz e la figura de la rectacio de doas dentz sanas e de doas maugudas, ayssi cum vezes aquestas liadas:	"And this is the shape of teeth and the figure of the treatment of two healthy teeth and two damaged ones as shown here:"
E quan se fa que retorno una dent o doas aprop le cazement de quascuna en lors locs, e sian recrescutz ayssi cum havem recomtat, e que remauguan.	"And when one tooth or two return to their places due to impact and have grown back as we have advised, and yet they remain damaged."
E no fa aquo sino bo artifexs e savi.	"This is the work of a skilled and knowledgeable artist."
E alcunas veguadas es aptat alcuna causa dels osses de vaca, e es fayt de lor ayssi cum forma de dent, e es pausada en loc en le qual defayl la dent, e es strengit ayssi cum havem dit, e reman e serveys am aquel per lonc temps.	"And sometimes a piece of cow bone is used for such a cause and made into the shape of a tooth. It is placed in the location where the tooth has failed and strengthened as we have said, and it remains and serves for a long time."
Capitol .xxxiv.	"And Chapter XXXIV:"
De inscizio del liament le qual ve en la lengua e prohibeys loquela.	"Concerning the cutting of the frenulum that appears on the tongue and hinders speech."
Aquest liguament le qual ve dejos la lengua alcunas veguadas o es natural am le qual hom nays, o accidental e accideys per plagua la qual ja es consolidada.	"This ligament which appears beneath the tongue sometimes is natural to that person or it occurs accidentally due to a wound which has already healed."
E la operacio en lu es que huobres la boca del malaute, le sieu cap existent en le tieu se; e eleva la sieua lengua, e aprop inscideys aquel liament nervos segon la latitut entro que sia solvuda la lengua de la sua recencio.	"The procedure is that the operator should open the patient's mouth while his head is held down. Then raise his tongue and cut the nerve ligament according to its width until the tongue is freed from its attachment."
Mays si en aquela es alcuna duricia o denodacio, e aquo es stat per consolidacio de plagua, lahoras tu gieta unci e scindeys aquel per la latitut entro que aias inscindit le liament e sia dissolvuda la nodacio.	"But if there is hardness or firmness in that ligament due to scar tissue from an old wound, then you should use oil and cut it through its width until you have completely cut the ligament and dissolved the hardness."
E guarda te que no sia fayta fissura en le preon de la carn e que scindas aqui arceria e vengua flux de sanc.	"And make sure that there is not too deep an incision in front of the flesh so that you do not accidentally cut arteries and cause bleeding."
E aprop sia lavat le vestigi de la inscisio am ayguaros o am vi agre o am aygua frega; e aprop pausa dejos la lengua licini; so es meca la qual tengua le malaute dejos la lengua en quascuna nuoyt per so que no sia consolidat autra veguada.	"And then wash the wound of the incision with warm water or vinegar or rubbed oil. Then place a linen cloth on top of it. This is the way that the patient should keep his tongue wrapped in clean linen at every hour to prevent reattachment."
Mays si accideys flux de sanc, pausa sobre le loc vetriol trissat; mays si le sanc ventz, lahoras cauteriza le loc am cauteri lantiginos le qual conveneys ad aquo.	"But if bleeding occurs, place on the location a piece of lint moistened with vinegar. But if the bleeding continues, then cauterize the location with a lantern cautery which is suitable for this purpose."
E aprop aquel cura am las autras causas entro que sia sanat.	"And then treat it with other remedies as necessary until it is healed."
Capitol .xxxv.	"And Chapter XXXV:"
De extraccio de ranula dejos la lengua.	"Concerning the removal of a ranula under the tongue."
Alcunas veguadas accideys dejos la lengua apostema asemblant a nomla petita prohibent la lengua de la sua operacio natural; e fort leu es magnificada entro que huempla la boca.	"Sometimes an abscess resembling a small mulberry appears under the tongue, hindering its natural movement. It gradually becomes larger until it fills the mouth."
E la operacio en lu es que huebras la boca del malaute sesent devant le solel e considera le apostema.	"The procedure is that the operator should open the patient's mouth facing the sunlight and examine the abscess."
E si tu le vezes de fusca color o de negra, dur, al qual le malaute no atroba sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel quar es cranc.	"If you see it as blackish or black in color, hard, and the patient feels no pain, do not touch it because it is cancerous."
E si es declinat a blancor, en le qual es humiditat, lahoras tu met le onci en lu, e inscideys aquel am spatum subtil, e inscindeys le de tota partida; e si sanc te ventz en la hora de la tua operacio, lahoras tu pausa desus zegi trissat, so es vetriol, entro que sia restreyt le sanc.	"But if it appears white and moist, then put oil on it and cut it with a fine spatula. Cut all around its edges. And if bleeding occurs during the operation, place on top of it a piece of lint moistened with vinegar until the bleeding stops."
E aprop retorna a la obra tua entro que lo haias trayt am compliment de lu, entro que sia lavat am vi agre e sal; e cura aquel am l’autra curacio ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	"And then return to your work until you have completely removed it with its base, until it is washed with vinegar and salt. Then treat it with other remedies suitable for this purpose until it is healed."
Capitol .xxxvi.	"And Chapter XXXVI:"
De extraccio de apostema de doas aurelhas e de aquel que es nada en le golayro e de las autras apostemas.	"Concerning the removal of abscesses in both ears and those that occur in the throat, as well as other abscesses."
Quan endeveno en le golayro godat, so son glandulas las quals son asembladas algodat, las quals accideysso deforas e son nompnadas doas aurelhas, las quals quan tu las curas am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no es sanat, lahoras tu considera si le apostema es dur, de fusca color, de pauc sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel am ferr.	"When swellings occur in the throat, they are called glands which are formed from fat tissue. These sometimes appear on the outside and are called ears. If you treat them with the remedies mentioned earlier in this division and they do not heal, examine whether the abscess is hard, blackish in color, and causes little pain. If so, do not touch it with an iron."
E si es de roga color e la razic es grossa, lahoras no toques aquela am ferr per le flux del sanc; abantz layssa aquel entro sia madurat, e lahoras o tu trauqueras aquel, o sira romput per si.	"Should the boil be red and its root large, then do not touch it with iron for fear of blood flow; rather let it ripen first, and then you shall draw it out or cut it open yourself."
E si es de blanqua color, radon, e la razit de lu es subtil, lahoras aquel es que cove esser inscidit.	"If it is white in appearance and its root fine, then that one ought to be incised."
E la operacio en lu es que consideras, denant la tua operacio, si ja ha repausat le apostema de lu caut am repaus complit o si es deminuit am alcuna deminucio; e lahoras fay sezer le malaute denant le soleyl, e·l cap de lu sia en le tieu se, e huebre la boca de lu, e le servidor prenent entre las suas mas prema la lengua de lu dejos am instrument mot noble del qual aquesta es la forma:	"And when operating on it, ensure beforehand that the abscess has fully ripened or has at least begun to decrease; then make the patient lie down in front of the sun, with their head on a high pillow, and open their mouth wide. The servant holding them should press their tongue down using a fine instrument like this:"
E sia fayt de argent o de aram, e sia subtil cum cotel.	"And it is made of silver or of bronze, being sharp-edged."
Donc cum tu premes am aquel la lengua e es mostrat a tu la apostema, e catz sobre aquel le tieu vezement, lahoras pren onci e fica aquel en l’amenla, e tira aquel a las partidas defora tant quant podes.	"Then, as you press down on the tongue with that instrument and reveal the abscess, carefully cut into it with your knife. Then grasp the opening with forceps and pull it apart from outside as much as possible."
Otra aquo que tiras alcuna causa de las tunicas, e aprop incideys aquela am instrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	"And if you tear some of its coatings, then carefully cut into it again with this instrument:"
e es asemblat a forceps, empero las extramitatz de lu son corvadas, ayssi que l’orrifici de quascuna de aquelas es en le endreyt del autra, mot agudas, le qual sia de ferr indi enbegut.	"And it resembles forceps, but its ends are curved inward so that the tips of each meet at the opposite side, being very sharp. This should be made of iron dipped in lead."
Mays si aquest instrument no es a tu present, lahoras inscideys aquel am spatum del qual aquesta es la forma de lu: E sia agut de la una part, no agut del autra part.	"But if this instrument is not available to you, then cut into it with this spatula instead, which has this shape: It should be sharp on one side and blunt on the other."
E pus que has inscidit una mella, inscideys l’autra segon aquesta meteyssa manieyra de inscizio, e aprop la inscizio le malaute guarguarise de aygua frega	"And once you have made an incision, make another according to the same manner of cutting, and then wash out the wound with water that has been boiled."
Mays si endeve flux de sanc, guarguarise aygua de decoccio de scorsa de milgrana o de fuelha de mirtra e semblantz ad aquel de las causas stiptiquas entro que·l flux del sanc sia restreyt, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	"But if there is blood flowing, wash it out with water from a decoction of oak bark or myrtle leaves and other styptic herbs until the bleeding stops. Then dress the wound once it has healed."
E alcunas veguadas naysso en le guolayro autras apostemas otra aquelas doas aurelhas, e inscideys aquelas segon que yeu e dit en la inscizio de doas mellas engualment.	"And sometimes, other abscesses appear near those two that you have cut open. Cut into those as I have described for the incision of two equal wounds."
E yeu ja fu medicat una femna de apostema le qual era nat en le golayro de lu, le qual apostema tendia a color fusca, de pauc sentiment, le qual ja havia claus le golayro de lu, e la femna respirava am meat streyt, e ja havia prohibit a lu comestio e beure de aygua, e ja era pervenguda a la mort si mays agues stat per un dia o per dos.	"And I once treated a woman who had an abscess in her buttock that tended towards a dark color and little sensation. The wound had closed over, but she was breathing with difficulty, her appetite had gone, and she was drinking no water. She was near death if not for one or two days."
E l’apostema ja tant havia pugat que havia mezes dos ramps entro que eyssiro per dos traucs.	"And the abscess had grown so large that it pushed out on both sides through two cracks."
Donc yeu me cuytegui fisturalment e fiquegui en un de lor onci, e tiregui aquel, e atirada es de lu gran porcio, e aprop yeu incidigui aquela de on comprendegui del autre trau, e aprop yeu obrigui la boca de lu, e compremegui la sua lengua, e aprop yeu fiquegui le onci en aquela apostema.	"So I cut into it fistulously and entered through one of its orifices. Then I reached in and pulled out as much as possible. Then I made an incision where the other opening was apparent, opened her mouth wide, pressed down on her tongue, and then entered that orifice into the abscess."
E aprop yeu abscizi gran partida de lu, e no corria de lu sino un pauc de sanc.	"And then you cut away a large portion of it, but only a little blood came out from it."
Donc absolut es le guolayro de aquela femna, e comensec tantost beure aygua, e aprop presec vianda, donc yeu no cessegui inscidir de aquela apostema motas vetz per lonc temps, e succesia apostema en loc de aquel, le qual inscizia entro que es prolonguat aquel.	"So the buttock of that woman was completely healed. Soon she began drinking water and eating food again. However, I had to cut into that abscess many times over a long period of time, and it kept recurring in the same place."
Donc yeu engen agui e cauterizegui le guolayro de lu, donc astec de addicio; e aprop yeu perambulegui e no saubi que fec Dieus de aquela aprop mi.	"So I took this [iron] and cauterized the buttock. Then I added more [material], and then I wandered around not knowing what God had done for me."
Capitol .xxxvii.	Chapter XXXVII
De inscizio de huvela quan es apostemada.	About incision of a boil when it is abscessed.
Quan catarr deysen a la huvula, e es apostemada e es longa, lahoras ela es nompnada perpendicular; e si es en la partida dejos grossa e redonda, e lahoras ela es apelada buba.	When catarr descends to the uvula, and is thickened and elongated, it is then named perpendicular; and if it is at the exit and is thick and round, it is then called bubo.
Mays quan es curada am aquo que havem dit en la divisio, e no comfereys la tua curacio, e eyssament ja vezes que apostema caut ja es ostat de lu e es subtil, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquela que es agreguadas redonda; e si es ad aquela longitut, e es sanguina, de fusca color o de negre, e no es a lu centiment, lahoras cove que tu temtes la inscizio de lu, quar en aquela es temor sobre le malaute.	If it is cured with what we have said in the division, and yet your cure does not succeed, especially when an aposteme has already burst open and becomes thin, then you should insert those that are aggregated roundly. And if it is at that length, and is bloody, of dark color or black, and there is no feeling in it, then you should fear the insertion of it, for there is danger to the patient in that case.
E quan tu vezes aquela segon la manieyra que yeu he dita de la sua blancor e longuesa, que tu fassas sezer le malaute e premas la lengua de lu am instrument del qual procesic la sua forma e aprop fica le onci en la nuva, e tira aquela en jos e inscideys aquela am un de dos instrumentz les quals e ditz en la inscizio de dos mellas.	When you see that according to the manner I have indicated of its whiteness and length, then you should seize the patient and press their tongue with an instrument from which its form protrudes, and immediately place the onion in the new one, and pull it down and cut it with one of two instruments which are mentioned in the incision of two melons.
E cove que no inscidas aquela sino aquo que es ajustat sobre le terme natural ses addicio, quar si tu inscides de lu mays, lediyras le sieu parlar.	But you should not cut that except what is properly fitted over the natural term without addition, for if you cut more than that, you will harm him.
E aprop la inscizio, usa de aquo le qual havem recomtat en la inscizio de dos mellas, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	And immediately after cutting, use what we have recommended in the incision of two melons, and take care until it is healed.
Mays si era le malaute espaventat per la inscizio de lu, cove que use de engen en la cauterizacio de lu ses temor, e la manieyra del cauteri en lu no es sino am aygua aguda, e es que tu pauses le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop prem la lengua de lu am le instrument le qual havem dit, e aprop pren de l’aygua la qual havem dita en le capitol de cauterizacio, e comfeys am aquela caus viva, e pausa aquela no spessa ni subtil, e de aquela omple la concavitat de l’estrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	But if the patient is frightened by the incision of it, then you should useengen in the cauterization of it without fear, and the manner of cauterizing it is not but with sharp water, and it is that you hold the head of the patient in his seat, and immediately press their tongue with the instrument which we have said, and immediately take some of the water which we have mentioned in the chapter of cauterization, and with that live cause, pause that no spessa nor subtil, and with that fill the concavity of the instrument whose shape this is:
Sia la extramitat de lu conquavitat en la qual sia pausada la medicina ayssi cum la conquavitat de culher de ray, e pausa le strument am la medicina sobre la vula, e·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu latz per so que corro saliva o musellage de la boca de aquel per la intrinscequa medicina, per so que no deyssenda de aquela deguna causa sobre le golayro de lu e que ledesca aquel.	Let the extremity of the concavity in which the medicine is placed be like this as the concavity of a spoon of radish, and place the instrument with the medicine over the wound, and let the patient lie on his side so that saliva or mucus from their mouth does not fall into the intrinsic medicine because otherwise it will not work.
E aprop te la tua ma am la medicina, e exprem aquela sobre la uvula per l’espazi de miega hora entro que vegas aquela esser denegrada e sedada per la mordicacio de la medicina.	And immediately take your hand with the medicine and press it on the uvula for half an hour until you see that it is blackened and sedated by the biting of the medicine.
E si vols, prengues coto e envolopes aquel sobre la extremitat del ray, e submergeys le coto en la medicina, e entrometas le ray am le coto en una canula de sobre entro que·l coto adheresca en aquela canula, e fay aquo tantas vetz entro que consiegues aquo que vols de la cauterizacio de la uva, e aprop leyssa aquela quar ela se seccara e cayra aprop tres dias o quatre.	And if you wish, take cotton and wrap it around the extremity of the radish, and immerse the cotton in the medicine, and insert the radish with the cotton into a cannula from above until the cotton adheres to that cannula, and do this many times until you achieve what you want from the cauterization of the wound, and then leave it alone until it dries and falls off after about three or four days.
E si indigeysses que iteras la medicina, itera aquela, e aprop la cauterizacio abstergeys en le circuit de la uva am coto enbegut en boder, e mondifica am aquel aquo que es en le circuit de lu de la medicina, e sia lavat am aygua frega, e sia curat deforo am embrocacio, e dedintz am guarguarismes entro que sia sanat.	And if you need to repeat the medicine, repeat it. And when the cauterization is finished, cleanse the area around the wound with cotton dipped in vinegar, and remove from that area anything that remains of the medicine, and wash it with warm water, and then cure it afterwards with embrocation, and finally with bandages until it heals.
E aquesta especia de curacio es pus salva que inscizio e pus long de temor.	And this kind of treatment is very beneficial, both for incisions and for wounds caused by fear.
Alcunas veguadas es curada la uvuola am aquo que es pus subtil que cauteri e inscizio, quar es curat am subfumigacio en aquesta manieyra: recipe calament, ysop, origua, ruda, scicados arabic, camamilla, broyda e semblant ad aquels de las erbas, e ajusta totas aquelas causas, o alcunas de lor, en una ola, e sian submergidas am vi agre, e bulhan; e la ola sia be lutada am lut decentment, e sia en le mieg loc de la ola un trauc, sobre le qual sia pausat un instrument conquau de aram segon aquesta manieyra; sia fayt de argent o de aram.	Sometimes the uvula is cured with something so subtle that it is neither cauterization nor incision, because it is cured by sublimation in this manner: take calamus, hyssop, origanum, rue, safflower, chamomile, brooklime and similar herbs, and adjust all of them or some of them in an alembic, and moisten them with sour wine, and boil them. And the alembic should be well sealed with clay, and in the middle of it there should be a tube on which is placed an instrument concave made of silver or brass according to this shape:
E sia entromesa la extremitat en la boca del malaute entro que la vapor poge a la uvula sobre la quanula, entro que la uvula sia mot ofuscada.	And let the extremity be inserted into the patient's mouth so that the vapour can reach the uvula through the nostrils until the uvula is moistened.
E aprop itera sobre aquela motas veguadas entro qu’es secca, e guarda te que no fassas aquesta curacio al comesament de l’aveniment de apostemas, quar trop ajustaria en le apostema, e no cove que tu fassas aquo, sino deves la declaracio de apostema de lu caut.	And then repeat this many times until it is dry. And be careful not to do this treatment at the beginning of an appearance of abscesses, because it would tighten too much on the abscess and you should not do that, but rather declare the abscess cure by cautery.
Mays si no es a tu present aquest instrument, lahoras pren una cana e compon en la extramitat de lu un clos de huou, per so que la boca del malaute sia comborida, quar le closc del huou prohibeys la vapor comburir la boca.	But if you do not have this instrument present, then take a reed and place at its extremity a plug of wool, so that the patient's mouth is covered, because the plug of wool prevents the vapour from burning the mouth.
E aquesta curacio es bona am salut.	And this treatment is good for health.
Capitol .xxxviii.	Chapter XXXVI
De extraccio d’espinas e de aquo que adhereys en le golayro e de las autras causas.	Chapter XXXVI On the extraction of splinters and other things adhered in the throat, and other causes
Motas veguadas adhereys en le guolayro o spina de peys o alcuna autra causa.	Many times there are adhered to the throat a thorn of fish or some other cause.
Adonc cove que tu extraguas aquo que de aquels es apparent, sobre le qual catz la vista, pus que tu premes la lengua am instrument denant solelh, per so que a tu sia declarat aquo que es en la guola.	Then you must remove that which is visible from those [the humors], upon which the gaze falls, because by pressing the tongue with an instrument beforehand, it will be declared what is in the throat.
E aquo que no apar e es a tu occultat en le guolayro, cove que tu fassas vomir le malaute denant que la vianda sia degerida en l’estomac, quar fort leu la causa annexsa le golayro sira foro-getada per vomit; o que deglusia le malaute una pessa de nap o de razit de laytuga o un boci de pa sec; o prengua una pessa de sponga marina sequa leon, e lia aquela fortment am fiel, e aprop le malaute transglussia aquela, quar cum perve al loc en le qual so spinas e es extrahuda, lahoras so foro-getatz.	And that which is not apparent and is hidden in the throat, you must make the patient vomit before the food has been digested in the stomach, because it easily causes a blockage in the throat if forgotten through vomiting; or have the patient swallow some bread dipped in honey or olive oil or a piece of dry bread; or take a sponge soaked in sea water and tie it tightly with flax, and have the patient swallow that, for when it arrives at the place where its spikes are removed, they will then be extracted.
E mays pren una anguila e be am fiel liada, e sia dedintz mesa e soptament sia extrayta; o pren un porr e soptament le metas e soptament l’en tratz.	And if you take an eel and tie it with flax soaked in milk, and put it inside the table, it will be suddenly extracted; or take a pot and suddenly place it there and suddenly remove it.
Mays si no so foro-getatz am aquelas causas las quals havem ditas, lahoras husa de un instrument de plom segon aquesta forma:	And if they are not forgotten with those causes which we have said, then you should use an instrument of lead made in this way:
E sia pus gros que ray un petit, e en la extramitat de lu sia conquavitat la qual tu entrometas en la sua guola am facilitat.	"The boil should be larger than a small pea; at its tip there should be an indentation which you insert into with ease."
E el aga le sieu cap elevat en sus, e guarda te que·l tocament del sieu os de la gola, per so que endevengua a lu cos e am aquela que enpellesca le os o la spina, o que aquel le metge am la sua ma.	"And lift your chin up high, and make sure that the touch of his bone on your throat does not happen, otherwise it will cause pain in that area and he might strike you with his hand."
Mays empero que·l malaute aquel entrometa es miels, per la sua sciencia del loc de la causa annexa e enpellisca en jos, e tira la sua ma am le instrument en sus, tot aquo segon la quantitat la qual es a lu preparada entro que sia foro-getada.	"But if the patient enters it better, according to his knowledge of the place where the cause is attached, and pushes down gently and pulls his hand with the instrument upwards, all this according to how much he has prepared inside so that it will not be forgotten."
Capitol .xxxix.	"Chapter XXXIX."
De extraccio de sancguisugua annexsa al golayro.	"Regarding the removal of bloodsucking parasites attached to the throat."
Quan es medicada sanguisugua am aquo que havem dit en la divisio de la curacio am medicinas e no comfereys, considera lahoras en le guolayro del malaute al solelh, pus que tu aias compremuda la lengua de lu am instrument le qual a tu havem recomtat.	"When the bloodsucking parasite is treated with what we have mentioned in the division of treatment using medicines and does not stop feeding, consider the hours at which you should remove it from the patient's throat, because you must use the tongue-like instrument that we have recommended to you."
Donc si tu vezes la sancguisugua, extratz aquela am onci petit o am gesti subtils decentment.	"Therefore, if you want to remove the bloodsucking parasite, do so gently with your fingertips or carefully with suitable instruments."
E si no es a tu possible estrayre am aquel, lahoras pren una canula concava e entromet aquela en lo guolayro del malaute, e aprop pausa en la concavitat de la canula un ferr ignit, e fay aquo tantas vetz (entro que la sancguisugua sia morta e se osta del guolayro) e abstengua se le malaute tot lo jorn de aygua.	"And if it is not possible for you to remove it with your fingers, then take a concave cannula and insert it into the patient's throat, and place a glowing iron wire in the concavity of the cannula, and do this several times (until the bloodsucking parasite is dead and removed from the throat), and abstain from giving the patient any water that day."
E aprop prengua una veyria plena de aygua frega, e obra la boca de lu en aquela, e lava la boca am aquela; e no trasglucia de aquela alcuna causa e maugua l’aygua una hora aprop autra am la sua ma, quar la sancguisugua tantost cum sent l’aygua catz.	"And then take a vessel full of water that has been wiped clean, and pour the mouth of it into the patient's mouth, and wash his mouth with it; do not let any of it pass through, and hold some water in your hand for about another hour, because the bloodsucking parasite immediately feels the water."
Mays si no es foro-getada am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras subfumigua le malaute am cimetz o am assafetida per le instrument le qual havem recomtat en la sufumiguacio de uvula.	"But if it is not forgotten what we have recommended, then fumigate the patient with frankincense or asafoetida using the instrument that we have mentioned in the fumigation of the uvula."
Fay aquo, so en quar cayra.	"After doing this, let him rest quietly."
E es un’autra manieyra de operacio en sufumiguacio de aquela, es que tu prenguas una ola en la qual sian carbos ignitz e la ola sia cuberta am una cobertora en le mieg de la qual sia un trauc, e sia compausat en aquel trauc la extremitat del instrument; e aprop dega desus la subfumigacio; e pause le malaute la sua boca en la extremitat de la canula, e claugua la sua boca per que la subfumiguacio no sia foro-getada entro que sapias que la subfumigacio es pervenguda a la sancguisugua, quar la sancguisugua tantost cayra.	"And another method of operation in fumigation is that you take an earthenware pot with burning coals inside it, and cover the pot with a lid through which a tube has been inserted, and insert the end of the instrument into this tube; then start the fumigation; and have the patient put his mouth on the other end of the cannula, and close his mouth so that the fumigation does not escape until you know that the fumigation has reached the bloodsucking parasite, because the bloodsucking parasite will soon fall."
E si no catz, lahoras tu itera la subfumiguacio motas vetz, e abstengua le malaute de beure, e mange causas saladas e alhs, e no begua aygua, e ayssi necessari es que am aquest regiment sia fora-getada.	"And if it does not fall, then repeat the fumigation many times, and do not give the patient water to drink, and let him eat salted foods and almonds, and do not let him drink any water, and it is necessary that with this regimen he be kept under observation."
E aquesta es la forma del instrument am le qual es trayta sancguisugua del guolayro quan es vista; e es semblant a forceps ayssi cum vezes, sino quar es en lu alcuna curvitat:	"And this is the shape of the instrument with which bloodsucking parasites are removed from the throat when they are seen, and it resembles forceps like these, except that it has some curvature:"
le qual sia mesa al guolayro, e la extremitat de lu es semblant a bec de ciconia, que es guanta, en la qual es aspretat de lima, per so quar, quan comprem alcuna causa, aquela no leyssa.	"which is placed in the throat, and its end resembles the beak of a stork, which is smooth, so that when it grips something, it does not slip."
Capitol .xl.	"Chapter XL."
En le qual es la suma del sermo en apercio de apostemas e en seccio de lor.	"In this chapter is the summary of the discourse on the opening of abscesses and their incision."
Les apostemas so motas specias, de motas manieyras, segon que ve rememoracio de lor, de quascuna en aquest libre.	"There are many kinds of abscesses, of many types, according to what comes to mind about them, each one is mentioned in this book."
E so diversas en perforacio e seccio de lor per doas manieyras, de las quals la una es per la specia de apostemas en si meteys; e per aquo que comprem de las humiditatz.	"And they are diverse in perforation and incision of them by two methods, one of which is for the type of abscesses themselves; and because of what we understand about humidity."
E la segonda manieyra es prop les locs en les quals accideys del cos, quar le apostema accident en le cap es autra de la apostema accident en le cul; e le apostema en le loc carnos accident es autra del apostema accident en junctura; e a quascun de lor es son juguament per operacio.	"And the second method is for the places where they occur in the body, because an abscess that occurs in the head is different from one that occurs in the buttocks; and an abscess that occurs in a fleshy part is different from one that occurs at a joint; and each of them has its own treatment by operation."
E mays de apostemas so alcunas las quals cove que no sian perforadas sino aprop maturacio de la sania en aquels o compliment de lor.	"And moreover, there are abscesses which should not be perforated until maturation of the skin over them or completion of their formation."
So autras apostemas les quals cove que sian traucatz quan son cruzes, e no son maturatz segon lor compliment, ayssi cum apostemas que son propdas a las juncturas, quar apostema quan ve prop junctura, lo esser de lu es prolonguat entro que·s poyreys aquo que es en le circuit de lu, e fort leu son corromputz les liamentz o les nervis de aquela junctura, per que es fayta causa de contraccio de aquel membre; o es apostema prop de membre principal, e si tu tardas la perforacio de lu entro sia madurat nosira al membre principal; o es prop le cul, donc perfora aque no-madurat; e no cove que·l perforas cru, de no-complida degestio, sino aquel que es prop del cul, per so que no poyresca le preon de lu e sia elonguat a las partidas dedintz del cul, e sia fayta fistula, o que sia fayt en le terme de lu que no sia sanat.	"There are also abscesses which should be drained when they are crossed and not mature according to their completion, such as abscesses that are near joints, because an abscess when it is near a joint prolongs its being until you can put in there what is around it, and very often the ligaments or nerves of that joint are corrupted by it, causing contraction of that member; or it is an abscess near a main member, and if you delay its perforation until it has matured to the main member, damage will occur to the main member; or it is near the buttocks, therefore perforate it not matured; and it is not necessary to perforate one with unripe digestion except that which is near the buttocks, so that you do not putrefy its skin and elongate it into the parts inside the buttocks, and a fistula be made, or that it becomes in its term that cannot be healed."
Mays cove que tu sapias la hora de la perforacio de la apostema, e aysso es quan es maturat.	"But you should know the time of perforation of the abscess, and this is when it has matured."
E sapias que es madurat quan es la cedacio de la dolor e la cessacio de la febre, e aprop la diminucio de la rogor e de la pulsacio, e la acuitat del cap del apostema, e les autres senhals.	"And you should know that it is mature when there is cessation of pain and fever, and around decrease of redness and swelling, and sharpness of the tip of the abscess, and other signs."
E quar cove que sapias la perforacio cazer en le loc pus dejos del apostema e de pus venient de curacio de la eminencia.	"And because you should know that perforation must be made where there is much pus near the abscess and coming from the cure of its swelling."
E perforacio tostemps sia per le lonc de la carn o del cors, si las apostemas son en las partidas de las mas o dels pes, e en loc dels lacertz, de las cordas dels nervis, de las arcerias; e, al derier, en totz locs enguals en les quals no es reflecio; quar en aquels que so reflectitz, usa de perforacio segon aquel membre.	"And perforation is always done along the length of the skin or flesh if the abscesses are in the parts of the arms or legs, and in the location of the nerves, tendons, arteries; and finally in all places where there is no reflection; because those that are reflected, use perforation according to that member."
Mays quan le apostema es en loc carnos, lahoras miels es que leysses la perforacio de lu entro que sia confermada la digestio de lu segon compliment, ayssi quo havem dit; quar si tu perforas aquel denant aquo, es prolonguat le cors del poyre de lu e de mota sordicia, e fort leu las labias de lu so enduradas e la profunditat de lu.	"But when the abscess is in a fleshy part, then it is better to leave its perforation until digestion of it has been confirmed according to completion, as we have said; because if you perforate it before that, the skin of its opening will be prolonged and much dirty, and very often the lips of it are hardened and deepened."
Mays alcus apostemas so perforatz segon la latitut de la carn o del cos deves la necessitat, o segon aquo del qual lo membre indigeys.	"But some abscesses are perforated according to the width of the skin or flesh due to necessity, or according to what the member requires."
E cove que administres petita perforacio , e·n les apostemas grans gran perforacio e ampla o motas seccios segon la diversitat de la grandesa dels apostemas.	"And you should make a small perforation, and in large abscesses a large and wide perforation or many incisions according to the diversity of the size of the abscesses."
E autras so dels apostemas en les quals cove que la codena sia conquavada e sia encidida, quan es fayta ayssi quo pan e fayta es en terme que ja stigua, ayssi cum aquel que accideys en trops de dubelec e de bubos.	"And others are abscesses in which it is necessary that the chain be concave and incised when it is made like this, as it was done with bread and then made in such a way that it has already stuck, such as those that occur in groin and buboes."
E de aquels so que so insciditz am seccio havent tres angles; e de aquels es en le qual es inscidit ayssi cum figura de fuelha de mirtra, ayssi cum las apostemas dels angonars.	"And of those that are incised with three-angle sectioning; and of those which are incised like the figure of a spearhead leaf, such as the abscesses of the armpits."
E de lor so en les quals es administrada seccio redonda e seccio lunar, e semblantz ad aquels.	"And of them there are those in which round incision and crescent moon incision is administered, similar to those."
Mays aquel al qual no es cap ayssi cum son apostemas leons superficials, cove que tu perforas aquel am perforacio superficial, o plana tant solament.	"But that one to which it does not apply like its superficial abscesses, you should perforate it with superficial or flat perforation alone."
E cove quant le apostema es gros e ya ha colligit mota sania, que perfores aquel e no te coytes que extraguas tot le poyre en aquela hora; habantz extratz de aquel una partida, e aprop opila le apostema entro al autre dia, e aprop extratz una partida major, e aprop fa aquo motas veguadas segon graduacio entro que sia foro-getat.	"But when the abscess is large and has already collected much pus, you should perforate it and not try to extract all the pus at that time; having extracted a part of it, then on the following day, apply a poultice to the abscess inside, and then extract a larger part little by little according to degree until it is completely drained."
E majorment si·l malaute es de freol vertut, o femna prens, o enfant petit, o viel en decrepitut, quar l’esperit animal motas vetz es resolvut am la egressio de la sania, e fort leu mor le malaute, e tu operte les.	"And if the illness is from a green boil, or pregnant woman, or infant, or old man in decline, because often the animal spirit is resolved with the exit of sanity, and easily death occurs, you operate thus."
Don guarda aquest capitol am gran cautela, e aprop la tua perforacio en la qual perforas aquestz apostemas, cove que abstergescas las plagues e consideras donc si la plagua del apostema es pauca, o es una seccio plana, lahoras tu aministra las qualguas de li o de coto antic; e si le apostema es gran, e las fissuras de la perforacio son motas, lahoras cove que tu pauses meca en quascun trauc entro que pervenguan ensemps.	"Be sure to examine this chapter with great care, and especially the incision you make for these boils, ensuring that you cleanse the wound and consider whether the boil's skin is thin or flat. If the boil is large and its incisions are many, then pause between each cut so they may heal together."
E si en le apostema es abscindit una partida de la codena o has concavada aquela en le circuit, lahoras cove que tu la complescas de coto viel o de fil fayt de drap de li, ayssi cum quan has traytz pans o razizos, ses humiditat; e strenh aquel entro al tertz dia; e aprop proceseys aquel e cura le am aquo que cove dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	"And if in the boil a piece of skin is cut off or there is a concavity around its circumference, then you should fill it with old lint or fine thread made from linen, like when you tie loaves of bread or roasts, without moisture; and strengthen that wound on the third day; and likewise proceed and heal it with whatever ointment is necessary until it is healed."
Mays si accideys flux de sanc en la hora de la operacio tua, lahoras tu aministra aygua frega e vi agre en les quals mules un drap de li, e pausa aquel sobre le loc del fluxs del sanc motas veguadas.	"But if blood flows during your operation, then administer water mixed with vinegar in which a linen cloth has been dipped, and place that cloth on the location of the blood flow several times."
Mays si persevera le fluxs del sanc, lahoras cove que tu aministres regiment e curacio e polveras las quals he recomtadas en motz locs de aquest nostre libre e de divisio.	"But if the bleeding persists, then you should administer remedies and care and apply powders that are recommended in many places of this book and its division."
Mays si es en temps de hivern, e·l loc de la apostema es loc de motz nervis, lahoras cove que tu enfundas pulvils en vi e oli caut, e pauses aquels sobre les locs.	"But if it is wintertime and the location of the boil has many nerves, then you should wrap powders in warm wine and oil and place them on those locations."
E si es en estiu, e les locs son carnoses, lahoras cove que tu pauses pulvils enbeguts am aygua e oli o am vi e oli, e tot aquo sia freg entro que sia le ters dia, ayssi cum havem dit, e lahoras cove que tu deslies le apostema e abstergescas aquel e aministres en la curacio de lu aquo que a lu conveneys entro que sia sanat.	"And if it is summer and the locations are fleshy, then you should place powders wrapped in cold water and oil or wine and oil, and all of that should be fomented until the third day, as we have said, and then you should lance the boil and cleanse it and administer to its care whatever is appropriate for it until it is healed."
E aysso es aquo que es necessari de la cognicio de la curacio de apostemas universalment, mays segon la via de distinccio ja he dit de tot apostema en qual manieyra es via de la cura de lu per capitols singularment.	"And this is what is necessary concerning the knowledge of the treatment of boils in general, but according to the way of distinction I have already spoken about each boil individually in its own chapter."
Capitol .xli.	Chapter XL.
De seccio de apostemas les quals veno en la codena del cap.	Of the Incision of Boils that occur on the Neck.
En la codena del cap petitz apostemas, e so de specias de nodes les quals conteno tunicas que so a lor factz ; e las specias de lor so motas.	On the neck there are small boils and they have species of knots which contain tunics that are made in this way; and their species are many.
E de lor son pingas, e de aquelas so que conteno humiditat semblant a lima.	And among them are pimples, and those contain moisture like lime.
E de aquelas so las quals conteno humiditat semblant a pols, et asemblantz a lor; e de aquelas so que son lapideas, durs.	And those which contain moisture similar to dust also resemble them; and those which are like stones are hard.
E en la seccio de totz, e en la extraccio de aquels no es temor, cum deves la exteccio de aquels no fa contrariat arceria.	And in the section of all of these, and their extraction, there is no fear, because their extraction does not cause any harm to the artery.
E la operacio en seccio de aquels es que tu esproes aquels am instrument la forma del qual ve aprop aysso, le qual es apelat entromes, entro que sapias que contengua.	And the operation for cutting these is that you express them with an instrument in the form of which can be seen below, which is called an "entromes," until you know that they contain.
Quar si aquo que conte es humiditat, lahoras scindeys aquel am seccio segon la longitut per seccio superficial segon aquesta forma:	For if what it contains is moisture, then cut it with a section along its length with a superficial section in this form:
E comensa en la seccio de la linha de .B. entro a la linha de .G. Donc cum la humiditat es evacuada, lahoras tu excoria aquela pel que conte aquela humiditat, e no leysses de aquela alcuna causa de tot, quar tropas veguadas retorna, si roman de aquela alcuna causa.	And begin the section of the line from B to the line G. Then when the moisture is evacuated, then strip away that which contains that moisture and do not leave any cause for it, because otherwise it may return.
E aprop submergeys coto en enguent egipciach, si es present, e sino, en aygua e sal; e umpleys am aquel la plagua e layssa aquel entro ad autra dia, quar am aquo corrodeys tot so que es romas de aquela pellicula.	And next immerse the wound in Egyptian ointment, if available, and otherwise in water and salt; and fill it with that and leave it for another day, because with that you will corrode everything that is left of that skin.
E aprop itera sobre aquel coto am enguent egipciach segondament e tersament si indigeyses de lu, entro que·t comfides que no y haia romas alcuna causa de aquela pellicula; lahoras cura la plagua am enguent entro que sia sanada.	And next apply Egyptian ointment to that wound secondly and thirdly if you need it, until you are confident that there is no remaining cause of that skin; then dress the wound with ointment until it is healed.
E si apostema conte nodi gras, lahoras tu inscideys aquel segon aquesta forma:	And if a boil contains fatty nodes, then cut it in this form:
am seccio havent forma de crotz, e geta oncis entre doas labias de la seccio e scorsa aquel de tota partida, e esforsa la tua vertut en extraccio de la tunica la qual conte aquel.	with a section having the shape of a cross, and make incisions between its two lips of the section and scrape it from all sides, and exert your strength in extracting the tunic which contains it.
Mays si a tu arceria fa contrarieta, lahoras fay aquo que yeu t’e recontat primieyrament.	But if cutting the artery causes harm, then do what I have already told you first.
E semblantment fay en le apostema lapificat de seccio e de curacio segon que a tu havem dit; e seccio sobre apostema lapificat es pus leugiera, quar es de pauc sanc e de pauca humiditat.	And likewise do for the stone-like boil in sectioning and treating it according to what we have told you; and the sectioning of a stone-like boil is easier, because it contains little blood and moisture.
E alcunas vetz so alcus de aquestz apostemas les quals so en le cap en alcus homes am los quals de tot no es humiditat; la qual causa es quar yeu inscindigui sobre un apostema en le cap de una femna vielha e atrobegui le apostema ayssi cum peyra sorda, aspra, blanqua, la qual no podia esser trinquada, e si a alcu fos am aquela percussit, plaguera aquel.	And sometimes there are some of these boils which are on the head in certain people who have little moisture; and this is because one once cut open a boil on an old woman's head and found it hard like an unsound, rough, white stone which could not be squeezed out, and if anyone struck against that it would hurt them.
Mays en les autres apostemas accidentz en le cap otra aquest no es aquest capitol, ayssi cum les apostemas que veno als caps dels enfantz e deves las razitz de las aurelhas, mays la seccio de aquestz totz sia seccio superficial.	But in other accidental boils on the head besides this one, do not follow this chapter, such as those that occur on the heads of children and around the ears, but their sections should all be superficial sections.
E pausa la perforacio de aquels de la partida pus bassa de lor per so que sia alleujat le cos de la sania a las partidas pus bassas.	And pause the perforation of those which have entered deeply because of this, lest you cause harm to the body from the parts that are deeper.
E aprop cura aquelas am aquo que conveneys ad aquel de curacio.	Then treat them with whatever is appropriate for their treatment.
Capitol .xlii.	Chapter XLII
De seccio de scrophulas las quals accideyso en le col.	Of the sectioning of scrofulas which occur on the neck
Motas veguadas endeveno aquestas apostemas en le colh e en las aysselhas e en les angonars; e alcunas veguadas accideyso en las autras partidas del cos.	Many times these boils occur on the neck and in the armpits and groins, and sometimes they occur on other parts of the body.
E so aquelas que accideysso en le colh, e so motas que so engendradas entre lor, e tota scrofula de aquelas es dintz la sua tunica propria, e ayssi cum en les nodis e apostema del cap, ayssi cum havem recomtat.	And those which occur on the neck are many and they are often generated among them, and all scrofula of these is inside its own tunic, just as in the nodes and boils of the head, as we have described.
E las specias de aquestas scrophulas son motas, quar de aquelas so alcunas lapideas, e de aquelas so que conteno humiditatz, e de aquelas so malignas las quals no obeseysso a curacio.	"These types of boils are many, for some are hard like stones, and some contain moisture, and some are malignant which do not respond to treatment."
Donc en aquela la qual tu vezes de bona disposicio en le Tocament, de la qual la color de aquo que es manifest es propda a la color de la codena, e es mauguda a tota partida, e no es annexsa am le nervi del colh, ni am las venas, ni am la arceria, e no es preonda, cove que tu inscidiscas aquela am siccio superficial de la partida desus a la partida dejos del cos de la linha de .G. entro la linha de .B., e scorja aquela de tota partida, e exten dos labias de la codena am onci, o am motz oncis si has necessitat de aquels, ayssi cum havem dit en las apostemas del cap, e extratz aquela petit a petit.	"Therefore, in that boil which you find to be of good condition upon examination, the color of which is similar to the color of bone, and is swollen on all sides, and not attached to any nerve, vein or artery, and does not appear to be filled with pus, then you should incise it with a scalpel from the surface of the swelling towards the body of the line .G. between the lines .B., and cut it away completely, and then extend the lips of the wound with forceps, or with many forceps if necessary, as we have said regarding abscesses on the head, and extract its contents little by little."
E es mays cautela que no sia inscidida la vena o nervi.	"And it is most important to take care that the vein or nerve is not incised."
E sia le spatum no mot agut, que no ajuste a tu la tua ma am inscizio, o que enquiete le malaute, e que inscidas aquo que no es necessari inscidir; quar si inscideysses vena o arceria e prohibeys tu de la tua operacio, lahoras pausa en la plagua vetriol trissat o autras polveras las quals ostan fluxs de sanc, e estrenh la plagua, e layssa aquel entro que·s repausa la acuitat de la apostema e sia mollificada la plagua e comense esser poyrida.	"And if the sputum is not moved, do not adjust your hand at the incision, or else it will harm the patient. And also refrain from making unnecessary incisions; for if you cut a vein or artery and prevent blood flow, then apply a dressing of vitriol powder or other powders that stop bleeding, and remove the dressing, allowing that which was causing inflammation to escape and letting the wound soften and begin to heal."
Quan le sanc es abscindit.	"When blood is cut off."
Donc retorna a la tua operacio entro que l’aias complida.	"And then return to your operation until it is complete."
E aprop inquireys am le tieu dit indic si es romas alcuna causa de las autras petitas scrophulas, donc inscideys aquelas e munda aquelas.	"And if you find any cause of the other small wounds, then cut them and clean them."
E si es en la razit de la scrophula gran vena, cove lahoras que no inscidas aquela scrophula de la sua razitz.	"If it is in the area of a large vein, do not incise that boil at its root."
Abantz cove que lies aquela am fiel doblat fort e que leysses aquela entro que caia per si ses nocument.	"And be careful to lift that [boil] with a doubled fold of gauze and allow it to fall back by itself without causing harm."
E aprop omple la plagua de coto vielh le qual tu has ja submirgit en enguent egipciac, e aprop cura aquel.	"And then fill the wound with dry cotton that you have already subjected to Egyptian ointment, and apply a dressing there."
E si inscides aquela scrophula tota, lahoras cove que tu ajustes las doas labias de la plagua e cuzas2 tantost pus que no y ha romasa deguna superfluitat.	"If you cut open that entire scrofula, then it is necessary to adjust both lips of the wound and sew them immediately so that there remains no excess."
Mays si tu vezes que haia romasa superfluitat per la grandeza de la scrofula, cove que tu entendas a inscidir la razit de aquela, e astrayra aquela e aministra sutura e aquo que es dit.	"But if some excess remains due to the size of the scrofula, then it is necessary to understand how to incise its root, and then excise that and administer suture."
E aquela de las scrophulas que conteno humiditatz, perfora aquela am perforacio superficial aqui la on appar a tu le loc de maturacio de lu, e pausa perforacio de aquo que siec le pus bas del cos, ayssi cum havem dit.	"And those scrofulas that contain moisture, pierce them with a superficial perforation here where their point of maturity appears, and pause the perforation from that which goes down to the base of the body, as we have said."
E aprop aministra perforacio, calguas am enguent e semblantz ad aquels, per so que corroda aquo que es romas de la corropcio.	"And moreover administer a plaster with gangrene and similar substances, so that it may burn away whatever remains of the corruption."
E aprop quan tu vezes la plagua ja esser mundada, lahoras tu cura aquela am enguent de carn generatiu entro que sia sanada.	"And furthermore, when you see that the wound is already clean, then cure it with a plaster of healing meat until it is healed."
Capitol .xliii.	Capítulo XLIII.
De seccio del pilhot del apostema accident dintz le guolayro.	Chapter XLIII. About sectioning the head of an accidental aposteme inside the gluteal region.
Diyssero les antics aquesta seccio en le epilhot, e no vist alcu hom en nostra terra que aquela aia fayta.	The ancients called this section in the epilogue, and we have not seen anyone in our land who has done it.
E aquesta es la inscriptura del sermo de aquels.	And this is the inscription of their sermon.
Mays en les homes haventz esquinencia, cove que sia esquivada la extraccio del epilhot, cum per aquo no sia fayt juvament per so quar totas las venas e las majors del malaute so aqui.	But in humans, the extraction of the epilogue should be avoided because if this is not done properly, all the veins and major blood vessels of the patient are cut.
Mays en aquels que han apostemas cautz en la boca o guolayro o dos aurelhas, quan la malautia no es en la cana, cove husar de la seccio de epilhot a fugir la perdicio la qual es fayta per perfocacio.	But in those who have sores on the mouth or throat or two ears when the illness is not on the head, it is necessary to avoid the epilogue section to prevent injury caused by suffocation.
Donc cove quan volem aquo, que inscidam le epilhot dejos tres cercles dels cercles del epilhot, o quatre am petita seccio per la latitut en aquel que es entre dos cercles per quantitat, que la seccio sia en ciphac, no en la cartillage, e aquest loc es convenent a seccio, quar es privat de carn e les vayselhs de sanc de lu son luhen.	Therefore when we want this, we should incise the epilogue from three circles of the epilogue circles or four with a small section across its width where it is between two circles in quantity, so that the section is on the hip joint and not on the cartilage. This location is convenient because it lacks flesh and the blood vessels are remote.
E si le metge es pauruc, cove lahoras que extenda la codena del golayro am onci, e aprop fenda la codena entro que pervengua a la canal, mays evite les vaysels de sanc si vetz de aquelas alcuna causa.	And if the physician is fearful, he should extend the neck of the throat with one hand and carefully cut the neck until it reaches the windpipe, but avoid the blood vessels if they are seen there for any reason.
E aprop inscida li ciplach segon que havem recomtat; e es significat sobre la seccio de la canal per le flacma le qual es de aquela eyssit am aquo que es de lu disromput e per la abscizio de la votz.	And then incise the epiglottis according to what has been recommended, and it is indicated above the section of the windpipe by a flag which is that of its exit, with this being of that air which escapes from there because of the disruption and the absence of voice.
E layssa la plagua uberta per alcun temps.	And let the wound remain uncovered for some time.
Donc cum la hora es remauguda en la qual perforacio es temuda, agregua doas labias de la codena de la plagua, e cus aquela sola ses la cartillage.	Therefore when the time has passed in which suffocation is feared, approximate two lips of the neck wound and sew that alone with catgut.
E aprop administra medicinas que fan naysser la carn entro que sia sanat.	And then apply medications that make flesh grow so that it may be healed.
E diyssec Albucasis que la summa del sermo le qual havem recomtat, exposicio no es sino que veias que alcus de aquetz apostemas ja han opilat lo guolayro del malaute, e le malaute es vengut entro a mort, e le ale de lu es entresecat, e alcus van a inscidir le epiglos per so que respire le malaute sobre le loc de la plagua per alcuna respiracio, e sia salvat de mort.	"Albucasis says that the summary of this speech amounts to this: some of these tumors have already filled the throat of the patient, and the patient has come close to death; and the artery of the patient is severed, and some go to incise the epiglottis so that the patient may breathe over the place of the plague for some respiration, and be saved from death."
E per aquo comandero layssar la plagua uberta entro que sia consumida la malicia de la malautia; e es la malicia de lu per tres dias; e donc lahoras comandero cosi la plagua, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	"Therefore, order the plague to remain until it is consumed by the disease; and this lasts for three days. Then command the disease thus, and cure that one as soon as it is healed."
E aquo que yeu he vist per mi meteys, es que una sirventa pres un cotel e mesec le en le sieu golayro e inscidic am aquel una partida de la cana del pulmo, e yeu fu apelat a la curacio de lu, e atrobegui la mugen ayssi cum es mugit del moridos, e descubrigui la plagua e atrobegui le sanc le qual era yssit de la plagua petit.	"I have seen this myself: a servant took a knife and put it into his throat and cut off a part of the trachea of the lung; and I was called to cure him, and I found him moaning like one dead, and I uncovered the wound and sucked out the blood that had flowed from the wound."
Donc yeu fo confessat que aquela no havia inscidit vena ni guidegi, e le vent yssia de la plagua, e curegui aquela entro que foc sanada.	"Therefore I was convinced that neither vein nor artery had been cut there, and the wind came out of the wound, and I cured him until he was healed."
E no accidic a la sirventa si no rauquiera en la votz, e aprop alcus dias retornec ad miloracio de las suas dispozicios.	"And it did not happen to the servant that anything entered into his throat; after some days I returned for betterment of his condition."
E ara dic yeu que en la seccio del epilhot no ha temor.	"And now you say that in the section of the epiglottis there is nothing to fear."
Capitol .xliv.	"Chapter XLIV."
De seccio sobre apostema le qual accideys en le golayro defora, e es apelat hernia del golayro.	"Of cutting over an abscess that occurs in the throat externally, and it is called a neck hernia."
Aquest apostema nompnat hernia del golayro es apostema gran segon la color del cors, e es mot en las femnas.	"This abscess commonly called hernia of the neck is a large abscess according to the size of the body, and is more common in women."
E es segon dos manieyras, quar o es natural o accidental.	"And it occurs in two ways: either naturally or accidentally."
E en le natural no es engen de curar.	"And in the natural one it is not good to cure."
E l’accidental es segon dos manieyras del qual la un es semblant a nodes grasses, e l’autra manieyra es semblant apostema le qual es fayt per nodacio de arteria, e en aquel es temor.	"And the accidental one occurs in two ways: one resembles fatty tumors, and the other way resembles an abscess that is made by the obstruction of an artery, and in that case there is danger."
E no cove que·s fassa presumpcio a lu cum ferr sino en aquel que es petit.	"And it should not be presumed to cut it with iron except where it is necessary."
E tu proha aquel e investigua aquel am le dit, e si atrobas lu semblant a nodi gras, e no es suspendut am alcuna de las venas, lahoras tu inscideys aquel ayssi cum les nodes, e extratz aquel am aquo que conte lu de la pel e bursiclam; e sino, lahoras es perscrutat tot le sieu esser, e aprop cura le loc am aquo que cove de curacio entro que sia sanat.	"And you should press it and examine it with the hand, and if you find it similar to fatty tumors, and not suspended from any of the veins, then you should cut it in the same way as nodes, and extract it with what it contains of skin and serous fluid; but if not, then you should carefully examine all its being, and especially cure the place with whatever is necessary for curing until it is healed."
Capitol .xlv.	"Chapter XLIV." (This is a repetition of Chapter XLIV. It should be Chapter XLVI.)
De seccio de las specias de nodes.	"Of section concerning kinds of tumors."
Dels nodes so motas specias e yeu ja he dit totas las specias de lor en la divisio.	"There are many species of tumors, and you have already mentioned all the species of them in the division [of anatomy]."
E cove que yeu recomte assi la diferencia entre node e exitura cum fassa dubitacio.	"And it is necessary that you explain the difference between a tumor and an ulcer when there is doubt."
Donc yeu dic que am exitura es caliditat e febre e dolors vehementz entro que es sedada la ebullicio de la superfluitat; e es complida putrefaccio que lahora cessa la febre, la dolor e la calor.	"Therefore I say that in an ulcer there is heat and fever and violent pains until the boiling away of the superfluity is quieted; but it is a complete putrefaction which then stops the fever, pain, and heat."
Mays am node no es caliditat ni febre ni dolor, e conte aquel ciphac leon le qual es al u sac propri.	"But in a tumor there is neither heat nor fever nor pain; rather it contains in itself its own fluid which is enclosed within its proper sac."
E es segon la color del cors, e le comensament de lu es cum un ceze e es fayt ayssi cum vace, sia major o minor, e son segon dos specias, quar o so grassas e conteno humiditat, e las colors de la humiditat son motas, segon que yeu diyssi en la divisio.	"And it is according to the size of the body, and its beginning is like a pimple and it becomes like a bag, whether large or small, and they are of two species: either fatty and containing moisture, and the colors of the moisture are many, as you said in the division."
Donc cove, quan pervenas a la curacio de node, que exprohes aquel e inquiras aquel al comensament am sturment le qual es apelat intromes, segon que vindra la sua forma en le capitol le qual es aprop aquest.	"Therefore, when you come to the treatment of tumors, you should examine it and inquire about its beginning with an instrument called a probe, according to what will be said about its shape in the next chapter."
E es manieyra de inquisicio de apostemas e de totz nodes, e es que tu prenguas aquest sturment e entromet aquel en le loc pus humit le qual atrobas en le apostema, e tu revolveras les tieus ditz am aquel petit a petit entro que sapias que·l sturment ja ha penetrat la codena.	"And this is the method of examining abscesses and all tumors: you should take this instrument and insert it into the moist place that you find in the abscess, and you should turn your hand with it little by little until you know that the instrument has already penetrated the chain."
E aprop ultima la tua ma segon la mesura de la grandeza del apostema, e aprop extratz le entromes e considera aquo que es yssit en le vestigi de lu.	"And then finally pull your hand according to the measure of the greatness of the abscess, and then extract the probe and consider what is issued in its track."
E si es fora-getada la humiditat corrent, de qualque color sia, lahoras tu le inscideys am seccio superficial segon que he dit en les autres apostemas.	"And if the flowing moisture is forgotten, whatever its color may be, then you should cut it with a superficial section as I have said concerning other abscesses."
E si del vestigi de l’intromes no hieys humiditat, lahoras sapias que es gras.	"But if there is no moisture in the track of the probe, then you know that it is fatty."
E secca sobre lu am seccio havent forma de crotz segon aquesta forma:	"And dry it over it with a cut having the shape of a cross according to this form:"
ayssi cum t’e ensenhat, e suspen aquel am oncis, e excorja la codena de tota part am facilitat, e guarda la pel o sac, si podes, sobre aquel e extraguas aquela sania am le node.	"like this as you have taught, and suspend it with forceps, and cut the chain from all sides with ease, and guard the skin or sac over it if possible, and extract that tumor."
Mays si es romput en la operacio, no es possible extrayre aquela sana, e motas veguadas endeve aquo, e lahoras tu la extratz a pessas entro que de lu no romangua denguna causa.	"But if it is broken during the operation, then it is not possible to extract that tumor whole; many times something remains there, and then you should extract it in pieces until nothing remains of it."
Quar si de lu roman denguna causa, pauc o trop, le node retorne segon le mays.	"Because if anything remains of it, little or much, the tumor will return according to its nature."
E si tu vezes que de lu roman alcuna part petita, lahoras comple la plagua de alcunas polveras corrosivas agudas e strenh la plagua, e pausa sobre aquela que sede apostema caut, e cura aquel del autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	"And if you see that some small part of it remains, then complete the wound with a plaster of some acrid corrosive powders and strengthen the plaster, and pause over it that which makes an abscess heal quickly, and cure it with other treatment until it is healed."
E si es node gran, lahoras tu cus las doas labias de lu e cura aquel am aquo que encarna.	"But if it is a large tumor, then cut the two lips of it and cure it with what heals it."
Mays si vena pulsatil es a lu contraria, o no-pulsatil, lahoras tu coyta e huemple le loc de zegi trissat que es vetriol e leyssa aquel streyt per dos dias o per tres entro que·s poyresca la plagua e que repause la ebullicio del sanc; e aprop retorna a inscindir aquo que es romas del node.	"But if there is pulsatile or non-pulsatile blood against it, then cut and cauterize the place with triple-segmented zinc and let it rest for two days or three until the plaster becomes dry and the boiling away of the blood returns; and then return to cutting what remains of the tumor."
Capitol .xlvi.	"Chapter XLVI."
De las formas del sturmentz necessaris en seccio e perforacio.	"Of the forms of instruments necessary for cutting and boring."
De aquels so las formas dels intromesas, e so de tres specias, que de aquels es alcu gran, e de lor es migier, e de lor es petit.	"There are three species of probes: some are large, some medium-sized, and some small."
La forma de intromes gran es aquesta:	"The form of the large probe is as follows:"
La forma de intromes migier es aquesta:	"The form of the medium-sized probe is as follows:"
La forma de intromes petit es aquesta:	"The form of the small probe is as follows:"
Sian faytz de ferr, de alfulud, de extremitatz cayradas decentment, per so que festino le intrament en les apostemas.	"They are made of iron, of aluminum, with pointed extremities properly shaped, so that they may enter easily into abscesses."
E aquestas so las formas dels experientz, e son nompnatz albered, e un de aquels es apelat berid.	"And these are the forms of probes used in experience: they are called sounders, and one of them is called a boring probe."
E so de tres especias, quar de lor es gran, migier e pauc.	"And there are three species of them: large, medium-sized, and small."
La forma de experient gran, forma de lu:	"The form of the large probe for experience is as follows:"
La forma de experient migier, forma de lu:	"The form of the medium-sized probe for experience is as follows:"
La forma de experient pauc, forma de lu:	"The form of the small probe for experience is as follows:"
Conveneysso que sian per aquels apostemas e exituras e fistulas e bubos per so que entre aquelas so dels osses e de autras causas.	"It is convenient that they be used for those abscesses and fistulas and boils, since they are also of bone and other causes."
E so faytz redontz, grosses, leons, ayssi cum grans agulhas am las quals son cosidas las selhas, e son faytas de eram citri, o de eram o de ferr, o de argent, E las milhors so quan so faytas de eram citri.	"And they are made round, thick, blunt, like large needles with which the sutures are sewn, and they are made of citrus ivory or bone or iron or silver. And the best ones are those made of citrus ivory."
E son faytz les experient de plum negre, les quals se acordan que per aquels sian ubertas las fistulas en la conquavitat de las quals so reflexios, que sian reflectidas am la sua levitat am aquelas refleccios.	"And probes are made of black lead, which are used to open those fistulas in the concavities of which reflections occur, so that they may be reflected with their own levity by those reflections."
E so de tres specias, quar alcus de lor so loncs, e dels autres migiers, e dels autres breus, segon la quantitat del ample de la fistula e de la strictura de lu.	"And there are three species of them: some are long, others medium-sized, and others short, according to the quantity of the width of the fistula and the stenosis of it."
Forma del experient gran de plom:	"The form of the large probe of lead is as follows:"
Forma del experient migier de plom:	"The form of the medium-sized probe of lead is as follows:"
Forma del experient petit de plom:	"The form of the small probe of lead is as follows:"
Las formas dels oncis so de motas specias, quar de aquels so alcus simples, als quals es una curvitat solament, e so de tres specias: grans, paucs e migiers.	"The forms of hooks are of many species, for some are simple, with only one curvature, and there are three species of them: large, small, and medium-sized."
E de lor so uncis orps, e so de tres specias.	"Of them there are three sorts, of three species."
E de aquels so uncis haventz doas curvaturas, e so de tres specias.	"And of those three kinds two curves exist, and they are of three species."
E de lor so haventz tres curvaturas, e so de tres specias.	"Of them there are three curves, and they are of three species."
E totz aquetz so necessaris en lor loc.	"And all these things were necessary in their place."
Forma de unci simple gran, forma de lu:	"A large simple curve form, its form:"
Forma de unci simple migier:	"Form of medium simple curve:"
Forma de unci simple pauc, forma de lu:	"Form of small simple curve, its form:"
Forma de unci orp gran:	"Form of large curved hook:"
Forma de unci orp migier, forma de lu:	"Form of medium curved hook, its form:"
Forma de unci orp pauc, forma de lu:	"Form of small curved hook, its form:"
Forma de unci gran havent dos curvaturas:	"Form of large curve with two curves:"
Forma de unci migier havent dos curvatas:	"Form of medium curve with two curves:"
Forma de unci pauc havent dos curvaturas:	"Form of small curve with two curves:"
Forma de unci gran havent tres curvaturas:	"Form of large curve with three curves:"
Forma de unci migier havent tres curvaturas:	"Form of medium curve with three curves:"
Forma de unci pauc havent tres curvaturas:	"Form of small curve with three curves:"
E aquestas so las formas dels scalpels am les quals son seccatz e scorjatz les nodes e le apostemas, e so de tres specias, quar de aquels es gran, migier, e pauc.	"And these are the forms of the scalpels with which nodes and warts are cut and scraped, and they are of three species, for those are large, medium, and small."
Forma de scapel gran:	"Form of large scalpel:"
Forma del scapel migier:	"Form of medium scalpel:"
Forma de scapel pauc:	"Form of small scalpel:"
Las extramitatz de aquels am les quals es fayta seccio so agudas e las autres extramitatz so no-agudas, e no so pausadas en tal manieyra, sino per que sia fayt juvament en la excorjacio dels nodes la temor de inscizio de vena o de nervi, e per aquels sia sanat le malaute e atrobe tranquilitat un petit per la adustio la qual atroba deves la excoriacio del apostema.	"The extremities of those with which section is made are sharp and the other extremities are not-sharp, and they are not pausing in such a manner, but so that the fear of cutting veins or nerves may be avoided when scraping nodes, and so that the illness may be healed and tranquility attained by the slight burning which follows the scraping of warts."
E aquestas son las formas de almagidas, e so de tres specias: gran, migier e pauc, ayssi cum veyras.	"And these are the forms of forceps, and they are of three species: large, medium, and small, as you see."
La forma de magda gran:	"The form of large forceps:"
Forma de magda migier:	"Form of medium forceps:"
Forma de magda pauc:	"Form of small forceps:"
Sian faytas de eram e so semblantz de ray am le qual e fayt alcofol.	"They are made of iron and resemble a rod with which alcohol is made."
E es en la extramitat lada punctada am spatum occultada e en aquela corr a las partidas dedintz e defora, quan tu vols, ayssi cum veses.	"And it has a pierced extremity on one side covered with a spatula, and in that corner you can insert the parts between which you wish to place it."
Las formas de spatimis, les quals so amaguatz entre los ditz deves la perforacio dels apostemas e no les percebo les malautes, e so de tres specias: gran, migier e pauc.	"The forms of sponges, which are hidden between the aforementioned to avoid injury from warts, and they are of three species: large, medium, and small."
E aquestas so las formas de aquels:	"And these are the forms of those:"
Las formas de ventozas am las quals es abscindit le flux del sanc, e so de tres specias; gran, migiera e pauca; las formas de lu:	"The forms of syringes with which blood flow is drawn off, and they are of three species: large, medium, and small."
Sian faytas de eram citri, redondas am alcuna longitut , e sian subtils.	"They are made of citric iron, round and somewhat long, and they are delicate."
E cove que sian aquestas specias de ventosas deves tu grans, migieras e paucas, per so que per aquelas abscindas flux de sanc am velocitat en necessitat, e lahoras quan a tu primieyrament no es medicina.	"And it is necessary that these species of syringes be large, medium, and small, so that blood flow may be drawn off quickly when needed, both for medicine and for other purposes."
Enpero no uses de aquelas ad abscidir sanc en tot loc del cors, e non uses sino en locs carnoses, ayssi cum en les lacertis de las cambas e de las coyssas, e en les lacertz dels brasses, e de las mamillas e del ventre e dels engonars, e semblantz a lor dels lacertz carnoses humitz.	"However, do not use them to draw blood from any part of the body, except for fleshy parts such as armpits and elbows, and thighs, breasts, abdomen, and buttocks, and similar moist fleshy parts."
E alcunas veguadas son faytz de aquels strumentz autres petitz semblantz scorsas de fisacs segon aquesta forma; per les quals lo sanc es abscindit quan es fayt per fleubotomia, o deves inscizio de vena o de arceria.	"And sometimes these instruments are made in other small forms resembling those of fleams according to this shape: for drawing blood when performing phlebotomy or cutting a vein or artery."
E alcunas veguadas son faytas redondas segon aquesta forma:	"And sometimes they are made round according to this shape:"
Capitol .xlvii.	"Chapter XLVI."
De la cura de las mamillas dels homes las quals so asembladas de femnas.	"Of the care of men's breasts, which resemble those of women."
Alcunas veguadas so infladas las mamillas de alcus homes deves le compliment del dormir cum comensan esser pellutz, e aprop so infladas las mamillas, e so asembladas las mamillas de las femnas, e romano apostemosas, lejas.	"Sometimes the breasts of some men become swollen during sleep and begin to resemble those of women in appearance, and they are like warts."
E ad aquel que avoreys aquo, cove que inscidisca aquelas am seccio lunar segon aquesta forma, de la linha de .B. entro a la linha de .G., e aprop excorja la groceza tota, e aprop uempla la plagua de medicament encarnatiu, e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am cosidura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	"And for those who suffer from this, it is necessary to cut them with a crescent-shaped incision according to this form: along the line B to G, and then scrape off all the thickness, and then fill in the wound with an incarnative ointment, and then sew up the two lips of the wound, and cure it until it is healed."
Mays si la mamilla declina a las partidas dejos e es mollificada per la sua magnitut ayssi cum endeve a las femnas, lahoras sia fendut en dos latz sieus pus sobiras, am dos seccios semblantz a figura lunar, de las quals quascuna sia contenguda en l’autra deves la fi de quascuna, entro que sia que la linha major contengua la menor segon aquesta forma de la linha de .B. e la linha de .G. E aprop excorja la codena la qual es entre dos labias de la plagua, e osta la pingueza, e aministra aquo que havem dit de la sutura e de las polveras aquo que es necessari en la curacio entro que sia sanat.	"But if the breast declines towards the sides and becomes softened due to its size like those of women, then it should be split into two parts: with two crescent-shaped incisions on either side, each containing the other at their ends so that the larger line contains the smaller one according to this form from B to G. And then scrape off the chain which is between the two lips of the wound, remove the fat, and administer what has been said about suturing and powders as necessary in the treatment until it is healed."
E si tu non conpleysses la inscizio de aquo que cove inscidir per la inquietut del malaute, e per flux de sanc, lahoras cove que huemplas la plagua de coto submergit en enguent corrosiu e layssa aquel entro que aquo corroda que es romas de la grayssa, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	"And if you do not perform the incision as necessary due to the agitation of the illness and for drawing blood, then it is necessary to fill in the wound with cotton soaked in corrosive ointment and leave that which has been corroded by it until it becomes smooth from its thickness, and then cure it until it is healed."
Capitol .xlviii.	"Chapter XLVIII."
De perforacio de apostemas que veno dejos le titillic.	"Of the perforation of boils that come from the joints."
Aquetz apostemas que veno dejos le titillic so de las specias de scrophulas, durs, las quals conte una pel que es sac.	"These boils that come from the joints are of the species of scrophulosis, hard ones which contain a point that is discharged."
E de aquelas so alcunas que conteno humiditatz; e aquelas que conteno humiditatz cove que sian inscididas am seccio lunar segon aquesta figura: de la linha de .G. a la linha de .B. E cum es tot evacuat aquo que es en le apostema de la sania, lahoras tu le comple de coto viel e leysa le entro al autra dia.	"And among these are some that contain moisture; and those that contain moisture should be cut with a crescent-shaped incision according to this figure: from line G to line B. And when all that is in the boil has been evacuated, then fill it with cotton wool and leave it alone for another day."
E aprop le coto sia ostat e sia curat am enguent convenient ad aquo, entro que sia sanat.	"And then let the cotton be removed and the wound dressed with an appropriate ointment until it is healed."
E si le apostema de las specias dels nodes es, e de las scrophulas, lahoras tu scindeys sobre aquel ayssi cum havem dit en la seccio sobre las scrophulas engualment.	"And if the boil is of the species of joints and scrophulosis, then incise it as we have said in the section on hard scrophulosis."
May si la plagua es extenduda en aysso que yesca poyredura, lahoras administra en lu cauteri segon que en aquo havem denant dit.	"But if the wound extends so that it becomes purulent, then apply cautery according to what has been said about it beforehand."
Capitol .xlix.	"Chapter XLIX."
De seccio de apostemas que accideysso per arceria o per vena.	"Of incision of boils that occur due to an artery or vein."
Quan arceria es rompuda, e la codena es consolidada la qual es sobre aquela, lahoras motas veguadas accideys apostema E les senhals per les quals es conoguda que imflamacio e apostema sian per la arteria o per vena: quar quan apostema es per arceria es lonc agreguat en le preon del cors; e que quan inpelleysses le apostema am les tieus ditz, sentes en lu quays sia stridor.	"When an artery is broken and the chain above it becomes consolidated, then sometimes a boil occurs. And the signs by which it is known that inflammation and boil are due to the artery or vein: for when a boil is due to an artery, it is elongated towards the front of the body; and when you press on the boil with your fingers, you feel stridor in it."
E aquel que es per vena es redon al manifest del cors.	"And that which is due to a vein is round near the surface of the body."
E seccio sobre aquest apostema es error, e majorment en aquel que es dejos las aysselhas, e en les angonars, e en le col, e en motz locs del cors; e es mot gran, donc cove que la sua curacio am ferr sia esquivada, e aquel que es en las extramitatz, o al cap, cove que sia evitat.	"And incision on this boil is an error, especially for those that are located near the armpits, buttocks, neck, and many other parts of the body; and it is very large, therefore its treatment with iron should be avoided. And that which is on the extremities or head should be avoided."
Mays sobre aquel que es de lor per imflacio de l’orrifici de la arceria, scindeys en la codena seccio en le lonc; e aprop huebre la seccio am uncis e aprop la arceria, e deliura de las tunicas entro que sia descuberta.	"But for those that are due to inflammation of the covering of an artery, incise in a straight line along the boil. Then widen the incision with forceps and expose the artery, removing the surrounding tissues until it is visible."
E aprop met sobre aquel agulha e fay aquela penetrar entro al autre latz, e estrenh la arceria am fiel doble en dos locs, — la qual causa yeu a tu eyssenhegui en extraccio de doas arcerias les quals so en les templars.	"And then place an awl and make it penetrate into the other side, and tie off the artery with doubled thread in two places — which is like taking out two arteries that are on the temples."
E aprop punh le loc le qual es entre dos liamentz am spatum entro que yesca le sanc tot que es en lu, e sia dissolvut le apostema.	"And then punch the spot between the two ligatures with a spatula until all the blood that is there has come out and the boil has been dissolved."
E aprop administra curacio en la qual es engendrat poyre entro que caian les liamentz; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz convenientz ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	"And then apply treatment to where purulence has been generated so that the ligatures fall off. And also dress it with appropriate ointment until it is healed."
E si es apostema per seccio de vena, lahoras cove que tu tenguas am la tua ma aquo que es a tu possible del apostema am la codena, e aprop intromet la agulha dejos le loc le qual tu has tengut dejos la tua ma, e fay aquela penetrar; e sia en aquela fil doble entro que tu extraguas aquel del autre latz, e aprop ligua le apostema am bo liament segon que yeu he dit a tu en le liament de uva4 de doas partz am doas extremitatz del fil.	"When the aposteme is due to the section of a vein, you should hold as much of it as possible with your hand and then insert the needle at the spot you have kept under your hand. Then make the needle penetrate; draw out that thread from the other side, and then tie the aposteme tightly using the bandage method I taught you, dividing it into two parts."
Mays si temes que extraguam le fil, lahoras entromet le fiel am aquela agula dejos tot le apostema deves la inscizio de la agulha primieyra, e strenh les tieus fiels en quatre locs.	"If you fear that the thread might come out, then insert the needle along with it throughout the entire length of the aposteme at the first incision point and tighten your threads in four places."
Aprop secca le apostema en le mieg loc de lu entro que quan es yssit aquo que es en lu, lahoras tu inscideys la superfluitat de la codena, e layssa aquo que de lu es liat.	"Then dry the aposteme in the middle of its opening until it comes out and then cut off any excess skin from it, leaving only what is necessary."
E aprop pausa sobre lu pulvil le qual has submergit en vi e oli, e aprop administra la curacio la qual es fayta am calguas e enguentz entro que sia sanat.	"And then press on the powder that you have immersed in wine and oil, and then apply the cure which is done with gauze and bandages until it heals."
Capitol l del apostema le qual accideys per torcio de nervis.	**Chapter 1: Abscess resulting from nerve injury.**
Ayssi cum accideys apostema en arceria e en vena, e semblantment accideys apostema en les nervis quan accideys en lor percussio o accideys per trebal superfluable, e per semblantz.	"Just as an abscess can occur in an artery and vein, similarly, an abscess can also occur in nerves when they are injured by percussion or due to excessive manipulation."
E es fayt le mays de lu en les locs dels adjutoris o del talo, o en tot loc en le qual so maugudas las juncturas.	"And it most commonly occurs in the locations of the assistants [i.e., helpmates] or the heel, or in any place where joints are connected."
E es apostema greu, e es asemblat a la color del autre cors, e es en las majors de lu disposicios ses de lor e quan es streyt am vehementia, sent en lu le malaute semblant stupor.	"And if the abscess is large and resembles the color of other flesh, and it is in the major parts of the body without any opening and when it becomes hard with great violence, then it causes a sensation similar to numbness."
E no es apostema agreguat en le preon del cors, e per so es dejos la codena, e el es maugut a tota partida e no va a las partidas denant ni detras.	"And if an abscess does not form on the surface of the body and instead is hidden beneath the skin, then it is difficult to find and cannot be seen in front or behind."
Donc aquo de aquels que es en las juncturas no cove que sia envasit am ferr, quar fort leu endevenguera contracio.	"Therefore, those that are located in joints do not need to be incised with iron, for it would cause too much contraction."
Mays aquel que es en le cap o en le front fen la codena am spatum.	"But if it is on the head or forehead, then cut open the skin using a scalpel."
Mays si es apostema pauc, lahoras te aquel am les forfecs e abscindeys aquel de razitz.	"But if the abscess is small, then use forceps and squeeze it until it bursts."
E si es gran, lahoras tu le suspen am unci, e excorja aquel, e aprop osta aquel; e ajusta la plagua am sutura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	"If it is large, then suspend it with a hook, remove that, and then hold that; immediately adjust the plug with stitches, and care for it until it heals."
Capitol .li.	"Chapter Two."
De seccio de apostema le qual accideys de cheil que accideys al ventre.	"Regarding an abscess that occurs in the cheekbone of a patient who has occurred in the abdomen."
Endeveno ad alcus homes motas veguadas en les ventres de aquels e en las autras partidas del cors de aquels theils les quals son apelatz funguals per similitut de aquels am funges, dels quals la razitz es subtil e·l cap de aquel es gros; e ja las labias de aquels so conversas, e es de aquels que es petit, e es de aquels que es mot magnificat.	"Some have seen moles in the bellies of those and in other parts of their bodies which are called functional because they resemble those with fungi, the cause of which is subtle and the head of that is large; and the lips of those are inverted, and it is of those that are small, and it is of those that are marvelously magnified."
E yeu ja e vist un, e en le ventre de lu eran dos theils les quals eran mays a funges semblantz, e no era diferencia entre aquels blancs, de menuda razitz.	"And I have already seen one, and in its belly there were two parts which were more like fungi, and there was no difference between them, they were white with small causes."
E ja las labias de aquels eran enversadas e se fendian, e humiditat corria de aquel tot temps.	"And the lips of those were inverted and split open, and moisture ran from that all the time."
Donc yeu inscidegui aquels e atrobegui en la un en pes quays xviii unc. e l’autre quays vi unc.	"Therefore I cut those and dressed them on the left foot weighing eighteen ounces, and the right weighing six."
E la operacio en la inscizio de lor es que consideres lahoras si·l malaute es humit, e la color de atheil es blanca, humit, de subtil razitz; lahoras tu le inscideys am spatum lat, e sian en la presencia tua cauteris en le foc, quar motas veguadas deves la seccio de lu es expellit mot sanc; e si te ventz le sanc, cauteriza aquel.	"And in the incision of their skin, you should consider the hours if the patient is humid, and the color of the flesh is white, humid, of subtle texture. Therefore, cut with a broad knife, and they should be present at your fire, because many times you should expel much blood from the section. And if blood comes out, cauterize that."
E si vezes le malaute pauruc e temeros, guarda te de inscizio am ferr; mays lahoras pren fiel de plom recent fayt, e strenh am aquel atheil, la manieyra del qual es aquela que havem dita; e leyssa aquel per dos dias.	"And if the patient is afraid and trembling, guard against cutting with iron; but rather take fresh lead filings, and apply them to that flesh, in the manner which we have said; let it remain so for two days."
E aprop ajusta en la strictura del fil de plom; donc, no cesses strenher le plom granre devetz en theil, entro que sia abscindit e cayha per se ses trebalh.	"And accordingly adjust to the constriction of the lead thread; therefore, do not cease to apply the lead frequently until it is severed and falls off by itself without working."
Mays si theil es de grossa razitz, lahoras en la inscizio de lu es alcuna causa de temor e de paor, e majorment en aquel que es en le ventre.	"But if the flesh is of coarse texture, then in cutting it there is some cause for fear and trembling, especially that which is within the belly."
Mays possibla es que tu inscindas la maytat de lu , e aprop cauteriza aquel per que no retorne.	"But it is possible that you cut through the middle of it, and accordingly cauterize it so that it does not return."
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanada la plagua.	Approximately: And then treat that wound which has been healed.
E guarda te que tu no presumas inscidir theil le qual es de fusca color, de pauc sentiment, de leg reguardament, quar aquel es absi cancros.	And beware lest thou presume to cut into thine own flesh which is of dark hue, lacking sensation and regular regard, for that is exceedingly cancerous.
E yeu vindre am rememoracio de cranc aprop aysso.	And I bring this in remembrance concerning cancer right now.
Capitol .lii.	Chapter 52
De curacio de eminencia del umbilic.	Concerning the treatment of hernia of the navel.
Eminencia del umbilic es fayta per motas causas; o per fissuras del ciphac le qual es sobre le ventre, e yeys de lu la tela o budel segon que endeve en las autras rupturas; o per sanc le qual flueys de vena o de arceria segon que es denant dit, o per ventositat coarctada en lu.	An umbilical hernia occurs due to many causes: either from fissures of the cicatrix which is on the abdomen, and through these the tissue or bowel may protrude like in other ruptures; or from blood that flows from a vein or artery as mentioned previously, or from constricted wind in it.
Mays si es per fissura del ciphac e per yssiment de la tela, lahoras la color del apostema es semblant a la color del cors; e es leon ses dolor, e aprop appar de divers situament.	But if it is due to a fissure of the cicatrix and protrusion of tissue, then the color of the tumor resembles that of the skin; there is little pain, and it appears suddenly in different positions.
E si es per egressio del budel, lahoras le situament de aquel am lu de aquo que havem recontat, de mays vehement diversitat, e cum tu premes aquel am les tieus ditz es occultat, e aprop retorna; e fort leu es am lu so, e es magnificat mot deves le introt de banh e vehement trebalh.	And if it is due to protrusion of the bowel, then its position changes greatly like we have described previously, and when you press upon it with your fingers it disappears suddenly and returns immediately; it has a loud sound, and the opening into which it protrudes is greatly widened and experiences violent struggles.
Mays si per humiditat, lahoras es leon e no es occultat quan premes am la tua ma, ni es constrengut, ni es cregut.	But if it is due to moisture, then there is little pain, and it does not disappear when you press upon it with your hand, nor is it constricted or distended.
E si es per sanc, lahoras am aquestz senhals apareys le apostema a negror declinant.	And if it is due to blood, then the tumor appears dark-colored.
Mays si es per carn nada, lahoras es apostema greu, gros e dur, e es ficat segon una quantitat.	"However, if it's due to flesh, then it is a serious, large and hard tumor, and its quantity can be considerable."
Mays si es per ventositat, lahoras le tocament de lu es leon.	"If it is caused by windiness, then the touch of it is like lion."
E la operacio en lu es que consideras lahoras si la eminencia de l’umbilic es per sanc de arceria, o de vena, o per ventositat; lahoras cove que sias prohibit de la curacio de lu, quar en aquela es temor e paor ayssi cum t’e ensenhat en le capitol en le qual he dit les apostemas per arceria e per vena.	"And the operation in this case is that if the protrusion of the navel is due to blood from an artery or vein, or windiness; then you should be prohibited from treating it, because there is fear and trepidation as I have taught you in the chapter where I spoke about tumors from an artery and vein."
E si la eminencia del umbilic es per le budel o per la tela, lahoras cove que comandes al malaute que tengua le ale sieu, e sia stant extendut; e aprop senha am tenta en le circuit de tot le umbilic, e aprop comanda a lu que stia envers entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos, e aprop circunda am spatum lat en le circuit del umbilic sobre le loc le qual has senhat am la tenta; e aprop exten la maytat del apostema a las partidas desus am unci gran; e aprop lia en le circuit am fiel fort o am ceda e la manieyra del liar decent.	"And if the protrusion of the navel is due to bowel or tissue, then you should order the patient to lie on their back and stretch out; next, take a bandage and wrap it around the entire navel area, and then place your hands over the patient's thighs but above their knees, and then encircle the navel area with a broad spatula over the area where you have wrapped the bandage; next, extend the mass of the tumor upwards with a large fist; finally, tie it tightly with strong flax or waxed thread using an appropriate tying method."
E aprop huebre le mieg del apostema extendut sobre le liament e intromet le dit tieu en aquel indic e quereys le budel; e si tu l’as atrobat ni guardat per le liament, lahoras tu extratz alxorati e impelleys le budel a las partidas dedintz del ventre.	"And then press down on the center of the extended mass towards the ligaments and insert your finger into that space seeking for the bowel; and if you find it, grasp and hold it with the ligaments, then carefully extract it and push it back inside the abdomen."
E si has atrobada la tela, lahoras pren aquel am unci; e inscideys las superfluitatz de lu.	"And if you have found tissue, then grasp it with your fingers and cut away its excess."
Mays si es contraria a tu arceria o vena, lahoras circunda aquel mot, e aprop retorna a la tua operacio; e pren dos agulhas e met en aquelas dos fiels fortz e entromet dos agulhas en le circuit le qual has feyt entorn le apostema en manieyra de crotz, las quals fassas penetrar; e aprop strenh le apostema en quatre partidas sobre las agulhas.	"But if it is against your artery or vein, then encircle that part and return to your operation; next, take two needles and tie two strong threads onto them and insert the two needles into the circumference you have made around the tumor in such a way that they cross each other, allowing them to penetrate; finally, stretch the tumor in four directions over the needles."
E si tu vols, osta las agulhas e leyssa le loc entro que poyresca la carn extenduda e caia per si; o inscideys aquel quan es subtiliat e se poyreys, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	"And if you wish, remove the needles and leave the area that can hold the extended flesh and fall back into place on its own; or cut it when it becomes thin and falls away, then cure it with water that is suitable for healing."
E si la eminencia del ombilic es de carn nada en lu o per humiditat, lahoras cove que tu conquaves le apostema ayssi cum havem dit e estraguas le sanc o la humiditat, la qual atrobas en lu, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove e que consolide le loc.	"And if the prominence of the navel is due to raw flesh or moisture, then you should cut away the tumor as we have said and remove the blood or moisture that you find in it; finally, cure it with water that is suitable for healing and consolidation of the area."
Capitol .liii.	Chapter 53
De curacio de cranc.	On the treatment of cancer.
Ja havem dit, en la divisio, de specia de cranc e en qual manieyra es via a la curacio de lu am medicinas, e que es squivador en lu la curacio am ferr per so que no sia ulcerat; e havem dit cranc engendrat en la mayra e cautela de la curacio de lu.	We have already mentioned, in the division of species of cancer and how it can be cured with medicines, that cure by iron is avoided because it would cause ulcers; we have also said that cancer generated in the breast or armpit requires caution in its treatment.
E diyssero les antics que alcunas veguadas cranc es en loc on es possibla la eradicacio de lu, ayssi cum de cran le qual es en las mamillas o en la coyssa e a lor semblantz dels membres allocat a estrayre tot aquel, e majorment quan es comensant petit.	The ancients said that sometimes cancer is located in an area where it can be completely eradicated, like cancer in the breasts or scrotum, and especially so when it is small at the beginning.
Mays quan es antiquat e es gra, no cove que te propries a lu, quar yeu non pogui sanar de aquel alcu ni no he vist autre, ni que sia pervengut ad aquo.	But when cancer is advanced and severe, it is not appropriate to approach it, because you cannot heal that ulcer nor have you seen another like it, nor has anyone else ever succeeded in treating it.
E la operacio en lu es quan es allocat ayssi cum havem dit, es que tu precedescas e laysses le malaute e purgues de colera negra alcunas veguadas, e aprop sagna aquel, si es atrobada replecio manifesta.	And the operation in such cases is when it is located as we have said: you should first let the disease take its course and purge black bile occasionally; then, if there is manifest fullness present, cut into it.
E aprop prepara le malaute am preparacio en le qual sia locat am operacio, e aprop prohiceys en le trauc uncis les quals cove ad aquel; e aprop concava de tota part am la codena sego bona perexcrutacio entro que no romangua alcuna causa de las razitz de lu.	Then prepare the patient for the operation where it is located, and then introduce forceps suitable for that purpose. Next, cut all around with a good sharp knife, making sure not to leave any cause of recurrence of the tumor.
E layssa correr le sanc, e no abscidas aquel leugierament, e exprem les locs, e abstergeys le sanc gros tot am la tua ma o am instrument am le qual es a tu possible dels instruments.	Let the blood flow out freely, and do not cut too deeply; squeeze the area gently, and wipe away all the thick blood with your hand or an instrument that is suitable for you.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat de sanc gros inscizio de vena o de arceria, lahoras cauterisa aquela entro que·l flux del sanc sia cessat, e aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	But if the flow of thick blood is contrary to your purpose during an incision of a vein or artery, then cauterize it until the bleeding stops; finally, cure it with other appropriate remedies until it heals.
Capitol .liv.	Chapter 54.
De curacio de ydropici.	"On the treatment of hydrocephalus."
Nos ja havem recomtat, en la divisio, de las specias de ydropici de l’aygua, e les senhals de quascuna especia, de la curacio de lu am medicinas.	"We have already discussed, in division, the types of hydrocephalus caused by water and their symptoms, as well as treating it with medicine."
E aquela la qual es curada am ferr no es sino la specia de althitas sola, e no es aproximat am ferr a la specia de timpanistres ni a la especia de yposarcha, quar aquo es mortal.	"And that which is cured with iron is only the species of alithias alone, and it should not be approached with iron near the species of tympanites or the species of hypochondriasis, for this is fatal."
E quan tu ja has medicat aquesta especia de ydropici timpanistre am medicinas e no comfereys la tua medicacio, lahoras considera, quar si al malaute ja es conseguida debelitat, o es am aquel autra malautia otra ydropici, ayssi cum si es en lu tos o cos de ventre e semblant ad aquels, lahoras guarda te que no le mediques am ferr, quar temor es sobre aquo.	"And when you have treated this species of tympanitic hydrocephalus with medicine and your treatment does not confer benefit, then consider whether the patient has already attained debility from another illness or if it is another form of hydrocephalus, such as in the case of coughs or abdominal conditions, then beware that you do not treat them with iron, for there is fear in this."
Mays si tu vezes le malaute de vertut exuberant, e am lu no es autra malautia sino ydropici tant solament, e no enfant ni vielh, lahoras la manieyra de la operacio de lu es que tu eleves le malaute entre las tuas mas, e le ministre aprop lu exprema le ventre de lu am la sua ma, enpellen la aygua a la partida dejos del pentenilh, e aprop pren spatum spinos segon aquesta forma:	"But if you encounter illness due to excessive virtue and there is no other illness but hydrocephalus alone, neither infant nor elderly, then the manner of operating on it is that you elevate the patient between your thighs, and the attendant presses the abdomen of it with his hand, expelling water from it through the nostrils, and appropriately takes a spina biceps in this way:"
sia de dos partz agudas lonc, de aguda extremitat ayssi cum spatum; mays empero sia en lu alcuna brevitat petit a petit, per so que en la operacio am aquel no passes entro al budel, e que ledas aquel.	"Let it be of double-pointed length, sharp at both extremities like a spine; but let there be some slight shortening towards the middle, so that in the operation you do not pierce into the bowel and hurt it."
E aprop considera si la generacio de ydropici es de part dels budels, quar lahoras cove que tu am la seccio te alonhes del ombelic per la quantitat de tres ditz a las partidas dejos, en le dreyt de lu sobre le pentenilh.	"And consider whether the origin of hydrocephalus is from the bowels, for then you must perform an incision near the navel by about three fingerbreadths to the left of it, on the right side above the pubis."
Mays si la generacio de hydropici es per malautia del fietge, lahoras la tua seccio sia sinistra del ombilic per tres ditz.	"But if the origin of hydrocephalus is due to liver disease, then your incision should be left of the navel by three fingerbreadths."
E si la generacio de lu es per la melsa, lahoras la tua seccio sia en le las dreyt.	"And if the origin of it is from the spleen, then your incision should be on the left side."
E no cove que la tua seccio sia sobre le costat sobre le qual vol jaser le malaute per que no corron las superfluitatz ad aquel loc freul.	"And do not make your incision over the side where you wish to evacuate the water, lest the superfetation run to that place."
E aprop perfora am le instrument tota la codena, e aprop entromet en aquela seccio, e eleva la tua ma am le spatum entre la codena e·l siphac, e tu excorja aquel; e si’ la quantitat de una ungla o enviro.	"And then perforate the whole chain with the instrument, and appropriately enter that incision, elevating your hand with the spine between the chain and the syringe, and draw out that water; if there is as much as a fingernail or nearly so."
E aprop perforo le ciphac entro que pervengua le spatum al loc vuoyt, e es loc de l’aygua.	"And then insert the syringe into it until the spine reaches the desired place, and that is the place of the water."
E aprop extratz aquel e entromet un instrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	"And then remove that [water] and insert an instrument of which this is the shape:"
e es semblant a canula de argent subtil; es fayt de argent o de eram o de lato leon, al qual en la partida pus bassa de lu es un petit trauc, e en les costatz de lu so tres traucs: dos de una partida e un del autra partida; e fayta es la extremitat de lu insciza segon la manieyra de pluma, ayssi cum vezes:	"It is like a thin silver cannula; it is made of silver or iron or lead, at the lowest part of which there is a small hole, and on its sides there are three holes: two on one side and one on the other; and its extremity is cut obliquely like a feather thus:"
E en la extramitat de lu pus sobirana es armilla, quar quan le instrument perve al aygua, lahoras aquela tantost deysen sobre le instrument, donc evacua de l’aygua en la ora miega quantitat, quar si tu evacuas de aquela mes que no cove en la hora, fort leu mor le malaute per resolucio del sieu spirit animal, o accideys a lu cincopi que es appropinquada la mort.	"And at the uppermost extremity of it is a ring, for when the instrument reaches the water, then that will immediately stop over the instrument, hence evacuating as much water in one hour as is necessary, because if you evacuate more than is necessary at that moment, this may cause the death of the patient through resolution of its animal spirit, or it may happen to him that he approaches his end."
Mays evacua de aquela segon la quantitat de la vertut de lu e segon que significan a tu las disposicios del malaute de la vertut del pols de lu e de la bontat de lu.	"But evacuate according to the quantity of its power and according to what the dispositions of the patient's virtue, pulse, and condition signify to you."
E aprop extrats le instrument, e rete l’aygua la qual causa es quar tantost es retenguda per la codena la qual rete le trauc que es sobre le ciphac del qual e recomtat a tu que perfores aquel segon aquela manieyra.	"And then remove the instrument, and retain the water which is kept by the chain that retains the hole on the syringe of which it has been commanded to you to pierce thus."
E aprop itera le instrument al autra dia si vezes le malaute tollerant aquo, e extratz de la aygua petita quantitat, e fay aquo per alcus jorns sobre temor, e guarda te de error entro que no romangua de l’aygua sino pauc.	"And then repeat the instrument on another day if the patient tolerates it thus, and draw out a little water each time, doing this for several days until there remains of the water but little, and take care that none of the water remains."
Mays si tu temes sobre le malaute, e leyssas de l’aygua gran quantitat, lahoras cura aquel am sepultura en arena cauda, e mota suzor en banh, e al solelh espere per lonc temps; e cura aquel am medicinas dessicativas entro que sia sanat.	"But if you are fearful about the patient and let out a great quantity of water, then cure him with dry earth burial, much sweat in baths, and expose him to sunlight for a long time; and cure him with drying medicines until he is healed."
E cauteriza sobre le stomac, e la melsa e·l fitge aprop la extraccio de l’aygua, segon que yeu he recontat en aquo que es precedit.	"And cauterize the stomach, spleen, and liver near the place of evacuation of water according to what has been said above in that which is precedent."
Capitol .lv.	"Chapter .lv."
De la curacio dels enfants les quals so natz les locs de la urina no-perforatz.	"Of the cure of children who are born with the places of urine unperforated."
Alcunas veguadas alcun dels enfantz es eyssi del ventre de la sua mayre e·l cap de la sua mixtio no es perforat (o es trauc streyt o no es en son loc).	Some children are sometimes born from their mother's womb with the head of their mixture not pierced (or tightly stuck or not in its place).
Donc cove coytar am perforacio de lu tantost que es nascut am spatum mot subtil segon aquesta forma:	So then it is necessary to cut around the perforation as soon as it is born using a very thin spatula in this way:
E aprop pausa en le trauc un clavil subtil de plom e ligua aquel, e te per tres jorns o per .iiii.tre.	And then place there a thin lead needle and tie it, leave it for three days or four.
E quant vol urinar sia remaugut e hurine; e aprop retorne aquel.	When they want to urinate, remove the needle and let them urinate; then put it back in place.
E si tu no pauses le plom, ja es possible que la urina la qual va sobre le loc, no leysa aquest claure.	And if you don't use lead, it may happen that urine which falls on this area does not close it.
Mays aquel del qual le trauc es streyt sia medicat am clavil de Plom, ayssi cum havem dit, per trops dias entro que sia amplificat.	But for the one whose head is tightly stuck, let him be treated with a lead needle, as we have said, for too many days until it widens.
Mays aquels en les quals es le trauc no en son loc, so leditz, la qual causa es quar de aquels, aquel que es nat e·l trau es deves la fi del cap de la vergua per que no pot urinar a las partidas dedintz, entro que eleva la vergua am la sua ma a las partidas desus; e no es a lu generacio, per so quar le sperma no pot pervenir a la mayre segon rectitut, e es malautia mot laga.	But for those in which the head is not in its place, they are called "strangled," and this cause is that some of them are born with the end of the penis bent back so that they cannot urinate properly until they lift up the penis with their hand to do so; and it is not due to generation, for therefore semen cannot reach the mother correctly, and it is a very bad illness.
E la manieyra de la operacio en lu es que·l malaute sia envessat sobre le sieu dos, e aprop exten le cap de la vergua de lu am la tua ma sinistra am vehement extraccio, e inscideys le cap del cap de la vergua del loc del perpucii am spatum agut, ayssi cum es inscizio de pluma, o que tu ne razas alcuna partida, per so que·l mieg de lu vengua semblant al cap de la vergua e que le trauc caia en le mieg loc segon que cove.	And the manner of operation in this case is that the patient should be placed on his back, and then extend the head of the penis with your left hand using vigorous traction, and incise the end of the head of the penis where it enters the perineum with a sharp spatula, just as you would incise a feather, so that the middle part of the penis resembles the head of the penis and the slit falls into its proper place.
E guarda te que en la tua operacio de flux de sanc, quar motas vetz accideys aquo; e pausa te a lu am aquo que abscindeys le sanc, e cura la plagua entro que si’ sanada.	And be careful in your operation for the flow of blood, because it often happens that this occurs; and stop the bleeding with whatever you can cut to cauterize the blood vessels, and dress the wound until it is healed.
Capitol .lvi.	Chapter .56
De albater le qual accideys en le prepucii en le cap de la vergua e de corropcio e negror e adherencia del prepucii del cap de la vergua.	Of whitening (albater) which occurs in the foreskin of the glans penis and its discoloration, blackness, and adherence.
Motas veguadas accideys aquest albater en la vergua e es eminencia de carn laga.	This whitening happens very often on the penis and it is a prominence of flesh like this:
E de aquela una es maligna e autra es no-maligna.	"And among them, one is malignant, another is non-malignant."
No-maligna, cove que suspendas am unci subtil e abscindas aquela entro que aquela mondes tota; e aprop pausa sobre aquela coto submirgit en enguent egipciac; e aprop aquel, cura le am enguent diafinicon entro que sia sanat.	"And having suspended it with a fine needle and severed that which you cut off, immediately press upon the stump with an Egyptian cautery; and then apply a dressing of fine linen until it is healed."
E si albater es maligna, de lega color, lahoras cove que tu aministres cauteri aprop la inscizio de lu e la razio de lu.	"And if it turns out to be malignant, with red edges, then you should apply a hot cautery immediately at the incision and its cause."
Mays si albater es en le prepuci del cap de la vergua no-circumcis, e la una partida de albater es dedintz le prepucii e l’autra partida es defora, lahoras cove que tu ostes albater le qual es dedintz al comensament entro que es consolidat; e lahora tu cura aquel deforo, quar quan tu curas aquel ensemps le prepuci, no es asegurat que no sia trinquat.	"But if it occurs on the foreskin of the head of the penis that has not been circumcised, and one part of the inflamed area is inside the foreskin and the other part is outside, then you should remove the inner inflammation first until it has healed; and only then treat the outer one, for when you treat both together with the foreskin, there is a risk of it becoming damaged."
E ja eysamen accideys en les genetius e en le prepuci negror e corruccio, adonc cove que tu conquavas tot aquo que ja es denigrat e que ja se vol corrompre o que ja es corrumput; e aprop lineys sobre aquel aprop aquo am mel, le qual es contusit am farina de scorsa de milgrana e de errs trissatz e crivellatz.	"And if it happens on the genitals or the blackened foreskin with decay, then you should remove all that is already discolored and about to decay or has already decayed; and apply linseed over it with honey, which has been mixed with barley flour and finely ground salt and sieved."
E aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sana.	"And apply this cure along with the other cure until it is healed."
Mays si endeve flux de sanc, lahoras aministra cauteri lunar segon aquesta forma:	"But if there is a flow of blood, then perform a lunar cautery according to this method:"
quar cauteri juvatiu es a dos disposicios ensemps, so es a flux de sanc e a la plagua quan es corrumpuda.	"because a cautery for the purpose of healing is applied in two ways together, it treats both bleeding and putrefaction when it occurs."
E si le cap de la vergua es corrodut e es destruit tot en la hora, lahoras cove que tu intrometas en lo meat del prepucii una canula de plom per so que le malaute urina per aquela.	"And if the head of the penis is completely destroyed in a single hour, then you should insert a lead cannula into the opening of the foreskin so that the urine flows through it."
En la adherencia del prepucii am le cap de la vergua (et aquesta adherencia no accideys sino en aquel del qual le prepucii es sa, e sobre lu no es exhigida circumcizio; e quan accideys adherencia per plagua o per apostema) cove que excorjas am spatum obtus entro que sia dissolvut le liament e sia deliurat le cap de la vergua de tota partida.	"In the adhesion of the foreskin to the head of the penis (and this adhesion only occurs in those who are circumcised, and for them it is not necessary; and when adhesion occurs due to inflammation or an aposteme), you should scrape with a blunt spatula until the adhesion is dissolved and the head of the penis is completely freed from all parts."
E si es dificil desirnir aquelas exquisidament, lahoras cove que tu excorjes am spatum alcuna causa del cap de la vergua e del prepucii, e aysso es quar le prepucii, quan es subtil, fort leu es perforat per la sua subtilitat leugierament.	"And if it is difficult to remove it in this way, then you should scrape with a spatula from the head of the penis and the foreskin, because when the foreskin is thin, it is easily perforated by its own thinness."
E aprop separa entre·l prepucii e·l cap de la vergua am dra7 de li subtil, le qual ja es mulhat en l’aygua frega per que no adherescan autra veguada.	"And apply a piece of fine thread between the foreskin and the head of the penis, which has been moistened in warm water so that it does not adhere again."
E aprop sia curat am vi stiptic entro que sia consolidat.	"And then treat it with styptic wine until it is consolidated."
Capitol .lvii.	"Chapter 57."
De mundificacio dels enfants e de la curacio de aquo que accideys ad aquels de circumcisio.	"Of the cleansing of children and the treatment of what happens to those who are circumcised."
Circumcisio no es solucio de continuitat ayssi cum las autras plaguas: mays empero cum sia de la nostra operacio e de nostra voluntat, e lus de aquela sia propriament en les enfants, es necessari que asignem en aquela milhor operacio e via pus leugiera perdusent a salut.	Circumcision is not a solution for continuity like other diseases: although it may be our operation and will, and especially concerning children, we must assign the best operation and way that is easiest to achieve health.
Donc dic que les antics no diyssero circumcisio en alcu dels lors libres, quar no n’usan en las suas leys, e no es sino quar havem aquisit per speriment, la qual causa es que yeu he atrobat la major partida dels artifexs e dels barbies usar circumcisir e mundificacio am novacula e am torores; e usan de liament am fiel e de inscizio am la ungla.	The ancients did not mention circumcision in all their books because they did not practice it according to their laws. And this is only because we have acquired this knowledge through experience, which is why most craftsmen and barbers today use circumcision with a razor and clippers; they also use lye for cleansing and the nail for cutting.
E yeu ja he prohadas totas aquestas manieras e no atrobegui milhor mondificacio am forfexs, am liament am fiel que en mondificacio cum la ungla, quar motas vetz efugeys la codena pus desus, quar la codena del prepucii a dos tunicas, e roman la tonica pus dejos, e fort leu es forsat ad autra inscizio e dolor sicura.	And I have already tried all these methods and found that cleansing with tweezers, lye, or using the nail for circumcision is not as good as cleansing with a scalpel; because often the cord escapes upwards, since the foreskin has two tunics, and only one remains underneath. It is much easier to force another incision and cause certain pain.
E am mundificacio le qual es fayta per alphecati, e es digital, del qual usan les sabatiers, no es segurada la inscizio de la extremitat del membre viril, quar fort leu intra en le trau de lu.	And regarding cleansing performed by apothecaries using a speculum (digital method), which is used by barbers, it does not ensure the incision of the end of the male member because it often slips into the trap of it.
Mays en la operacio am ungla, fort leu obazeys ferr e corromp la tua operacio.	But in the operation using a nail, you often hit bone and spoil your operation.
E la codena del enfant es breu per natura, e motas veguadas nays en tal manieyra que no ha necessitat de mondificacio, e yeu he vist aquel.	And the child's foreskin is short by nature, and many times it appears in such a way that it does not require cleansing, as I have seen it myself.
Mays de la mondificacio que·s fa am forfexs e liamentz am fiel, la bontat, experiment descrobic a mi, quar las forfexs so de proporcional inscizio, per aquo quar la acuitat que es desus es ayssi cum la acuitat que es dejos; e donc cum tu premes la tua ma so proporcionadas dos acuitatz, e inscideysso segon una comperacio en un temps; e es fayta compressio del fiel am figura contenent la codena de la vergua de tota partida, am le qual no catz error de tot.	But regarding cleansing done with tweezers and lye, the operation described by me has proven to be good because tweezers provide proportional cutting; since the sharpness above is equal to the sharpness below. Therefore, when you press your hand proportionally with two sharp points, you cut equally at one time, without error in all parts of the foreskin.
E la manieyra de la operacio primeyra es que tu fassas estar le enfant majorment si es de aquels que entendo un petit, que no fassas sino que tu lies le fiel en la sua vergua tant solament, e que leysses aquel entro al autra dia.	And the first way of operating is that you should make sure the child is well restrained if he is one of those who understands a little, so that you only apply lye to his foreskin and leave it on for another day.
E aprop fay aquel alegrar en tota aquela manieyra que es a tu possibla de aquo que recep la sua intelligencia.	And appropriate at that moment is to make the child happy in every way possible according to your ability, so that he can better tolerate the operation.
E aprop fa aquel estar entre las tuas mas estatuir preparadament, e no sia ges cezent; e occulta las forfexs en la tua ma o dejos le tieu pe, que l’enfant no veia aquelas ni degun autre dels instruments.	And it is appropriate to have the child between your thighs and well restrained without centering him, hiding the tweezers in your hand or behind your ear so that the child cannot see them nor anyone else's instruments.
E aprop entremet la tua ma a la vergua de lu e suffla en la codena, e tira aquela entro que sia eyssit le cap de la vergua, e aprop mondifica aquel de aquo que es agregat en ela de sordicia.	And then insert your hand between the child's legs and blow on the foreskin to cause it to retract. Once the head of the penis is exposed, promptly clean away any accumulated dirt from there.
E aprop lia le loc signat am fiel dobla, e aprop ligua pus bas de aquel un petit le segon liament, e aprop te am le dit pous e endic tieu le loc del liament dejos am bona retencio, e inscideys entre dos liaments.	And then fold the marked location with lye-soaked cloth, and next tie another bandage below that one a little loosely. Then take the tied pouch with your hand, holding it firmly in place while cutting between the two bandages.
E aprop eleva la codena sus leugierament e estratz le cap de la vergua; e aprop leyssa le sanc corre petit e petit, quar es milhor ; e pausa polvera desus e sobre la polvera pausa drap en le qual es spandut mugol de huou coyt en ayguaros concosit am oli rozat recent bo; e layssa aquel sobre aquel entro al autra dia; e cura aquel am curacio entro que sia sanat.	And then gently lift the foreskin upward and expose the head of the penis. Then allow blood to flow gradually, little by little, because it is better that way. Afterward, apply powder on top and over the powder place a cloth onto which has been spread mutton suet cooked with hot water and mixed with fresh, refined rose oil. Leave this in place overnight, and treat the wound with care until it heals.
La forma de las forfexs a mondificacio, aquesta es la forma:	Here is the form of tweezers used for cleansing:
Sian las unas extramitatz no-talhantz e las autras sian talhant, que non sia yssit le ram del clau, e sia la longitut de las doas acuitatz ayssi cum la longitut de dos manubres engualment.	The nails are well-shaped and not too short, ensuring the nail bed is not exposed; the length of both points should be equal to that of two knuckles when fingers are pressed together.
Mays la error en mundificacio es quar fort leu efugeys la codena intrinseca tota, o partida de lu deves la inscizio.	The mistake in cleaning is often fleeing the entire inner chain or breaking it from where the incision is made.
Donc cove que tu extendas aquela de la tua hora am la tua ungla denant la apostemacio del loc e que inscidas aquela segon equalitat.	Therefore, you must extend that part of your hour with your nail in front of the pustule and incise it evenly.
E si no la podes tenir am la tua ungla, lahoras extratz aquela am unci e inscideys aquela.	And if you cannot hold it with your nail, then extract it with tweezers and cut it open.
Mays si son passatz tres dias, e roman aquo que es imflat dejos la vergua apostemat, lahoras tu leyssa aquo entro que sia cedat le apostema caut, e excorja aquel am fecilitat, e inscidex aquel segon que a tu es preparat.	However, if three days have passed and the swelling has increased around the boil, you should then let what is inside come out until the boil bursts open naturally, carefully squeeze it out, and incise it according to your preparation.
E guarda te del cap de la vergua, quar no nosera a lu aquo.	And be careful of the head of the boil, so that nothing comes out.
E donc cura aquel am aquo que la plagua consolida de las polveras las quals havem recomtadas en le tractat de las polveras.	And then treat it with the ointment consolidated from the powders which we have recommended in our treatise on powders.
E si es inscidit de la codena sobre mesura, e obezeys a las partidas desus, aquo no notz a lu.	If it has been cut open too much, and you have followed the instructions above, then nothing will happen to it.
E mays cura aquel am aquo que havem dit entro que sia sanat.	"And let him who has this, as we have said, be healed."
Capitol .lviii.	"The fifty-eighth chapter"
De curacio de urina retenguda en la vesiqua.	"On the treatment of urine retention in the bladder."
Retencio de urina en la vesica es fayta per oppulacio fayta per peyra o per sanc congilat, o per poyre o per carnada, e semblantz ad aquels de aquo que havem dit de las manieyras de curacio en la divisio.	"Retention of urine in the bladder occurs due to excess thickness caused by stone or concretion, or due to weakness or obesity, and it is similar to those conditions that we have mentioned earlier regarding the methods of treatment."
E si no es dissolvuda la urina, e veses retencio de lu esser per peyra le qual ja es en le col de la vesica, lahoras cove que le malaute sia encorbat sobre les sieus denolhs.	"And if the urine is not dissolved, and retention occurs due to a stone that is already in the neck of the bladder, then it is necessary for the patient to be bent over on their hands and knees."
E aprop conponeys les pes de aquel sobre le sieu dos e extendas le sieu ventre de la partida pus desus del sieu dos, e le malaute estrengua le sieu ale tant quant es a lu possible.	"And then apply weights to that person's back and stretched out their belly from the navel upwards, and the patient should strain their anus as much as they can."
Donc lahoras le col de la vesica es costreyt ha espulsio de la peyra a las partidas detras, per que la urina es absolta.	"Therefore, at that moment the neck of the bladder is constricted and the stone is expelled through the passages behind, so that the urine may be released."
E si no es dissolvuda am aquo que havem dit he vehement es fayta la causa sobre le malaute, lahoras cove que aministres extraccio de lu am instrument le qual es apelat siringua, del qual aquesta es la forma: Sia de argent e sia subtil leon conquau, ayssi cum canula de pena de ausel am subtilitat de ray lonc en similitut d’un palm e mig, al qual sia cana subtil en le cap de lu.	"And if it is not dissolved with what we have mentioned before, then the cause for the illness is very severe. Therefore, extraction must be performed using an instrument called a syringe, which has the following shape: It should be made of silver and carefully crafted like a bird feather quill, with a length similar to that of a palm and a half, at one end of which there should be a thin tube."
E la manieyra del eyssiment de la urina per aquel es que prenguas le fiel doblat e lies en la extramitat de lu lana o coto per bona liadura; e entrometas las extramitatz del fiel en la partida dejos de la ciringua, e inscideys am las forfexs si superflueys alcuna causa de la lana, mays intromet la en la canula am vehemencia E aprop enongeys la ciringua am boder e am album de huou.	"And the method of extracting urine through this is as follows: Take a folded feather and insert it into the narrow opening of the syringe, then cut any excess feathers with scissors. Then insert the feather into the tube with force, and then attach the syringe to an eggcup or a vessel containing hot water."
E fay cezer le malaute sobre la selha, e embroca la vesiqua de lu e la vergua am olis umitz, e oli de oliva e ayguaros.	"And have the patient lie on their back and then insert the syringe into the urethra, having first greased it with a mixture of olive oil and water."
E aprop entromet la ciringua am facilitat entro que pervengua a la razit de la vergua; e aprop dobla la vergua desus a la partida del embelic; e aprop empelleys la ciringua dintz aquela; e aprop empelleys aquela entro que pervengua a la vesica, e aquela centa le malaute esser pervenguda a la causa vuoda, e no es fayt asso segon aquest orde, sino le meat en le qual va a tortuositat.	"And then gently insert the syringe into the urethra until it reaches the opening of the bladder; and then bend the urethra upwards at the navel; and then push the syringe further inside that; and then push it further still until it reaches the bladder, and when this is done correctly, the patient will feel relieved. But if it does not go in as described here, then it may be due to some tortuosity of the passage."
E aprop exten le fiel am la lana petit a petit, quar la urina siec la lana.	"And then gradually extend the feather with the syringe, because urine follows the feather."
Aprop extratz aquela e fay per curacio urina, e usa ciringua, no cesses fer aquo e usa ciringua entro que sia evacuada la vesica e le malaute atrobe alleviacio.	Approximately extract urine through a curette for treatment purposes, and use a catheter. Do not cease until the bladder is evacuated and the patient shows alleviation of their condition.
Capitol .lix.	Chapter LIX
De qualitat de clisterizacio de la vezica am clampcedra e am semblantz instrumentz les quals sian acordants ad aquo.	Regarding the quality of catheterization of the bladder with clamps and similar instruments, which are suitable for this purpose.
Quan accideys en la vesica ulceracio o apostema, o sanc congilat en aquela, o es coartat poyredura, e vols en aquela destillar ayguas e medicinas, lahoras sia fayt am instrument le qual es apelat clampcedra, e aquesta es la forma de lu:	When an ulceration or abscess occurs in the bladder, or blood clots form there, or its opening becomes obstructed and you wish to introduce water and medicines into it, then use the instrument called a catheter, which is shaped as follows:
sino que en la extramitat de lu es sorda, so es clausa.	but at its end it is blunt, so it is closed.
Et en aquela so tres traucs: dos de la una partida , ayssi quo vezes.	And in that there are three openings: two from one side, arranged thus.
En le comensament es loc concau, en le qual es aquo que es enpellit, e sia segon quantitat que oppile aquel, ses addicio, entro que quan alcuna causa es ab aquel tirada de las humiditatz, sia atirada, e quan es expellida, am aquo sia atirada, e quan es expellit lonc, segon que fa clampcedra am la qual es phicat naphta en las batalhas de mar.	At the beginning there is a concave place where urine accumulates and is expelled according to its quantity without adding anything. If any cause prevents it from being drawn out, then it is drawn out with this device. When it is expelled, this is also drawn out. This is similar to how catapults were used in naval battles.
Donc cum tu vols prohicir humiditatz en la vesica, entromet la extremitat de clapcedra en la humiditat, e atira am aquel aquo que es empellit a las partidas desus, quar la humiditat es atirada en la conquavitat de clapcedra.	Therefore, when you wish to introduce liquid into the bladder, insert the end of the catheter into the liquid and draw with it what is expelled from the aforementioned openings because the liquid will be drawn into the concave part of the catheter.
E aprop entromet la extramitat de clapcedra en la vergua segon que havem recomtat en la ciringua; e aprop empelleys la humiditat am aquo que empelleys, quar aquela humiditat perve a la vesica tantost, e le malaute cent aquela.	And also insert the end of the catheter into the urethra as we have described in the surgery section. Then push the liquid through with whatever you are pushing it with because that liquid will reach the bladder quickly and relieve the pain there.
Forma del cristeri subtil am le qual la vesica es cristerizada, e es aquela la forma:	Here is the form of the slender catheter used to evacuate the bladder, which is as follows:
E sia fayta de argent o de lato, de la qual le cap pus aut sia semblant a petita pluma, e dejos lu cana dedintz liament.	"Let a silver or latten probe be made, whose head should resemble a small feather, and let it be inserted gently within."
E aprop pren vesica de moto, e pausa en aquela la humiditat que vols cristirizar en la vesica, e aprop lia aquela entre dos am fort liguatura am fiel doble, e escalfa aquela humiditat sobre le foc.	"Then take a vessel of mucus and place within it the moisture you wish to crystallize in the bladder, tie that vessel tightly with two firm knots tied with doubled thread, and heat that moisture over the fire."
E aprop entromet la extremitat del cristeri en la vergua.	"And insert the extremity of the crystal into the urethra."
E aprop estrenh la tua ma sobre la vesica am la humiditat am strectura descent entro que·l malaute centa que aquela humiditat ja es pervenguda a la vesica.	"And stretch your hand over the bladder with the moisture, pressing down until you feel that the moisture has reached the bladder."
Mays si a tu no es present vesica, lahoras tu pren una pessa de parguames e fay de aquel cercle; e perfora aquel de tota la sua retonditat; e aprop entromet fiel fort en aquels traucs, ayssi quo so revolgut; e aprop agregua le cercle ayssi quo es agreguat alsofatur, pus que tu pausas en aquel aquo que tu vols de las humiditatz, e olis e ayguas.	"But if the bladder is not present, then take a piece of parchment and make from it a circle; pierce that through its entire thickness; then insert strong thread into those holes thus: so that it may be turned; then attach the circle as it is attached to aloft, for you place in that water what you wish of moistures, oils and waters."
E aprop tu lia aquel en le instrument e fay am aquel ayssi cum has fayt am la vesica, e exprescio am la tua ma entro que la humiditat pervengua a la vesica.	"And then you tie that to the instrument and do with it as you did with the bladder, pressing with your hand until the moisture reaches the bladder."
Capitol .lx.	"Chapter .lx."
De extraccio de peyra.	"On the removal of a stone."
Nos ja havem dit en la divisio las specias de peyra e curacio de lu am medicinas, e la diferencia entre peyra engendrada en los ronhos e peyra engendrada en la vesica, e les senhals de aquela.	"We have already spoken in the division about the types of stones and their treatment with medicines, and the difference between stones generated in the urethra and those generated in the bladder, and the signs of this."
E havem dit la peyra en la qual catz operacio am ma, e seccio.	"And we have spoken of the stone in which every operation is done by hand, and cut."
E la peyra engendrada en la vesica propriament es aquela que es ficada en la vesica.	"Only the stone that has been formed inside the bladder itself is considered true."
E yeu so narrant aquel am exposicio manifesta e abreviacio.	"I am now relating that in exposition manifest and abbreviation."
Donc dic que peyra engendrada en la vesica majorment ve als enfantz; e dels senhals de lu es que la urina que es eyssida de la vesica es semblant a aygua en la sua subtilitat, e apar en aquela arena; e le malaute fregua la sua vergua, e motas veguadas pen, e aprop es dressada; e am aquo yeys foro le cul en motz de aquels.	"Therefore it says that stone generated in the bladder mostly goes to children; and among its symptoms is that urine which exits from the bladder is like water in its subtlety and appears in that area; and the patient rubs their groin, often pants, and is suddenly erect; and at this time there is often discharge from the anus."
E es laugiera la sanacio dels enfants de aquela entro que han conseguitz xiiii ans; e es dificil curacio en les viels.	"And it would be easier to heal children from that illness who have reached fourteen years of age; and difficult treatment in old people."
Mays en les joves es migiera per aquo quar es entre aquels.	"But among young ones, it is half as bad because it is between them."
E de aquel del qual la peyra es major e la curacio es pus leugiera; E si es pauca, es contraria ad aquela.	"And for that person from whom the stone is larger and its cure easier; And if it's small, it opposes that."
Donc cum pervenem a la curacio de aquela, cove al comensament de aquela que mondifiquem le malaute am cristeri le qual extragua tota la fenda la qual es en les sieus budels; quar aquela fenda alcunas veguadas prohibeys la envencio de la peyra deves la inquisicio de lu.	"Therefore, when we come to the cure of this, it is necessary at the beginning that we cleanse the patient with a clyster which draws out all the openings which are in their bowels; for that opening sometimes hinders the exit of the stone during its investigation."
E aprop sia pres le malaute am les sieus pes e sia contosit e maugut enjos per so que la peyra descenda al preon de la vesica, o que saute de loc aut alcunas veguadas.	"And then let the patient be taken with their feet and shaken up so that the stone may descend to the neck of the bladder, or what comes out of place sometimes."
E aprop fay aquel cezer entre las tuas mas preparat, e las mas de lu sian dejos las coysas de lu, per so que la vesica tota sia fayta declinant a las partidas dejos.	"And then let that water be put between the thighs more prepared, and its heat should be close to it, so that the whole bladder may become inclining towards those parts."
E aprop perquier aquela e tota aquela deforo.	"And then inquire about that and all that, carefully."
Donc si sentes la peyra en l’espazi, lahoras tu te coyta tantost am seccio sobre lu.	"So if you feel the stone in its place, then quickly make an incision over it."
E si no catz de tot dejos le tieu tocament, lahoras cove que tu untes am oli le tieu dit indic de la ma sinistra, si malaute es enfant, o le dit miga si es jove complit, e entrometas aquel en le sieu cul.	"And if you cannot find it with your touch at all, then you must anoint with oil the tip of your left index finger if the patient is a child, or the middle finger if they are fully grown, and insert it into their anus."
E perquier de la peyra entro que stia dejos le tieu dit.	"And inquire within to see where the stone stands near your finger."
E converteys aquela petit a petit entro al col de la vesica.	"And gradually guide that little by little towards the neck of the bladder."
E aprop prem sobre aquel am lo tieu dit, e expelleys aquel a las partidas defora ves le loc del qual vos la seccio.	"And then press upon it with your finger and expel it out through the place where you made the incision."
E comanda al ministra que prema la vesica am la sua ma; e comanda a un autra ministra que am la sua ma dextra extenda les genetius a las partidas desus, e am la sua autra ma remaugua la codena la qual es dejos les genetius, en partida del loc en le qual se fa la seccio.	"And command the minister to press upon the bladder with his hand; and command another minister that with his right hand he extend the thighs upwards, and with his other hand he pull back the cord which is below the thighs, away from the place where the incision is made."
E aprop entromet espatum be inscident del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	"And then introduce spatula-shaped probes as follows:"
e scindeys en lu aquo que es entre·l cul e·ls genetius, no en le mieg loc, abantz al latz de la coyssa sinistra; e sia la seccio sobre aquela peyra e·l tieu dit sia en le cul, e sia fayta seccio transversa, per que la seccio defora sia ampla e dedintz streyta segon la quantitat que egrecio de la peyra sia a lu possibla, e no major, quar fort leu comprem le tieu dit le qual es en le cul la peyra deves la seccio, e es foro-getada ses defacultat.	"Make an incision in the patient between the buttocks and genitals, on the left side; the cut should be made over that hip bone and your finger should be inside the buttock during the incision, which should be transverse so that it is wider outside and narrower inside according to how much of the hip bone can possibly be exposed, not more, because too much pressure could cause the hip bone to break."
E sapias que de la peyra es alcuna a la qual so angle e margers, per que le eyssiment de lu es fayt deficil per aquo.	"And know that there is some bone at the tip of the hip bone which makes its exposure difficult due to this."
E de aquela aquo es leon semblant a glan, e es redonda, e es fayt de lu leugier eyssiment.	"And from that part it seems like a glans, round and light exposure is made."
Donc si es aquela al qual so angles e marger, ajusta en la fissura.	"So if this is the angle and margin, fit into the crevice."
E si no es ayssi foro-getada, lahoras cove que tu engenes sobre aquel, o que strenguas sobre aquel am gesti decentment, la extremitat del qual sia ayssi cum lima am le qual strenguas sobre la peyra, e no evasesca de lu; o que entrometas dejos lu instrument subtil de curvada extremitat.	"And if it is not forgotten like this, then you must act upon that, or press strongly on it gently and decently, the tip of which should be like a file with which pressure is applied to the bone, and do not erase it; or introduce that subtle instrument with curved extremity."
Mays si tu no podes sobre aquel, lahoras tu amplifica le trauc un petit, e si tu veus flux de sanc, abscindeys en strenh aquel am vitriol trissat.	"But if you cannot act upon it, then slightly widen the path and if you see blood flow, cut into that strongly with crushed vitriol."
Mays si la peyra es mays de una, lahoras al comensament tu impelleys la ma a la boca de la vesica, e aprop inscideys sobre lu; e aprop impelleys un petit aprop aquo; e semblantment fay si son motas mays de doas.	"But if there are more than one hip bone, then initially introduce your hand into the mouth of the bladder and cut directly onto it; also introduce a little bit right next to it; similarly proceed if they are many."
E si es peyra mot gran, lahoras ignorancia es que tu inscidas aquel am gran seccio, quar accideys al malaute una de doas causas: o que mora o que endevengua a lu destillacio de urina continuabla, per aquo quar le loc no es de tot consolidat.	"And if it is not a large hip bone, then ignorance leads you to incise that with a wide section, because the patient experiences one of two causes: either obstruction or the formation of calculi in continuous urine distillation due to which the location is not completely consolidated."
Mays aministra expulcio de lu entro que sia fora-getada, o engenia en la fractura de lu am las forfexs entro que extragua aquela en pessas.	"But administer expulsion of that within which was forgotten outside, or engage in the fracture with forceps within those which extract it piece by piece."
Donc cum tu auras cumplit la tua opperacio, lahoras omple la plagua de enses de aloe e de sanc de drago, e strenh aquel.	"So once you have completed your operation, then fill the wound with aloe leaves and dragon's blood, and press it strongly."
E pausa sobre aquel drap enfus en oli e vi, o en oli rozat e aygua frega, per so que apostema caut sia cedat.	"And place on that cloth dipped in oil and wine, or in rosemary oil and water, so that the wound may heal without inflammation."
E aprop resupina le malaute sobre le sieu col, e no deslias le liament entro al tertz dia.	"And also have the patient lie supine on their pillow, and do not remove the bandage for three days."
E cum aquel auras desliat, embroca le loc am aygua e mot oli, e aprop cura aquel am enguent diafinicon e am enguent diabazilicon entro que sia sanat.	"And when that has been removed, cleanse the wound with warm water and much oil, and also treat it with daffodil ointment and diabaesilicon ointment until it is healed."
Mays si en la plagua accideys apostema caut, adhust e corrosiu, e de aquel semblantz ayssi cum si le sanc es en la vesica congelat, e per lu es la hurina prohibida (e aquo es conogut per la egressio del sanc am urina), a donc entromet lo tieu dit en la plagua e extratz aquel sanc, quar si roman provoca la vesica a corropcio de la vesica e de lu putrefaccio.	"But if inflammation occurs in the wound, hot and corrosive, and it resembles as if the blood is frozen in the bladder, and therefore urine is prohibited (and this is known by the exit of blood with urine), then introduce your finger into the wound and remove that blood, because if it remains it provokes the bladder to corruption and putrefaction."
E aprop lava la plagua am vi agre, aygua e sal, e am opposicio a tota specia, am aquo que conveneys a lu de la curacio entro que sia sanat.	"And also cleanse the wound with vinegar, water, and salt, and with opposition to all kinds of inflammation, with what is suitable for the cure until it is healed."
E cove en las horas de tota la curacio que tu lies amdos las coyssas e ajustes las medicinas las quals so pausadas sobre le loc.	"And ensure during all the time of the cure that you keep both hands clean and adjust the medications which are placed on the wound."
E si la peyra es petita e es en le meat de la vergua, e es ficat en lu, e eyssement de urina es prohibit, lahoras cura aquel am aquo que yeu recomti denant que pervenguas a seccio, quar tropas veguadas per aquesta curacio yest acusat de seccio; e ja yeu e esproat aquo, e es que tu prenguas un perforador de ferr alfelut, del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	"And if the hip bone is small and it is in the middle of the urethra, and it is stuck there and urine emission is prohibited, then cure it with what I recommend earlier that you should resort to sectioning, because many who have been seen through this cure have been accused of sectioning; and now I will explain how:
de triangulada extramitat, agut, ficat en fust.	Triangle-shaped, sharp, inserted into wood.
E aprop pren fiel, e lia am aquel la vergua dejos la peyra per so que no retorne a la vesica.	Then take some wax and smear it on the stone to prevent it from returning to the bladder.
E aprop entromet le ferr en la vergua, perforant am fecilitat entro que·l perforador vengua ad aquela peyra.	And then insert the iron into the stone, carefully maneuvering until the drill reaches that particular stone.
E revolveys le perforador am la tua ma en aquela peyra petit a petit, e tu perforsa la perforacio de lu entro que fassas aquel del autra part penetrar; quar la urina tantost es absolta.	And slowly rotate the drill with your hand against that small stone until you pierce it through so that urine can flow out again.
E aprop prem la tua ma sobre aquo que es romas de la peyra de la partida deforo de la vergua, quar aquela es trinquada, e es foro-getada am la urina, e le malaute es sanat.	Then press your hand on what remains of the broken stone outside the stone-cutting tool, because it is triangular and has been emptied by urine, and the illness is healed.
Mays si aquesta curacio no es a tu aparelhada per alcuna causa la qual prohibeys de aquela, lahoras lia un fiel dejos la peyra, e autra fiel desus la peyra.	But if this treatment is not suitable for you due to any reason that prohibits it, then place some wax beneath the stone and some above it.
E aprop encideys sobre la peyra en aquela vergua entre doas liaduras.	And then strike the stone on that cutting tool between two clamps.
E aprop extratz aquela.	"And then extract that."
E aprop deslia le liament e mondifica le sanc congilat, le qual es fayt en la plagua.	"And then untie the ligature and modify the congested blood, which is formed in the plug."
E no es necessari liament de fiel dejos la peyra, sino per que no retorne a la vesica, e l’autre liament desus sino, quar quan es desliat le fiel aprop la egrecio de la peyra, la codena retorna a son loc e cobra la plagua.	"And there is no need for a thread of catgut around the stone, except to prevent it from returning to the bladder, and the other ligature above that one, because when the catgut near the neck of the bladder is untied, the cord returns to its place and covers the opening."
E per aquo es a tu necessari quan lias le fiel desus, que tu eleves la codena a las partidas desus, o que retorne deves le tieu compliment, e cobra la plagua ayssi co havem dit.	"And for this reason it is necessary when you tie the catgut above that you elevate the cord to the parts above, so that it may return to its place and cover the opening as we have said."
Capitol .lxi.	"Chapter .61."
De extraccio de peyra de las femnas.	"On the extraction of stones from women."
Peyra en las femnas pauc es engendrada.	"Stones in women are rarely formed."
Mays si ve peyra ad alcuna de aquelas, lahoras dificil es la curacio de lu, e es prohibida per tropas manieyras.	"But if a stone is seen in any of them, its cure is difficult and is prohibited by many authorities."
La una de lor es quar la femna fort leu es verges.	"The one reason for this is that women are usually reluctant to undergo treatment."
E la segonda es quar tu no trobas femna be scient que descroba si meteyssa al metge quan es casta, o es de las femnas haventz maritz.	"And the second reason is that it is difficult to find a woman who knows how to explain her symptoms accurately when she visits the doctor, or who is a virgin, or has not had sexual relations."
La tersa es quar tu no hatrobas femna be sabent aquesta art, majorment la operacio am ma.	"The third reason is that it is difficult to find a woman who knows this art, especially the operation of lithotomy with a knife."
E la quarta es que·l loc de la seccio sobre peyra en las femnas es longinc del loc de la peyra, per que indigeys de seccio preonda, e en aquela es temor.	"And the fourth reason is that the site of the incision for lithotomy in women is far from the location of the stone, so that a deep incision is required, and there is fear involved."
Mays si necessitat provoca a tu ad aquo, lahoras cove que tu prenguas una femna metga be scient, e pauc es atrobada.	"But if necessity demands it, then you should take a woman who is very knowledgeable, and not afraid."
Mays si tu es privat de aquela, lahoras cerca metga quast e subtil, o presenta una femna matrona be esenhada en le feyt de las femnas, o femna que en aquesta art ennueys partida del art.	"But if you are deprived of that, then search for a wise and subtle physician, or present a mature woman who is skilled in the ways of women, or a woman who has some knowledge of this art."
Donc fay aquela present, e comanda a lu que fassa tot aquo que tu li mandaras, de la enquisicio sobre la peyra al comensament; la qual causa es que reguarde si la femna es verges, lahoras cove que meta lo sieu dit en le cul de lu e quiera la peyra.	"So have that woman present, and command her to do everything that you order her to do regarding the examination at the beginning; for this reason: if the woman is a virgin, she should insert her finger into her anus and feel for the stone."
Donc si atroba aquela, coarte aquela dejos le sieu dit, e lahoras comanda a lu que inscida sobre aquela.	"So if she finds it, have her remove her finger, and then command her to make an incision there."
Mays si no es verge, lahoras comanda a la matrona que entrometa lo sieu dit en le conh de la malauta e enquiera sobre la peyra, pus que pausa la sua ma sinistra sobre la vesica, e comprem aquela am bona comprecio.	"But if she is not a virgin, then command the midwife to insert her finger into the vagina of the patient and examine for the stone, because she can press there with her left hand on the bladder, and compress it well."
Donc si atroba aquela, lahoras cove que gradantment maugua aquela de l’orrifici de la vesica a las partidas dejos am somman de la sua vertut entro que pervengua am aquel a la razit de la coyssa.	"So if she finds it, then gradually move that towards the opening of the bladder with the strength of your virtue until you arrive at its root."
E aprop inscida sobre aquela apposicio de la maytat del conh deves la razit de la coyssa de qualque part sia a lu parada e cent la peyra en aquela partida, e·l dit de lu no sia remaugut de la peyra coartan dejos lu.	"And appropriately make an incision on that side of the opening of the vulva where you stop and find the stone, making sure to keep your finger pressed against the stone as you remove it."
E la seccio sia pauca al comensament; e aprop entrometa lo ray sobre aquela seccio, e si sent la peyra, lahoras ajuste en seccio segon la quantitat la qual sap que la peyra sira getada de aquela.	"And the incision should be small at first. Then insert your hook into that incision and if you feel the stone, then adjust the size of the incision according to how much of the stone you know will be removed from there."
E sapias que las specias de peyra son motas: quar de aquelas es pauca e gran, e leon e aspra, e longua e redonda, e havent ramps.	"And know that stones are many in species: some are small and large, pointed and rough, long and round, and have branches."
Donc tu sapias quantas specias so de lu per aquo que tu signifiques sobre aquo que vols.	"So you should know how many species there are of it according to what you indicate about what you want."
E si tu veus flux de sanc, ajusta en le loc vetriol trissat e te aquela per una hora entro que sia abscindit le sanc, e aprop retorna a la tua operacio entro que la peyra sia fora-getada.	"And if you see blood flowing, adjust the location of the vessel cut by the knife and let it bleed for an hour until the blood is stopped. Then return to your operation until the stone is removed."
E fay que prepares am tu dels instrumentz les quals e ditz en la extraccio de peyra en les homes, per so que sias ajudat per aquels en la tua operacio.	"And have ready with you the instruments that are mentioned in the extraction of stones in men, so that you may be assisted by them in your operation."
E si tu veus flux de sanc, e sabes que la expulcio del sanc es de la arceria que es insciza, lahoras tu pausa polvera sobre le loc e estrenh aquel am pulvils e strictura descent, e no iteras aquo; e layssa la peyra e no extraguas aquela, quar fort leu morira la malauta.	"And if you see blood flowing and know that the flow of blood is from the artery that has been cut, then place powder on the location and strain it with a bandage and compression downwards, but do not repeat this. Leave the stone and do not extract it, for strong bleeding will kill the patient."
E aprop cura la plagua.	"And then dress the wound."
Donc cum es cedada la acuitat del sanc aprop alcus jorns, e·l loc se poyreys, lahoras tu retorna a la tua operacio entro que la peyra sia fora-getada.	When the sharpness of the blood decreases somewhat for several days and the place is freed up, then you return to your operation before the fever has passed.
Capitol lxii.	Capítol lxii.
De seccio sobre ernia acoza.	Of cutting on an incarcerated hernia.
Hernia ayguoza no es sino agregacio de humiditat en le ciphac blanc lo qual es dejos la codena dels genetius contenent le huou, e es nompnat ciphac.	An incarcerated hernia is nothing but the collection of moisture in the white sac that contains the intestine and is called the "sac."
E alcunas veguadas es en le propri pannicol le qual a lu preparec natura en la partida del huou, entro que sia cuyat que ja es autre huou; e es la codena del genetiu entre le ciphac blanc le qual havem dit, e no es aquo sino tart.	And sometimes it is in the proper peritoneum which nature prepares for it at the place where the intestine passes through, whether it has already passed or not; and it is the intestine between the white sac that we have mentioned, and this is called "tart."
E la generacio de aquest hernia es per debelitat la qual accideys als genetius, per que ad aquels es efundunda aquesta materia, e alcunas vetz accideys per percuscio fayta sobre les genetius.	The cause of this hernia is the weakness that occurs in the intestines, due to which this material accumulates there, and sometimes it happens due to a blow received on the intestines.
E aquesta humiditat es havent motas colors, quar la color de lu o es declinant a citrina o a sanguinent, o rog, o es negra feculenta, o es ayguosa blanqua, e es aquo que es mays.	And this moisture has many colors, because the color of the fluid is changing to yellowish or reddish, or purple, or blackish, or cloudy white, and this is what happens most often.
E les senhals per les quals es saubut on es aquesta agreguacio de aygua so aquestz: quar si es en le ciphac blanc le qual havem dit, lahoras le apostema es redon declinant un pauc a longitut ayssi cum figura de huou, e appar le genetiu, quar la humiditat conte aquel de tota part.	And the signs by which it is known where this collection of water is located are as follows: if it is in the white sac that we have mentioned, then the swelling will be somewhat elongated in length like an egg shape, and the intestine will appear because the moisture contains that part on all sides.
E si la humiditat es en le propri pannicol, lahoras le apostema es redon am partida del huou e per aysso hom estima que es autre huou.	And if the moisture is in the proper peritoneum, then the swelling will be round at the place where the intestine passes through, and for this reason it is thought that it is another hernia.
E si la humiditat es entre la codena dels genetius e·l ciphac blanc, lahoras catz dejos le centiment.	And if the moisture is between the intestines and the white sac, then the person feels discomfort on the left side.
E cum tu vols la cognicio de la color de la humiditat, lahoras tu esproa la color de la humiditat en le apostema am entromes cayrat del qual la forma es precedida; e segon aquo que es eyssit en le vestigi del entromes, jutga de aquo que es dedintz lu.	"And when you wish to know the color of the humor's moisture, then examine the color of the moisture in the abscess with narrow cautery from which its form is preceded; and according to what issues forth in the tracks of the narrow cautery, judge what lies beneath it."
Donc quan nos vinem a la curacio de lu am ferr, lahoras cove que comandem al malaute que sia fleubotomat si aquo es a tu possibla, e vezes le cos de lu ple.	"Therefore when we come to the treatment of him with iron (surgery), then it is necessary that we command the patient to be placed on their back if possible, and turn his side facing up."
E aprop sia resupinat sobre le sieu dos sobre alcuna causa un pauc auta, e pausa dejos lu motz draps.	"And appropriate let him lie on his back over some cause with a little higher than usual, and pause for a while under the mouth drapes."
E aprop setz tu sobre la part sinistra de lu, e comanda al ministra que segua a la dextra de lu, le qual extenda la sua vergua a hun de dos latz a la codena dels genetius e a la partida del mirac del ventre.	"And appropriately sit on the left side of him, and command the assistant to follow on his right side, who shall extend his handspan between one or two fingerbreadths at the joint of the thighs and at the start of the scrotum of the abdomen."
E aprop pren spatum lat e scindeys la codena dels genetius del mieg loc per la longitut entro prop le pentenilh.	"And appropriately take a wide spatula and incise the scrotum of the testicles from its middle part along its length up to near the penis."
E sia fayta la seccio segon rectetut engualment distant de la linha que deveseys la pel dels genetius, entro que pervengua al ciphac blanc comprehendent.	"And let the section be made according to the correct way, equally distant from the line that divides the skin of the scrotum, until it reaches the white cicatricial scar."
E excorja aquel, e observa, e guarda te per aysso que tu no inscidas aquel; e la tua excoriacio am la qual aquel excorjas per partida jassia que sia suspenduda am le huou mays e subtilment escruta am la excoriacio segon la quantitat a tu possibla.	"And remove that, and observe, and beware lest thou cut that; and thy excision with which thou dost excise it should be parted equally suspended with the hook, and more subtly search with the excision according to the quantity possible for thee."
E aprop perfora le ciphac ple de aygua am perforacio ampla, e extratz tota l’aygua.	"And appropriately pierce the cicatrix full of water with a wide perforation, and extract all the water."
E aprop separa entre doas labias de la seccio am uncis, e exten le ciphac a las partidas desus; e no toques la codena les genetius comprehendent, e inscideys le ciphac en aquela manieyra que es a tu possible.	"And appropriately separate between the two lips of the section with forceps, and extend the cicatrix at its parted ends; and do not touch the scrotum containing the testicles, and incise the cicatrix in that manner which is possible for thee."
E inscideys aquel am la sua totalitat o en pessas, e majorment le sieu latz subtil, quar si tu no perscrutas exquisidament la inscizio de lu, no es fayta segurtat que la aygua no retorne.	"And incise that with its entirety or in pieces, and more subtly its edges, because if thou dost not search meticulously the incision of it, there is no certainty that the water will not return."
Mays si le huou procezeys de aquela defora de la sua codena en la ora de la tua operacio, lahoras quan tu auras complida la seccio del ciphac, retorna dedintz aquel, e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la codena dels genetius am sutura, e aprop cura aquel ayssi cum las autras plagua, entro que sia sanat.	"But if the hook proceeds from that outside of its scrotum in the hour of thy operation, then when thou hast completed the section of the cicatrix, return within it, and appropriately adjust the two lips of the scrotum of the testicles with suture, and appropriately cure it even as the other wound until it is healed."
E si atrobas le huou corromput per autra malautia, lahoras cove que tu lies les vayssels les quals so sore le suspensori, e extrat le huou, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit.	"And if thou findest the hook corrupted by another disease, then it is necessary that thou ligate the vessels which are sore near the suspensiony ligaments, and extract the hook, and appropriately cure it with what we have said."
Mays si l’aygua es agreguada en doas partidas esemps, lahoras sapias que doas son las ernias; donc inscideys aquela partida segon que has feyt en l’autra engualment; e si es a tu vist que sia una opera, lahoras tu la fay.	"But if the water is collected in two parts separately, then thou shouldst know that there are two hernias; therefore incise that part according to what thou hast done in the other equally; and if it appears to thee that it is one operation, then thou dost do it."
E aprop tu abstergiys le sanc, e entramet en las seccios lana submersa en oli o en oli rozat; e pausa deforo autra lana la qual tu as submersa en vi e oli, e expandeys aquela sobre dos genetius e·l mirac del ventre; e pausa desobre draps doblatz e pulvils, e lia aquels desobre am liament le qual es segon aquesta forma:	"And appropriately thou dost cleanse the blood, and enter into the sections wool immersed in oil or rose oil; and afterwards put another wool which thou hast immersed in wine and oil, and spread it over the two testicles and the marvel of the belly; and put doubled cloths and powders on top, and tie those upon it with a bandage which is according to this form:"
e aprop sian preses dos draps e sian humplitz de lana carmenada segon aquesta semblansa; e sian faytas las extremitatz am les quals es premut de coto o de lana humida, e sian agreguatz am strectura en le braguier de las braguas, e la una de las extremitatz prengua del cul entro al dos, e la segonda prengua a la partida del pantenilh, e dos extramitatz sobre dos coyssas dejos e dos extramitatz autras sobre dos angonars, e tota extrictura sia ajustada en le braguier de las braguas.	"And appropriately two cloths should be taken and humidified with carded wool according to this likeness; and their extremities should be made with cotton or wet wool, and they should be attached with a bandage in the breeches of the breeches, and one of the extremities should take the buttock within the other, and the second should take at the part of the thigh, and two extremities over the hips and two other extremities over the ankles, and all constriction should be adjusted in the breeches of the breeches."
E alcunas veguadas aquesta hernia es medicada artificialment am cauteri en loc de seccio am ferr; e es que tu prenguas cauteri cutellar subtil e que inscidas am aquel la codena dels ginitius, e es ignit segon que havem recomtat entro que sia descubert le ciphac blanc contenent la aygua, e lahoras tu pren cauteri segon aquesta forma:	"And sometimes this hernia is medicated artificially with cautery instead of sectioning with iron; and it is that thou dost take a sharp knife cautery and incise with it the scrotum of the testicles, and it is ignited according to what we have recommended until the white cicatrix containing the water is discovered, and then thou dost take cautery in this form:"
e es asemblat a letra greca.	"And it is like Greek letter."
E aprop perfora am aquel ciphac, e es ignit entro que tota la humiditat sia fora-gitada.	"And appropriately perforate that cicatrix with it, and burn until all the moisture has evaporated."
E aprop exten le ciphac am uncis, e excorja am uncis, e excorja am cauteri subtil ignit; e inscideys aquel segon que es a tu possible entro que eradiques tot lu; e guarda te del huou que·l foc no·l toque.	"And appropriately extend the cicatrix with forceps and remove it with forceps and burn it with a sharp cautery that is ignited; and incise it according to what thou art able until thou dost eradicate all of it; and guard thyself lest the hook be touched by the fire."
E sapias que aquesta operacio es pus salva e pus longinqua de flux de sanc, e milhor que operacio am seccio.	"And know that this operation is safer and further from blood flow, and better than operation with section."
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat apostema caut en la hora de seccio o en hora de cauteri, o flux de sanc, lahoras cove que tu cures qual contrarietat fa a tu per aquo, am curacio la qual conveneys a lu segon que es dit.	"But if thou findest an aposteme caut in the hour of section or in the hour of cautery, or blood flow, then thou shouldst cure whatever contrariety thou dost have for it with the cure which is convenient to it according to what is said."
Mays si le malaute es pauruc, e no spera la segonda operacio per la sua horribilitat, lahoras administra perforacio segon que yeu recomti aquo; e es quan es certificat deves tu, per aquo que havem dit de las significacios, que aquela hernia es ayguosa.	"But if the disease is fearful and does not await a second operation because of its horror, then thou shouldst administer perforation according to what I recommend it; and it is when thou art certain that that hernia is watery, as we have said of the significations."
Lahoras cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute sobre alcuna cezelha elevada, aprop perfora le apostema en la partida pus bassa de lu am spatum lat, e pausa la perforacio segon la longitut del cos.	"Then thou shouldst do this: cut the disease over some elevated prominence, appropriately perforate the aposteme in the lowest part of it with a broad spatula, and make the perforation according to the length of the body."
E sia la apercio ampla entro que corro tota l‘aygua.	"And let the aperture be wide enough to evacuate all the water."
E aprop pausa sobre le loc coto e lia aquel e layssa aquel, per so que corro le romanent de l’aygua.	"And appropriately put cotton on that location and tie it and leave it there, so that it may drain the remaining water."
E aprop cura aquel entro que la plagua sia sanada.	"And appropriate care should be taken until the wound is healed."
Mays si contrarietat es a la egrecio de l’aygua en aquela hora tu perforas aquela: e aquo no es fayt sino per aquo quar le pannicol blanc en le orrifici de la plagua fa contrarietat e prohibeys le eyssiment de l’aygua, lahoras cove que tu metas en la plagua pena o instrument am la qual es extrayta l’aygua dels ydropitz, la forma del qual es precedida; o ajusta en la opprecio de la plagua un petit.	"But if there is a hindrance to the exit of water at that time thou dost perforate it: but this is done only when the white paniculus in the orifice of the wound makes hindrance and prohibits the exit of the water, then thou shouldst put into the wound a pen or an instrument with which the water is extracted from hydrops, the form of which is preceded; or adjust to the opening of the wound a small tube."
E sapias que l’aygua retorna, e es agueguada aprop vi meses o enaviro aquels; e cum es agreguada, lahoras sia perforat segon aquela meteyssa manieyra, quar le malaute ayssi passara les sieus dias.	"And know that the water returns, and it is aggravated appropriately six months or more after; and when it has increased, then it should be perforated in the same manner, for thus the disease will pass its days."
Capitol .lxiii.	"Chapter LXIII."
De seccio sobre hernia carnosa e la curacio de lu.	"Chapter on Fleshy Hernia and Its Treatment."
Sapias que en la seccio sobre aquesta hernia es temor perdusent a pernicia en las majors disposicios; per que a mi es vista la dimissio de lu e esser salvat per aquela milhor.	"You should know that in this section about this hernia, there is fear of losing patients with the most serious dispositions. Thus, for me, it has been seen that its dismissal and being saved by surgery are preferable."
E yeu so rememorant la operacio en aquela e las specias dels apostemas.	"And you remember the operation on that one and the types of fistulas."
Donc, dic que l‘apostemas natz en les cos dels quals les genetius so conponutz e es fayt aquo per motas causas: o per superfluitat aguda agra, la qual es efundida als genetius, o per percuscio.	"So, I say that fistulas are born in the bodies where the veins are damaged and this happens for many causes: either by acute painful excess blood flow that spills into the veins, or by injury."
E es la color de la apostema segon la color del cos, e no es atrobat en lu dolor, e es apostema greu.	"And the color of the fistula follows the color of the body, and it is not found in the pain, and it is a serious fistula."
E fort leu es apostema lapificada, del qual la color es fosca, e no es centiment a lu.	"And the most severe type of fistula is called 'lapified,' which has a dark color and does not have sensation."
E alcunas veguadas es fayt per nodacio de las arcerias, e per imflacio de aquelas ayssi quo ja es perceubut la rememoracio de lu, o per imflacio de venas.	"And sometimes it occurs due to the hardening of the arteries, and also because of inflammation of those vessels which is already perceived as remembered, or by inflammation of veins."
Mays aquo que es per imflacio de arcerias es conogut per la dispercio de la apostema quan compremas aquela am les tieus ditz; e no cove que aquel toques.	"But what happens due to the inflammation of arteries is recognized by the spreading of the fistula when you press it with your fingers; and it does not need to be touched."
Mays aquel que es fayt per imflacio de vena no es dispergut de lu alcuna causa deves la compressio am les ditz.	"But that which occurs due to inflammation of a vein does not spread from it at all, even with pressure applied with your fingers."
E ja es possible que sobre aquesta specia sia fayta seccio e sobre les autres carns; e es que tu inscida la codena dels genetius, e aprop esten le huou a las partidas desus, e extratz aquel del ciphac blanc, e deliura le suspensori dels vaysels, e ligua les, e inscideys le suspensori pus que tu deliuras aquel de tota partida de las partidas del huou.	"And it is possible that on this type of fistula there may be made an incision and on other flesh; and if you insert the chain of veins, and approximate the edges towards each other, and extract from it the white matter, and deliver the suspensory vessels, and tie them up, and cut the suspensory ligaments until you have delivered everything from all parts of the wound."
Donc si l’huou ja es am aquelas carnadas consolida, lahoras cove que tu extraguas le huou e inscidas aquel.	"Therefore if the wound has already consolidated with those flesh parts, then it is necessary to extract the wound and incise that [area]."
E si es adherencia entro alcuna causa del ciphac, o entre aquo que es entre les bayssels, lahoras cove que tu deliures tota aquela adherencia e inscidas aquela per inscizio redonda.	"And if there is adhesion within the wound due to some reason from the fat, or between that which is between the vessels, then it is necessary to deliver all of that adhesion and make an incision through a round incision."
Mays si es nativitat de carn en le loc de la adherencia la qual es detras, lahoras cove que tu inscidas tot aquo que es de lu, e extraguas le huou ayssi cum havem dit.	"But if there is new flesh in the place of adhesion that is behind it, then it is necessary to incise all of that which is from it and extract the wound as we have said."
Donc cum es complida la tua operacio, lahoras omple la plagua de lana imfuza en oli rozat e vi; e aprop cura aquela am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	"So when your operation is completed, then fill the wound with a wick of wool moistened in rose oil and wine; and approximate it with another dressing until it has healed."
Capitol .lxiv.	"Chapter .lxiv."
De la curacio de hernia que es de vitz.	"Concerning the treatment of a hernia that is from wind."
Vit es apostema envolut per alcuna envolucio semblant a broto am mollificacio dels testiculs, e es fayt dificil movement exercitiu e deambulacio sobre le malaute.	"An abscess has formed around the testicles, wrapped in some soft, swelling-like covering, making it difficult for the patient to move and walk."
E en la curacio de aquesta malautia es per temor per aquo del qual es precedida rememoracio.	"And in treating this illness, one must first address the underlying cause that led to its onset."
Empero cove que diguam opperacio en aquela segon que fero les primiers.	"But how shall we call this operation according to what was said earlier?"
E dic que cove que fassas sezer le malaute sobre una cezelha elevada; e aprop enpelleys le suspensori dels testiculs a las partidas dejos; e aprop te la codena dels genetius am les tieus ditz am les baysels que so probdas a la vergua; e tengua aquels autre ministre que tu, e extenda aquels am extencio vehement.	"I say that you should place the patient on an elevated table; then pull back the suspensory ligament of the testicles from the scrotum using forceps; and also grasp the spermatic cord with its contents using your fingers, pulling it away from the pubic bone. And have another assistant hold those parts with great tension."
E aprop inscideys am spatum lat agut per seccio traversa en le dreyt dels vaysels entro que sian les vayssels descubertz.	"And then make a transverse incision with a sharp spoon or scalpel on the right side of the vessels where they are exposed."
E aprop excorja de tota partida ayssi quo a tu havem dit en extraccio de arceria las quals so en las templas.	"Then carefully strip away all tissue as we have described in the removal of hernias, leaving only the vessels intact."
E aprop fica en aquelas un’agulha en la qual sia fiel doble, e lia aquel en le primier del locs en les quals accideys vit, e lia aquel autra veguada en le derier de lor.	"And then insert a needle with a double thread into the initial and final points where the vessels were cut."
E aprop inscideys aquels en le mieg loc per seccio dreyta segon la longuesa del cos, e extratz aquo que es agreguat de las humiditatz fetulentas e corruptas.	"And then make a second transverse incision in the middle of those points along the length of the body to remove any accumulated putrid and corrupted fluids."
E aprop cura la plagua am curacio de las autras plaguas en las quals vols sania esser engendrada per so que caian les vaysels les quals noyreysso un de dos genetius, quar no es mal per aquo.	"And then treat the wound with the same care as any other wound to ensure that it heals properly and does not result in the loss of one or both testicles, for this is not a good outcome."
Mays si accideys vit a totz les bayssels, lahoras cove que·ls testicols sian extragutz o que les testicols per aquo se cequo am les vayssels, per que sia privat de tot nutriment per la inscizio dels vayssels, e que sian estaborits, o que cequo per so que no sia juvament am aquels.	"But if all the vessels are severed, then it is necessary to remove the testicles or tie them off with the vessels because otherwise they will become gangrenous due to the lack of nourishment caused by the cutting of the vessels. This should be done without causing any harm."
Capitol .lxv.	Chapter LXV
De la cura de hernia entestinal.	Of the treatment of intestinal hernias
Le adveniment de aquesta hernia es per seccio que endeve en le ciphac extendut sobre le ventre de part dels angunars del mirac del ventre, per que deysendo les budels de aquela ruptura ad alcu dels budels.	The occurrence of this hernia is due to a separation that occurs in the diaphragm when it is extended over the abdomen on one side of the stomach, allowing some loops of bowel to pass through that opening.
E aquesta ruptura es o del ciphac o de excencio de lu, e accideysso aquestas doas specias per motas causas: o percussio, o per sautz, o per clamor, o per elevacio de alcuna causa greu, o per semblantz.	And this separation can occur either from the diaphragm itself or from an opening in it. These two types of hernia occur for many reasons: impact, straining, coughing, vomiting, lifting something heavy, or other causes such as tumors.
E·l senhal de aquo, quan es per extencio del ciphac, es que accideys pauc a pauc en lonc temps, e no accideys soptament, e es apostema engual entro ves le preon per so quar le ciphac comprem le budel.	The sign that this is due to an extension of the diaphragm is that it occurs gradually over time and not suddenly. This is because the diaphragm compresses the bowel loop causing an abscess to form between the peritoneum and the abdominal wall.
E le senhal de lu es quan es per seccio del ciphac, quar al comensament fa accidir dolor vehement sobtament; e es apostema divers aparent dejos la codena propdana aparent, e aquo es per eyssiment del budel, e·l cos de lu a las partidas deforo del ciphac.	The sign that this is due to a separation of the diaphragm is that at the beginning it causes sudden severe pain. An abscess will appear different from usual, near the groin, and this is due to the displacement of the bowel. The body part affected by this type of hernia is usually located in front of the diaphragm.
E alcunas veguadas es fora-getat am le budel la tela, e es apelada aquesta hernia entestinal zirbal.	Sometimes the bowel becomes obstructed and strangulated due to the hernia, which is then called an "incarcerated" or "strangulated" intestinal hernia.
E alcunas veguadas es fayta am ventositat, e alcunas veguadas corr en le budel fenda, e aqui es retenguda, e es am aquo gran pernitia3 del malaute, e alcunas veguadas fa endevenir dolor malvada e majorment quan es premut.	Sometimes there is flatulence, sometimes the bowel contents are poured out and retained in the hernia, causing great harm to the patient. Sometimes severe pain occurs when the hernia is pressed upon.
E en la curacio de las especias de aquesta malautia am ferr es temor, per que cove que sia esquivat le cazament en aquela.	In treating this condition with iron, care must be taken to avoid cauterizing the bowel in that location.
E la manieyra de la operacio de aquela es que comandes al malaute que redugua le budel am la sua ma a las partidas dedintz de la sua conquavitat si obezeys al sieu retornament, e aprop sia envessat sobre le sieu col entre las tuas mas, e eleva las cambas de lu.	The procedure for treating this condition is as follows: tell the patient to try to push the bowel back into place with their own hand on the inside of their convexity if it returns, then have them lie on their side and elevate their hips.
E aprop sten la codena la qual siec la codena dels testicols a las partidas desus, e inscideys la codena dels testicols tota per le lonc; e aprop fiqua en doas labias de la seccio uncis segon que indigeysses a hubrir la seccio am aquels.	Then tie the scrotum, which holds the spermatic cord at its upper end, and cut through the entire spermatic cord. Then put two ligatures on both sides of the incision to secure it open with the aid of needles as needed.
E si’ la seccio segon la quantitat que a tu sia possible que de aquela le huou sia foro-getat.	If you make an incision large enough that the hernia can be completely reduced through it.
E aprop excorja aquela ciphaqueth les quals so dejos la codena dels testicols, entro que sia descubert le ciphac blanc dur de quascuna partida.	Then strip away the thin diaphragm-like tissue on both sides of the spermatic cord until the white, firm diaphragm is exposed on each side.
Lahoras tu entromet le tieu dit en aquo que siec le testicol, en aquo que es entre ciphac blanc, le qual es dejos la codena del huou, e entre le ciphac segon, e absolve am aquel’adherencia que es en la partida detras del huou.	Then insert your finger between the white diaphragm and the spermatic cord on both sides of the hernia sac. Then separate it from the adhesion that is behind the hernia sac.
E aprop mau am la ma la codena dels testicols a las partidas deforo, e am aysso exten le ciphac blanc en sus am la ma sinestra, e eleva le huou am le ciphac a la partida de la seccio; e comanda al ministre que extenda le huou ensus e tu dissolveys la adherencia que es detras am solucio complida.	Then grasp the spermatic cord with your left hand at its outer end, stretch the white diaphragm upwards with your right hand, elevate the hernia with the diaphragm to the level of the incision. Then ask an assistant to extend the hernia sac upward and you can dissolve the adhesion behind it using a saturated solution.
E cerqua am les tieus ditz que lay no sia alcuna causa del budel envelopat en le ciphac blanc dur.	Make sure that there is no bowel wrapped around the firm white diaphragm.
Mays si tu atrobas de lu alcuna causa, lahoras tu enpelleys aquel al ventre dejos.	But if you find such a cause, then carefully pull it back into the abdomen on the left side.
E aprop tu pren una agulha en la qual sia fiel gros fayt de x fiels, e entromet aquel deves le derier del ciphac, le qual es jos la codena dels testicols, la qual siec seccio; e aprop inscideys las extremitatz las quals emineysso del fiel entro que sian quatre fiels, e aprop compausa alcus de lor sobre alcuna figura en manieyra de crotz; e lia am aquel le ciphac del qual havem dit que es dejos la codena dels testicols am fort liament de dos partz.	Then take a needle with a thick thread attached and insert it behind the last stitch on the cut edge of the diaphragm, just below the spermatic cord. Then make four more stitches through both edges of the thread, tie some of them together in a cross-like shape, and use this to secure the diaphragm on the left side of the spermatic cord with a strong knot tied twice.
E aprop envolveys las extremitatz dels fiels e lia aquelas am liament vehement entro que alcu dels vayssels que noyrrisso aquels no puscan trametre alcuna causa per so que de aqui no accida apostema caut.	Then tie the ends of the threads together and secure them with a strong knot, taking care that none of the vessels are ligated too tightly to avoid causing an abscess in this area.
E pausa autra veguada liament segon foro le primier liament, lonh de lu mens tres ditz; e aprop aquestz dos liaments layssa del ciphac le qual es dejos la codena dels testicols la quantitat de la grandeza del dit, e inscideys tot le romanent segon redondeza, e osta de lu le huou.	Then tie another knot about three finger widths below the first one. Then cut away the excess diaphragm tissue on both sides of the spermatic cord with a rounded incision and discard it.
E aprop inscideys en la partida dejos de la codena dels testicols per seccio de la qual corra sanc e sania ayssi cum havem recomtat en aquo que havem dit.	Then make an incision on the left side of the spermatic cord through which blood and pus can flow freely, as previously mentioned.
E aprop aministra lana submersa en oli, e pausa en la plagua; e aministra le liament le qual havem recomtat (e alcunas veguadas le ciphac blanc es cauterizat, le qual havem dit aprop la inscizio de lu temen de flux de sanc, quar motas veguadas accideys aquels) e leyssa le liament entro que per si caia.	Then apply sterile gauze soaked in oil to the wound and close it with the suture we have recommended (and sometimes cauterize the white diaphragm at the time of the incision to prevent bleeding, as this is often necessary). Then tie the knot so that it falls by itself.
Mays si le cazement de lu es tardat, lahoras de aygua cauda sia embrocat, e pausa sobre aquel entro que caia segon que havem dit.	But if the closure of the wound takes too long, then use hot water to cleanse it and apply sterile gauze soaked in warm water over it until it falls into place as mentioned earlier.
E aprop cura la plagua am l’autra curacio de las plaguas entro que sia sanat.	Then treat the wound using the usual methods for treating wounds until it heals.
Capitol .lxvi.	Chapter 66
De hernia ventosa.	Of Inguinal Hernia
En aquesta hernia no e vist alcu que sia estat ardit sus la curacio de lu am ferr.	In this type of hernia, there is no record of anyone having been burned during its treatment with iron.
E les primiers diyssero que es fayta ayssi cum havem recomtat en la hernia que es am vi; la qual es que tu lies les vayssels aprop la seccio sobre aquela am fecilitat de lu; e aprop secca en le mieg loc en enviro le apostema am aquo que obro aquel, entro que caian les vayssels.	The early surgeons said that it should be treated in the same way as a hernia with pus, which involves lying the patient on their side near the incision and drying the area around the abscess with the aid of whatever helps to promote wound healing.
E cura la plagua segon que havem dit entro que sia sanada.	Then treat the wound according to what has been said until it heals.
Capitol .lxvii.	Chapter 67
De la disropcio que es fayta en les anguonars.	Of Dislocation of the Ankle
Alcunas veguadas endeve ruptura en les angonars ayssi cum havem dit, e emineys le loc.	Sometimes there is also a fracture of the ankle bones as mentioned earlier.
E no deyssen als genetius alcuna causa dels budels al genetius; e si deyssen, aquo es pauc; e retorna s’en en totas horas.	There are rarely any problems with the bowels in these cases and if there are, they are minor ones that resolve quickly.
Mays si es prolonguat le temps am aquo, es ajustada fissura en le ciphac entro que deysenda le budel en le ciphac; e accideys aquo per la extencio del ciphac le qual es en le angonars ayssi cum havem dit, la qual causa es quar le ciphac es estendut, e aprop es mollificat e·l loc es apostemat e emineys.	But if the condition persists for a prolonged period, a fissure forms in the diaphragm through which the bowel may herniate into the chest. This occurs due to the expansion of the diaphragm in the area of the ankle, which leads to softening and inflammation of the tissue, followed by the formation of an abscess.
E la cura de lu es am cauteri ayssi quo es precedida la narracio de lu.	"The cure for him is with such cautery as has been previously narrated."
E alcunas veguadas es curada am ferr segon aquesta manieyra: e es que·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu dos entre las tuas mas, e aprop secca le loc de la ruptura dels apostemas emineys am seccio per la latitut segon la quantitat de tres ditz.	"Sometimes it is cured with iron according to this method: the patient lies on their back between your hands, and then you carefully dry the location of the protruding apostemes through a lateral section according to its quantity."
E aprop strenh le ciphac blanc que es jos la codena entro que sia descubert.	"And then strengthen the white cyphac that is under the neck until it is discovered."
E aprop pren le ray e pausa aquel sobre le loc eminent del ciphac, e prem aquel al preon del ventre.	"Then take the wand and place it on the highest point of the navel, pressing firmly upon the stomach."
E aprop cus le dos locs eminentz sobre la extremitat del ray del ciphac, e ajusta am la sutura un de aquels am l’autre.	"Then mark both prominent points on either end of the navel wand and adjust them carefully together with one against the other."
E aprop extratz la extremitat del ray, e no inscidas del ciphac de tot, ni no extenda le huou, ni autra causa ayssi cum yeu te fi saber en la curacio de hernia entestinal.	"Then remove the wand and ensure that the navel is completely emptied of its contents, neither stretching it out nor causing any other similar injury, as you should know in the care of intestinal hernias."
E aprop cura aquela am la curacio de las plaguas, e cum inscideyses les fiels, mundifica aquela e restaura la plagua entro que sia consolidada; quar le ciphac es contrayt e no es ajustada la eminencia de ruptura.	"Then proceed with the treatment of hernias and, when you have incised the skin, cleanse it and restore the hernia until it is consolidated; for the navel contracts and does not adjust to the prominence of rupture."
E cauteri es milhor en aquest loc, quar es pus propda a salut.	"It is better to cauterize here because it is closer to safety."
Capitol .lxviii.	"Chapter .lxviii."
De mollificacio de la codena dels testiculs.	"On the softening of the spermatic cord."
Motas veguadas la codena dels testiculs en alcus homes es mollificada per aysso quar las carns que so entre aquela son mollificadas, e es fedat le reguardament de lu.	"The spermatic cord in some men becomes softened in this way because the flesh between it is softened; and this should be observed."
Adonc necessari es ad aquel que es preguat en la curacio de lu que fassa jazer le malaute segon le sieu dos, e enscida tota la codena la qual es mollificada sobre la codena natural; e aprop que ajuste doas labias am la sutura.	"Therefore, it is necessary for someone who seeks treatment for this to make the patient lie on his back and incise all the softened spermatic cord above the natural one; then approximate both lips with a suture."
E si vols, cus en le comensament la superfluitat de la codena mollificada am tres cozeduras o quatre e am ferma sutura.	"And if you wish, cut away the initial excess of the softened spermatic cord with three or four stitches and close it firmly with a suture."
E aprop inscideys entre las suturas; e aprop cura per curacio de las autras plaguas entro que sia sanat e caian les fiels.	"Then incise between the sutures; then treat by treating other hernias until they are healed and the skin falls off."
Capitol .lxix.	"Chapter .lxix."
De castracio.	"On castration."
Sapias que castratio en nostre ley es excomengada, mays per causa es legut a mi que·m remembre de lu en aquest libre; e no es necessaria la rememoracio de lu sino per doas manieyras, de las quals es la una per so que aquo sia en la sciensa del metge quan es enterroguat de aquela, que sapia la curacio de lu al qual accideys; e l’autra manieyra es que nos motas vetz havem necessitat de castracio de autras bestias per les juvamentz nostres per aquelas, ayssi cum de motos, e de bocs, e de porcs, e de semblantz a las bestias.	"Know that castration is condemned by our law, but for the sake of instruction it was permitted to me to remember this in this book; and there is no need to remember this except for two methods, one of which concerns the knowledge of the physician when he is summoned for it, so that he knows how to treat it if it happens; the other method concerns the fact that we often have a need for castration of other beasts due to our livestock, as with sheep, goats, pigs, and similar beasts."
E donc dic que castracio es fayta en dos manieyras: o per atrissio, o per fissura a seccio.	"And therefore I say that castration is done in two ways: either by crushing or by cutting with an incision."
Mays en aquela que es fayta per atrissio, la via de la opera es que nos fassam cezer la bestia en aygua cauda entro que·ls genetius de lu sian mollificatz e sian linhitz e que pendan.	"But in that which is done by crushing, the way of the operation is to make the beast lie down in cold water until its testicles become softened and enlarged and hang."
E aprop pren aquels am la tua ma entro que sian resols e no apparescan dejos le tocament.	"Then take those with your hand so that they are resolved and do not appear from afar due to the touching."
Mays en castracio fayta per fissura e seccio, cove que tu tenguas la bestia e premas la codena dels testicols de lu am la ma senestra.	"But in castration done by incision and cutting, you must hold the beast and press the spermatic cord of its testicles with your left hand."
E aprop lia le suspensori, e inscideys sobre quascun huou am una seccio entro que dos huous proceseysso.	"And then ligate the suspenderian fascia, and incise above each one with an incision so that two openings result."
E aprop inscideys aquels pus que auras quascu excorjat.	"And then incise those until you have cut out each one."
E no leysses sobre aquels del ciphac alcuna causa, sino le ciphac subtil le qual es sobre les vazes.	"And do not leave any cause on those of the scrotum except for the thin skin which is above the vessels."
E aquesta manieyra de castracio es milhor la qual es fayta per atrissio, quar atrissio fort leu layssa alcuna causa dels testicols per que la bestia desira coyt.	"And this method of castration is better than that done by crushing, because crushing leaves no cause of the testicles so that the beast desires copulation."
E aprop cura la plagua entro que sia sanada.	"And then treat the wound until it is healed."
Capitol .lxx.	"Chapter .lxx."
De la cura de hermafrodozia.	"On the treatment of hermaphroditism."
Hermafrodozia en les homes es segon dos manieyras: la una es quar o appar en aquo que siec l’espazi en la codena de testiculs, en aquel que es entre dos testiculs figura quar cunh de femna en la qual so pels.	"Hermaphroditism in men occurs in two ways: one is when there appears between the space of the spermatic cord, between two testicles, a figure resembling that of a woman's vulva."
E alcunas veguadas de aquel corr urina le qual es en la codena dels testiculs.	"And sometimes from that same place urine flows which is in the spermatic cord."
Mays en las femnas es una specia: e es que·l conh de la femna sobre le pentenilh es ayssi cum dos testiculs de home un pauc de tot yminiheys a la partida deforo ayssi cum le perpucii de home e dos testicols.	"But in women, it is one kind: and it is that the vulva above the pubes resembles two testicles of a man somewhat diminished at their entrance into the furrow like the male penis and two testicles."
E la curacio es de tres specias: de dos dels homes e de una specia de las femnas.	"And the treatment is of three kinds: two for men and one kind for women."
E es que cove que tu inscidas aquelas carns ajustadas entro que efuga la emprecio de aquela, e aprop que cures aquelas am curacio de las autras plaguas.	"And it is necessary that you incise those adhered flesh so that the emission of that may escape, and then treat those with treatment for other wounds."
E en la segonda specia dels homes de la qual yeys urina la qual es en la codena dels testiculs, no es curacio ni opperacio en lu.	"And in the second kind of men from which urine flows which is in the spermatic cord, there is no treatment nor operation for it."
Capitol .xxi.	"Chapter .xxi."
De lentinge e de carn eminent per causas de las femnas.	"On lens and flesh protuberance caused by women."
Lentige fort leu es ajustada sobre causas naturals entro que es etressat e es fayt leg le reguardament; e alcunas veguadas es magnificada en alcunas femnas en tant entro que es spandit ayssi cum en les homes e perve entro al coito.	"Freckles are rarely attached to natural causes, but they can become raised and appear like moles due to carelessness. And sometimes in some women they become large and spread out like those of men and cover the face."
Adonc cove que tu tenguas la superfluitat de lentinge am la tua ma o am unci e inscidas.	"So it is necessary that you hold the excess of freckles with your hand or with a wisp of wool and incise them."
E no ultimes en inscizio, majorment en le preon de la razit, per so que no endevengua flux de sanc.	"And do not make the incision too deep, especially on the forehead, lest bleeding occur."
E aprop cura aquela am curacio de las plaguas entro que sia sanada.	"And then treat it with treatment for wounds until it is healed."
Mays carn nascuda es carn que nays en le horrifici de la mayre entro que umple aquel, e fort leu es eyssit a las partidas deforo segon semblansa de coa (e per aquo alscus primiers appelero aquo “malautia caudada”); donc cove que nos inscidam ayssi cum inscidem lentinge, e curem aquela entro que sia sanada.	"But flesh born is flesh that grows in the horrible part of the mother so that it fills there, and it often appears at the openings of the furrow according to the likeness of a tail (and for this reason some first called it “tailed disease”); therefore we must incise it like freckles, and treat it until it is healed."
Capitol .lxxii.	"Chapter .lxxii."
De curacio de alratica.	"On the treatment of albinism."
Alratica es que le conh de la femna no sia perforat, o sia le trauc petit.	"Albinism is when the vulva of a woman is not perforated, or has a small opening."
E es o natural o accidental.	"And it can be either natural or accidental."
Accidental es per malautia la qual ha precedit, e aquela es fayta o per carn nada ajustada o per ciphac subtil o espes.	"Accidental is due to illness that has preceded, and it occurs either by flesh adhered or by thin skin or thick skin."
E es fayt o en le preon de la mayre, o en les costatz de lu, o en le pus sobira de lu, o en le pus bas de lu, e prohibeys de cuoyt e de enprenguacio e de enfantament, e fort leu prohibeys las mestruas.	"And it occurs either in the forehead of the mother, or on the sides of it, or above it, or below it, and it prevents coitus and pregnancy and childbirth, and it often prevents menstruation."
E la cognicio de aquela es fayta per reguardament de la metrona, si la oppilacio es apparent, propdana; mays si no es apparent, lahoras tu cerqua aquela am les tieus ditz o am le ray.	"And the recognition of it is done by observation of the mother if the obstruction is apparent, but if not apparent, then you must examine her with your fingers or a probe."
Mays si oppilacio es per ciphac subtil, e es propda a las doas labias, lahoras tu coyta e disromp aquela.	"But if the obstruction is due to thin skin and it extends between the two lips, then you must cut through it with scissors."
E es que pauses sobre las doas labias pulvils, e aprop pausa les tieus ditz indicz de amdoas las mas encemps.	"And if it extends over both lips, then you must first dilate them with your fingers, and then insert the tip of your index finger from both sides."
E la femna sia sobre le sieu dos, las sieuas coyssas extendudas, e aprop exten las doas labias am forsa entro que aquel ciphac subtil sia romput e la oppilacio sia uberta.	"And the woman should be placed on her back, with her thighs extended, and then you must dilate both lips with force so that the thin skin is torn and the obstruction is opened."
E aprop pren lana e enbeu le4 en oli e pausa aquela sobre·l loc, e jagua am home le dia per so que·l loc inscis no sia consolidat.	"And then take wool dipped in oil and place it on that location, and leave it there for a day so that the wound does not close up."
Mays si le ciphac es gros e espes, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquel am spatum lat o am fuelha de mirta.	"But if the skin is thick and thick, then you must incise it with a broad blade or with a myrtle leaf."
Mays si la oppilacio es per carnada, lahoras suspen aquela am unci, e inscideys aquela.	"But if the obstruction is due to flesh adhered, then suspend that with a wisp of wool and incise it."
E sian am tu las medicinas que fan cessar flux de sanc ses mordicacio, ayssi cum ahacatia, e sanc de drago, e enses, ajustat am album de huou.	"And use on it the medicines that stop bleeding without biting, such as aloe, dragon's blood, and frankincense mixed with white lead."
E aprop aministra una canulha de plom ampla per so que la plagua no sia consolidada leugierament.	"And then apply a wide leaden cannula so that the wound does not close lightly."
E tengua aquela per alcus jorns e aministra calgua de li sec.	"And keep it on for a few days and apply hot water compresses."
E aprop sia curada am l’autra curacio de consolidacio entro que sia sanada.	"And then treat it with other treatment for consolidation until it is healed."
E alcunas vetz accideys en la mayre nativitat de autres carns, e lahoras cove que inscidas segon aquesta manieyra.	"And sometimes during childbirth other flesh appears, and therefore you must incise according to this manner."
Mays si aysso es per apostema crancos, a l’apostema crancos le qual es en la mayre no sia fayta contrarietat am ferr en deguna manieyra.	"But if this is due to a head boil, then do not let it be treated with iron in any manner."
Capitol .lxxiii.	Chapter 73
De la cura de emorroydas e de tayl e de botor roja que accideysso en le conh de las femnas.	Of the treatment of hemorrhoids and anal prolapse that occurs in women's buttocks.
Emorroydas so apprecio dels orificis de motas venas entro que de aquelas corro mot sanc continuadament; e cum so antiquadas emorroydas e son fayts theyls.	Hemorrhoids are caused by the veins around the anus becoming enlarged due to continuous strain, and when these hemorrhoids become hardened and gangrenous.
E ja yeu he dit en la divisio las specias de aquelas e les senhals de aquelas, e diyre ayssi aquelas que recebo curacio e aquelas que no recebo curacio.	As I have already said in the division of species and symptoms, I will now say which ones receive treatment and which do not.
Donc dic que emorroydas e theyls quan so en le preon de la mayre e no apparo al sentiment, lahoras en aquelas no sia fayta curacio am ferr.	Therefore, I say that hemorrhoids and anal prolapse that are in the front of the anus and do not protrude can be treated with iron.
Mays aquelas las quals so en le orrifici de la mayre sobre las quals catz sentiment, so aquelas que so curadas.	But those that are on the surface of the anus and can be felt, are those that receive treatment
E cove que tu metas la femna en mayso frega e aprop exten atheyl am les forfexs, o am drap aspre, e inscideys aquelas am las razitz.	And it is necessary to place the woman in a warm bath and then extend her buttocks with forceps or rough cloth, and incise those that are hard.
E aprop pulveriza sobre aquelas deves le fluxs del sanc de una de las polveras insciscivas ses mordicacio, ayssi cum acassia e semblant ad aquels.	And then sprinkle over them powder made from the fluxes of menstrual blood, ground without biting, such as cinnamon and similar things.
E aprop enpellesca les sieus pes per una hora, e aprop pausa aquela en aygua freja.	And then wrap her buttocks with hot wool for an hour, and then place that one in warm water.
E si persevera le fluxs del sanc, lahoras fay aquela sezer en decoccio de sumat e de scorsas de milgranas e de gualas e de semblantz.	And if the bleeding continues, then make her sit in a decoction of sumac and walnut husks, pomegranate seeds, oak bark and similar things.
E aprop pren farina de ordi e comfiys aquela am miel e vi agre e fay emplastre am aquo sobre le dos de lu.	And then take barley flour and mix it with honey, vinegar and wine, and make a plaster with this to put on the back of her.
E si le sanc es abscindit, bo es; e sino, fay adherir am dos ventozas, e a las mamilhas ses escarificatio.	And if the blood is cut off, it is good; and if not, then make two leeches adhere to them, and scarify the breasts.
E aprop pren lana e submergeys aquela am suc de coliandre o am suc de arnagloza o am suc de guarravier am vi pentit e fay adherir al loc; e aprop cura le loc am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And then take wool and immerse it in juice of coriander or juice of coltsfoot or juice of guaiacum with five parts wine, and make it adhere to the place; and also cure the place with a poultice until it is healed.
Mays athyl rog le qual es de aspre reguardament, cove que tu inscidas aquo que a tu appar de aquel segon que he dit en theyl engualment.	But if the pain is very severe, it is necessary to incise what appears of that one according to what has been said earlier in this chapter.
E cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And cure her until she is healed.
Capitol .lxxiv.	"Chapter 74."
De perforacio de eyssedura accident en la mayre.	"A perforation of the bladder occurring in the thigh."
Motas specias de apostemas accideysso en la mayre, ayssi cum cranc e apostema lapident e ulceracios e adhubelat e erpetromens e fistulas emorroyas e raguarrias e thyl e autres apostemas.	"Among the most frequent occurrences of swellings in the thigh are those like the crab and aposteme, as well as ulcers, scabs, hernias, fistulae, hemorrhoids, wounds, moles, and other swellings."
E yeu ja he dit aquestas malautias e las specias de aquelas e les senhals de aquelas, e las curacios de lor en la divisio.	"I have already discussed these illnesses, their types, their symptoms, and their treatments in the previous division."
E cove que yeu digua en aquest tractat de apostema caut le qual ve en la mayre quan es dels apostemas que collegeysso sania, e si vols saber en qual manieyra se fa la opperacio de lu am ferr.	"And so you should say in this treatise about the cautery operation performed on an aposteme that occurs in the thigh: how it is done with iron."
Adonc cove que tu consideres si la dolor de la apostema en le sieu comensament es aguda am percussio e flecma e febre, e vezes aquel enrogezir e si catz sobre aquel le sentiment, lahoras no·t coytes am perforacio de lu, e cura aquel am aquo que ajuda sobre la maturacio entro que cesse la acuitat dels accidentz.	"Therefore, you should consider whether at the beginning of an aposteme's pain there is sharpness with percussion and inflammation and fever, sometimes redness and tenderness. If so, do not attempt perforation, but instead treat it with water that promotes maturation until the sharpness of the symptoms ceases."
E lahoras cove que tu fassas cezer la femna sobre una cezelha que aia doas cezelhas; e recline sobre le sieu dos e ajusta les sieus pes a la partida pus dejos del ventre, e las sieus coyssas sian expandudas, e pausa les sieus brasses dejos les sieus denols, e lia quascus am liament ad aquo convenient.	"And then you should make the woman lie on her back and place two pillows under her hips. She should adjust her feet close to each other near the thighs away from the belly, with her knees expanded, and pause her arms at her sides, and bind each thigh with a cloth dipped in warm water."
E aprop la matrona segua del latz dreyt e aministre le instrument am le qual es ubert le orrifici de la mayre, la forma del qual vindra en aquelas causas que·s faran aprop.	"And the midwife should then go to the right side and administer the instrument with which the opening of the thigh is widened. Its shape will be shown in the following causes."
E cove quan vols ministrar aquest instrument que tu fiques am lo ray le preon de la mayre de la femna, e aquo que del instrument es intrat en la mayre no sia mays que·l preon de la mayre e leda le malaute.	"And when you want to administer this instrument, you should place it on the root of the thigh of the woman, ensuring that only as much of the instrument enters the thigh as is necessary for treating the illness."
Mays si l’estrument es major que·l preon de la mayre, lahoras cove que tu pauses pulvils sobre la textura del preon de la mayre per sso que sia prohibit l’intrament de tot instrument en le preon de la mayre.	"But if the instrument is larger than the root of the thigh, then you should place powders on the texture of the root of the thigh so that the entrance of any instrument into it is prohibited."
E cove que tu pauses le vertitge que corr en le strument del latz pus desus e que le ministre tengua le strument e revolva le vertitge entro que sia ubert le orrifici de la mayre.	"And you should place a handle on the left side above the instrument so that the person administering it can hold the instrument and turn the handle until the opening of the thigh is widened."
E cum appar la excitura, e es tocada am la ma e es leon e molh, lahoras cove que tu secces aquela deves le cap de lu am spatum lat.	"And when the extraction appears, and it is touched with the hand and found to be soft and moist, then you should cut its head off with a broad knife."
E cum la sania es evacuada, lahoras cove que tu pauses en la plagua una meca submersa en oli rozat o oli vert en le qual sia alcuna stiptisitat; e pausa la calca7 en la seccio en le preon de la mayre.	"And when the sanies is evacuated, then you should place a wick dipped in rose oil or wormwood oil, which has some astringency, on the plug of the wound. Then press the cloth onto the section at the root of the thigh."
E pause deforo la mayre e sobre le pentenilh lana munda submersa en aygua en la qual sian bulidas malvas.	"And then close the thigh and place a clean linen cloth dipped in water infused with mallows on top of it."
E aprop sia curada aprop dos dias am enguent le qual conveneys ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	"And it should be treated immediately for two days using an ointment that is suitable to heal this."
E alcunas veguadas es lavada la mayre e la plagua enayssi que es cristerisat am aygua e mel, e aprop am aygua en la qual es bulhida razit de liri o de aristologia longua, e aprop retorna al enguent.	"And sometimes the wound and the ulcer are washed in such a way that it is crystallized with water and honey, and also with water in which rue or long-rooted comfrey has been boiled, and then return to using the ointment."
E si la plagua es dedintz en la mayre ameguada, lahoras cove que tu sias prohibit de la curacio de lu am ferr, habantz cura aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio.	"And if the ulcer is deep within the wound, then you should be prohibited from treating it with iron, having instead treatment with what has been mentioned in this section."
Capitol .lxxv.	"Chapter LXXV."
A ensenhar las matronas en qual manieyre les enbrios bius sian medicatz quan yeysso segon figura no-natural.	"To teach midwives how to treat women with child who, according to their figure, are not natural."
Necessaria causa es que la matrona conogua en le comensament la figura del enfantament natural per senhals de lu, e es que quan tu vezas la femna expremar a las partidas dejos e desira odorar le ayre, e sobre aquo es enleujada per aquo que sobre ela es del part, e festina le eyssiment del enbrio, lahoras sapias que aquest part es segon figura natural, e es l’eyssiment de lu sobre le sieu cap, e la segondina am aquel o suspensa o pendent del ombelic.	"It is necessary that the midwife knows at the beginning the figure of a natural childbirth by its signs, and it is this: when she sees the woman pressing on her hips and desiring to smell the air, and when she is relieved by what is above her during labor, and she hastens the birth of the child, then you know that this birth is according to nature's figure. And the second [sign] is that the head presents first, with the second coming either suspended from or pendant on the navel."
Donc cum tu vezes aquels senhals, lahoras cove que·l ventre de lu sia compremut per so que l’embrio deysenda leugerament quar quan deyssen sobre le sieu cap, deysen a lu la segondina, e es mondada de aquelas superfluitatz am bona mondificacio.	"Therefore, when you see those signs, it is necessary that the woman's belly be pressed so that the child may descend gently, for when the head presents, then the second [sign] follows. And she should be cleaned of those superfluities with good cleansing."
Mays aquel que es otra aquest part es no-natural e no-lausable, quar quan le enbrio es eyssit sobre sos pes e·l cos de lu es eyssit devant le cap de lu e·ls pes de lu, e la ma de lu una, o al pe de lu i, o es eyssit le cap de lu e la ma de lu, o al ventre de lu, e fort leu es convertit sobre le sieu col, e semblant de las figuras de lu no-lausablas.	"But if this birth is other than that which is natural and laudable, for when the child presents feet first and its body emerges before its head and its feet, and one of its hands, or even its foot, or its head appears with one of its hands, or it presents on its belly, then it has become turned toward its backside, resembling those figures which are not laudable."
Don necessaria causa es a la matrona que sia savia e subtil en totas aquelas causas, e que·s guarde de error e de decepcio.	"Therefore, it is necessary for the midwife to be wise and skilled in all these matters, and to guard against error and deception."
E yeu so mostrant tota figura de aquelas, e qual engen es en aquelas per so que sia significat per aquo e sia stat sobre aquo.	"And I show you here all those figures, and what kind each is, so that it may be understood by this and its state may be known."
Quan le feyt es eyssit sobre le sieu cap per egrecio natural, e aquel es vehement sobre la femna e es fayt a lu part dificil, e vezes la vertut de lu ja debelitada, lahoras fay aquela sezer , o que las femnas tenguan lu, e evapora le conh de lu am fenugrec coyt e am olis humitz.	"When the feet are presented first due to a natural malposition, and that is vehement upon the woman and she suffers difficulty in childbirth, and her strength is already weakened, then let her be seated, or have others hold her up, and evaporate her pain with incense made of fenugreek seed and humid oil."
E aprop entrometa la metrona entre les sieus ditz espatum petit e fenda am aquel la segondina, o secce aquela am la sua ungla entro que corro aquo que es en ela de humiditat.	"And appropriately the midwife should insert her little finger between those said lips and tear them apart with that second [finger], or cut them with her nail inside, where there is moisture."
E preme le ventre de la femna entro que deyssenda le fet.	"And press on the woman's belly so that the child may descend."
Mays si no deyssen, lahoras cove que la femna sia cristirizada de mucellage de ptilli e mucellage de fenugrec am cizami.	"But if it does not descend, then it is necessary for the woman to be rubbed with a mixture of pitch and fenugreek seed mixed with wax."
E aprop comanda a lu, aprop le cristeri, que sia compremuda e fay aquela stornudar am condisi; e te la boca de lu e·l nas de lu per huna hora, quar le fet sira foro-getat tantost.	"And appropriately command her to be pressed, and have her rubbed again with the mixture, and make her sneeze with condimentum; and hold closed her mouth and nose for one hour, for the child will soon forget [the pain]."
E si las doas mas del fet so foro-getadas al comensament, lahoras cove que tu redusiscas aquelas am fecilitat petit a petit.	"And if both hands of the child are forgotten at the beginning, then it is necessary that you gently reduce them one by one."
Mays si no obezeys al intrament, lahoras pausa la femna sobre una cezelha e leva les pes de lu sus, e aprop concuceys la cezelha sobre la terra; e la femna sia tenguda que no caia deves la concussio.	"But if it does not obey the maneuver, then place the woman upon a bench and lift her feet up, and appropriately strike the bench on the ground; and let the woman be held so that she does not fall due to the concussion."
E si las mas no son dedintz tornadas e morr le fet, lahoras inscideys aquelas e extratz le romament del fet o lia le cors a la ma de lu am drap e extratz aquel am equalitat, quar aquel sira foro-getat.	"And if the hands are not turned in and the child is dying, then cut them and extract the membrane of the child or tie its body to your hand with cloth and extract it gently, for it will soon forget."
De eyssiment del embrio sobre les sieus pes.	"Of the emergence of the embryo feet first."
Quan le fet yeys sobre les sieus pes, lahoras cove que tu impelliscas aquels en sus, e aprop convertas le fet petit, e aprop que engualhes aquel, e aprop que prenguas un pe de lu e extendas aquels petit a petit.	"When the child presents feet first, then it is necessary that you push those upward, and appropriately turn the child gently, and appropriately anoint it, and appropriately take one of its feet and extend them little by little."
Mays cum son eyssit entro a las coyssas, lahoras tu comanda a lu que se exprema, e fay aquela extornudar am condizi, quar sira foro-getat si Deus lo vol.	"But when it has entered into the cavity, then you command it to be expelled, and make it sneeze with condimentum, for it will soon forget if God wills."
E si no es foro-getat am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras tu retorna le fet petit a petit entro que pauses aquel segon figura natural, quar aquel sira lahoras foro-getat am leugier eyssiment.	"And if it is not forgotten with what we have recommended, then return the child gently until you pause it according to its natural figure, for it will soon forget now with easy emergence."
E si es prohibit am tot aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras pren de musellage de altea e de goma dissolvuda, e percuteys tot en le mortier per bona percussio, e aprop linieys am aquo le conh de la femna, el pus bas del ventre de lu.	"And if it is prohibited with all that we have recommended, then take pitch and gum dissolved, and pound them together in the mortar with good pounding, and appropriately anoint the pain of the woman, beneath her belly."
E aprop fay aquela cezer en aygua tebeza, entro que consegua les ypocondias.	"And appropriately let her sit in warm water, until she achieves the hypochondria."
E cum vezes que las partidas dejos de lu so lenificadas, lahoras fay a lu subfumiguacio de mirta e sub-pausa aquela a lu.	"And when sometimes the passages of childbirth are relaxed, then let her have fumigation with myrtle steam and pause her upon it."
E quan te la sub-fumiguacio per una hora, lahoras tu la fay sezer sobre una cezelha, e aprop fay aquela stornudar e extrenh la boca de lu, e levas de aquela, e prem la partida pus bassa del ventre de lu am leugiera compressio, quar le fet sira tantost foro-getat.	"And when she has had steam fumigation for one hour, then let her sit upon a bench and appropriately make her sneeze and open her mouth, and lift from that, and press the lower part of her belly with gentle compression, for the child will soon forget."
Eyssiment del fet sobre les sieus denols e las suas mas.	"Emergence of the child on its back and hands."
Quan le fet eyssira segon aquesta forma, lahoras tu engenies en entrometen las suas mas petit a petit; e aprop la femna stia evessada sobre le sieu col, e les pes de lu pengo en jos, e aquelas sia jasent sobre le lieyt, e complegua las suas mas.	"When the child emerges in this form, then you gently insert its hands little by little; and appropriately the woman should be placed on her back, and let her feet hang down, and those hands should rest upon the bed, and she should bring her hands together."
E aprop prem sobre le ventre de lu petit a petit, e aprop extratz aquo que es dejos les pes de lu de las aurelhas entro que sia preparada en la partida pus dejos.	"And appropriately press gently on its belly little by little, and appropriately extract what is below its feet from the ears until it is prepared for the lower passage."
E si le fet no es fora-getat, lahoras pren les pes de lu e mau aquels am movement vehement, e aprop prem aquo que es sobre les ypocondres petit a petit entro que le fet puege a las partidas desus.	"And if the child is not forgotten, then take its feet and shake them with violent motion, and appropriately press what is on the hypochondria little by little until the child pushes itself into the upper passages."
E aprop entrometa las suas mas e engualhe le fet petit a petit, e comanda a la femna que se exprema entro que le fet sia foro-getat.	"And appropriately insert its hands and anoint the child gently little by little, and command the woman to expel it until the child is forgotten."
Eyssiment del fet latutidinalment pendent una de las suas mas.	"Emergence of the child laterally suspended by one of its arms."
Sia engeniat en reduccio de la ma de lu, mays si no podes aquela reduzir, lahoras eleva la femna e fe aquela anar.	"It should be gently reduced by its arm, but if you cannot reduce it, then lift the woman up and make her walk."
E si anar no pot, lahoras fay la jazer sobre le lieyt, e concuteys las coyssas de lu am concussio vehement, e aprop aministra liamentz les quals yeu e recomtatz de mucillages.	"And if she cannot walk, then let her lie on the bed and strike its cavity with violent concussion, and appropriately administer remedies which you have and recommended of mucilages."
E si es vengut le enfantament, lahoras fay aquela sezer sobre cezelha, e aprop studia sobre la reduccio de la ma, e enguala le fet segon figura natural, e fay stornudar la femna e comanda a lu que comprema a si entro que sia foro-getat.	"And if the childbirth has come, then let her sit upon a bench and appropriately study about reduction of the arm, and anoint the child according to its natural figure, and make the woman sneeze and command her to press herself until it is forgotten."
Eyssiment del fet sobre·l col expandudas las suas mas e la fassia de lu es al dos de la sua mayre.	"Emergence of the child on its neck with its arms expanded and its face turned towards its mother's back."
Cove que la matrona tengua la ma del fet e aprop revolva aquel petit a petit, e eque aquel am facilitat.	"It is necessary that the midwife hold the hand of the child and appropriately turn it little by little, and ease it out gently."
E cum es e quant so es engualhat, e lahoras pausa sobre le conh de lu aquo que havem recomtat de oli e de mucellages.	"And when it is eased out and quantified, then pause upon its head what we have recommended of oil and of mucilages."
E aprop comandas a lu que·s maugua petit a petit, e quan auras feyt aquo, lahoras fay aquela cezer sobre una cezelha e comanda li que sia inclinada sobre le latz dreyt, e aprop comanda a lu que sia compremuda; e fay aquela stornudar am condizi.	"And appropriately command her to move gently little by little, and when you have done this, then let her sit upon a bench and command her to lean on her right side, and appropriately command her to press herself; and make her sneeze with condition."
Exitus foetus praeparati super latus.	"Preparatory exit of the fetus over the side."
Quan deyssen a horrifici de la mayre segon aquesta manieyra, considera, e lahoras tu inscideys la segondina am la tua ungla entro que sia evacuada de la humiditat.	"When you see horrible things in the mother according to this manner, then consider it, and appropriately incise the secondine with your nail until it is evacuated of humidity."
E si le fet es suspendut sobre la cara e·l col de lu, lahoras tu inscideys aquela del embelic, per so que no sia retengut e mora.	"If the body is hanging over the face and neck, then incise that part of the belly to prevent suffocation."
E aprop empelleys le fet a las partidas dedintz entro que pauses aquel segon que cove, e manda a la femna que comprema a si alcunas veguadas, e el sira fora-getat am eyssiment leugier, si Dieus o vol.	"Therefore push the body gently to its sides until it rests in position, and tell the woman to hold her breath several times. Then, let him exhale easily, if God wills."
Exitus geminorum aut foetuum multorum.	"Exit of twins or multiple fetuses."
Sapias que gemels motas veguadas so natz, e alcunas vetz naysso tres o quatre , mays aquo es estranh e tart s’endeve; mays v so causas foro natura, e no vivo.	"Know that twins are often born and sometimes even three or four at once, but this is rare and should be avoided if possible. But there are five causes of nature, not to live."
E conte aquelas, ja sia que sian montiplicatz, una segondina, e son seperatz per ciphac, distingen aquels enter le liguament en l’ombilic de cascun de aquels E alcunas veguadas so foro-getatz ayssi cum es un fet per eyssiment natural leugier, e so eysitz alcunas veguadas per eyssiment no-lausabla ayssi cum havem recomtat.	"And if they are multiplied, one after another, and are separated by membrane, distinguish those that are connected through the ligament in the navel of each. And sometimes they are expelled thus as one fetus by easy exhalation, and sometimes they are expelled by difficult exhalation as we have explained."
E si son dificils alcus de lor deves le enfantament e perveno ad aquo que havem dit de las figuras no-naturals, lahoras tu cura aquels ayssi cum havem recontat.	"And if some of them are difficult to deliver and arrive at what we have said about the unnatural figures, then care for them as we have explained."
E si’ la matrona subtil e fassa aquo que fa am facilitat e subtilitat, e am tarditat, e sia ingeniat segon tota figura segon que es a lu preparat de l’engen amenant a salut.	"And if the midwife is subtle and does what she does with ease and subtlety, and with patience, and if she is knowledgeable according to all figures as prepared by nature for bringing about health."
Rememoratio eius quod formatur in matrice ex embrionibus et Abortiuntur.	"Recollection of what is formed in the matrix from embryos and are aborted."
Alcunas veguadas son formatz en la mayre un, e dos, e tres, e quatre, e v, e vi, e vii, e mays x, e ja es deves mi verificat que una femna abortem ne getet vi, e una autra x totz formatz, la qual causa fo fayta per mensuracio dels glorios savis.	Some women have twins, and three, four, five, six, seven, eight, nine or more formed in the womb. It has already been verified that one woman aborted six, and another bore ten fully formed, which was caused by measurement of the glorious wise ones.
E tot aysso cove que sia en la sciencia de la matrona quar fort leu ad aquela parve semblant de aquo, e donc opause se ad aquo am so que cove.	And also it is necessary that there be in the science of midwifery knowledge about how to deal with such a small one like this, and thus pause until it can open.
Capitol .lxxvi.	Chapter LXXVI
De extraccio del fet quan es mort.	Of the extraction of the dead fetus.
Quan tu curas le fet mort am aquo que havem dit en la divisio de la medicacio e no es defora eyssit, e tu yest forsat usar de opperacio am ma, lahoras cove que consideras si la femna es de sana vertut e no es am alcu dels accidentz per les quals sobre ela es temuda perdicio.	When you treat a dead fetus as mentioned in the division of medicine and it has not yet been expelled, and you wish to use manual operation, then consider whether the woman is of healthy disposition and is not affected by any accidents that could lead to her harm.
Lahoras cove que la femna sia envessada sobre le lieyt sobre le sieu dos, e sia le cap de lu enclinat enjos e las coyssas de lu sian elevadas.	The woman should be placed on her back on the bed, with her head inclined downward and her buttocks raised.
E·l ministre tengua aquela de doas partz o sia liada en le lieyt per so que·l cos de lu no se extenda deves la extraccio del fet.	The assistant should hold the woman's thighs together, keeping them on the bed to prevent excessive extension of her body during the extraction of the fetus.
E aprop tu humecta la boca de la mayre de lu am olis humitz e am mucellage de altea e de fenugrec e de semensa de li.	Then you should moisten the mouth of the woman with oily water and a poultice made from marsh mallow, fenugreek, and linseed.
E aprop unte la matrona la sua ma am aquels olis e mucellages, e aprop entrometa la sua ma am fecilitat en la mayre, e aprop cerque am la ma loc en le qual fique les uncis en le fet.	Then the midwife should anoint her own hand with those oils and poultices, gently insert her hand into the woman's vagina, and then locate the position of the fetus' feet with her hand.
E locs convenient en aquo: adonc tu considera si le fet es preparat que deysenda sobre le sieu cap, e lahoras tu fique les uncis en les huels de lu, o en le col, o en la boca, o en le palat, o dejos la barba, o en la furcula de lu, o en les locs propdas de las costas, o dejos les ypocondres.	In this situation, you should then consider whether the fetus is prepared to be born feet-first. If so, place your fingers in one of the following locations on the fetus: the heels, the neck, the mouth, the palate, the chin, the furcula (the wishbone), or near the ribs or hypochondria (the lower chest).
Mays si le deysendiment es sobre les pes de lu, lahoras en le pentenilh, o en le mieg de las costas.	But if delivery is occurring feet-first, then in the perineum or in the middle of the back.
E cove que tengua le unci am la ma dreyta, e pausa la curvitat de lu en aquel loc le qual es entre les ditz de la ma senestra, e entrometa la ma am facilitat e fique le unci en alcu de aquels locs les quals havem ditz, entro que pervengua a la causa boyda.	You should hold the fetus with your right hand and guide its curvature at that point where it enters between the fingers of your left hand. Insert your left hand gently and place your fingers in one of those locations mentioned earlier until you reach the full width of the baby's body.
E aprop pause e fique en la apposicio de lu un autre unci, o le tertz si es necessitat, per so que sia atraccio engual, e no sia extencio segon la sua rectetut tant solament.	Then you should place another finger or even a third one if necessary alongside the first one to ensure equal traction is applied and not excessive tension according to the baby's curvature.
Ans sia maugut a tota partida, per so que l’eyssiment de lu sia alleujat ayssi cum es fayt en dent deves la eradicacio de lu.	And this should be done gently throughout the entire delivery process so that the fetus is delivered as easily as possible, just like removing a tooth during extraction.
E cove en lu aquo que es entre lor que la extencio sia mollificada; e si alcuna partida de lu es retenguda, lahoras cove que la matrona unte alcus sieus ditz am oli e entrometa aquels espertament e revolva am aquels aquo que es retengut.	In this case where traction needs to be softened, the midwife should anoint some of her fingers with oil and gently insert them carefully while twisting those fingers around the part that is stuck.
Donc si la partida del fet es fora-getada, lahoras les uncis sian permudatz entra loc le qual sia pus aut; e fay aysso entro que tot le fet sia fora-getat.	Therefore, if the baby's presentation is engaged (stuck), then the midwife should change her position so that she can push harder. She should do this until the entire baby has been born.
Mays si la ma es eyssida denant l’autra, e no es possible reduzir aquela per la coartacio de lu, lahoras cove que drap sia envolopat sobre aquela; e aprop extratz aquela entro que tota sia fora-getada, e inscideys aquela o en la junctura de la ma o en le coyde.	But if the midwife's hand is pushed out ahead of the baby and cannot be reduced by pressing down on it, then a cloth should be wrapped around that hand. Then pull gently until the entire hand has been delivered, cutting any membranes or skin that remain attached to the hand or wrist.
E ayssi cove que fassas en l’autra ma e en les dos pes.	And the same procedure should be followed for the other hand and both feet if they become stuck as well.
Mays si le cap del fet es gran, o accideys a lu coartacio en le eyssiment, o es en le cap de lu aygua ajustada, lahoras cove que entrometa entre les ditz espatum spinos e fenda le cap e extragua la aygua, o que discroba aquel am un instrument le qual es nompnat “alundat”, la forma del qual vindra am las formas dels autres instruments en le capitol le qual es aprop aquest.	But if the baby's head is large or the presentation causes difficulty in delivery, or there is an excess of fluid around the head, then you should insert your hand between the spinous processes and separate them with a finger to expose the fontanelle. Then extract the fluid using forceps or a tool called "alundat," the shape of which will be shown later in this chapter.
E semblantment fassa si·l fet es de gran cap per natura: e lahoras cove que inscida aquel am algematu, o que prengua aquel am alunda ayssi cum havem dit; e aprop extra les osses am les forceps.	Similarly, if the baby has a large head by nature, you should perform a fontanelle incision using scissors or extract the bones using forceps as described earlier.
E si le cap es eyssit e es coartat deves la furcula, lahoras sia fendut entro que la humiditat la qual es en le pietz sia efunduda.	If the baby's head is delivered but is stuck behind the pubic bone (symphysis pubis), then make an episiotomy to allow for drainage of the fluid in the perineum.
Mays si no es complicat, ni obezeys a eyssiment, lahoras tu inscideys le cap tantost segon que a tu sira possible.	But if there are no complications and delivery is not imminent, then you should perform a cephalotomy (incision of the baby's head) whenever it is feasible to do so.
E si le dejos del ventre es apostemat o es en lu ydropici, lahoras cove que tu perfores aquel entro que corro la humiditat que es en lu.	And if there is ascites or hydrops in the left lower abdomen, you should perform a paracentesis to drain the fluid.
Mays si le fet es sobre les sieus pes, lahoras la atraccio de lu es leugiera e la direccio de lu a la boca de la mayre es leugiera.	But if the baby is presenting by the breech (feet-first), then traction should be gentle and the baby's direction towards the mother's vulva should also be gentle.
Mays si es coartat deves le ventre e·l pietz, lahoras cove que tu extraguas aquel am drap le qual auras envolopat sobre la tua ma, e que fendes le ventre e·l pietz entro que corra aquo que es en aquels.	But if the baby is stuck at the level of the pubic bone and perineum, then you should extract it using a cloth wrapped around your hand. Then make an incision in the skin and tissue of the lower abdomen and perineum to relieve any tension or pressure.
Mays si les autres membres so ostatz e torna le cap, lahoras la metrona entrometa la ma senestra; mays si la boca de la mayre es huberta, lahoras intrometa la ma en le preon de layre, e cerque am aquela le cap, e atira aquel am les ditz entro a la boca de la mayre, e aprop entrometa en lu un unci, o dos uncis, e atire lu am aquels.	But if the other limbs are extended and the head is turned back, then the midwife should insert her left hand. If the mother's vulva is covered with secretions, she should insert her hand into the perineum and encircle the baby's head with it. Then use this hand to guide the baby's head towards the birth canal and deliver it using one or two fingers inserted into the baby's mouth.
E si la boca de la mayre es coartada per apostema caut le qual accideys a l’u, lahoras cove que no sia trebelhat sobre lu; abantz cove lahoras aministrar efusio de causas humidas grassas.	And if the mother's vulva is obstructed by a hard scab that has formed due to an inflammation of the urethra, then do not try to push through it. Instead, administer a warm compress with thick ointment to soften and remove the scab.
E aministre emplastres; e segua le pacient en ayguas que mollifican e humectan.	And apply poultices; follow up with the patient using warm water to soften and moisturize.
E si le fet es sobre le sieu costat, lahoras si possible es, sia agulat: e sia aministrat aquo que havem dit en le fet viu.	If the baby is lying on its side, try to rotate it (if possible) and administer the remedies mentioned for a live baby.
E si aquo no es possible, lahoras sia inscidit en pessas, e sia extrayt.	And if that is not possible, then make an incision in the uterus and extract the fetus.
E cove que non layssas alcuna causa dedintz de la segondina.	And be sure to remove all afterbirth.
E cum tu auras complida tota la tua opperacio, lahoras aministra aquo que havem dit de la curacio en les apostemas cautz les quals accideysso de la mayre.	And once you have completed your procedure, then administer the remedies mentioned earlier for treating hard scabs that may have formed on the mother.
E si accideys flux de sanc, lahoras deyssendas en ayguas stipticas e aministra l’autra curacio.	If there is bleeding, use compresses with astringent water and apply other treatments to stop it.
E yeu ja e vist una femna en le ventre de la qual era fet mort, e aprop sobre aquel foc autra veguada emprenhada, e aprop foc mort es le fet autre.	I have seen a woman whose uterus contained a dead fetus, and later she became pregnant again with another dead fetus.
Accidit al u aprop lonc temps apostema en le sieu embelic; e inflat es entro que foc ubert, e comensec a getar brac.	A scab formed on her umbilical cord for a long time; it swelled up and opened, and then she began to cough up blood.
E yeu fu appelhat a la cura de lu, e medicat a lu per lonc temps, e la plagua no es consolidada.	I was called to treat her and did so for a long time, but the illness did not improve.
Adonc yeu pausegui sobre lu de alscunas causas emplastra de forta atraccio, e eyssic de lu un os, e aprop passero alcus jorns, e eyssic un autre os; e yeu fu trop meravilhat, cum en le ventre no sia os.	Then I applied poultices with strong drawing power and extracted a bone from her, but after some days passed, I extracted another one. I was greatly amazed, for there are no bones in the uterus.
E adonc yeu cogitegui que eran dels osses del fet mort.	And then it occurred to me that these were the bones of the dead fetus.
Donc yeu enguisigui la plagua, e extrayssi de lu motz osses , la femna existent en las sieuas milhos disposicios, e ja visquec en tal manieyra per lonc temps, correc de lu un petit de brac.	Therefore I healed the illness, extracted many bones from her, and the woman recovered and remained in good health for a long time, until she gave birth to a child.
E yeu no afermegui asso esser stranh, sino quar en aquo es sciensa e ajutori ad aquo que le metge artifec am la ma per curacio aministra.	I do not find this strange, for in this there is skill and assistance to aid what the skilled physician administers with his hand for treatment.
De las formas dels instrumentz que so necessaris a extrayre le fet.	Of the shapes of the instruments that are necessary for extracting the fetus.
Forma de vertitge am la qual es uberta la mayre:	Form of scissors with which the mother is opened:
Aquesta es la forma de strenhedor en le qual so engualhatz les libres, al qual engualhament sian dos virtitges en doas extremitatz de dos futz.	This is the form of a forceps in which the blades are hinged together at one end, with two small scissors at the other ends.
May empero aquesta virtitge cove que sia pus subtil de strictori, e sia fayt o de eba o de fust de boys.	However, this scissor should be more slender and narrow, made either of iron, horn or wood from a young oak tree.
E sia la latitut de quascun fust quays dos ditz e le marge de quascu amdos quays un dit, e la longitut de quascu es un palm e mig; e en le mieg loc de dos fustz so dos ajustaments de aquel meteys fustz les quals ja son fermatz, dels quals la longitut es la maytat de un palm e un pauc mes, e la latitut de quascu es quay dos ditz, o un pauc mes.	And let the width of each blade be two fingers wide at its outer edge and one finger wide on both sides, with a length of one and a half palms; in the middle of the two blades there are two holes for fitting together the metal blade which is already securely fastened, each with a width of two fingers or slightly more, and a length equal to one and a half palms.
E aquestz dos additamentz sian entromeses en la boca de la mayre per que sia uberta am aquels quan tu revolves las doas prescriptas virtigges.	"And these two additional things are inserted into the mouth of the mother so that it can be opened with those when you turn both prescribed powers."
Forma autra semblant de aquela pus subtil e pus leugiera:	"Another form similar to this one, but even more subtle and lighter:"
Sia fayta de fustz de eba o de boys segon la semblansa de forceps.	"It should be made of ebony wood or boxwood according to the likeness of forceps."
Mays empero en la extremitat de lu so dos additament ayssi cum vezes, e la longitut de aquels additament es quays un palm, e la latitut de quascu es dos ditz.	However, at the end of each of these two additional things there are thus times two, and the length of those additions is one span, and their width is two fingers.
E cum tu vols am aquels ubrir la mayre, lahoras tu fay cezer la femna sobre le lieyt les pes pendentz, ubert aquo que es entre las coyssas de lu.	"And when you want to open the womb with those, then make the woman lie on her back with her feet hanging down, opening what is between her thighs."
E aprop obre la tua ma am le instrument ayssi cum fas am forfexs engualment segon la quantitat que vols de la aprecio de la boca de la mayre entro que la metrona fassa so que vols.	"And then open your hand with the instrument thus, as you do with pincers grasping according to the amount that you wish of the opening of the mouth of the womb, until it makes what you want."
La forma de vertitge la qual diysero les antics:	"The form of virtue which they called it in ancient times:"
Forma de impellent am le qual es empellit le fet:	"The form with which the fetus is pushed out:"
Forma de amisidat2 am le qual es conterit le cap gran	"The form with which the large head is contained"
E es asemblat a forceps al qual so dentz en la extremitat, ayssi cum vezes, e alcunas veguadas es fayt lonc ayssi cum forceps segon aquesta forma, ayssi cum vezes, al qual so dentz ayssi cum dentz de ressegua am le qual es inscidit e conterit.	"And it is similar to forceps with teeth at the end thus, sometimes it is made long like forceps according to this form, sometimes with teeth like those of a saw with which it cuts and contains."
Forma de amesidat pauc:	"The form for containing little:"
Forma de unci havent una spina:	"The form of a hook having a spine:"
Forma de unci havent doas spinas:	"The form of a hook having two spines:"
Forma de forceps a la qual so dentz de cerra am le qual le cap del fet sia conterit:	"The form of forceps with which its teeth close so that the head of the fetus is contained:"
Forma de spatum havent dos extremitatz am le qual le cap es abscindit:	"The form of a spatula having two extremities with which the head is cut off:"
Forma de dos espatums latz:	"The form of two lateral spatulas:"
Totz aquels instrumentz so excersitatz, e quan mes so multiplicadas las specias de aquel e so preparadas deves le artifexs, quant es pus leugier a la sua opperacio e pus aut deves les homes per la sua quantitat.	"All those instruments must be exercised, and when they are multiplied the more easily is their operation performed, and the better is the art of the craftsman through their quantity."
E no obres de aquels instrumentz ja sia qua sia deves tu aparalhat, quar la necessitat de aquels no es excusabla.	"And do not work with those instruments, whichever they may be, for the necessity of them is inexcusable."
De extraccio de la segondina.	"On the extraction of the afterbirth:"
Quan la segondina es retenguda deves le enfantament, lahoras cove que tu comandes a la malautae que retengua le sieu ale, e aprop fay aquela stornudar am condizi, e strenh la tua ma sobre la boca de lu e sobre las nars de lu, e si per aysso es defora eyssit, bo es.	"When the afterbirth is retained at childbirth, you should order the midwife to hold her breath, and then make her sneeze with some condition, and stretch your hand over her mouth and nose, and if it comes out thereby, so much the better."
E sino, lahoras tu pren una ola e perfora en la cuberta un trauc e pausa en aquela erbas ubrent la boca de la mayre, ayssi cum calament e ruda e anet e camamilla e scicados arabic e cassia lignea e santaurea.	"And if not, then you take some water and make a hole in its covering, and pause on that herb which has been burned for the mouth of the mother, thus with calamint and rue and aneth and camomile and dried scammony and arabic seed and cassia lignum and golden seal."
Totas aquestas erbas o alcunas de lor sian submersas en aygua en la ola, e pausa aquela sobre le foc.	"All these herbs or some of them are submerged in water in the bowl, and that is placed on the fire."
E aprop pausa una canula de canaviera en la boca de la mayre, e tengua aquela entro que la evapor vengua a la concavitat de la mayre.	"And at the same time place a cane tube into the mouth of the mother, and hold it so that the steam comes to the concave part of the mother."
E aprop fay aquela stornudar ayssi cum havem dit, e la segondina sira fora-getada am velocitat.	"And at the same time make her sneeze as we have said, and the afterbirth will be expelled with speed."
Mays si roman aprop aquesta curacio e no es eyssida, lahoras tu comanda a la matrona que submerge la sua ma sinistra en oli sizami o en micellage de altea, e aprop entrometa aquela en le conh e queresca am aquela la segondina, e cum aquela auras trobada, lahoras pren la e exten aquela pauc a pauc Mays si es annexsa en le preon de la mayre, lahoras entrometa la sua ma segon que havem recomtat, e quan aura trobat la segondina, extragua aquela petit a petit segon rectetut per so que la mayre no caja deves la atraccio vehement.	"But if it still remains after this treatment and is not expelled, then you order the midwife to immerse her left hand in olive oil or in white wax, and then insert that into the vagina and try with that to draw out the afterbirth; and when that has been found, then take it and extract it little by little, but if it adheres to the perineum of the mother, then insert your hand as we have recommended, and when you have found the afterbirth, draw it out little by little directly, so that the mother does not suffer from violent traction."
Abantz cove que sia permudada als costatz dreyt e sinestre am facilitat.	"It is necessary that they be changed on the right and left sides with ease."
E aprop sia ajustat en la quantitat de atraccio, quar ela obedira e evasira de adhirencia.	"And also the amount of traction should be regulated, for it will obey and easily slip out if there is no adhesion."
E si la boca de la mayre es coartada, nos ja havem recomtat la curacio am sturnutacio e am medicacio de la ola am erbas.	"And if the mouth of the mother is obstructed, we have already recommended treatment by sneezing and by medication with water containing herbs."
Mays si no es fora-getada am totas las causas las quals havem recomtadas, lahoras guarda te que no fetigues sobre aquela en iteracio de abstracio, mays empero cove que aquo que es eyssit de lu a la boca de la mayre lies a la coyssa de la femna, e aprop cristeriza aquela am enguent e tetrafarmacon; quar aquel fara poyrir aquela aprop alcus dias e sira dissolvuda e sira fora-getada.	"But if it is not expelled despite all the causes we have recommended, then be careful not to tire yourself out in repeated attempts at abstraction, but what does come out of her should be placed on the thing of the woman, and then crystallize that with ointment and tetrafarmacon; for that will cause it to soften and dissolve and be expelled."
Mays quan se poyreys, es de lu elevada mala audor al cap, e al estomac, e aquo ledeys la malauta; e adonc cove que sian aministradas sub-fumiguacios e convenientz ad aquo.	"But when it softens, bad odor arises to the head and stomach, and that leads to illness for the midwife; and then fumigations and suitable remedies should be administered."
Mays alcus dels Antics ja so esproatz sub-fumigacio de nazitort e de figuas seccas.	"But some of the Ancients used fumigation with nitre and dried figs."
Forma de instrument am le qual la femna es sub-fumiguada deves la retentio de mestruas e de la segondina:	"Form of an instrument with which a woman is fumigated during the retention of menstruation and afterbirth:"
Sia fayta de veyre o de eram.	It should be made from vein or sinew.
E sia pausada la extremitat subtil en le conh e la extremitat ampla sobre le foc, e la sub-fumiguacio sia pausada sobre las brazas del foc.	"The narrow end of the funnel should be placed in the vessel and the wide end over the fire; beneath this arrangement place a smoky fumigation over the embers."
E tengua aquela entro que sia consumida aquela sub-fumiguacio e itera·n autra.	"And hold it until that fumigation is consumed, then repeat with another."
De curacio del cul del enfant no-perforat.	"Treatment of unperforated anal disease in a child."
Motz enfantz naysso e les culs de lu no so perforatz, les quals ya ciphac subtil e opilat.	"The anus and buttocks of these children are not perforated, being closed up narrow and tight."
Adonc cove a la matrona que perfore am le sieu dit aquel ciphac; e sino, perfora aquel am spatum agut, e guarda se que no toque le lacert.	"Therefore, have the midwife carefully perforate that opening with her finger; if not possible, use an acuminated probe to pierce it, taking care not to touch the intestines."
E aprop pause sobre aquel lana enfusa en vi e oli; e aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia senat.	"And then place a poultice made of wool soaked in wine and oil; keep applying this ointment until it is healed."
Mays si temes que sia opilat, lahoras pausa en le trauc una canula per motz dias, e osta la quan le enfant voldra degerir.	"But if you fear that it might become obstructed, then place a small tube there for several days and remove it when the child wants to defecate."
E ja accideys oppilacio del cul per consolidacio de plagua o de apostema; adonc cove que aquela consolidacio sia inscidida, e aprop sia curada am aquo que avem dit de la curacio e del plom.	"And if blockage of the anus occurs due to a scab or abscess, then that scab should be cut and removed, and then treated with what we have said about cure and plaster."
De curacio de las fistulas que endeveno dejos.	"Treatment of fistulas that deviate from there."
Las fistulas que endeveno en la partida dejos pus bassa so nodacio e grossetut las quals endeveno prop del cul defora o en l’espazi de la una partida.	Fistulas that occur at the exit of the anus are usually small and thick, often appearing near the outside of the buttocks or in the space between them.
E es una fistula o motas.	And it is a fistula or warts.
E cum aquela nodacio es antiquada e corr de la humiditat aygosa blanca o poyridura subtil, e alcunas veguadas so de aquestas fistulas alcunas penetrantz.	And when that nodule becomes old and breaks open due to dampness, it produces white moisture or thin pus, and sometimes these fistulas have some penetrating points.
E aquelas penetrantz so conogudas per aquo que es eyssit de aquelas per la egressio e per ventosetat; e alcunas vetz use le malaute de egressio, e fort leu es eyssit de aquelas verm.	And those penetrating points are known by what comes out of them through the exit and from the windy state; sometimes they cause pain upon evacuation, and often it is bloody matter that comes out.
E so de aquelas fistulas alcunas veguadas en l’espazi penetrantz entro a la vesica, e entro al meat de la vergua; e so de aquelas penetrantz entro la junctura de la coyssa e entro al notz de la coeta.	And sometimes from those fistulas in the space penetrating points enter into the bladder and into the flesh of the penis; and from those penetrating points they can also enter into the junction of the thighs and into the groin.
E aquo en que es conoguda fistula penetrant entro al cul e no-penetrant, es que tu metas le tieu dit endic en le cul, e entrometas tenta subtil de eram o de ferr en la fistula quan no y es turtuositat.	And it is known that a penetrating fistula enters into the anus when you insert your finger into the anus and gently probe with a thin probe of iron or lead to see if there is a hole.
Mays si en aquela es turtuositat, lahoras entromet en aquela tenta subtil de plom o de pels de caval entro que tu sentas la tenta o le pel en le tieu dit.	But if there is no opening, then use a thin probe of lead or horsehair until you feel the probe or the hair on your finger inside the anus.
E si no sentas aquela de tot ni no procezeys del trauc alcuna causa de egestio ni verm ni ventositat, ayssi cum havem dit, lahoras sapias que es no-penetrant, e lahoras coyta te a la curacio.	And if you do not feel anything with that probe or find any cause of evacuation such as blood or windiness, then you know that it is not penetrating, and thus you should apply treatment.
E quan la fistula es penetrant entro a la vesica o entro al meat de la vergua, lahoras la significacio de lu es eyssiment de urina de aquela e prohibicio de lu ad aysso que·l loc am medicina sia consolidat.	And when the fistula is penetrating into the bladder or into the flesh of the penis, then the meaning of that is that there will be urinary incontinence from that place and prohibition of sexual intercourse until the location has been consolidated in medicine.
Mays si es penetrant entro la junctura de la coyssa o entro al os e envencio de dolor en le circuit, lahoras senhal de lu es que la tenta perve entro aqui si en lu no es turtuositat entro al os, e envencio de dolor en le circuit de la partida; e que de lu yeys poyredura tostemps; e que no val en aquela medicacio, ni es consolidada am enguent.	But if it is penetrating into the junction of the thighs or into the bone and surrounding tissues with pain in the area, then the sign is that the probe has entered here if there is not an opening into the bone, and pain at the point of departure; and that from that place there will always be pus; and that medicine and ointments are ineffective and it does not heal.
E en totas aquelas fistulas penetrant no es curacio de tot, e la curacio de aquelas es trebalh e vanetat dels folyls metges sobre·l qual so fermatz.	And in all those penetrating fistulas there is no cure at all, and the cure for those is the struggle and ignorance of foolish doctors about which we are firm.
Mays en aquela que no es penetrant e no antiqua, sanacio am ferr es sperada segon que yeu a tu recomtare, e aquo que ja yeu e proat.	But if it is not penetrating and not ancient, then healing with iron is expected according to what I will recommend to you, and that which I have already said is true.
E es que le malaute jagua entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos e eleva las cambas de lu entro sus, las coyssas sian enclinadas al ventre de lu, e aprop entromet tenta de plom, o de eram si es en la fistula turtuositat, entro que sapias le loc on perve la tenta.	And the disease appears between your buttocks, mostly on the left side and lifts up the folds of skin there, the thighs being inclined towards the belly, and gently introduce a probe of lead or iron if there is an opening in the fistula, so that you may know where the probe goes.
E si aquela sent le malaute entorn le cuol, lahora cove que tu entrometas le tieu dit endic en le cuol.	And if the pain is around the anus, then it is necessary for you to insert your finger into the anus.
E si sentas en le tieu dit la tenta ja per si meteyssa descuberta penetrar, otra aquo que sentas entre le tieu dit e aquela siphac o carn, lahoras sapias certanament que aquela es penetrant; e adonc no trebalhes en aquela, quar no es en aquela sanacio, ayssi cum havem dit.	And if you feel the probe already entering through its own opening when inserted, other than what you feel between your finger and that fissure or flesh, then you know for certain that it is penetrating; and therefore do not attempt to treat it, because healing is not possible there, as we have said.
Mays empero diyssero alcus que es sana en alcus homes tart.	But however some people say that it can heal in certain cases.
E de la medicacio per la qual es sperat juvament en lu es que tu ignes cauteri subtil segon le ample de la fistula, ayssi cum es precedit, e intrometas aquel ignit en la fistula entro que pervengua entorn le cuol; e aprop itera aquel doas o tres vetz entro que sapias que ja son adhustas totas aquelas carns ajustadas fistuladas que so semblantz a cana de pluma de ausel.	And the treatment by which healing is hoped for in this case is that you ignite a cautery subtly according to the width of the fistula, as is described above, and introduce that burning iron into the fistula until it reaches around the anus; and repeat that twice or three times until you know that all those flesh-like tissues attached by the fistula are burned.
E aprop cura aquela am calguas envolopadas en boder entro que en yescan totas aquelas carns que so adhustas, e aprop cura aquela am medicinas la carn engendrantz e consolidantz, e si es sanada, bo es; e sino, lahoras no es sana en degun temps per autra curacio.	And then dress it with gauze wrapped in a bandage until all those tissues are healed, and then treat it with medicines that generate and consolidate flesh, and if it heals, good; but if not, then it will not heal at any time by any other treatment.
E si la tenta intra, e no penetra entro·l tieu dit le qual es en le cul, e entre aquel e la tenta que es velament spes de carn o de ciphac, e vezes la fistula en aquo que siec la superficia de la codena, lahoras secca la codena del comensament de la fistula, e tu ve seccan am la tenta, e sia en la fistula entro que la seccio pervengua al loc en le qual perve la extremitat de la tenta, e per la tenta es liberat e catz.	And if the probe enters but does not penetrate into the anus which is in the buttock, and between that and the probe which is covered with flesh or skin, and the fistula goes along the surface of the hip bone, then cut through the hip bone at the beginning of the fistula, insert the probe there to see where the section reaches, and by means of the probe it will be freed and cleared.
E aprop mundifiqua aquelas carns fistuladas las quals so asembladas a canula de pena de ausel e no romangua de aquelas alcuna causa.	And then clean those tissues attached to the fistula which resemble a feather quill, and do not leave any residue of them.
Mays si flux de sanc vezes que vengua entre tu e la tua opperacio quan ensideysses aquelas carns, lahoras le milh que sia e del pus leugier instrument es cauterizar am foc o am medicina acuta, quar cauteri am foc ajusta bonas doas habitutz: so es adhustio de aquelas carns ajustadas, e abscizio del sanc exseccacio de las humiditatz.	But if blood flows frequently between you and your operation while cutting those tissues, then milk it and remove the pus with a light instrument cauterized with fire or with an acute medicine, because cautery with fire is good for burning twice and adjusting those attached tissues, and for removing blood and drying out moisture.
E aprop cura aquela am calguas envolopadas en boder o en caus trissat entro que·l loc geta brac, e aprop lahoras cura la plagua am enguentz carn dura engendran e consolidan.	And then dress it with gauze wrapped in a bandage or twisted catgut until the wound closes up and then treat the inflammation with hard flesh-generating and consolidating ointments.
E so medicinas en las quals so stipticitat e exseccio; quan lahoras es restaurada ja es sanada e no temes iteracio.	And these are medicines that have astringent and drying properties; when they are applied, the wound is restored and it will not need to be repeated.
Mays si la fistula ja perve entro al preon del cul e es elonguada de lu superficia del cos, lahoras entromet le tieu dit en le cul e inquireys am aquel.	But if the fistula has already opened up into the perineum and is elongated along the surface of the body, then insert your finger into the anus and explore with it.
E donc si centes la tenta e entre tu e ela es velament de ciphac o de carn, e es propda a la penetracio, lahora no es operacio en lu sino segon via di fiducia e de speransa.	And therefore if you cannot find the probe and between you and it there is skin or flesh covering it, preventing penetration, then do not operate on it, but follow another route with caution and hope.
La qual causa es aministrar en lu una de tres manieyras: o que cauterize aquela ayssi cum havem dit; o que secces aquela entro que consieguas la conquavitat de lu per que sia a tu possible entrometre las qualcas e la curacio propdana; e no procesiscas mot am seccio per so que no inscidas le lacert contenent le cuol, e que accidisque sobre le malaute eyssiment de la egistio ses voluntat; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit quar fort leu sira sanat; o que elongues aquel velament e mondes aquel pus que seccas aquel entro prop le cul, ayssi cum havem dit, o am tenta o am autre instrument de aguda extremitat, e aprop mondifique aquelas carns fistuladas las quals so en la seccio entro la on podes am percrustacio; e aprop esforsa te a far la restauracio de tota la plagua am seccio, e si le orrifici pus desus no es consolidat, e romangua la fistula uberta en la partida del cul, e sira pus leugier per le malaute.	And therefore administer one of these three methods:
E alscunas veguadas la fistula es finida segon aquesta manieyra: es quan tu entrometas la tenta en la fistula, e es en le latz del cul entorn la superficia del cos am la codena e en le marge del cul, lahoras pren tenta de perforada extremitat, que es ayssi cum agulha de preparantz les coers segon aquesta forma:	"Sometimes the fistula is finished in this manner: when you insert the probe into the fistula and it enters on the side of the buttock near the surface of the body and on the edge of the anus, then take a probe with a perforated end, like a needle for preparing hearts."
e entromet en aquela fiel envolopat de v fiels o entorn aquels; e aprop entromet tenta am fiel en la fistula entro que consiegua la conquavitat de lu.	"And insert the probe into that field, enveloping it with five fields or around them; and then insert a probe with thread into the fistula until you reach its concavity."
Mays si es penetrant en le marge del cul prop dedintz, lahoras tu extratz le fiel de aquel trauc ayssi que tu intrometas le tieu dit en le cul; e extraguas la extremitat del fiel e ajustes las duas extremitatz essemps, e estrenh cascuna, e leyssa aquo per un dia o per dos, e quan mays inscideys le fiel en la carn, estrenh be aquel entro que aquelas carns sian inscididas las quals so entre doas extremitatz del fiel e que cajan.	"But if it enters near the margin of the anus inside, then you remove the thread from that track in such a way that you insert your little finger into the anus; and pull out the end of the thread and adjust both extremities evenly, and tie each one separately, leaving this for one or two days. And when you can see that the flesh is incised, carefully cut that thread between those two fleshy parts which are between the two extremities of the thread."
E aprop cura la plagua entro que sia consolidada e sanada.	"And then cure the wound until it is consolidated and healed."
Mays si le orrifici de la fistula no es penetrant, lahoras fay aquel penetrar, en qualque manieyre sia a tu preparat, sino que sia mot en le preon, quar no es a tu que fassas aquo per que no inscidas le lacert; e aprop fay am aquela entro que sia sanada.	"But if the opening of the fistula does not penetrate, then make it penetrate in any way you are prepared to do so, but do not press too much on the front because otherwise you will incise the skin. And then leave it alone until it is healed."
La forma de spatum spinos am lo qual es fenduda la fistula: la curvitat del qual es mot aguda e l’autra partida es no-aguda, per so que no inscidas aquo que no es necessari, ayssi cum vezes.	"The shape of the spatula used to open a fistula: its curvature is very acute, and the other end is not sharp, so that you do not incise anything unnecessary, as often happens."
De sutura de emorroydas en las quals corra sanc en la inscizio de aquelas.	"Regarding the suturing of hemorrhoids in which blood runs from the incision of them."
Emorroydas so segon dos manieyras, quar o so entre le cul semblantz aysi que es de carbos, o quays aquelas sian cum a gras de rasim.	Hemorrhoids occur in two manners: either they are between the anus resembling blackheads, or they appear like red grapes.
E de aquelas so petitas e grans, e que le sanc corr de aquelas tostemps e es una, e so motas, e so fora·l cul, e en las extremitatz de lu.	And those are small and large, and blood flows constantly from them and they are one, many, or outside the anus, and at its extremities.
Mays empero aquelas que so foro le cul so segon las mes de pauca humiditat, de las quals corr aygua citrina o un petit de sanc am cos continuabla, e so segon la color del cos.	However, those that are outside the anus are due to a lack of humidity in the intestines, from which citrine water or a little blood continues to flow continuously, and they are according to the color of the body.
E la curacio de aquela que es dedintz le cuol es que comandes al malaute que se assela e que se exprema entro que le cuol yesca e las emoroydas apparescan a tu.	And the treatment for those that are inside the anus is to order the patient to squat and expel while the anus opens and the hemorrhoids appear.
Adonc tu te coyte e suspen am uncis o que tenguas aquelas am la tua ungla, e aprop incideys aquelas deves las suas razitz.	Then you take hold with forceps or your fingernail, and press gently to incise their roots.
Mays si les uncis no so tengutz en aquelas per la humiditat de lor e mollificacio de aquelas, lahoras pren aquelas am drap aspre o am coto o am flassada de lana, e extratz aquelas am les tieus ditz, e aprop inscideys aquelas e polveriza sobre lor alcunas polveras caudas aprop la inscizio, per que sian ad aquelas en loc de cauteri; o cauteriza aquelas segon que es precedit en le capitol de cauterizar.	But if the forceps do not hold onto them due to the humidity and softness of those parts, then grasp them with rough cloth or cotton or a wool thread, and extract them with your fingers and gently incise them and sprinkle some powdered myrrh on the incision so that they adhere there instead of cauterization; or cauterize them according to what is mentioned in the chapter on cauterization.
E aprop cura aquelas am l’autra curacio entro que sian sanadas.	And then treat those with another cure until they are healed.
E si le cul no obezeys a egressio, lahoras cristerisa le malaute am cristeri en le qual sia mordicacio petita, e sia lavat am aquel aquo que es en le cuol e que obezesca a egressio leugierament quan le malaute s’esprem.	And if the anus does not obey to evacuation, then have the patient kneel on a cushion with a small bite in it, and wash them with the water that is in the anus so that they may evacuate easily when the patient expels.
Mays si las emorroydas so defora le cul, lahoras la causa de lor es leugiera, e es que tu prenguas aquelas am la tua ungla, o que prenguas aquelas am unci, e inscidas aquelas, e aprop cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit entro que sian sanadas.	But if the hemorrhoids are outside the anus, then their cause is slight, and it is that you grasp them with your fingernail or with forceps, incise them gently, and treat them with water as mentioned earlier until they are healed.
E aquel que avoreys inscizio, cove que aministres sutura de lor segon aquesta manieyra: pren fiel envolopat e entromet aquel en agulha e aprop extratz las emorroydas a las partidas dessus, e fay aquel penetrar am la agulha en la razit del autra part, e envolveys las doas extramitatz del fiel en la partida pus dejos de la agulha, e so latitudinalment; e estrenh la emorroyda am strectura fort, e aprop noza le fiel e extratz la agulha.	And those who have had an incision should administer sutures in this manner: take linen thread and insert it into a needle, and then grasp the hemorrhoids on both sides and insert the needle through the root of the other side, and wrap both ends of the thread around the part below the needle horizontally; then tie the hemorrhoid tightly with the thread and knot the thread and remove the needle.
E fay aquo a totas, e layssa de aquelas una e no la cozes, per so que la superfluitat del sanc corra de aquela.	Do this to all of them, and leave one alone without tying it, so that the superfluous blood may flow out from that one.
E aprop pausa sobre le cul drap enfus en oli rozat o en cerot; e pausa aquel sobre·l cuol e comanda al malaute que·s repause.	And then apply over the anus a piece of cloth soaked in rose oil or wax, and place it on the perineum and instruct the patient to remain at rest.
E aprop layssa aquela entro que caja; e quan es casuda, cura aquelas am enguentz o am autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And then leave that one open; and when it is healed, treat it with ointment or with another cure until it is completely healed.
De curacio de fistulas.	On the treatment of fistulas
Motas veguadas accideys per exseccacio de fenda o per costriccio de natura.	Many times, a fistula occurs due to excessive dryness of the skin or constriction of nature.
E cum so antiquadas e no val en aquela medicina, lahoras cove que tu razas aquelas am la puncta de spatum o am la tua ungla entro que sian faytas humidas e sia hostada de aquelas la escorsa pus desus, la qual prohibeys aquelas de consolidacio; e aprop cura aquelas entro que sian consolidadas.	"And since those old remedies prove ineffective in this case, now you should remove them with the point of a spatula or your nail, ensuring they are moistened and that the old pus on top is scraped off, which was hindering consolidation. Then cure those areas that have already consolidated."
Lahoras tu osta aquelas am razio pus vehement que la primieyra entro que mot sancno e sian excoriadas; e aprop cura aquelas entro que sian sanadas.	"Now you should remove them with great care, so as not to hurt the first time and cause them to become excoriated; then cure those areas that are healed."
De curacio de almesamir, so es clau.	"And in the treatment of ophthalmia, this is key."
Sapias que alamermar, so es clau, e no es si no notz redon segon la color del cors semblant a cap de claviel, e es fayt en tot le cors e majorment en las partidas dejos les pes e als ditz, e endeve per aquels dolor deves le anament.	"Know that ophthalmia is key and not if it's not round like the head of a nail, and it occurs throughout the body but more so in parts near the feet and hands. There you should examine for those pains."
E adonc cove que sia inscidit aquo que es en le circuit del clau, e sia tengut am les forfexs o am unci, e sia eradicat de la sua razit; e aprop cura aquel.	"And then it is necessary that this be incised around the nailhead and held with forceps or tweezers, and then removed from its root. Then cure that."
E si vols, cauteriza le segont que es precedit en le sieu capitol.	"And if you wish, cauterize the second one which is mentioned in this chapter."
Mays de veruca es eminencia petita aspre fistulada redonda sobre la superficia del cos, e motas veguadas veno en las mas dels enfantz.	"But a verruca is a small, rough, fustulated and round elevation on the surface of the body, many of which appear in most children."
E curacio de lu es que estendas e inscidas aquela, o que estrenhas aquela am fiel o am pel entro que caja.	"And its treatment is to stretch it out and incise it, or scrape it off with a file or a sharp-pointed knife."
E si vols, cauteriza aquo, segon que havem dit, am foc o am medicina acuta.	"And if you wish, cauterize it with fire or with an acute medicine, as we have said before."
E ja so eradicadas enversas e no-enversas am le instrument le qual yeu diyre.	"And now that both verrucas and inverted ones have been removed with the instrument that I mentioned earlier."
Mays formica es eminencia petita feutrada o fistulada grossa sobre la superficia del cos anant mot en le preon, e quan le freg atroba aquela es centit en lu semblant de mordificacio de formigua, e es fayta entorn le cos.	"But a wart is a small, smooth or fustulated elevation on the surface of the body, often found on the face, and when it's rubbed it feels like an ant bite. It can occur anywhere on the body."
E curacio de lu es que prenguas una canula de pena de auca o de pena de voltor, e sia fort, e pausa aquela sobre la formigua entro que la contengua le cercle de la canula de las partidas de lu; e aprop revolveys la tua ma am la canula entro que inscidas aquo que es en le circuit de la formigua, e pauses aquela en le preon de la carn, e que eradiques la formigua de la sua razit.	"And its treatment is to take a feather quill of an owl or a vulture, and it should be strong. Place it on the wart so that it encompasses the circle of the quill's opening. Then turn your hand with the quill so that you incise around the perimeter of the wart, pressing it against the skin. And then remove thewart from its root."
E si vols, fay aquo am canula de eram o de ferr segon aquesta forma:	"And if you wish, do this with a heated iron or steel probe following this method:"
Sia la partida desus de la canulha trahent a subtilitat, sorda (so es no-perforada), envolopada per so que sobre le dit la aprencio de lu sia ablaviada e la revolucio de aquela.	"The point of the probe above should be sharp, blunt (not perforated), wrapped in cotton so that when it is placed on the wart, it does not burn and can be rotated."
E si vols cauteriza la formiga segon que es denant dit en la cauterizacio de atheyl en le capitol de cauteri.	"And if you wish, cauterize thewart according to what has been mentioned earlier in the chapter of cautery regarding the cauterization of warts."
De forma dels instrumentz que so aministratz a dar cristeri.	"Regarding the forms of instruments used for giving cautery."
Alcunas veguadas es fayt cristeri de argent o de lato o de eram fondut o malleat; e alcunas veguadas es fayt de aquels instrumentz petit e gran segon aquels als quals so aministratz, quar aquel que es aministrat en la curacio dels petitz enfants sia petit; e de aquel dels quals los culs son freuls o doloyrozes, les cristeris de aquels sian petitz.	"Sometimes cautery is done with silver or lead or melted iron or brass. And sometimes it's done with instruments that are small and large according to those used by others, for the one used in treating children should be small; and those whose handles are loops or dolorous ones, their cauteries should be small."
La forma de cristeri gran e pauc:	"The method of performing cautery using a large iron and rarely:"
Le cap de la canula de lu desus en le qual es liada la borsa sia ampla segon aquesta manieyra; e sia a lu distinacio la on la borsa es liada ayssi cum vezes.	"The end of the probe above, onto which the bag is tied, should be wide in this manner, and it should be at the same distance where the bag is tied as this."
E la extremitat de lu pus dejus, la qual es entromesa en le cul, sia sorda (so es no-uberta) mot leon, atrasent a subtilita; e en la un del latz de lu sian dos traucs, e en l’autre costat un trauc, e sia la amplesa del trauc segon la groseza dels rays e pus gros un petit.	"And the extremity below, which is inserted into the bag, should be blunt (not open), somewhat pointed at subtlety; and on one side of it there are two holes, and on the other side one hole. And the width of the holes should correspond to the thickness of the rays, with larger ones being smaller."
E sia la borsa en la qual sian pausadas las medicinas de vesica de bestia o de pel de ovelha, e la razit de lu sia un palm.	"And the bag in which vesicatory medicines or sheep's wool are placed should be about a palm long."
E sia perforada per motz traucs ayssi cum es revolvuda; e si l’espazi le qual es entre les traucs la grossetut del dit.	"And it should be perforated with many holes around it, so that the space between the holes is about the thickness of a finger."
E aprop entromet en aquels traucs fiel fort de fiel cru le qual sia de detz fiels, o enviro aquels; e ajusta am aquel la borsa; e quan es pausada en lu la borsa, sia streyt en le cap del cristeri entre dos distingentz am fort costriccio, e aprop cristeriza am aquel quascun trauc: Mays la qualitat de cristerizar am aquel es que tu omples la borsa de la medicina, que sia escalfada segon la quantitat de la tolleransa del malaute; e guarda te que no sia trop cauda ni trop freja.	"And then insert into those holes a strong thread of raw flax, which should be about ten threads thick, or wind it around them. And adjust the bag with that. Then place the bag on the cautery device between two points with strong constriction. And then cauterize with that through each hole: But the quality of cauterizing with that is to warm the bag of medicine according to the quantity of the patient's tolerance, and be careful not to make it too hot nor too cold."
E aprop le malaute sia resupinat sobre le sieu dos, e eleva las suas cambas en sus e pausa dejos lu un cuer sobre le qual ja so les homes o un lansol; e aprop unta la extramitat del cauteri am oli o am album de huou o am mucellage de fenugrec o de semblantz; e aprop entromet aquel en le cul am facilitat, e aprop le ministre prengua la borsa e exprema aquel am doas mas e essemps am vehemencia entro que sia evacuat en le budelh tot aquo que es en le cristeri; e aprop extra le cristeri e le malaute leva las suas cambas a la paret.	"And then the patient should lie on their back, raise their hips up and place underneath them either a cloth or a blanket. And then anoint the end of the cautery with oil or egg white or fenugreek mucilage or something similar. Then insert it into the rectum gently. Then the attendant takes the bag and presses it with two hands and squeezes vigorously until all of the contents of the cautery have been evacuated from the bowel. Then remove the cautery, and the patient should raise their hips to the wall."
E si la medicina forsa aquel a eyssiment, tengua le tant quant poyra; e si dorm am aquel per tota una nueyt, es mays derier en juvament.	"And if the medicine causes him to have an emission, let him hold it as long as possible. And if he sleeps with it for the whole night, it will be more effective in its action."
Mays si tu cristerizas aquel en las malautias de solucio de ventre e l’eyssiment de lu le coyta, lahoras tu itera le cauteri entro que sia sanat.	"But if you cauterize him for conditions of diarrhea and emission of feces from the anus, then repeat the cautery until he is healed."
E si en le cul so emorroydas o apostemas ledens, lahoras sia le cristeri mot subtil e leon, dels cristeris am les quals les enfantz so criterisatz.	"And if there are hemorrhoids or painful fissures in the anus, then the cautery should be very subtle and pointed, like those used for children."
De curacio de las plaguas.	"Regarding the treatment of plagued wounds."
Yeu ja e dit en la divisio de la curacio de las plaguas aquo que convenia al libre, e yeu dic assi la curacio de aquelas am ma e am medicinas segon le conpliment.	"I have already said in the division on the treatment of plague wounds what was appropriate for this book, and I will now explain the treatment of those with medicine according to their complexity."
Donc dic que las plaguas son diversificadas segon aquo en que son faytas las plaguas e segon le loc sobre le qual cazo las plaquas.	"So I say that plague boils are differentiated according to how they occur and the location on which the boil has appeared."
E las causas per que motas vetz son faytas las plaguas so ayssi cum getament de peyra, o inscisio d’espaza o de cotel, o percussio am lansa, o am fustz, o am sageta, o semblantz ad aquels de motas causas.	"And the causes for which many times plague boils occur are like this: a cut from a stone, or an incision with scissors or knife, or a blow with a lance or club or arrow, or similar causes."
Mays las plaguas que so en les locz del cos so ayssi cum plagua la qual catz sobre le cap, o·l col, o·l pietz, o·l ventre, o·l fitge, e semblantz ad aquels dels membres.	"But plague boils that occur in certain parts of the body are like this: one that appears on the head, neck, chest, belly, thigh, and similar ones on the limbs."
E yeu so recomtant la curacio de alcunas plaguas per que pauses aquela ratiocinacio e regla sobre las autras plaguas.	"And I am recounting the treatment of certain plague boils because this reasoning and rule applies to other plague boils as well."
E yeu comensare de las plaguas del cap simplas, quar la rememoracio de las compostas vindra al comensament del tertz capitol.	"And I will begin with simple head plague boils, for the memory of compound ones will come at the beginning of the third chapter."
Donc dic que quan accideys en le cap plagua simpla e no es fractura, lahoras considera: si es per getament de peyra o de semblant, e ja ha trinquada la codena tant solament e es gran plagla e temes sobre aquel malaute havinement de apostema caut, lahoras tu te coyta e fleubotoma la cephalica tantost, e no tardas aquo; e extrats ad aquel del sanc segon la quantitat de la vertut de lu si no mes alcuna causa prohibent de fleubotomia, majorment si·l sanc que es eyssit de la plagua es pauc.	"So I say that when a simple head boil occurs and it is not a fracture, then consider: if it is from a cut by a stone or something similar, and the chain has broken only on one side and it is a large boil, and you fear that an abscess may form in that patient, then quickly perform phlebotomy on the cephalic vein, and do not delay doing so. And extract blood according to the quantity of its strength if there is no other cause prohibiting phlebotomy, especially if the blood that has issued from the boil is little."
E sia la flaubotomia del contrari de la partida plaguada; e guardase le malaute de replecio e de vi e de viandas grossas.	"And let the phlebotomy be done on the opposite side of the boil. And keep the patient from exertion and wine and heavy foods."
Mays si de la minuicio prohibeys alcuna causa, lahoras sia aminorat de la vianda e no apropinque a carn ni a vi.	"But if you prohibit any cause from being performed because of its minuteness, then let him be diminished in food and not approach meat or wine."
E pausa sobre la plagua, si a lu accideys apostema caut, coto enfus en oli rozat solet o en vi en le qual es stipticat.	"And if an abscess forms on the boil, cut it open and put in warm rose oil or wine in which something has been steeped."
Mays si est segur de apostema caut, lahoras pausa sobre la plagua, si es recent am le sieu sanc e le ayre no ha mudat aquela la polvera la qual yeu recomtare aprop petit.	"But if you are sure that an abscess will form, then pause over the boil, if it is fresh with its own blood and the air has not changed the powder that I will recommend later."
E si le ayre ja ha mudada aquela, lahoras pausa sobre alscus enguentz entro que sia sanada.	"When that air has changed its place, then place it over the wounded area until it is healed."
Mays si la plagua es gran o es per inscizio d’espaza e de semblantz, e no so ajustadas las labias de lu per puvils, lahoras ajusta aquelas am sutura segon que yeu recomtare de la sutura de lor.	"If the wound is large or it has gaps and edges that are not aligned due to swelling, then align those edges with stitches according to my recommendations on wound closure."
Mays si la plagua ja es discuberta del os e pen, e no es retencio de lu sino un petit suspensori, lahoras inscideys aquela e aprop cura la plagua am medicinas e restaura la carn aprop en loc de codena, e comanda al malaute que sia pescut de viandas en las quals es groceza: caps e formen coyt e semblantz a lor, entro que sia compost.	"But if the wound is already cleaned of bone and pus, with only a slight swelling but no retention of fluid, then incise it and carefully clean the wound with medicines, restore the flesh appropriately in place of any deficiency, and instruct the patient to be fed on gruel made from wheat flour, broth, and similar foods until they are recovered."
E si atrobas en la codena putrefaccio e no adhereys al os, lahoras tu inscideys tot aquo poyrit e geta aquo, e aprop cura aquo.	"And if you find putrefaction in the flesh that does not adhere to the bone, then incise all of that rotting flesh and remove it, and cleanse it properly."
Mays si en aquestas plaguas es arteria o vena de la qual fluxs de sanc pot evenir, e no es abscindida per medicinas, lahoras tu inquier sobre la arteria, e si atrobas aquela no-inscidida, lahoras tu inscideys aquela am spatum, o lia aquela; e si necessitat te provoca que aquo que havem dit no comfereys, lahoras tu cauteriza entro que·l sanc sia abscidit.	"But if in these wounds there is an artery or vein from which blood flow can occur and it cannot be stopped by medication, then inquire about the artery. And if you find that it has not been incised, then incise it with a scalpel or ligate it; and if what has been said does not suffice, then cauterize until the bleeding is stopped."
E si aquestas plaguas son simplas e petitas, lahoras la causa de lor es leugiere; enayssi que tu polverizas sobre aquelas aquesta polvera, quar consolidada aquela denant que l’ayre mude aquelas.	"And if these wounds are simple and small, their cause is light. Therefore, powder them with this powder, so that they may be consolidated before the air alters them."
E la manieyra de la polvera es aquesta: recipe oli de enses partida una, de sanc de drago partida doas, de caus no-extincta partidas tres; sia tot mot trissat e crivellat, e de lu sia la plagua omplida, e sia constrengida per bona constriccio entro que be sobre aquela aderesca, e sia coagulada am le sanc.	"And the manner of making this powder is as follows: take one part oil of sesame, two parts dragon's blood resin ground, and three parts of un-extinguished camphor. Grind everything together thoroughly and sift it, and use it to fill the wound and bind it with a good bandage so that it adheres to it, and let it coagulate with its own blood."
E aprop strengeys aquela desus am pulvils e leyssa aquela, e no la deslias mentre esta ayssi que no es apostemada, quar no es eredicada de lu la medicina entro que sia sanada.	"And bind that wound above with powders and leave it alone. Do not remove the bandage while it is still healing, because otherwise the medicine will lose its efficacy before the wound is healed."
E alcuna vetz fa aquo sola cautz, quan no es a tu en present enses e sanc de drago.	"And sometimes you may use cautery alone when you do not have sesame oil and dragon's blood resin present."
E ja fa aquesta meteyssa operacio en las grans plaguas quan conveneys que sia pausada sobre aquelas e sian streytas, e so plaguas recentz am le lor sanc, las quals le ayre no ha alteradas.	"And this same operation is also performed on large wounds when it is necessary to put pressure on them and bind them tightly, especially fresh wounds with their blood, which the air has not yet altered."
E si le ayre las ha alteradas, e majorment quan es en temps d’estiu, lahoras no es entencio a la posicio de aquesta polvera, mays adonc cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit, enayssi que tu pauses sobre aquelas alcus enguents degistius, o que pauses sobre aquelas pols de la farina del ordi am aygua e mel entro que getan poyredura; e aprop cura aquelas am l’autra curacio entro que sian sanadas.	"And if the air has altered them, especially during the summer time, then it is not appropriate to use this powder. But in such cases, treat those wounds with what has been said above, that is, apply some of these ointments or apply flour paste with water and honey until they gain strength; and thus cure those wounds until they are healed."
Mays si accideys am la plagua fractura en os, e es petita, lahoras tu extratz aquo am gesti.	"But if there is a fracture in the bone with the wound, especially if it is small, then treat that with gesture alone."
E yeu diyre la cura de las fracturas del cap en aquo que es envenidor.	"And I will discuss the treatment of fractures of the head in what follows."
De las plaguas del col.	"Regarding wounds to the neck."
Mays si la plagua accideys en le col, lahoras no es en lu differencia en medicacio, e entre la plagua del cap quan es simpla.	"But if a wound occurs on the neck, there is no difference in treatment between that and a simple wound on the head."
Mays si ja le nervi del col es inscis o arteria, lahoras si es nervi, no es en lu engen sino que sia evitada curacio de lu am aquo que fa vehement stipticitat, ayssi cum ziniar e zegi que es vetriol e semblantz a lor quar nozo als nervis e contrazo aquel.	"But if the nerve or artery of the neck is cut, then if it is a nerve, avoid treating it with anything that causes violent styptic action, such as vinegar and quicklime which are harmful to nerves and cause them to contract."
E no pauses sobre la plagua alcuna causa de tot freja, quar la sustancia dels nervis es freja e la continuacio de lu es am le cervel, le qual es le pus aut de totz les membres.	"And do not apply any caustic substance on the wound, because the substance of nerves is fiery and their continuity is with the brain, which is the chief part of all members."
E si’ aquo am que es curat de medicinas leugieras, ayssi cum es caus lavada am aygua dousa, alcuna veguada enfusa en oli rozat o no-rozat, e thucia quan es lavada am aygua dousa e las autras peyras minarantz segon aquesta manieyra, e enguentz humitz.	"And if it is treated with light medicines, such as washing it with rose water or infusing it in rose or white oil, or with thyme when washed with rose water and other minor drugs according to this manner, then apply a moist ointment."
Mays si la plagua es gran, lahoras aministra sutura, o coarta las labias de lu, e aprop cura aquela am pulvils entro que sia sanada.	"But if the wound is large, then stitch it up or bind its lips and then cure it with powders until it is healed."
Mays si a la plagua es profunditat o accideys en lu a la pus bassa partida poyredura, lahoras perfora aquela en le loc mays depremegut.	"But if the wound has depth or occurs in a hollow or sunken part of the body, then make a perforation there to relieve the pressure."
Mays si en la plagua ja es inscisa arteria e es conseguit flux de sanc, lahoras separa o secca aquela, o lia aquela, o cauteriza aquela si necessitat te provoca ad aquo.	"But if an artery is cut in the wound and bleeding occurs, then separate it or tie it off with a ligature or cauterize it if necessary."
Mays si ja ha insciditz les spondils del golayro o tot, e so salvadas las venas del col, lahoras tu ajusta las labias de la codena am sutura sobre la cana del golayro e no toques aquel; abantz egala aquel e reduzeys aquel sobre la sua figura natural, e aprop strenh aquel am strectura decent, e leyssa aquela per alcus jorns; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz en les quals es stipticitat e excitacio entro que sia sanat.	"But if the spinal cord of the neck is injured or completely severed and the veins of the neck are saved, then adjust the lips of the wound with stitches over the windpipe of the neck and do not touch it; then align that and reduce it to its natural shape, then strengthen it with proper traction, and leave it alone for a few days. Then cure it with ointments which have styptic and stimulating properties until it is healed."
Mays si la plagua ja en le os a fayta enprecio, lahoras percuireys aquela, e lahoras si en lu ha fragmentz de hos, extratz totz aquels que podes de lor; e aquo que a tu no es apparelhat, leyssa aquo entro que la plagua se poyrisca, e sia separat e la egrecio de lu sia alleujada.	"But if the wound reaches down to the bone, then probe it with something and remove any bone fragments that you can; leave what cannot be removed alone until the wound granulates and separates from it, so that its tension is relieved."
E si la plagua es recent lahoras polveriza sobre aquela polvera la qual t’e recomtada.	"And if the wound is fresh, then sprinkle some of this powder on it which I have recommended to you."
Mays si en la plagua es fayta fistula, lahoras cura aquela am aquo del qual la rememoracio vindra aprop en le sieu capitol.	"But if there is a fistula in the wound, then cure that with what will be mentioned later on in its proper chapter."
De las plaguas del col o de semblantz quan fayta entre las spallas e es fayta am spaza o am cotel o am lansa o am semblantz.	"Regarding wounds to the neck or similar ones when they occur between the shoulders and are made by a slash or cut with a sword, knife, lance, or other such weapon."
Si es percussio de lansa o de cotel, e vezes de lu la profunditat, lahoras considera mays si de la plagua yeys ventositat quan le malaute elena; lahoras sapias que la plagua es mortal.	"If it is a wound from a lance or knife thrust and the depth of it varies, then consider whether there is ventilation in the wound when the patient exhales. If so, then know that the wound is mortal."
E si en lu no es profunditat e la plagua es recent am le sieu sanc, lahoras tu pauses en lu de la primieyra horo polvera, e no strenhas aquel per que no sia le sanc retengut en la profunditat de lu e que retorne al cor e que aucigua le malaute, mays pausa en lu enguent atractiu, e deslia aquela doas veguadas le dia.	"And if it is not deep and the wound is fresh with its own blood, then pause there during the first hour with this powder. Do not strengthen it so that the blood does not remain in its depth and return to the heart and worsen the condition of the patient. Rather, apply an attractive ointment twice a day."
E si l’enguent no es a tu present, lahoras tu pausa en le orrifici de la plagua coto viel per que sucque aquo que yeys de las humiditatz; e fay que le malaute dorma sobre la plagua per que corra aquo que es en lu ajustat.	"And if the ointment is not available, then plug the wound opening with wool so that it does not suck up anything from its surroundings. Make sure that the patient sleeps on the wound side so that what has gathered there flows out."
Mays si ja de la plagua son passatz tres dias o mays e no accideys al malaute spasme ni tremor de cor mal ni strictura de ale, e vezes las autras dispozicios bonas de lu, lahoras sapias que plagua es salva; e adonc cura aquela am calguas e am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanada.	"But if three days have passed since the wound was inflicted and no spasms or cardiac palpitations or respiratory difficulties occur in the patient and other dispositions are good, then know that the wound is safe. Then cure it with lotions and other treatments until it heals."
Mays si la sanacio de lu es excusada, e ja tot temps es uberta, lahoras sapias que ja es fayta fistula; cura donc aquela per le sieu capitol.	"But if the wound does not heal despite all efforts and time has passed without improvement, then know that a fistula has formed. Then cure it according to its chapter."
E si la plagua es per inscisio de spaza o de cotel, e es simpla en la superficia del pietz o del dos, lahoras cura aquela am aquo que es precedit de sutura, si es gran, o am polvera, si es petita.	"And if the wound is from a slash or cut with a sword or knife and is simple on the surface of the flesh or back, then cure it with something preceded by stitching if it is large, or with powder if it is small."
Mays si ja ha fayta enprecio en le os, e so ja de lu inscizas pessas, lahoras tu torqua la plagua e coyta ad extrayre aquelas pessas, si so separadas.	"But if the wound has reached down to the bone and some pieces of it have already been cut off, then turn the wound and try to extract those pieces if they are separate."
Mays si no so separadas, lahoras leyssa las entro que se poyresca la plagua, que la extraccio de lor es alleujada.	"But if they are not separate, then leave them alone until the wound granulates and the extraction of them is relieved."
E de las autras plaguas accidentz en les autres membres le juvament en curacio es le juvament de aquo que havem dit.	"And regarding other accidental wounds in other members, their treatment follows what has been said."
De las plaguas del ventre.	"Regarding abdominal wounds"
L’indisposicio la qual accideys en le ventre es o gran, o pauc, o migiera.	"The condition that occurs in the abdomen is either too great or too little, or moderate."
De la gran alcunas veguadas yeys le budel o nervi del budel, per que es fayta intromissio de lor e la sutura de lor esser pus vehement e pus subtil.	"From the great abundance of veins or nerves of the intestines, it is caused by their intrusion and the suture of them being very strong and delicate."
E disrupcio petita es fayta dificil per autra manieyra, e siec se que la reduccio de lor es pus dificil, si no te coytes de la intromissio de lor al sieu loc tantost, quar se ubre e es engrossat per que le intrament de lu es fayt difficil.	"It is difficult to make a cut in another manner, and so the reduction of them is more difficult if you do not quickly restore their intrusion to its proper place, because it has already been broken and swollen due to its contents."
E donc la milhor disrupcio es migiera, quar en aquela no es dificil la reduccio del budel, ayssi cum es dificil en las doas specias denant ditas.	"And therefore the best incision is midline, because in that one it is not difficult to reduce the intestine, as it is also difficult in both species mentioned above."
E sapias que sutura del ventre es segon quatre manieyras, mays doas suturas son comunas que conveneysso en suturas de las autras plaguas del cors.	"And know that there are four ways to suture the abdomen, but two sutures are common and can be used for other wounds of the body."
E duas autras suturas proprias comunican a las autras plaguas, mays empero so mays proprias en la sutura del ventre.	"And the other two sutures are specific to other wounds, but they are more suited to the suture of the abdomen."
E yeu recomti a tu quascuna am exposicio e declaracio.	"I will recount each one with its explanation and description."
Donc dic que quan la plagua es petita e es eyssit alcuna causa del budel per aquela, e es fayt dificil a reduzir aquel, lahoras aquo es en una de doas manieyras: o per parvitat de la disrupcio ayssi cum havem dit, o quan al budel es venguda inflacio per la frigiditat de l’ayre.	"Therefore it is said that when the wound is small and some cause of the intestine comes out through it, and it is difficult to reduce it, then there are two methods: either because of the smallness of the incision, as we have said, or when the intestine has come inflamed due to the cold air."
E donc quan aquo es ayssi, lahora cove que tu scalfes aquel enayssi que tu submerges una sponga ho drap humit en aygua tebeza sola, o que coguas en aygua squinant, e cyperum, e spic, e embroques am aquela le budel entro que la imflacio sia resolvuda.	"And therefore when that is the case, then you should cauterize it in such a way that you immerse a sponge or wet cloth in hot water alone, or in water with squinanth, cyperus, spic and embroques, until the inflammation has been resolved."
E alcunas veguadas fa aquo vi en le qual ha stipticitat, e es milhor que la aygua sola en resolucio de la imflacio.	"And sometimes it is useful to do this in wounds where there is hemorrhoids, and it is better to use hot water alone for the resolution of inflammation."
E donc cum tu vezes la imflacio esser resolvuda, lahoras tu humecta le budel am aygua en la qual es coyta altea e malvas, quar per aquo es alleujat le intrament de lu am pauca causa.	"And therefore when you see that the inflammation has been resolved, then you should moisten the intestine with water in which altaea and mallow have been cooked, because by doing this the pain is alleviated with little cause."
Mays si es escusat le intrament de lu aprop aquesta curacio, lahoras scindeys la disrupcio un petit am strument am le qual so inscididas emorroydas.	"But if the pain has not been relieved by this treatment, then cut the incision a little with an instrument with which you can remove hemorrhoids."
E la curacio primieyra es milhor, quan es propriada que no es seccio, e no sia occupacio a seccar aprop necessitat e defaliment.	"And the first treatment is better when it is appropriate and not necessary to cut, and there is no need for unnecessary cutting."
Del instrument, sec se la forma de lu:	"Concerning the instrument, describe its form:"
La una partida de lu torta aguda, e l’autra partida no-acuta, e la extremitat subtil, e no sia am la subtilitat de spatum, abantz sia obtusa un pauc.	"The one side of it is cut into a sharp edge, and the other side not sharp, and its end is thin but not too thin like a spatula, rather it should be somewhat blunt."
E donc cum la plagua es amplificada e yeys fora le budel, lahoras cove que la sua reduccio sia segon la forma de lu natural, en le sieu loc propri, si es possible sobre aquo, quar milhor es.	"And therefore when the wound has widened and the intestine has come out, then its reduction should be according to its natural form, in its proper place if that is possible, because that is better."
Mays quan la disrupcio es ampla, e es en la partida pu bassa del ventre, lahoras cove que tu fassas jazer le malaute sobre le sieu dos, e pausa las suas cambas pus autas que·l sieu cap; e si es en la partida pus desus del ventre, lahoras tu pause le cap de lu e·l pietz pus autz que las partidas dejos.	"But when the incision is wide and is in the lower part of the abdomen, then you should make the patient lie on their back, and place their feet higher than their head; and if it is in the upper part of the abdomen, then place the head of the bed down and the feet higher than the sides."
E semblantment si la disrupcio es en una de las doas partz del ventre, lahoras pausa la tua entencio e la tua consideracio tostemps en aysso per que la partida en la qual es la plagua sia pus auta que l’autra.	"And similarly if the incision is in one of the two parts of the abdomen, then always place your intention and attention on this so that the side where the wound is should be higher than the other."
E ayssi cove que tu aministres aquo en las plaguas grans e en las plaguas migieras.	"And thus you should administer this in large wounds and medium-sized wounds."
E en las plaguas petitas, pausa aquo que es a tu preparat, e aprop fay que·l ministre sia entre las tuas mas pyatados, le qual tengua la disrupcio tota am la sua ma e ajusta las labias de lu, e aprop descuebre de aquela ad aquel que siec la sutura alcuna causa aprop autra.	"In cases of smallpox, place what is prepared at hand and make sure your assistant stands between your hands. They should hold the entire disruption with one hand and adjust the lips of it. Then uncover that which might cause some other suture."
E aquesta es la manieyra de sutura comuna: una que prenguas la agula, o comte de agula segon la cantitat de la amplitut de la plagua; e aprop layssa de la extremitat de la disrupcio del dit anular, e strenh la agula una, otre que tu no metas fiel en las doas extremitatz de la codena, am doas extremitatz del ciphac que es dejos la codena de las partidas dedintz, entro que fassas aquela penetrar de aquela partida; e tu ja has agreguadas doas extremitatz de la codena e doas extremitatz del ciphac, e so faytas quatre ordes.	"This is the common method of suturing: First take a needle, or count needles according to the size of the wound. Then leave it at the end of the disruption on your little finger, and pull the thread through one end, making sure not to knot the two ends of the thread together with a ciphac that is left on both sides of the wound. Once you have pierced it from one side, bring the two ends of the thread together and tie them in four knots."
E aprop strenh am fiel doble en le circuit de la agula, e alcunas veguadas de doas partz ensemps, e aprop agregua las doas labias e la plagua per agreguacio decent; e aprop layssa la grossitut del dit e fiqua una autra agulha en aquela, e aprop lia aquela am fiel ayssi cum fiest am la primieyra agulha; e no cesses far aquo si es necessitat am las agulhas entro que ajas complida tota la contriccio de la plagua.	"And pull with doubled thread around the needle, tying it sometimes at two places together. Then bring both lips and the wound together neatly by suturing. Leave the thickness of the finger and place another needle there. Tie this one with thread as you did with the first needle. Continue doing this until you have completely closed the wound."
E sian las agulhas migieras entre groceza e subtilitat, quar las agulhas subtils mot leugierament insciden la carn; e las grossas so de dificil intrament en la codena, e donc per aquo cove que sian migieras en subtilitat e grosseza.	"And needles should be moderate in thickness and fineness. For fine needles scarcely pierce the flesh, while thick ones are difficult to pass through the thread; therefore they should be of moderate fineness and thickness."
E no cove que la agulha sia ficada en doas extremitatz de la codena propdana mot, per so que la carn no sia inscidida leugierament e que la plagua se huebra devant la sua consolidacio.	"And it is not necessary for the needle to be inserted at both ends of the wound very close together. For this reason the flesh should not be pierced lightly and the wound should heal before consolidation."
E no sian prolonguadas de sutura per que la plagua no sia prohibida de consolidacio.	"And sutures should not be prolonged so that the wound is not hindered from healing."
E aprop inscideys las extremitatz de las agulhas per so que no ledescan le malaute deves le sieu dormier; e pausaras sobre la sutura pulvils expanduts de tota partida, les quals tenguan las extremitatz de las agulhas; e layssa aquelas entro que sapias que la plagua ja es consolidada.	"And cut off the ends of the needles so that they do not cause injury while sleeping. Then sprinkle powdered resin over the sutures, pressing it on with both hands, especially at the ends of the needles. Leave them there until you know that the wound has healed."
E aquestas specias de sutura am agulhas en cal manieyra es pus convenient en las plaguas petitas, quar habasta en la sutura de lor una agulha o doas o entorn aquelas.	"And this kind of suturing with needles is more suitable for small wounds, as they can be closed with one needle or two or three."
Mays la segonda sutura es cominal: e es que tu aministres am sutura las quatre extremitatz, de la codena e doas extremitatz del ciphac, en una veguada, am agulha en la qual sia fiel envolopat engual en subtilitat e grosseza.	"But the second type of suturing is common: it consists in sewing together all four ends, those of the thread and both ends of the needle, at once with a needle on which there is doubled thread of moderate fineness."
E aprop quan am la agulha auras penetrat aquestas quatre extremitatz, reduzeys la agulha de aquela meteyssa partida de la qual comensest, per so que le fiel retrayt caja de la pus subirana partida a la plagua, per so que la sutura sia segon sutura de drap am la qual les draps so strengutz.	"And when the needle has pierced all four ends, withdraw it from that same opening where you began. Thus the thread will draw together both sides of the wound and the stitching will be like sewing cloth, with the edges joined together."
E pausa entre quascuna sutura la quantitat del gros del dit mendre.	"And pause between each stitch the thickness of a little finger."
E aquesta sutura sabo les homes.	"And this is how it is done by skilled people."
E am tal sutura yeu cozegui la plagua la qual era accidida a un home en le sieu ventre le qual era stat plaguat am un cotel, e era la disrrumpcio de la plagua major de un palm, e era eyssit dels budels entorn dos palms del budel del mieg loc e era la disrupcio en le mieg del membre; e adonc yeu reduzegui aquel depus que le budel havia stat foro la plagua per xxiiii horas.	"And with this stitching, I closed a wound which had been accidentally inflicted on a man in his abdomen by a knife, the disruption of which was more than a palm's breadth. The wound had extended from two palms around the mid-gut and had disrupted the middle of the intestine. After twenty-four hours, I reduced that part where the intestine had been exposed through the wound."
E la plagua fo consolidada en le spazi de xv dias o entorn, e curegui aquel e es sanat; e aprop aquo visquec per motz ans, e es conversat en las suas disposicios.	"And the wound was healed in about fifteen days or so. The man recovered and was restored to his former condition."
E les autres metges havian jutgat que no fora sanat; e per miracle foc, quar yeu no curegui aquel am enguent, quar era en loc en le qual enguent no era atrobat ni deguna medicina, mays pausegui sobre la plagua coto viel dos veguadas lo dia e ablucio assiduo am aygua de mel entro que foc sanat.	"And other physicians had judged that he would not recover. But it was a miracle that he did, for I did not treat him with any ointment or medicine, but only applied clean bandages twice a day and washed the wound gently with warm water mixed with honey until it healed."
Mays yeu diyre dos specias de sutura proprias segon narracio de Paraula.	"But I will describe two other kinds of stitching according to the account given by Avicenna."
E es que tu comenses am sutura de la codena, e entrometas agulha de la partida deforo a la partida dedintz.	"The first kind is that you begin with sewing the thread and insert the needle from without inwards."
E donc cum la agulha penetra en la codena e en aquel meteys lacertz segon rectetut e en longetut de tot le cos, e layssa la extremita del ciphac en le qual has entromesa la agulha; e fay penetrar en la autra extremitat la agulha de la partida dedintz a la partida deforo en l’autra extremitat del mihat.	"Then with the needle passing through the thread and along the length of the body, leave the end of the needle in that side where you first inserted it. Then pass the needle from within outwards on the other side."
E don cum tu auras fayta aquela penetrar, lahoras tu fay aquela penetrar autra veguada en aquela meteyssa extremitat del mihat de la partida deforo a la partida dedintz; e leyssa la extramitat del ciphac que es en aquest latz, e fay penetrar la agulha en l’autra extremitat de la partida dedintz a la partida deforo.	"And then when you have made the needle penetrate once more on that same side from without inwards, leave the end of the needle on this side and make the needle penetrate again on the other side from within outwards."
E fay penetrar am aquela la tua penetracio am la qual fas aquela penetrar en le ciphac en la extremitat del mirat la qual es en la partida de lu entro que tot aquel penetre.	"And make your penetration with that needle through which you made the previous penetration, and bring it out on the same side as before."
E aprop comensa de aquest meteys costat e cus aquel am la extremitat que es del ciphac en l’autra latz, e extratz la agulha de la codena la qual penetrec, e aprop redutz aquela en aquela codena e cos la extremitat del ciphac que es en l’autra costat am aquesta extramitat del mirat; e extratz aquela de la codena la qual es de part de lu.	"And start again on the same side and bring out the needle with its end which is on the other side, withdraw the thread that has been passed through, and reduce it back into the thread and tie together the ends of the needle on both sides."
E fay aquo una veguada e autra, e fay aquo una veguada aprop autre veguada entro que tu cozes tot aquo que es deforo segon aquel eysemple.	"And do this once or twice more until you have closed all that is outside according to the example given."
E la suma de aquesta manieyra de sutura es que tu cozes am sutura de pellicies am la qual cozo las pels, enayssi que tu cozes le ciphac una veguada de la part de la extremitat de la codena, e que leysses aquela autra veguada entro que la ajas complida.	"The purpose of this method of stitching is to close the skin wound in such a way that it closes the skin. The needle should be passed through once from the end of the thread and left once more before completing it."
Mays la segonda specia de sutura propria la qual dieys eyssament Gualia , e aquest es de sermo de lu e per lu recomtat, es que tu cozas aquela segon semilitut am la qual alcus medicantz cozo aquela, enayssi que agreguan tota partida a la sua compar partida a lu convenient per natura; e aplican la extremitat de autre de lu e la extremitat del mirat al autra extremitat de lu, e aquo es fayt segon que yeu a tu recomti.	"But the second kind of stitching, which Galen describes in detail and recommends for use internally, is as follows: sew along the length of the wound, joining together each part with its opposite part according to nature. Then apply the end of the thread to one end of the wound and the point of the needle to the other end, and do this accordingly."
Cove que tu fiques la agulha en la extremitat del mirat a tu propdana de la partida deforo, e fassas aquela penetrar a la partida dedintz en aquel sol, e leysses dos extremitatz del ciphac; e aprop revolveys la agulha e fay aquela penetrar de foro a la dedintz en dos extremitatz del ciphac.	"First place the needle on the point at one end of the wound and pass it through from without inwards. Leave both ends of the thread outside. Then turn the needle around and pass it back again from without inwards, bringing both ends inside."
E aprop revolveys aquelas cascunas, e fay penetrar quascunas de la partida dededintz entro a la partida deforo en dos extremitatz del mirat autras que so en le latz contrari.	"And then reverse the process, passing each one through from within outwards on both ends of the needle, but on the opposite side."
E aquesta manieyra de sutura es milhor de la sutura comuna leugiera, e es sutura de la qual precedic rememoracio.	"And this kind of stitching is better than common stitching because it leaves fewer marks afterwards."
Aquest es le sermo de Gualia	"This is the speech of Galen"
E mays le diyssero alcus, sutura del ventre es rectificada am dos agulhas, so es que tu entrometas en aquestas a quascunas un fiel, e comensa am intromiccio de agulha de aquo que es deves tu, e fay aquela penetrar entro al autra latz segon sutura de aquels les quals cozo les cuers engualment.	"And some say that stitching the abdomen is best done with two needles, each threaded with a silk thread. Begin by inserting one needle and sewing from one side to the other according to the method used for sewing heart wounds."
E sapias que quan disrupcio es en le mieg loc del ventre, lahoras la sutura de lu es pus difficil que dels autres locs del ventre.	"And know that when there is a disruption in the middle of the abdomen, stitching it is more difficult than stitching other parts of the abdomen."
Mays le juguament de medicacio de plagua es jutgament de las autras plaguas.	"But judgment regarding the treatment of wounds applies to all kinds of wounds."
La qual causa es quar quan tu consieguas la plagua recent am le sieu sanc denant que l’ayre altera aquela, e reduses le budel e cozes aquela e aptas aquela decentment, lahoras pausa sobre aquela polvera encarnativa.	"This is because when you close a fresh wound with its own blood before the air can corrupt it, reduce the gut and sew it up properly, then apply that healing powder."
E si le ayre ja ha alterada la plagua, lahoras pausa sobre aquela alcus enguentz les quals so a tu presens entro que fassan peyra dura e cajan les fiels, e sian consolidatz ciphac e mirat; e aprop cura aquela ayssi cum es la curacio de las autras plaguas entro que sia sanat.	"If the air has already corrupted the wound, then apply some healing ointments that are readily available to make the threads hard and strong, and bind them together. Then treat the wound as you would any other wound until it heals."
Mays si a tu no so presens las medicinas, lahoras pausa sobre aquela tantost, pus que comensa a getar brac, coto viel, e permuta aquel dos veguadas le dia, ayssi cum a tu e ensenhat, entro que sia sanat, quar tu no indigeysses de autra medicacio en motas disposicios quan las plaguas so simplas.	"But if you are not present with medicines, then apply some clean cloth immediately, because it begins to ooze blood and pus, and change it two or three times a day as I have taught you until it heals. For in many cases simple wounds do not require other treatment."
Mays si tu temes que la plagua comunique en lesio als membres principals, lahoras cove que tu submergas lana leon en oli de trempada qualiditat, o en oli rozat, e pausa aquela en le circuit dels locs que so entre les angonas e dejos las aysselas.	If you fear that the plague may communicate injury to the main members, then it is necessary that you submerge lion's wool in warm oil of good quality or in rose oil, and place that on the course between the angles, leaving them there.
E si sent dolor o putrefaccio en les sieus budels, quar motas veguadas aquo s’endeve, lahoras cristeriza aquel am vi stiptic negre tebe, e majorment si la poyredura es pervenguda en le budel e es fayta exitura penetrant entro la conquavitat de lu.	And if there is pain or putrefaction in their bowels, since often this occurs, then you should cover that with vinegar and black syrup of hellebore, especially if the putrefaction has reached the bowel and it is necessary to penetrate within its curvature.
E sapias que aquela que es del budel gros es de pus leugiera sanacio que aquela que es en les budels subtils.	And know that that which is of the large bowel is of lighter healing than that which is in the subtle bowels.
E es de dificil sanacio quar le budel le qual es apelat “gegunu” no recep sanacio de plagua que caja en lu de tot; e aquo es per la gran multitut de venas que so en lu e per la magnitut de lu que so en aquelas, e per subtilitat del cos de aquel, e per propinquitat de aquel a natura de nervis.	And it is difficult to heal the bowel which is called "gegunu," since plague that falls into it causes no healing at all; and this is because of the great multitude of veins that are in it and the magnitude of them that are there, and their subtlety of body, and their proximity to the nature of nerves.
Mays si aquo que procezeys de la plagua es la tela, e conseguas aquela recent, redutz aquela segon la tua rectetut am la qual reduzes les budels engualment.	But if what proceeds from the plague is the tissue, and you obtain that fresh, then reduce it according to your discretion, together with which you also reduce the bowels equally.
Mays si es passat a lu spazi e ja es feyt vert o negre, lahoras que tu strenguas aquela am fiel sobre le loc que es denigrat de lu, per so que vengua fluxs de sanc, quar en la tela so venas e arterias.	But if it has passed into the bowel and is now black or green, then you should burn that with pitch on the spot that is darkened by it, so that fluxes of blood may come forth, since in the tissue are veins and arteries.
E aprop inscideys aquo que es otra aquel liament, e pausa dos extremitatz del fiel pendentz de la partida dejos de la plagua foro lu, per que sobre tu sia alleujada la atraccio de lu deves le cazement de la tela e emissio del brac de la plagua.	And furthermore incise that other membrane which is over there and suspend the ends of the pitch from its edges where the plague has flowed forth, so that you may relieve its attraction by removing the coating of the tissue and emission of the branch of the plague.
Rememoracio de las plaguas quan accideysso en le budel.	Reminder of the plague when it occurs in the bowel.
Quan accideys disrupcio en le budel e es petita, lahoras es possibla que sia resteurada en alcus homes, per aysso quar yeu vi aquel le qual era stat plaguat en le sieu ventre am percussio de lansa et era la plagua de la part dreyta del stomac, e la plagua era antiquada e fayta fistula, e eyssic de lu gestio e ventositat.	When disruption occurs in the bowel and it is small, then it is possible that it may be restored in certain individuals, as I have seen this happen to a man who had been struck with a lance in his abdomen on the right side of the stomach, and the plague was ancient and had made a fistula, but nevertheless he was cured and well.
Adonc yeu pansegui la curacio de lu ja sia que no era confizat en la sanacio de lu, mays cessegui subtiliar aquel entro que foc sanat e le loc es consolidat.	Therefore I followed the cure of it even though it was not confirmed in its healing, but ceased investigating that bowel which had been healed and the spot is consolidated.
E yeu pus que vi le loc ja consolidat, timegui sobre le malaute que endevengues sobre lu accident de mal en le sieu ventre; e no endevenc alcu per aquo mal accident e romas en las suas milhos disposicios mangant e bevent, e aprop entrec en banh e es exercitat en sos ditz.	And I also put that you saw the spot consolidated, and was careful about the illness that might occur from that accidental injury in his belly; and he did not succumb to any harm because of this accident but rather remained in his usual good health eating and drinking, and even entered into a bath and exercised his body.
E ja diysero alcus experimentados que quan endeve plagua en le budel, e es petita, lahoras cove que sia liada segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu prenguas fromiguas de grans caps; e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua e pausa una fromigua de aquelas que aja la boca uberta sobre las doas labias de la plagua; donc quan pren sobre aquelas e strenh la sua boca, abscindeys le cap de lu, quar adhereys e no es dissolvut.	And some experienced persons have said that when a small plague occurs in the bowel, then it is necessary to tie it up in this manner: and thus you should take frogs with large heads; and furthermore adjust the two lips of the plague and place one of those which has its mouth open over the two lips of the plague; therefore when it seizes upon them and stretches its mouth, cut off its head because it adheres and is not dissolved.
E aprop pausa autra formigua prop la primieyra, e no cesses aquo a far am formiguas una aprop autra segon la quantitat de tota la plagua.	And furthermore place another frog nearby the first one, and do not cease doing this with frogs one after another according to the quantity of all the plague.
E aprop reduzeys aquela e cos la plagua; e romanguan aquels caps annexces en le budel entro que·l budel sia sanat; e no accideys al malaute degun nocument.	And furthermore reduce that and close up the plague; and those attached heads will remain in the bowel until the bowel is healed, and there will be no harm from any injury.
E ja es possible que·l budel sia liat am fiel subtil lo qual es fayt del budel de bestia annexs am lu, pus que es mes en agulha; e es que tu prenguas la extremitat de aquestz fiels de budel, e sia mot descarnat, e aprop lia la extremitat de lu am fiel de li, envolopat, e aprop entromet aquel fiel en agulhas e cos am aquel le budel, e areduzeys aquel en la disrupcio.	And it is also possible that the bowel may be tied up with fine thread made from the gut of an attached beast, because it is more like a needle; and thus you should take the end of these threads of gut, and have it well cleaned, and furthermore tie the end of it with a thread of itself, wrapped around, and furthermore insert that thread into needles and sew it up with that bowel, and reduce it in the disruption.
E aquesta manieyra de sutura am formiguas no es sino segon via de fiducia e d’esperansa.	And this manner of suturing with frogs is only a matter of trust and hope.
Mays si la plagua es gran e ampla, majorment si es en un dels budels subtils, quar lahoras no es engen sino subtiliacio, e no es sanacio de lu de tot.	But if the plague is large and extensive, especially if it is in one of the small bowels, because then it is only a matter of subtlety, and not a complete healing of it.
De curacio de zuchem e fistula.	Of the treatment of fistulas and fistulous openings.
Sapias que tota plagua e apostema quan se envilheseys e se Antiqua, e es fayt ulcus, e no es consolidat e geta braç tot temps e no es abscindit, lahoras, en qualque membre sia, universalment es nompnada fistula e nos la apelam aquela azukem.	Know that all plague and abscess when it opens and becomes ancient, and is made into an ulcer, and is not consolidated and continually gives forth a bad smell but is not cut off, then, whatever member it may be in, generally it is called a fistula, which we call that fistulous opening.
E fistula segon veritat es nodacio feutrada, dura, blanqua am la qual no es dolor e a la qual es conquavitat ayssi cum es conquavitat de pena de ausel; e per aysso nompnat aquela alcus rizatz, id est pena.	And in truth a fistula is a hard, thickened, white scar without pain and with a cavity like the cavity of an egg-shell; and for this reason that ulcer is called "penis," that is, egg.
E es en alcus homes humida, la qual geta brac; e fort leu la humiditat es abscidida en alcunas horas.	And there are some people with a moist ulcer which gives forth a bad smell; and if the moisture is cut off in some hours it is cured.
E alcunas veguadas aquesta humiditat es mota, e es pauca, e es grossa, e es subtil.	"This humidity is sometimes excessive, scanty, thick, and subtle."
E yeu ja he denant dit en la divisio, lahoras cum yeu diyssi las plaguas, que tot ulcus que no es sanat ni no es en lu nuda carn, no es aquo sino per una de ix causas: de las quals la una es o per pauquesa de sanc en le cos; o per malicia de lu; o quar entre lu e las labias es carn dura prohibent nativitat de carn; o quar es de mota legesa; o quar aquel ulcus en si meteys es poyrit e la materia que es a lu tramesa es de mala qualitat; o quar la medicina es enconvenient en la curacio de lu; o quan corrupcio catz en la regio, e es pestilencia; o per proprietat de regio ayssi cum endeve a Saragossa , en la qual es fayta difficil degestio de las malautias, e es tardada en aquela sanacio de apostema per natura; o quar en lu es os un, o motz osses.	"There are nine causes that prevent an ulcer from healing when it is not on bare flesh: scarcity of blood in the body, or malice of the ulcer itself; hard, resistant skin between the ulcer and its lips preventing granulation tissue formation; excessive depth; excessive thickness of pus that enters the wound; inappropriate treatment; corruption and pestilence in the area; certain regions where healing is difficult, such as Saragossa, where ulcers have a delayed resolution by nature; or when there is bone present."
Ja e mostrat totas aquelas causas, e·ls senhals de aquelas e la curacio de lor am medicinas en la divisio.	"I have now explained all those causes and their signs, along with the treatments for them in the relevant sections."
E cove assi que yeu fassa a tu saber la curacio de fistula la qual es fayta per via de operacio am ma.	"And furthermore, I want to inform you about the treatment of fistulas, which is usually performed surgically using my method."
E sapias que fistula accideys en totz les membres del cos; quar de aquelas son fistulas que perveno a las venas grantz e arterias, o als nervis, o al ciphac, o al budel, o a la vesica, o ad alcuna de las costas, o ad alcu dels spondils del dos, o ad alcuna de las juncturas compostas per composicio ayssi quo de la ma e del pe; e de aquelas so que dan a lu propinquitat del membre principal e de semblantz.	"And you should know that fistulas occur in all parts of the body: some originate from large veins and arteries, nerves, bladder, intestines, or from between the ribs, spine, or joints composed by articulation like those of the hand and foot; others are situated near the main member and similar structures."
E donc aquela de aquestas fistulas que es segon aquesta manieyra es de las malautias de dificil sanacio, e no recep curacio, e occupacio am aquela es trebalh e ignorancia.	"And therefore, those fistulas that are difficult to heal according to this method receive little care and attention, often being neglected due to ignorance."
E si es de las fistulas alcuna la profunditat de la qual no perve ad aquestz locs que e dit, e esperas e confizas en la curacio de lu, e vols pervenir a cognicio de lu, lahoras pren tenta de eram o de ferr, e si la fistula va segon rectetut, e perquireys aquela am lu.	"And if there is any fistula whose depth does not extend to those places I mentioned earlier, and you hope for healing from it, then take a probe or needle, and if the fistula appears straight, try to explore its course with that."
Mays si la fistula es tortuissitat, lahoras investigua aquela am tenta de plom subtil, quar plom am la levitat del sieu cors es alleujat e curvat deves la tortuositat.	"But if the fistula is tortuous, then investigate it using a lead probe with thin walls, because due to its own weight, lead is straightened and can navigate around curves."
E si la fistula es havent motz horrificis, no es a tu possible que signifiques sobre lu am tenta.	"And if the fistula has many branches or openings, it will not be possible for you to mark them with a probe."
Adonc cristeriza le orrifici per sos orrificis, quar la humiditat per la qual clisterizas aquela va deves las autras orrificis e corr de lor.	"Therefore, cauterize each opening separately, because the liquid used for irrigation will flow into the other openings and branches."
E aprop inquier exquisitament, segon qual manieyra a tu es possible que conoguas si aqui has os o nervi, e es la conquavitat de la fistula longinqua o propdana, o es una fistula a la qual so motz orrificis e esta sobre aquo tot am la suma de la tua fortaleza, am la tua enterroguacio, am la qual enterroguas le malaute, e la invencio de la dolor deves la tua compressio am la ma sobre le loc, e semblantz de las significacios e de las causas accidentz al apostema.	"And carefully examine whether here you have bone or nerve present, and whether the fistula is deep-seated or superficial, or if it has many openings and lies under all of that with your utmost strength and thorough examination, using compression with your hand over the area to locate the source of pain, and similar signs and accidental causes of an abscess."
E cum tu auras stat sobre totas aquelas causas am stacio veraya, lahoras ve a la curacio segon confidencia: e es que tu consideras lahoras si es fistula apparent propinqua o en loc sal, longinqua de junctura, o de nervi, o de arteria, o de vena, o de un dels locs les quals yeu a tu e ditz.	"And after you have considered all of these causes carefully and truly, then proceed to treatment with confidence: consider whether the fistula is apparent near the surface or in a sound location, distant from joints, nerves, arteries, veins, or any other locations mentioned earlier."
Lahoras tu secca la fistula segon que denant es dit de la naracio de lu, e osta aquo que es en aquela filtracio e de carns corrumpudas, e aquo que es nascut en le orrifici de la carn, o de theil e de semblantz, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	"Then dry out the fistula according to what was said earlier about its irrigation, and remove whatever is present in that filtration that consists of putrid flesh, and anything that has been born from the opening of the flesh or similar, until it is healed."
Mays si la fistula es de longinqua profunditat, e es segon rectetut, lahoras cove que inscidas aquela en le preon atant quant a tu sira possible, e aprop mondifica aquela de totas las suas carns corrompudas; e aprop administra calguas envolopadas en medicinas acutas, e intromet aquelas entro a la conquavitat de la fistula, la qual has conprenduda am ferr.	"But if the fistula is deep and goes straight downwards, then it is necessary to insert probes into it as far as you can reach, carefully removing all putrid flesh from inside; then apply hot compresses wrapped in sharp medicines, inserting them into the depth of the fistula that you have reached with an iron probe."
E fay aquo am aquela alcunas veguadas entro que la medicina acuta corroda tot aquo que es romas en la conquavitat de la fistula de la corrupcio.	"And do this several times, until the sharp medicine has destroyed all of the putrid matter within the depth of the fistula."
E aprop restaura aquela am enguentz les quals engendran carn sana entro que sia sanada.	"Then restore it using ointments that promote the growth of healthy flesh, until it is healed."
Mays si no es sanada per aquo, lahoras tu cauteriza aquela segon que havem recomtat.	"But if it is not healed by this method, then cauterize it according to what has been recommended."
Mays si la causa de fistula es os e es deves tu certificat aquo, lahoras tu inquireys aquela e secca aquela segon que havem recomtat, si tu no prohibeys alcuna causa de vena o de nervi o de membre principal ayssi cum havem dit.	"But if the cause of the fistula is bone and you are certain of this, then examine it and dry it out according to what has been recommended, provided that there are no veins, nerves or main vessels involved as mentioned earlier."
Mays si le os es a tu descubert e es en lu alcuna corrupcio e negror, lahoras tu ratz aquel entro que la corrupcio sia hostada tota; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que lu encarne entro que sia sanat.	"But if the bone is exposed and there is no corruption or blackness present, then scrape away the surrounding flesh until all of the corruption has been removed; then cure it using a suitable remedy until it is healed."
E si no es sana e gieta brac ayssi cum fazia, lahoras sapias que tu no est pervengut a la eradicacio tota de la corrupcio; e adonc tu descuebre sobre lu segondanament e exquisitament fay la razio de lu e la mundificacio de lu am la deriera fortalasa tieua, e aprop restaura aquel.	"And if it does not heal and continues to discharge as before, then you should know that you have not completely eradicated the corruption; therefore, uncover it again carefully and investigate its cause, scrape away any remaining corrupted matter with your last effort, and then restore it."
E donc si es sanat, bo es; e sino, lahoras sapias que aquela corrupcio es en la profunditat longinqua del cors, la qual no ha conseguida, e adonc a tu en aquel no es engen sino laysar aquela.	"And therefore, if it is healed, that's good. But if not, then you should know that the corruption lies deep within the body and has not been reached; in such cases, there is nothing else to do but leave it alone."
E si le os corromput es petit, o es a tu possible atirar aquel, lahora tu le atira am forceps subtils las quals conveno ad aquo.	"And if the bone is small and decayed, or if it can be removed, then remove it with small forceps that are suitable for this purpose."
E si so motz osses, lahoras exquisitament fay la extraccio de totz aquels, e de aquels no laysses denguna causa am la tua fortaleza.	"If there are many bones involved, then carefully remove all of them using your full strength and leave none behind."
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat alcuna causa de las humiditatz, e en lor inscizio no ha temor ni error, lahoras inscideys aquelas liaments o carns si so aqui, e deliura les osses.	"But if there are any difficulties due to the humidity involved and there is no fear or mistake in its incision, then incise the ligaments or flesh that may be present, and free up the bones."
Mays si a tu no es preparacio de ostar les osses de la tua hora, lahoras pausa sobre la plagua aquo que poyresca la plagua aquela, e layssa aquela entro que aquo es al enviro de aquels osses de carns e de liamentz, e guarda la plagua que no sia consolidada, e sia constrengida la seccio la qual tu has inscidida en la tua operacio.	"But if you are not prepared to remove the bones yourself at that hour, then apply a dressing that will protect the wound and leave it there until those bones of flesh and ligaments have grown together; keep the dressing moistened and press the edges of the wound that you have incised during your operation so that they cohere."
Habantz, si temes, pausa sobre lu coto submers en sopre trissat am oli, o coto submers en anguent egipciac, o en alcu dels enguentz vertz, quar quan poyriran aquelas liaments, e les osses son de lor seperatz la ablacio, e de aquels atraccio es alleujada.	"Then if you are afraid, apply a poultice consisting of linseed oil or Egyptian ointment or one of the green ointments, for when these ligaments and bones separate due to the attraction of each other, relief is brought about."
Mays si es un gran os ayssi cum le os de camba o de coyssa o semblantz ad aquels, e aquo que de lu es corromput es la facia de lu tant solament, lahoras ratz aquela am resio tant solament derriera entro que sia ostada aquela negror e corrupcio, e aprop restaura la plagua.	"But if it is a large bone such as the thighbone or shinbone or similar ones, and only the surface of it is decayed, then scrape away that decay only from behind until all of the blackness and corruption has been removed, and then apply a dressing."
Mays si aquo que de lu es corrumpyt es gran partida, e la corrupcio ja ha conseguida la medulla del os, lahoras es causa necessaria cerrar aquel e aquel tot inscidir entro al loc on es pervenguda la corrupcio, e lahoras cura aquel entro que sia consolidada.	"But if a large part of the bone is decayed and the corruption has already reached its marrow, then it is necessary to close up that area and incise into the location where the corruption has spread; then treat it until it is consolidated."
E yeu recomti a tu aquo que endevenc ad un home en la sua coyssa per que pausez aquela a eyssempli e adjutori sobre la tua operacio.	"And I recommend to you that when performing an operation on the shinbone of a man, you have assistants and helpers nearby to aid in your procedure."
Foc un home jove per etat entorn xxx ans, al qual accideys dolor en la sua cueyssa, e de las partidas dedintz mauguda es sobre la materia dedintz le cors entro que la materia es pervenguda a la cueyssa, e es materia de apostema am gran apostema, e no foc a lu causa extrinseca.	"A young man of about 30 years of age suffered pain in his shinbone, and it was found that the swelling on the inside of his leg had spread to the bone itself, forming an abscess with a large amount of pus. This was not due to any external cause."
E adonc foc extendut le temps am aquela per la error dels metges entro que l’apostema es hubert, e acorrero de lu materias motas, e la sua curacio foc aprop pausada entro que la camba foc fistulada, e faytz son en lu motz orrificis les quals totz getavan poyredura e las humiditatz del cos.	"And so much time passed with him due to the error of his doctors in not opening up the abscess earlier, that by the time it was finally done there were many materials present and its cure was delayed until the thighbone became fistulous, with many orifices all discharging pus and humidity from the body."
E adonc le curec multitut de metges entorn dos ans, e no foc en aquels savia ma en la art, entro que yeu fu appelat.	"And thus he was treated by many doctors for about two years, but none of them knew more than the art until I was called."
E vi la camba de lu e las materias que corrian de lu aquels orrificis per gran cors; e ja le cos de aquel home era tot stabozit e la color de lu era citrina.	"Then examine the bedding of the patient and the matter that flows from them, those horrible things due to excessive corpulence; already the body of this man was entirely stiffened and his complexion was yellowish."
E adonc yeu intromesi la tenta ad un de aquels orrificis e pervenguec la tenta al os.	"I then inserted my hand into one of those openings and reached the bone."
E aprop yeu e perscrutat tostz les orrificis e trobegui aquels pervenir a lor de totas partidas de la camba.	"And further, you examined all the openings and found that they all originated from all parts of the bedding."
E adonc yeu me coytegui e inscidegui sobre un dels orrificis aquels entro que descrobegui una partida del os, e atrobegui aquel corromput, e ja era terros e corrumput e denigrat; e era ja corrumpuda una partida de la camba entro que havia penetrat entro a la mezola.	"And then you took me and inserted me into one of those openings where I discovered a fracture in the bone, and I encountered that rotting flesh which was earthy and rotted and discolored; already a part of the bedding through which it had penetrated to the middle was corrupted."
E adon yeu serregui aquo que a mi era discubert e preparat del os descubert.	"Then you closed that which I had discovered and prepared from the bone discovered."
E yeu cujegui que no fos en le os sino aquela corrupcio la qual abscidigui e serregui, e yeu ja havia derraziguada.	"And you showed me that it was not in the bone but rather that corruption which I had cut away and closed, and you were already healed."
E aprop pausegui la restauracio de la plagua am medicina consolidativas per lonc temps, e no es consolidada.	"Then you paused the treatment of the plague with consolidative medicine for a long time, and it was not consolidated."
E aprop yeu iteregui e descubregui sobre le os segondament sobre le descubriment primier, e atrobegui continua corrupcio am le os.	"And then you opened again over the bone according to your first discovery, and you found continuous corruption with the bone."
E serregui aquo que a mi apares de aquela corrupcio, e aprop yeu fo perforsat fayre la curacio de lu e restauracio, e no es restaurat.	"And I closed that which appeared to me from that corruption, and then you were pierced fairly deeply in the cure and restoration of it, but it was not restored."
E adonc yeu descubri sobre lu autra veguada e no cessegui inscidir le os petit a petit particuladament e perforsa la restauracio de lu, e no es restaurat entro que inscidigui entorn un palm de lu, e aquel extraxi am la medula sua, e aprop restauregui aquel am medicinas, e es consolidat leugierament e sanat.	"And then you discovered it again and did not cease to gradually incise the bone little by little particularly and deeply in order to restore it, but it was not restored until you incised around about a palm's width of it, and that extracted with its marrow, and then you restored it with medicines, and it was lightly consolidated and healed."
E no es necessaria iteracio en la operacio de lu e seccio de lu sino per la disposicio de la freulesa de lu e per la paucitat de la tollerancia de lu e paor de lu de mort, quar a lu accidia en totas horas per superfluitat de evacuacio sincopi mala.	"And it is not necessary to repeat the operation and section of it except for the disposition of its fleshiness and for its scarcity of tolerance and fear of death, because it has idleness in all hours due to superfluous evacuation and fainting."
E donc sanat es per sanacio entiera, e nada es en loc de os carn dura; e es fayta bona la disposicio de lu en le sieu cors e retornec la vertut de lu; e es conversat en las suas disposicios e no fec a lu contrarietat en ambulacio ni nocument en denguna causa.	"And thus it is healed in its entirety, and nothing remains but hard bone; and the disposition of it in its body is good and returns its virtue to it; and it has been converted in its dispositions and does not do contrary things in walking nor cause harm in any cause."
Mays si es os eminent en loc del cors ja trauquat, lahoras cove que tu secces aquel segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu prenguas liament e strenh aquel en la extremitat de aquel os eminent, e comanda ad alcu que extenda aquel en sus; e pausa aquel liament de lana pus gros del primier liament; e aprop lia aquel sobre la carn que es dejos le os, e exten la extramitat de lu per que atires la carn a las partidas dejos, e tu descuebras la carn sobre le loc le qual voles serrar per que la serra no leda la carn.	"But if it is prominent in the place of the body already broken, then you should cut it in this manner: and that you take linen and bind it around the extremity of that prominent bone, and command someone to extend it while holding it; and pause that first bandage which is thickest; and then lay another one over the flesh which is near the bone, and stretch out the extremity of it so that you can draw the flesh away from its sides, and uncover the flesh above the place where you want to cut in order that the saw does not touch the flesh."
E pausa fust o taula dejos le os decentment, quar quan tu fas aquo no es prohibida la serra que no secce la carn corrumpuda.	"And pause a piece of wood or board near the bone decently, for when you do this it is not forbidden that the saw does not cut corrupt flesh."
E cove que sia la serradura sobre le loc corrumput petit a petit, quar si es en la concavitat del os corrupcio e no appar en la sua apparicio al sentiment, e forssa a serratura de lu autra veguada.	"And the sawing should be done on the corrupt place little by little, because if it is in the concavity of the bone corruption and does not appear in its appearance to the touch, it will force you to saw it again."
E si le os es corrumput e no-eminent, abantz es la una partida continuada am la autra, e la corrupcio es al mieg loc o en partida de lu, lahoras tu descuebre la carn de totas partz tota; e aprop pausa fust dejos, e aprop serra aquel de la primiera partida la on es la corrupcio entro que sia continuada la serratura del autra partida.	"And if the bone is corrupt and not prominent, then it is one continuous piece with another, and the corruption is in the middle of it or in a piece of it; then uncover the flesh from all parts altogether; and pause wood near it, and saw that first piece where the corruption is until the sawing reaches the other piece."
E sia la serradura segon le loc de la corrupcio un petit, segon que havem dit.	"And let the sawing be according to the place of the corruption a little, as we have said."
E si la corrupcio es en la junctura, inscideys aquela junctura corrumpuda, e serra le os la on es continuat del autra part.	"And if the corruption is at the joint, then cut off that corrupt joint and saw the bone where it continues from the other part."
E si de la corrupcio es en la continuacio de doas juncturas, lahoras no es en lu razio sino engen.	"And if the corruption is in the continuation of two joints, then it is not in its proper place but ingenious."
E si la corrupcio es en le pecte de la ma o del pe, es mot dificil; empero cove que tu inquieras la corrupcio en qual manieyra appareys a tu, e que abradas aquela, e mondes aquela segon quascuna disposicio la qual es a tu possibla, e am cascum engen sia rectificat a tu, quan no fa a tu contrarietat vena o nervi.	"And if the corruption is in the palm of the hand or foot, it is very difficult; but you should inquire into the corruption in whatever manner appears to you, and scrape that off and clean it according to each disposition which is possible for you, and with every device make it rectified to you when it does not harm veins or nerves."
E sapias qual es inscididors e las serras a inscidir aquestz osses son motz segon le situament dels osses, e la preparacio de aquels, e la grosseza de aquels, e la subtilitat e la grandeza e la parvitat de aquels, e la duricia e la lor raritat; per que cove que tu prepares a tota specia de operacio estrument convenient ad aquela opperacio.	"And know which are the cutting instruments and saws for cutting these bones are many according to the situation of the bones, and their preparation, and their thickness, and their subtlety and greatness and smallness, and their hardness and rarity; therefore you should prepare all kinds of appropriate instruments for each operation."
E sapias que aquela operacio significa a tu sobre la specia del strument del qual indigeysses; quan am tu es gran studi e lonc e conoyssensa de las manieyras de aquesta art, e testimoni de manieyras de malautias, quar lahoras ja tu las avias per tu meteys aquo que es convenient a lu dels sturmentz a tota malautia.	"And know that this operation signifies to you about the type of instrument which you need; because if you have great knowledge and long experience and understanding of the ways of this art, and experience of diseases' symptoms, then you already know what is suitable for each disease regarding instruments."
E yeu so a tu formant en la fi de aquest capitol le nombre dels instrumentz les quals pausaras cum eyssimples am les quals proceziras a la tua prohibicio la qual experimentaras sobre las autras.	"And I will tell you at the end of this chapter the number of instruments which you should prepare with them, simple ones with which you will proceed to your prohibition which you will experience over others."
Forma de serra:	"Form of saw:"
Forma de autra serra:	"Form of another saw:"
Forma de autra serra:	"Form of another saw:"
Forma de autra serra gran:	"Form of large other saw:"
Forma de ray:	"Form of awl:"
Sia le cap de aquest ray segon la forma de cap de clau stellat, e les puntz de lu sian segon la forma dels puntz alstefegi.	"And let the head of this awl be in the form of a starred key head, and its points be in the shape of asterisk points."
E no conveneys sino que am aquel sian confricadatz les caps de las juncturas quan so corrumpudas, o es la boca gran ampla.	"And it is not convenient unless with that are rubbed together the heads of joints when they are corrupt or have a large wide mouth."
Forma de razori major dels autres:	"Form of larger razor than others:"
Forma de razori menor:	"Form of smaller razor:"
Forma de razori lat:	"Form of broad razor:"
Forma de serra autra decentment fayta: sia fayt arc de lu pus sobira e la acuitat de lu de ferr, e le membre de lu de boys punhal descentment fayt.	"Form of another saw properly made: let it be made with its upper part arched and sharp like iron, and its handle made of wood nicely made."
Forma de lu:	"Form of it:"
Forma de razori en la qual ha concavitat:	"Form of razor in which there is a concavity:"
Forma de razori autra subtil:	"Form of another subtle razor:"
Forma de autra razori de curvada extremitat:	"Form of another razor with curved extremity:"
Forma de rasori petit semblant a tenta:	"Form of small rasp similar to a probe:"
Forma de incisori am le qual so inscidit les osses:	"Form of cutter with which bones are cut:"
Forma de inscisori autra minor:	"Form of another smaller cutter:"
Forma de un autra inscissori; aquest semblant a ray, e la extremitat de lu es cum serra, e es exhibit en motz locs en la razio dels osses:	"Form of another cutter; this similar to an awl, and its extremity is like a saw, and it is used in many places in the ratio of bones:"
Forma de ray lo qual conveneys a rasio de aquel que es perforat dels osses:	"Form of awl which is suitable for that which is bored through the bones:"
E la extremitat de lu es triangulada e de aguda extremitat.	"And its extremity is triangular and has a sharp point."
E es fayt de ferr de India , e semblantment cove que totas las causas que havem ditas de rasoris e de inscissoris e de serras.	"And it is made of Indian iron, and likewise all the causes that we have mentioned of razors and cutters and saws."
De inscizio extremitatz e de la serratura dels osses.	"Of cutting off extremities and sawing bones."
Las extremitatz se poyresso o per causa intrinseca o per causa extrinseca, o cum tu auras medicat aquela corrupcio per curacio de aquelas medicinas e la curacio no comfereys, o vezes la corrupcio anar deves le membre la qual no percuteys denguna causa, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquel membre entro aquo la hon acossec la corrupcio, per que le malaute evasesca per aquo de mort o de malicia que es major defeliment del membre.	"Extremities are removed either by intrinsic cause or extrinsic cause, or because you have medicated that corruption with curation of those medicines and the cure does not occur, or sometimes the corruption goes towards the member which you do not perceive due to no cause; then you should cut off that member where the corruption has occurred, so that the disease escapes through that death or malice which is greater damage to the member."
E le senhal de aquel al qual accideys, es que·l membre es fayt negre entro que sia cujat que foc la ja comburit, o se poyreys aprop la negror entro que la poyredura aquela ane entro aquel membre que siec lu e que prengua tot le cors; e donc coyta te am inscizio de aquel.	"And the sign of that to which it happens is that the member becomes black where the corruption has been burned up or becomes black nearby where putrefaction enters into that member which seizes it and takes all the body; therefore you should cut off that."
E semblantment si es causa de la corrupcio percussio de alcunas causas venenosas ayssi cum de scorpio mari o de vupera o de rutela e de semblantz.	"And likewise if it is a cause of corruption from some venomous blows such as from the sea scorpion or viper or rat and similar ones."
E si la corrupcio o la percussio es en la extremitat del dit, lahoras tu inscideys le dit e no dones spazi a la corrupcio per que ane entro a la ma.	"And if the corruption or blow is on the extremity of the finger, then you should cut off the finger and not give space for the corruption to go into the hand."
E semblantment si accedeys a la ma, lahoras tu inscideys aquela de la razit del focil, e no dones spazi a la corrupcio entro que prengua en le focil del bras.	"And similarly if you approach the hand, then incise that of the wrist of the arm, and do not give space to corruption within, lest it take hold in the joint of the arm."
E si envezeys aquel, lahoras inscideys le bras entro al coyde en la junctura.	"And if you remove that [the hand], then incise the arm between the elbow at the joint."
E si passa otra la corrupcio e la vezes enviro le coyde, lahoras en aquel es la mort del malaute; e aministrar autra causa otra aquo en curacio es quantitat de vertut.	"And if corruption passes through and becomes widespread in the cold regions, then that is the death of the patient; administering another cause for this in treatment is a matter of quantity of virtue."
E semblantment fay del pe quan corrupcio envezeys le dit del pe, lahoras tu inscideys aquel entro ad un dels nozes.	"And similarly concerning the foot when corruption invades the aforementioned skin, then you shall incise it into one of the bones."
E si pren en la pente del pe, lahoras tu inscideys tot le pe.	"If you take hold of the foot's sole, then you shall cut off the entire foot."
Mays si pueja entro al denol, lahoras tu inscideys la camba entro a la junctura del denol.	If the pain can enter the anus, then you should cut open the skin at the joint of the anus.
E si la corrupcio ja es pervenguda sobre le denol, lahoras en lu no es engen sino dimissio, e layssar le malaute a la mort.	And if corruption has already reached the anus, then it is only a matter of dismissal and letting the patient die.
E la manieyra de inscidir le membre o de serrar lu es que tu strenhas le liament en la partida pus dejos la qual voles inscidir, e strenh autre liament sobre le loc; e extenda le ministre un liament a las partidas dejos, e extenda le ministra autra liament en sus; e tu separa la carn la qual es entre dos liamentz ain spatum lat entro que sia descuberta tota la carn; e aprop sia inscidit o serrat.	To incise the member or cut it off, you should stretch the tissue at the part where you want to make the incision and place another tissue on top of it; extend one ligature to both sides of the incision site and another ligature above them; and then separate the flesh that lies between the two ligatures with a wide-bladed knife until all the flesh is exposed; after this, it should be incised or cut off.
E cove que sia pausat drap de li de totas partidas per so que no toque le loc sa, e que vengua al malaute lesio ajustada e apostema caut.	It should be translated as:
Mays si accideys flux de sanc quan obras, lahoras tu cauteriza le loc coytadament, o pausa sus lu alcunas polveras restrenhentz le sanc; e aprop retorna a la tua medicacio entro que sia complida.	"Should bleeding occur while working, cauterize the area carefully or apply powders to constrain the blood; then return to your treatment until completed."
E aprop lia le membre plaguat am liament al u convenient, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	"And then tie the limb with linen bandages where appropriate, and care for it until healed."
E yeu recomti a tu aquo que endevenc a un home en le sieu pe, aquest meteys accident le qual yeu e a tu recomtat, le qual es quar accidic a lu negror en le sieu pe am adustio que era asemblada a combustio de foc.	"You should know what happens to a man on his feet. This is the accident that you and I are discussing: it occurred when he fell into the darkness, suffering burns resembling fire combustion."
E aquela corrupcio accidic primierament en le sieu dit entro que tendec tot le pe.	"And this corruption first happened in his fingers spreading throughout his entire foot."
E adonc aquel home preparec per si meteys pus que vic la curacio anar al membre am la vehemencia de lu que atrobec de dolor e de adustrio de lu, e el inscidic aquel pe entro a la junctura, e foc sanat.	"And then that man began to apply remedies with greater urgency as the pain and burning increased in his foot, which eventually resulted in gangrene at the junction."
Lonc temps accidic a lu aquela meteyssa corrupcio en le dit de la ma indic.	"That corruption persisted for a long time in the fingers of that hand."
E adonc venc a mi, e so me perforsat repercutir aquela superfluitat am aquo que pausegui sobre la ma de las medicinas, aprop la mundificacio del cos de lu; e no es repercussa la superfluitat e comensec anar al autra dit entro que comensec en la ma.	"Then it came to me, and that superfluity began to reverberate with what I had applied on the hand for medicinal purposes. It then started to spread throughout the body; however, the superfluity did not reoccur, but instead began to affect another finger on the same hand."
E el apelec me a inscidir la ma de lu, e yeu no volgui far aquo sperant sobre la repercussio de aquela superfluitat, e mays que temegui deves la inscizio de la ma de lu mort, quar la vertut del malaute era sobre cazement.	"He ordered me to amputate his hand, but I refused to do so hoping for the reverberation of that superfluity. Instead, I was more afraid of the death resulting from the amputation of his hand, as the power of the disease was too great."
E pus que el se desperec de mi, es retornat en la sua terra e pervenguec a mi que aquel home preparec e inscidic la sua ma tota, e es sanat.	"And after he left me, he returned to his land and it reached me that that man had prepared himself and amputated his entire hand, and he was healed."
E no he adhuzida aquesta narracio sino per que sia adjutori sobre aquo que catz de aquesta malautia, e que sia significacio per la qual sia significada e segon la qual sia obrat.	"And I have now ended this narrative only so that it may serve as an aid to those who suffer from this disease, and that its meaning may be understood according to which it is signified and according to which it is acted upon."
De cura sinuum et qualitate clisterizationis cum medicinis.	"On the cure of sinus (boils) and the quality of clysters with medicines."
Quan accideys apostema en alcus membres carnozes e·l spazi de l’apostema es prolonguat entro que fa colleccio de sania, e aprop es romput e perforat, e es eyssida de lu la sania, e roman le loc vuoyt quays cum si era vayssel, e la codena que es desobre lu ayssi cum drap subtiliat, e no es pervengut a deriera corrupcio, e no inprimeys en le os o en nervi ni en liament, es apelat sinu, e no es nompnat fistula.	"When an aposteme occurs on certain fleshy members and the space of the aposteme is prolonged until it forms a collection of pus, and then bursts open and discharges its contents, leaving behind an empty cavity that appears like a vessel, and the cord that is above it resembles a thin thread, and there is no further corruption nor impression on the bone or nerves or ligaments, this is called a sinus (boil), but not fistula."
Mays empero si le spazi es prolonguat entro que la corrupcio enprema en alcun membre, lahoras es appelada fistula e no zukem.	"But if the space is prolonged until corruption impresses on some member, then it is called a fistula and not a boil."
E la cura de lu es que inscidas aquela codena tota ayssi cum es revolvut, e majorment quan es subtiliada e es fayta cum drap, e comfizas que no adhereys al loc per la sua corrupcio.	"And its cure is to excise that entire cord as it revolves, especially when it is thin and resembles a thread, and ensure that it does not adhere to the location due to its corruption."
Mays si tu speras que la codena adheresca e que aquela corrupcio no aja conseguit per deriera consecucio, e en la codena ha spassitut de cara, lahoras tu cura aquel am clisteri.	"But if you hope that the cord will adhere and that corruption has not yet spread further, and there is inflammation in the cord, then you should treat it with clysters."
E es que consideras al sinu, e lahoras si es gran, e·l brac que yeys es de fetent odor, lahoras clisteriza aquel am medicament egipciac le qual es de oli e vi agre e ziniar recebent partidas enguals, e sian ajustadas en un vayssel, e sian coytas sobre le foc entro que’l medicament se fassa rog e pervengua a specitut de mel.	"And when considering the sinus (boil), if it is large and the arm that it affects emits a foul odor, then you should clyster it with the Egyptian medicine which consists of oil, sour wine, and cinnamon bark cut into equal parts, adjusted in a vessel, and cooked over the fire until the medicine becomes thick like honey."
E aprop tu pren de lu aquo que es necessari e dissolveys lu am aygua e mel; e clisteriza am aquel le sinu, e strenh le orrifici de lu, e layssa la medicina en lu per la quantitat de doas horas.	"And then you take what is necessary from it and dissolve it with water and honey; and you clyster the sinus (boil) with this, and strengthen its opening, leaving the medicine inside for about two hours."
E aprop extratz aquela am sprecio; e fay aquo per tantz dias entro que sia mundificat le sinu e sia remauguda la pudor.	"And then extract it with a lancet; and do this for so many days until the sinus (boil) is cleansed and the corruption removed."
E alcunas veguadas es clisterizat am aygua de cendre, quan no es a tu prezent aquest medicament; e es que tu prenguas la cendra de vitz, e met sobre lu aygua; e aprop cola aquela e clisteriza aquel am ela entro que te confizes que·l sinu lahoras es ostat.	"And sometimes it is clystered with water of ashes when this medicine is not present; and you should take the ash from vine wood, place it on the water, and then boil it and clyster with that until you are satisfied that the sinus (boil) has been opened."
E si le malaute no ha tollerancia sobre le medicament egipciac ni l’aygua de la cendre, lahoras clisteriza aquel am aygua e mel e quays sia mesclat ziniar trissat, e clisteriza aquel am vi e mel mesclat, quar de proprietat de mel es que mondifique e lave, e le vi fa adherir le sinu, e majorment quan en le vi ha superfluitat de stipticitat e de siccitat.	"And if the condition does not tolerate the Egyptian medicine nor the water of ashes, then clyster with water and honey mixed with cinnamon bark crushed fine, and also clyster with wine and honey mixed together, because it is a property of honey to cleanse and wash, and wine causes the sinus (boil) to adhere, especially when there is excess heat and dryness in the wine."
E cum tu fas aquo alcunas veguadas e te comfizes que·l sinu ja es remaugut, lahoras clisteriza aquel am aquo que fa naysser la carn en lu.	"And when you have done this several times and are satisfied that the sinus (boil) has been removed, then clyster it with water that makes flesh grow in its place."
E es que prenguas de enguent dyafinicon e dissolveys aquel am oli rozat e vi stiptic; o que clisterizas aquel am alcunas medicinas e enguentz autres que hajan las proprietatz les quals ja he yeu scritz en le tractat dels enguents.	"And take some diaphoretic unguent and dissolve it with refined oil and cold wine, or clyster it with other medicines and unguents that have the properties which I have already written about in the treatise on unguents."
E si le orrifici del sinu es streyt en le qual no es recebuda la canula del clisteri, lahoras tu le amplifique aquel am ferr petit a petit, e pausa en lu calgua envolopada en enguent egipciac o en enguent basilicon entro que sia amplificat.	"And if the opening of the sinus (boil) is narrow and will not allow the clyster nozzle to be inserted, then you should gradually widen it with a small probe, pausing to apply hot water wrapped in Egyptian unguent or Basilicon unguent until it has been widened."
E semblantment si le orrifici es ample, lahoras tu agregua las labias de lu am sutura e layssa de lu quantitat en la qual intre le clisteri ses addicio.	"And similarly, if the opening is wide, then you should draw together its lips with stitches and leave a space for the clyster to pass through without additional openings."
E si le orrifici de lu del qual corr le brac es elevat a las partidas desus, lahoras secca aquel en le pus bas loc que es en lu per que le brac corra entro dejos, quar quan le brac es coartat en la preondeza de sinu la carn esser en lu engendrada.	"And if the opening from which corruption runs up to the parts above is elevated, then dry it with pus applied beneath that part where the arm runs in order that the flesh may not be generated there due to the constriction of the sinus."
E si no es a tu possible seccar le sinu entro al enviro del os pus bas segon que voles, lahoras te perforssa que prepares le membre am preparacio per la qual corr de lu le brac leugierament segon que es a tu apparelhat e que no sia en lu retengut alcuna causa del brac.	"And if it is not possible to dry the sinus from beneath with pus as you wish, then prepare the member with such a preparation that corruption runs out of it lightly according to what appears appropriate to you, and ensure that there is no cause retained in the arm."
E pren medicinas consolidativas que sian pausadas sobre le sinu convenientz ad aquo que vols exxten aquelas sobre drap de li.	"And take medicines with astringent properties which are applied over the sinus appropriately according to what you wish, and extend them onto cloth for application."
E le drap sia de tan gran quantitat cum fa la comunicacio de tot le sinu; e aprop inscidey am las forfexs en le dreyt del orrifici del sinu un trauc pus ample un pauc que l’orrifici del sinu; e aprop exten sobre autre drap de li dels enguentz leons segon la quantitat del trauc, e pausa le sobre aquel per posicio longinqua del orrifici del sinu per que sia aleujat le eyssiment del brac de lu e no ostes le drap gran sino aprop alcus dyas una veguada.	"And the cloth should be of sufficient size to cover the entire sinus; and then incise with forceps on the right side of the opening of the sinus an oblique slit a little wider than the sinus; and then extend onto another piece of cloth some adhesive ointments according to the size of the slit, and apply it over that for a distant position from the opening of the sinus in order that the discharge of corruption may be eased and the cloth not adheres too much, but only for a few days once."
Mays aquel que es sobre le orrifici del sinu, le qual remauguas en tota hora per so que yesca aquo que es ajust en lu del brac.	"And that which is over the opening of the sinus should be removed at all times in order to allow that which has accumulated in the arm to be expelled."
E per que sapias si aquo que corr de lu del brac es mot o pauc, o es digest, o es no-digest.	"And so that you may know whether what runs out of the arm is much or little, digested or undigested."
E am aysso tu considera le loc de aquel sinu, si en lu sent le pacient dolor o no, e si es en lu apostema.	"And at the same time consider the location of that sinus, whether the patient feels pain there or not, and if it is an aposteme (abscess)."
E cum la tua medicacio es prolonguada en la tal manieyra, e vesas la matiera que es gitada sobre le orrifici del sinu ja adhereys, o se apropria adherencia, lahoras le mayti tu le deslia o le tertz dia, e quan deslias la plagua, lahoras muda le drap per autre e renova le enguent.	"And when your treatment has been prolonged in this manner and you see that the matter which is thrown out onto the opening of the sinus already adheres or has begun to adhere, then remove it on the third day, and when you remove it, change the cloth for another one and renew the ointment."
Mays si del sinu aprop lon spazi yeys virus subtil, lahoras no te desperes de la adherencia de li, quar la sanacio de lu se apropria, quar so alcus homes en les quals tarda generacio de carn en las lors plaguas, e de aquels so en les quals es fayt le contrari de lu.	"But if from the sinus a subtle virus spreads over a long distance, do not despair of its adhesion because the healing of it will take place because some people have late generation of flesh in their wounds, and others have accelerated growth."
E si del sinu aprop motz dias es yssit brac indigest, lahoras sapias que·l sinu no adhereys; e si es tardada la adherencia del sinu e es la causa prolonguada, lahoras tu ajusta en exsiccacio de las medicinas, e si las medicinas so humidas en lor substancia e en la sua vertut, son seccas ayssi cum enguent dyafinicon, quan es en lu ajustada superfluitat de addicio de zegi.	"And if from the sinus undigested corruption is issuing over many days, then you will know that the sinus does not adhere; and if adhesion of the sinus is delayed and the cause prolonged, then adjust for drying of medicines. And if the medicines are humid in their substance and virtue, they become dry like a fine ointment when there is an abundance of addition of gypsum."
E le mays derier am le qual es curat, es que prenguas de enguent dyafinicon e sia dissout en oli rozat, e sia sobre lu vojat vi antic engual en la sua substancia, e aprop comfeys aquel am lu, e usa de aquel.	"And the final treatment is to take some powder of diaphoretic drugs, dissolve it in rose oil, and apply it as a poultice on the affected area."
E ja fa semblant en aquela accio, quan no y a brac, enguent dyafinicon, mel quan es coyt entro que sia engrossat, e usa de lu; o que prenguas mirra e aloen e enses, e trissa tot e polveriza sobre le mel quan es sus le foc, e aprop lineys aquo sobre drap e strenh aquel sobre le sinu; e lineys aquel am le mel le qual has cuoyt entro que es engrossat, e polveriza sobre drap e strenh aquel.	"And similarly in this action when there is no broth, you take diaphoretic powder and honey which has been mixed together and apply it; or else you take myrrh, aloeswood, and incense, grind all these together and powder them over the honey when it is on the fire, then line that with cloth and apply it to the chest; and apply that honey which has been mixed together onto the cloth and powders it."
E alcunas veguadas so administratz am lu aristologia longua e razitz de lili celesti (e es lili celesti) e farina de errs e centaurea, e usa de aquels simples o ajustatz, trissa aquels e cribela e polveriza sobre le mel le qual he recomtat; e husa de lu.	"And sometimes it is administered with long pepper and small quantities of celestial lily (and this is the celestial lily) and barley flour and centaurea, and apply those simples either separately or combined, grind them and sieve them and powder them over the honey which has been prepared; then use that."
E si es prolonguat le sinu, e no es sanat per aquesta curacio, lahoras sapias que la corrupcio es en le preon de lu, e ja fa enquisicio en les osses o en les autres membres durs o als liaments; lahoras tu le cura am curacio fistular, ayssi cum desus es dit.	"And if the chest is prolonged and not healed by this cure, then you should know that the corruption is in the lungs, and then make an investigation into the bones or other hard members or the humors. Then you treat it with a fistular treatment, as has been mentioned above."
De curacio de panarici et unguis attritae et incisione digiti additi et sectione.	"And concerning the cure of panniculus carnosus and horny callosity and trimming of nails and cutting of fingers and amputation."
Panarici es apostema le qual nays dejos la ungla del dit pous de la ma o del pe, e fort leu nays en les autres ditz, e cum es prolonguat e la sua curacio es mens prezada, o es apostemat de apostema caut, o es corrumput, e gieta brac entro que corrodeys la razitz de la ungla, e fort leu corromp aquela tota, e fort leu perve la sua corrupcio al os entro que es a lu odor fetent, e es fayta la extremitat del dit lada, e la color de lu es fayta fusca.	"Panarici is an aposteme that appears under the nail of the thumb or other fingers, and when it becomes prolonged its cure is more difficult. Either it is an aposteme from cauterization or corrupted, and it pushes out brawn that corrupts the skin around the nail, and sometimes it corrupts all of it. And sometimes it permeates its corruption to the bone so that there is a foul odor, and the tip of the finger becomes gangrenous, and the color becomes dark."
E donc quan tu auras aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu inscidas am ferr tota la superfluitat que es romasa de la ungla e aprop cauteriza la plagla aprop aquo, quar cauteri mot es juvatiu en aysso.	"And therefore, when you have that with what has been said in the division and your cure does not confer, then it is necessary for you to cut away with iron all the superfluity that remains from the nail and apply caustic to the wound nearby, because cauterization is very helpful in this."
Mays si le os es sa e la ungla es sana, e las addicios de la ungla vuoydas ja compremen las carns a las partidas dedintz, e comensan lu punger e ledeysso aquela, lahoras cove que tu pauses ray subtil dejos le angle de la ungla que pungeys la carn, e impelleys aquela sus e inscideys aquela carn am facilitat, e pausa sobre aquo que roman de la carn de las medicinas comburentz corrosivas entro que sia tot remaugut; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	"But if the bone is sound and the nail is healthy, and the edges of the nail begin to hollow out and then they start to sting and hurt that place, then it is necessary for you to make a thin incision at the angle of the nail that pierces the flesh and push it upwards and cut that flesh easily. Then apply medicines that burn corrosively until all the remainder of the flesh has been removed. And then cure it with ointment until it is healed."
Mays si la corrupcio ja enprem en le os, lahoras cove que tu inscidas le os aquel e le extraguas, car nul temps no es sanat que sia en lu le os corrumput.	"But if the corruption has already entered into the bone, then it is necessary for you to cut away that bone and extract it because there is never a time when the bone can be healed once it is corrupted."
E si vezes la corrozio e la corupcio anar en le dit, lahoras tu inscideys aquel en un dels nozes segons que es premesa la sua rememoracio, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	"And if sometimes the corruption and decay go into the finger, then you should cut it at one of its joints according to what is remembered in its treatment. Then cure it until it is healed."
Mays si a la ungla endeve percussio o atricio, e endeve en aquela dolor vehement, lahoras cove que tu al comensament fleubotomes le malaute, e aprop secca la ungla am spatum agut am seccio transversa desus en jus, e guarda te que la seccio no pervengua entro a la carn que es dejos la ungla, quar tu faras accidir al malaute dolor vehement, e sira causa a nativitat de la carn ajustada superflua en le loc; e aprop cura aquel loc am aquo que ceda dolor.	"But if the nail receives percussion or attrition and there is violent pain in that place, then it is necessary for you to perform flebotomy at the beginning, and then dry out the nail with a sharp spatula making a transverse section above and below, but guard yourself so that the section does not go into the flesh that is near the nail because you will cause great pain there and produce superfluous flesh in that place. Then cure that place with something that alleviates pain."
Mays dit ajustat, le qual es nat en las mas de alcus homes, fort leu es carnos tot, e fort leu so en lu osses, o fort leu es en lu ungla.	"But this is a condition that occurs in many men. Sometimes it is fleshy throughout and sometimes it appears on the bones or sometimes it appears under the nail."
E alcus de lu son natz en la razit de la junctura, o es la nativitat de lu en alcus nozes dels ditz.	"And some of them are born in the joint of the root of the nail, or they appear at certain joints of these fingers."
Mays aquel que es nat en alcus nozes del dit no se mau, e aquest que es nat en las juncturas fort leu es maugut.	"But that which appears at certain joints of the finger is not painful. But that which appears in the joints is usually painful."
E de aquels que son natz carnoses, la seccio es leugiera, e es que tu inscidas aquel deves la sua razitz am spatum lat.	"And of those that are born fleshy, the section is easy to make. And it is necessary for you to cut it down at its root with a broad spatula."
Mays de aquel que es nat en la razitz de la junctura, la curacio es dificil; e donc guarda te de la abscizio de lu.	"But of that which is born at the root of the joint, the cure is difficult. And therefore guard yourself from doing an incision to it."
Mays en aquel que es nat en dit deves les nozes, cove que tu inscidas al comensament la carn de lu am inscizio redonda entro al os, e aprop serra am una de aquelas serras convenientz ad aquo, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	"But in that which appears on the finger between the joints, it is necessary for you to first cut away the flesh of it with a round incision down to the bone. Then saw it off with one of those convenient saws suitable for this purpose and then cure it until it is healed."
Mays consolidacio la qual accideys als ditz entre lor motas veguadas o per nativitat del home que nays enayssi, o per consolidacio de plagua o per combustio de foc, o per semblantz, adonc cove que secces aquela consolidacio entro que les ditz retorno a la sua forma natural.	"But consolidation which occurs in these between their visible spots or by nature of the man who is born thus, or by consolidation of wounds or by burning with fire, or by similarity, then it is necessary to dry out that consolidation until those things return to their natural form."
E aprop pausa entre lor draps de li enfuzes en oli rozat per que no sian consolidatz leugierament, e separa entre aquels, o pausa entre aquels una lamina de plom subtil entro que sia consolidat segon que cove.	"And apply between their wounds layers of cloth soaked in rose oil to prevent them from becoming consolidated easily. And separate those places or apply a thin plate of lead between them so that they become consolidated as necessary."
E semblantment si accideys consolidacio en alcus ditz am la palma, lahoras tu secca aquela consolidacio segon que es preparada e conveneys a la figura del membre.	"And similarly if consolidation occurs in some fingers on the palm, then you should dry out that consolidation according to what is prepared and suitable for the shape of the member."
De inscizio de vices, so son varicas.	"There are two kinds of incisions:"
Vices so son varicas, e so venas envolutas grossas plenas de superfluitatz melencolicas las quals veno en motz dels membres del cors, e le major adveniment de lor en las cambas, e majorment en las cambas dels itinerantz e dels laborantz e dels portantz.	Vices cause varicose veins, and these are thick veins filled with superfluous melancholic humors that come in the form of swellings on various parts of the body, especially on the legs. This is more common among travelers, workers, and porters.
Adonc cove que tu administres purguacio del cors de colera negra alcunas veguadas am expulcio fort, e aprop sangna le pacient de la vena basilica.	Therefore, you should administer a purge of black bile several times with forceful evacuation and draw blood from the patient's basilica vein.
Mays la curacio de lor am ferr es segon dos manieyras: la una es que sia inscizas e sia atirat aquel sanc negre, e l’autra manieyra es que sia elevada la vena e sia extrayta tota.	But the treatment of varicose veins with iron is done in two ways: one way is to cut them open and draw out that black blood, and the other way is to elevate the vein and extract all of it.
La seccio de lu es segon aquesta manieyra: embroca al comensament la camba am aygua cauda mot entro que le sanc gros sia resolvut, que es feculent de la camba, e aprop strenh la camba del malaute a la partida pus sobirana de la coyssa entro a la partida dejos del denol am una benda, e aprop secca la vena en un loc, o en dos, o en tres am seccio ampla, e aprop eleva le sanc negra am la tieua ma de la partida dejos de la camba entro en sus, e desus en jus, entro que del sanc sia yssida la quantitat que voles e que vezes habastar, e la qual tollera la vertut del malaute.	The sectioning is done in this manner: first, insert a sharp-pointed blade into the vein at its beginning with cold water so that the thick blood may be dissolved and drawn out, which is the sediment of the vein. Then tie off the vein of the sick person near its upper starting point above the swelling and below the ankle bone with a bandage, and cut it open in one or two or three places with a wide section, elevating the black blood with the tourniquet from the lower part of the vein upwards and downwards until as much blood as you desire has been removed. This is enough to relieve the sickness.
E aprop lia aquela, e comanda a lu que abstengua de las viandas colera negra engendrantz.	"And then bind that [wound], and command the patient to abstain from eating black bile-producing foods."
E itera la curacio per fleubotomia quan las venas so umplidas e aquo notz al malaute.	"And repeat the cure through phlebotomy when the veins are full, as desired by the patient."
Mays la elevacio de lor es segon aquesta manieyra: tu que razas la camba del malaute, si en lu so motz pels, e aprop met le en banh e embroca la camba de lu am aygua cauda entro que s’enrogesesca e las venas sian exuberadas; o que sia exercitat per exercici fort, si banh no es a tu present, entro que·l membre sia scalfat.	"The elevation of their limbs should be done in this manner: you that raises the patient's leg, if it is bound by bandages, remove them and place the limb in warm water to heat it up until the veins become visible; or have them engage in vigorous exercise if bathing is not available, until the limb becomes heated."
E aprop secsa la codena en le dreyt de la vena per seccio en le lonc o en le derier de lu deves le denol, o en le pus bas de lu deves lo talo.	"And then cut the vein on the right side with a scalpel along its length or at its end, as desired by the patient, or lower down, close to the ankle."
E aprop uobre la codena am uncis e excorja la vena de tota part entro que appara al sentiment, e es deves la appericio de lu que vezes aquela roga declinant a negror.	"And then open the vein with forceps and strip the vein from all sides until it becomes visible to the touch; this is how one recognizes that the wound has healed properly."
E donc cum evazeys e de la codena tu vezes aquela blanca quays sia corda.	"Then, as you evacuate blood from the vein, you will see that white substance which is called 'cord' appearing."
E aprop tu met dejos aquela le ray entro que sia elevada e sia gitada de la codena, e sospen aquela am onci orp leon.	"And then you should put a bandage around it to elevate and compress the wound, and suspend it with a splint or a stick."
E aprop secsa autra seccio aprop aquela seccio per tres ditz, e aprop excorja la codena de la partida desus de la vena entro que apparia.	"And then make another incision close to the first one three days later, and strip away the wound from above the vein until it appears."
E aprop eleva aquela e inscideys aquela en deriera seccio deves le talo, e aprop extratz aquela e eleva aquela entro que sia yssida per la seccio segonda, e aprop extratz aquela de la seccio que es sobre aquela.	"And then elevate the wound and make another incision further down towards the ankle; extract the blood from there and elevate it so that it drains through the second incision, and also extract it from the incision that is above it."
E fay aquo entro que extraguas aquela de la seccio que es pus sobirana o pus auta de totas las seccios, entro que tota es yssida; e lahoras inscideys aquela.	"And do this until you have extracted all the blood from the incision that is above or from all the incisions, so that it has all drained out; then stitch up the wound."
E si no obezeys a tu ad extrayre e elevar, lahoras intromet una agulha am fiel fort doble e ligua aquela e extratz la, o intromet dejos lu le ray e revolveys la tua ma a tota part entro qu’en sia getada.	"If you are unable to extract and elevate it in this manner, then insert a strong double-threaded needle with catgut through the vein and tie it off, or put a bandage around it and twist it tightly until the bleeding stops."
E guarda te que no sia inscidida; quar si es trencada, es fayt a tu dificil elevar aquela mot e es vengut sobre le malaute per aquela nocument.	"And be careful not to cut yourself; for if you do, it will be difficult to stop the bleeding and this will cause further illness from that injury."
E cum aquela tota auras fora-gitada, lahoras pausa sobre le loc de la plagua lana submerssa en vi e oli rozat e oli no-rozat, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	"And once all of it has been drained out, then apply to the wound area lanolin soaked in rose oil and olive oil, and cure it until it heals."
E si la vit es contrayta havent tortuositat a la qual sia envolucio a las partidas, e no es segon rectitut segon que havem dit, lahoras cove que tu fendas sobre aquela a tota partida de tortuositat de lu e als locs de envolucio de lu, e aprop suspen aquela am uncis entro que eleves aquela tota.	"And if the vein is constricted with no tortuosity in its path as we have described, then you must make incisions all along the course of the tortuosity and at the points where it branches out, and suspend those areas with forceps so that you can elevate them."
E guarda te deves la tua seccio que no inscidas la vena e que no plagues aquela, quar dificil sira a tu elevar aquela; e serva la tua prudencia en aquela.	"And be careful not to cut into the vein itself or to compress the wound too much during your incision, as it will then be difficult to elevate that area; use your discretion in this matter."
Forma del inscident am le qual es seccada vit:	Here is a description of how to perform an incision to expose a vein:
Forma de unci orp:	"Form of an ointment for eyes:"
No es a lu accuitat ayssi cum als uncis ni es de aguda extremitat per so que no plague la vena; e es de grossa flexibilitat leon, quar si era subtil, inscidira la vena per la sua subtilitat; habantz es en lu superflua grosseza ayssi cum havem dit.	"It is not made like other ointments or with sharp edges so as not to harm the vein; and it is of considerable flexibility, for if it were too thin, it would cut into the vein due to its thinness; having some excess thickness above as we have said."
De extraccio venae cruris.	"Of extracting blood from the leg vein."
Aquesta vena es engendrada en las cambas en terras caudas ayssi cum al- Ategi en terra de Arabics e en las terras de India caudas e aridas de pauca teneritat e en las quals no nays erba ni aybre.	"This vein is generated in the buttocks, like that found on the ground in Arab lands and in dry lands with little tenderness where there is neither grass nor shrubbery."
E fort leu es engendrada en autres locs del cors otra las cambas.	"And it also originates in other parts of the body besides the buttocks."
E la gestacio de lu es de putrefaccio que ve dejos la codena ayssi cum venen dedintz le cors serpentz e vermps e scarides e verms engendrantz entre la codena e la carn.	"And its generation is due to putrefaction that arises from the spine, like venom spreading within the body causing serpents and worms, scorptions, and other vermin to breed between the spine and the flesh."
E senhal de la suscepcio de l’adveniment de lu es de aquesta vena que accideys en la camba enflammacio vehement; e aprop le loc es vesicat; e aprop comensa la vena yssir del loc de aquela vesicacio quays sembla razit de planta.	"And the sign of its occurrence is this vein that occurs in the buttock with intense inflammation, and around that location there is blistering; and from that location the vein begins to emerge like a root of a plant."
E adonc cum appar de lu la extremitat, lahoras cove que tu envolvas sobre aquela una pessa de plom del qual sia le pes de una drac. entro a ii drac., e noza aquela e layssa le plom suspendut de la camba.	"And then when the tip of it appears, you should immediately wrap around it one weight of lead, whose weight is that of two dragons, and tie that and let the lead hang from the buttock."
E tantas veguadas cum yeys de lu alcuna causa a las partidas defora, envolveys aquo em plom e noza aquel.	"And whenever some cause comes from it towards the outside parts, wrap that in lead and tie it."
E si mot es prolonguat, lahoras tu inscideys una partida de lu e envolopa le romanent; e no inscidas aquela de razit entro que sia fora yssida, quar si inscideys aquela es contrayta e intra en la carn e fa accidir apostema e poyredura en le loc e ulceracio mala.	"If it does not extend further, then you should cut off a part of it and wrap the remainder; but do not cut that part which is still inside, for if you do so it will contract and enter into the flesh causing an aposteme and putrefaction in that location with bad ulceration."
Per que cove que sia tractada suaument e sia extrayta petit a petit, entro que sia fora-gitada del derier de lu e no remangua de lu alcuna causa en le cors.	"So that it should be treated gradually and extracted little by little until it is completely removed from the body, so that there remains no cause of it within the body."
E de aquesta vena es yssit en alcus homes que es en la sua longitut de v palms e de detz e ja es pervengut a mi que yssic un de xx palms.	"And I have seen some men with veins that are as long as two or three palm lengths, and one has even come to me that was twenty palm lengths."
E si es inscidida en la hora de la sua medicacio, lahoras intromet lo ray en le trauc de lu e perfora aquela am lonc trauc am le cors, entro que sia evacuat tot aquo que es en la materia, e administra putrefaccio del loc per alcus dias am medicinas; e aprop cura aquela per la curacio de apostemas.	"If it is cut at the time of its treatment, then insert a thread into the tract of it and pierce it with a long thread through the body until all that is within it has been evacuated, and apply putrefaction to the location for several days with medications; and immediately cure it by the method of treating apostemes."
E aquesta vena alcunas veguadas ha motz ramps, e majorment quan apar a la junctura del pe o en le pe, e veno a lu motz orrificis, e es yssit de quascu orrifici ram.	"And this vein sometimes has many branches, especially when it appears at the junction of the foot or in the foot, and many orifices come to it, and each orifice has its own branch."
E donc cura aquela ayssi cum havem dit en la divisio e am aquo que es desus dit.	"And then cure it as we have said in the division above with what has been mentioned above."
De sectione super vermes generatos sub cute et dicitur aegritudo bovina.	"Regarding the cutting of worms generated under the skin, it is called bovine disease."
Aquesta malautia es nompnada en alcuna terra deves nos malautia bovina per so quar motas veguadas endeve als bious e es verm pauc un le qual es nat entre la codena e la carn, e va en tot le cos pujan e devalan, e es mostrat al sentiment deves le sieu anament de membre en membre entro que disromp la codena e yeys fora.	"This disease is called in some lands 'bovine illness' because many times it happens to oxen and is a worm that is born between the backbone and the flesh, and goes throughout the body causing pain and discomfort, and it shows itself by its movement from member to member until it breaks the backbone and comes out."
E la generacio de lu es per putrefaccio de alcunas humors ayssi cum accideysso verms e serpentz e lombrics e ascaridas en le ventre.	"And its generation is due to putrefaction of certain humors, just as worms, serpents, earthworms and ascarids are generated in the belly."
E es temut per la malicia de lu, quar quan el va en le cors e es elevat al cap, e es pervengut al huel, lahoras fort leu uebre en lu e intra e destruzeys le huel, e aquo endeve motas veguadas.	"And it is feared for its maliciousness because when it goes into the body and rises to the head and reaches the brain, then it often breaks open in it and enters and destroys the brain, which happens many times."
E donc quan tu voles curar aquel e extraire lu, lahoras no se fa si no deves la sieua ambulacio e apparacio de lu al sentiment, e adonc cove que tu strenhas aquo que es sobre lu e aquo que es dejos lu am liament e constriccio fort, e aprop secca sobre lu e extratz aquel.	"And therefore when you want to cure it and extract it, first observe its movement and appearance through the sensation, and then grasp what is above it and what is below it with linen and strong compression, and immediately dry it out over it and extract it."
E si es preondat en la carn e no le atrobes, lahoras tu pausa cauteri am foc sobre le loc entro que mora, e la major causa que es temuda es corrupcio de lu am la qual corrump le loc ayssi cum havem dit.	"And if it is embedded in the flesh and cannot be grasped, then apply a cautery with fire to the location where it resides, for the greatest cause that is feared is corruption of it with which it corrupts the location as we have said."
May si tu vezes aquel esser pervengut al cap prop del huel, lahoras strenh sobre le sobrecil am fort strictura, e aprop secsa sobre lu, e extratz aquel; e cove que·l malaute use de mondificacio del sieu cors am medicinas evacuantz humors putridas malas, e guarda se de viandas generantz putrefaccio.	"And if it reaches the head near the brain, then grasp above the eyebrow with strong compression and immediately dry out over it and extract it; and the patient should use medicines to purify his body by evacuating bad, putrid humors, and avoid foods that cause putrefaction."
De sectione super aegritudinem nafir.	"Regarding the cutting of the disease called nafir."
Aquesta malautia es nompnada en nostra terra nafir, e es dolor la qual ve en alcus membres, e aprop es permudada de membre en membre.	"This illness is named in our land as nafri, and is a pain that comes to certain limbs, and then moves from limb to limb."
E yeu ja e vista aquela segon que yeu te recomtare.	"And you have already seen that one according to what I recommended."
Yeu fu apelat a una femna malauta ad una vila, e descubric le sieu bras e vi una imflacio petita en la vena funis del bras, e pus que fu romas per una hora, vi aquela imflacio anar ayssi cum va verm pujan ad aquest, mays pus leugierament que esser por, ayssi cum si fos argent viu quan corr de loc en loc.	"You were called to a sick woman in a village, and when you uncovered her arm you saw a small inflammation on the vein of the forearm. And since it had been there for an hour, you saw that inflammation move like this way or that way, but more slowly than water flowing from one place to another, as if it were molten silver running from place to place."
E adonc anet s’en la dolor de aquel loc e fiquet se en le muscle, e aprop aqui stec per una hora.	"And then the pain went away from that place and settled in the muscle, and remained there for about an hour."
E aprop correc en l’autre cors entro que pervenc al autre bras.	"Then it moved to the other side of her body until it reached the other arm."
E aprop recomtec a mi que revolvia se per tot le cors sieu segon que yeu vi; e fo trop meravelat de la permutacio de lu e de la velocitat de membre en membre.	"And then he told me to examine her entire body according to what I saw; and he was too amazed by the movement of it and the speed with which it moved from limb to limb."
E yeu ja havia vist denant aquo en les mieus huels segon aquela manieyra, empero yeu he vistz motz les quals atroban dolor esser permutada de membra a membre.	"And I had already seen something like that before in my practice, though I have never seen anything more clearly showing how pain can be transferred from limb to limb."
Mays no vi aquo am les huels ayssi cum en la femna.	"But I had not seen such clear examples of this phenomenon as with the case of this woman."
E yeu no cogiti esser aquo sino que es per aquo quar la femna era de viela, on so de secs cors e de venas descubertas, e en aquesta apparec al sentiment aquela ventositat permutada.	"And you thought that it was because the woman was elderly and had dry skin with visible veins, and therefore this wandering sensation could be felt more easily."
E es necessari que no apparesca segon aquesta retro-curacio en aquels que son delicioses e am cors humitz de venas ameguadas.	"And it is necessary that it does not appear according to this retrocution in those who are delicate and have moist skin with hidden veins."
E cum tu voles la curacio de lu, e le pacient sent aquela dolor, lahoras no es a tu aparent al huel ayssi cum havem dit, lahoras tu strenh sobre aquel e dejos lu leugierament e secse sobre aquel entro que sia yssida aquela ventositat coartada, e cauterize le loc.	"And when you want the pain to pass, and the patient feels it in a way that is not apparent to your touch as we have said, then you should press on it lightly and carefully where that wandering sensation has stopped, and cauterize the spot."
Mays si tu no la vezes am los tieus huels, alhoras tu cura aquel am excussio del cors e am aquo que expelleys ventositatz, e carmina aquelas am pillulas fetidas e am pillulas de serapi e semblantz.	"But if you do not feel it with your own hands, then you should treat her by purging the body and using remedies that expel windiness, and give her pills made of stinking herbs and pills of serpentaria and similar substances."
De extraccio de sagetas.	"De extracció de saquetes."
Sagetas son diversificadas segon las specias, e segon les locs dels cors en les quals cazo, quar la lor diversitat es que de aquellas so que han grans puntas, e petitas, e concavas, e sordas, so es solidas; e de lor so que han tres angles, e de aquelas a las quals so que han lenguas; e de aquelas a las quals so astelas.	"Saquetes són diversificades segons les espècies i segons les parts del cos on caiguen, car la seva diversitat és que hi ha aquelles que tenen grans puntes, petites, concaves i sordes, i també solides; i també n'hi ha amb tres angles, amb llengües o amb forma d'estel."
E aquela que es segon les membres e las pessas en las quals cazo es segon dos manieyras: quar les membres o so membres principals concaus, ayssi cum le cervel, le cor, e·l fitge, e le pulmo, e les ronhos, e les budels, e la vezica, e a lor semblantz; e donc quan catz en alcu de aquestz membres e aparo a tu senhals de mort, la qual causa yeu recomtare aprop, lahoras cove que tu evites extraccio de aquela sageta en aquels quar la mort siec aquel en le qual en las majors disposicios, e quan a tu no appareysso aquestz mals senhals, e la sageta no es amaguada en la profunditat del membre, lahoras tu extratz aquela e cura la plagua.	"Hi ha saquetes que es segons els membres i els òrgans on caiguen, de dues maneres: perquè alguns membres o òrgans principals són causants, com ara el cervell, el cor, el fetge, els pulmons, les bròquies, les budelles i la bufeta urinària, i els seus semblants; i per tant, quan caiguen en alguns d'aquests membres i apareixen senyals de mort, que explicaré pròximament, haureu d'evitar l extracció d'aquella saqueta en aquells casos en què la mort és imminent. Però quan aquests malaltia no apareixen i la saqueta no està amagada en la profunditat del membre, llavors extrieu-la i tracteu la ferida."
E dels senhals del servel es quan catz en lu sageta, e trespassa le os, e es yssit del cyphac le qual es sobre le cervel, quar accideys per lu soda vehement, e scotomia, e vertige, e rogor en les huels, e imflamacio e rogor de la lengua, e spasme e permixtio de entendament e vomi de colera, e fort leu es abscindida la paraula e es destruida la votz, e es yssit del loc de la plagua humiditat blanca semblant a pols, e yeys de lu semblant ad aquositat de la carn.	"Els senyals del cervell quan cau una saqueta i travessa l'os, i és vist al cispaç que està damunt el cervell, són: un sòd sobtat i violènt, escotomia, vertigen, calor als ulls, inflamació i calor de la llengua, espasmes i confusió mental, vòmits biliosos, una forta sensació de dolor que impedeix parlar i destrueix la veu, i hi ha una humitat blanca com a pols al lloc de la ferida, semblants a l'aigua de la carn."
E donc si appareyso a tu aquestz senhals, lahoras tu abste de la curacio e de la extraccio de la sageta, si non es fora.	"Per tant, si apareixen aquests senyals, haureu d'abstenir-vos del tractament i de l'extracció de la saqueta, si no és per força."
Mays les senhals de la sageta quan catz en le cor, so que ela es prop de la mamila senestra, e sent am aquela quays sia ficada en causa dura, e no es causa vueda; e fort leu le movement de la sageta es semblant a movement del pols, e corr de la plagua sanc negra, e siec aquel fregiditat de las extremitatz, e suzor freja, e sincopi; e donc sapias que la mort descen ses tot dopte.	"Els senyals d'una saqueta quan cau en el cor són els següents: generalment es troba a prop del pits esquerre i s'atura en un lloc dur i no buit; el moviment de la saqueta és fort i similar al dels pols, i hi ha sang negre que surti de la ferida. També hi pot haver fred als extrems, sudor fred i sincòpi, i sabreu que la mort és imminent."
E les senhals quan la sageta ha plaglat le pulmo so eyssiment de sanc spumos de la plagua, e les vayssels que so prop del col so apostematz, e es mudada la color del malaute, e expira sperit gran aut, e demanda atraccio de ayre freg.	"Els senyals quan una saqueta ha colpitu els pulmons són els següents: hi ha sortida de sang espumós per la ferida i els vasos propers al coll estan congestionats. També es canvia la color del malalt, expira amb gran sopar o demanda aire fred."
E si catz la sageta en le velament le qual es en le pietz, e la dolor lahoras es prop de las costas petitas, e es fayt le ale gran am vehement dolor e am sospir, e no so maugutz totz les membres dels muscles.	"Si cau una saqueta en el vel·leït del pit (el diafragma), el dolor és propi de la zona de les costelles petites. També hi ha respiració ràpida i dolorosa amb suspiros, i tots els membres es queden sense musculatura."
E si catz la sageta en le stomac, lahoras fort leu yeys de la plagua vianda alcuna indigesta.	"Si cau una saqueta en l'estómac, llavors hi ha un fort dolor per la ferida i hi ha alguna cosa que no està digerida."
E si catz la sageta en le ventre, e es ficada en lu, yeys alcuna fenda de la plagua, o la tela, o budel le qual es disromput, e no es speransa en la curacio de lu extraccio de la sageta.	"Si cau una saqueta a l'abdomen i hi ha una ferida, es possible que es produeixin lesiones a l'intestí o als vasos sanguinis i no es té esperança de guarir-la amb l'extracció de la saqueta."
E si la sageta catz en la vesica, e es yssida defora urina, e procesesca de lu alcuna causa a las partidas defora, e fort leu es dolor sobre le malaute, lahoras sapias que es mortal.	"Si cau una saqueta en la bufeta urinària i l'orina és expulsada per fora, amb procesos al voltant dels marges exteriors, hi ha un dolor molt fort. Sabreu llavors que és una ferida mortal."
Mays les autres membres ayssi cum es la cara, le col, e·l golayro, e las spallas e le adjutori, e les spondils del dos, e la furcula, e la coysa, e la camba e a lor semblantz dels membres, son salvatz segon las majors disposicios quan la sageta no atroba vena ni arteria e no es sageta venenosa.	"Però els altres òrgans com ara la cara, el coll, l'espatlla, el maluc i els costats, les vertebres dorsals, la clavícula, la cua, la cambra i els seus semblants, es poden salvar segons les majors disposicions quan la saqueta no atorga cap vena ni artèria i no és venenosa."
E yeu recomtare aquo a tu que he vist del esser de aquestas sagetas, per que signifiques per aquo sobre la curacio tieua.	"Aquí endedrec com a vostre amic i confidencial sòc disposat a revelar-vos els secrets d'aquestes saquetes perquè pugueu conèixer la seva cura."
La qual causa es, quar en un home cazec sageta en le lacrimal del huel de lu en la razitz del nas, e yeu extrayssi aquela a lu del autra partida, dejos le grays de l’aurelha de lu, e es sanat, e no accidic en le huel de lu nocument.	"El motiu d'això és que quan un home va rebre una saqueta al canal lacrimal del seu ull i tu la vas extreure per l'altra banda, deixant el graó de l'orella del mateix costat, es guarirà i no hi haurà cap mal als seus ulls."
E extrayssi autra sageta a un Juzeu la qual cazec en lu en lo grays del sieu huel, dejos la palpebra pus dejos, e la sageta ja era occultada e no so conseguit de aquela sino una petita extremitat am la qual adhereys al sieu fust, e era gran sageta de las sagetas agudas dels Turcs , am ferr leon en la qual no havia aurelhas.	"En extraure una altra saqueta a un jueu que havia caigut en el graó del seu ull i va deixar la palpebra coberta de pus, però no va poder extreure-la perquè estava amagada. Només es va aconseguir una petita extremitat amb la qual adhèrieix al seu fust. Era una gran saqueta d'agulles agudes dels turcs, amb ferramenta lleona sense orelles."
E senat es le Juzieu , e no accidic en le sieu huel mal accident.	"El jueu va guarir i el seu ull no va patir cap mal."
E extrayssi una autra sageta a un home Crestia la qual era cazuta en le golayro, e era sageta arabica, e es aquela a la qual so aurelhas; e adonc yeu inscidegui sobre aquela entre doas guidegi, e ja era submersa en le golayro de lu; e adonc yeu so subtiliat am aquela, e aprop extraxi aquela, e es sanat le Crestia .	"Va extreure una altra saqueta a un cristià que havia caigut en l'espatlla. Era una saqueta àrab amb orelles i va ser incisa entre dues guies. Després de ser submergida en l'espatlla, es va extraure amb molta subtilitat i el cristia va guarir."
E extraxi autra sageta a un home la qual era cazuta en le sieu ventre, e cogitegui que moris per aquela; e donc, pus que foro passatz xxx dias e no es mudat sobre lu alcuna causa de las suas disposicios, inscidegui sobre la sageta e engenagui sobre aquela, e es sanat, e no accidic a lu accident mal.	"Va extreure una altra saqueta a un home que havia caigut al seu abdomen i pensava que moriria per aquella. Després de trenta dies sense cap canvi en les seves condicions, va ser incisa sobre la saqueta i extreta, guarint-se i no patint cap mal."
E vi mays un home en le qual cazec una sageta en le dos de lu, e consolidada es la plagua sobre lu, e pus que foc aprop set ans, yssic la sageta en la razitz de la coyssa.	A man is brought before you in whom an arrow has lodged itself in his back. The wound is festering and it has been so for six years, yet the arrow remains embedded in its shaft.
E vi una femna a la qual cazec sageta en le sieu ventre, e la plagua es consolidada dedintz lu, e no es mudada en las suas disposicios en re, e la femna no atrobec nocument en alcunas de las suas opperacios naturals.	A woman comes before you who has had an arrow lodged in her belly. The wound has healed over and remains unchanged in appearance, yet she experiences no discomfort in any of her natural functions.
E vi un autre home al qual cazec sageta en la sua cara e consolidada es la plagua e romas la sageta, no atrobant aqui mota dolor, e motz semblantz ad aquestz.	Another man comes before you with an arrow lodged in his face. The wound has healed over and the arrowhead is still there, but he feels no pain here, just as it seems to you.
E extrayssi la sageta del home dels princeps del rey que era cazuda en le mieg loc del nas sieu e ja havia declinat a la partida dreyta un petit, e occultada era tota la sageta.	And the arrow was extracted from the nostrils of the king's son who had it stuck in the middle of his nose and had already declined slightly to the right, and the entire arrow was hidden.
E yeu fu appelat a la curacio de lu aprop le cazement de la sageta entro a tres dias.	And you were called for his healing as soon as three days after the lodging of the arrow.
E adonc yeu atrobegui la plagua de la sageta mot streyta; e adonc yeu inquirigui aquela am tenta subtil, e no sentigui aquela; mays el la sentia puncio dejos la aurelha dreyta, e adonc speregui que aquela punccio era per la extremitat de la sageta.	And therefore you found the wound of the arrow very narrow; and therefore you inquired therewith subtly, and did not feel it there; but he felt it piercing from behind his right ear, and therefore you supposed that this piercing was by reason of the extremity of the arrow.
E amplastregui le loc am emplaustre en le qual es vertut atrectiva e digestiva, confizant de mi que·l loc se apostemes per que appares a mi le loc de la sageta, per que secces sobre aquela.	And you enlarged the place with plaster in which there is attractive and digestive virtue, being confident that this place attracts to itself the place of the arrow, so that it appears before me and dries up upon it.
E no accidic en le loc accident significant que la sageta hagues conseguit aquel loc; e yeu continuegui am le emplaustre sobre lu per motz dias e no accidic accident; e consolidada es la plagua entretant, e romas le malaute de la extreccio de lu per spazi de motz dias entro que un jorn sentic la sageta dintz le sieu nas e recontec aquo a mi.	And there occurred no accidental accident that the arrow had reached that place; and you continued with the plaster upon it for many days, nor did any accident occur; and meanwhile the wound had healed up, but the pain of the extraction remained for the space of many days until one day he felt the arrow inside his nose and recognized this to me.
E adonc yeu pausegui sobre la plagua medicina acuta corrosiva per motz dias entro que foc ubert, e am la tenta yeu assagegui aquel, e atrobegui la extremitat de la sageta subtil, la qual adhereys al fust.	And therefore you put upon the wound a caustic corrosive medicine for many days until it opened up; and with your finger you touched that place, and you found the extremity of the arrow subtly adhering to its shaft.
E aprop yeu ajustegui en la apersio de la plagua per aquela medicina acuta entro que apparec a mi visiblament la extremitat de la sageta, e passec a mi temps am aquo per le spazi de temps entro quatre meses.	And immediately you adjusted in the opening of the wound by that caustic medicine until I saw visibly the extremity of the arrow appearing to me; and after that time it took about four months.
E aprop pus que la plagua foc amplificada, e foc a mi possible entrometre las forfexs en lu, e remaure aquela, e no obezic ad eyssiment, lahoras yeu no cessegui subtiliar e ingeniar sobre aquela am manieyras de engen, entro que comensegui un dia sobre aquela am manieyras de engens pendre lu am forceps descentment faytas, segon que vindra la forma de aquelas en la fi del capitol, entro que extraxi aquela; e aprop restauregui aquela plagua.	And after the wound was enlarged and it became possible for me to insert forceps into it, I remained there and did not cease subtly to strive and devise concerning that with various devices until one day I began upon it with various devices to take hold of it with descending forceps made of bone, according to what shall come at the end of this chapter, until I extracted it; and immediately afterwards I restored that wound.
E alcus metges jutgavan que la cartillage del nas no es restaurada, e yeu restauregui aquela e la plagua es consolidada, e sanat es le malaute per sanetat entiera, e no noguec en lu en deguna causa.	And some physicians judged that the cartilage of the nose was not restored; but I restored it and the wound was healed up, and the pain was entirely cured, with no remainder in any cause.
E yeu recomti a tu la qualitat de extraccio de alcunas sagetas per que pauses aquo regla e significacio sobre aquo que no he dit, quar las partidas de aquesta art e las difinicios de aquela no so conprehendudas am narracio ni no comprehen aquelas le libre.	And I relate to you the manner of extracting certain arrows, which pause this rule and meaning over that which I have not said, for the parts of this art and their definitions are not understood with narration nor do they comprehend this book.
E le artifexs savi compara am pauc sobre mot; e am aquo que es present sobre aquo que es absent; e atroba operacio novela e instrument novel deves le descendement de las causas extranhas del art quan accideysso.	And the wise artisans compare little with much; and about that which is present they say more than about that which is absent. And they find new operation and novel instrument by the descent of the extrinsic causes of the art when it happens.
E donc yeu dic que sagetas no son fora-gitadas dels membres en les quals son ficadas sino segon dos manieyras: o per atraccio del loc en le qual intrec; o per le contrari de la autra partida.	And therefore I say that arrows are not extracted from the members in which they are inserted except by two manners: either by attraction of the place into which it enters, or by the contrary part of the other.
E aquela que es gitada per le loc don es intrada, o es sageta procedent en loc carnos, e es atirada e fora-gitada.	And that which is shot through the place where it enters, either it is an arrow proceeding from a fleshy location and is drawn out and extracted.
E si no obezeys a eyssiment de la hora en la qual catz, lahoras cove que tu la laysses per alcus dias entro que poyresca la carn que es al enviro de lu, e sia alleujada l‘atraccio de lu e la sua egressio.	And if it does not obey extraction at the time when it was shot, then it is necessary that you leave it for some days until the flesh which is around it may soften, and thus its attraction and its exit are facilitated.
E semblantment si es ficada en os e no obezeys a tu a eyssiment, lahoras layssa aquela per alcus dias e itera aquela am atraccio e mocio en quascun dia, e ja es fora-gitada.	Similarly if it is inserted into bone and does not obey extraction to you, then leave it for some days and repeat this with attraction and movement every day, and it will already be extracted.
E si no obezeys a tu eyssiment aprop alcus dias, lahoras cove que tu perforas en le circuit de la sageta en aquel os de tota partida am taravel subtil entro que·l loc sia amplificat de la sageta, e aprop extratz aquela.	And if it does not obey extraction even after several days, then it is necessary that you bore into the circumference of the arrow in that bone with a subtle borer until the place is enlarged by the arrow, and immediately extract it.
E si la sageta es ficada en le os del cap e ja ha procezit en un dels ventres del cervel, e apparo en le malaute alcus de aquels accidentz les quals yeu e ditz, lahoras abste de la extraccio de la sageta e layssa aquela entro que·l sieu esser sia equat aprop alcus dias; quar si la sageta perve al ciphac, lahoras la mort no es a lu prolonguada.	And if the arrow is inserted into the bone of the head and has already proceeded into one of the ventricles of the brain, and certain accidents appear in the disease which I have mentioned earlier, then abstain from extracting the arrow and leave it there for some days until its being there is equalized; because if the arrow pierces the brain, then death will not be prolonged.
E si la sageta no es ficada sino en le cors del os tant solament e no passa entro al ciphac, e roman le malaute per alcus dias, e no accideys a lu denguna causa de aquels accidentz, lahoras tu engenia en la atraccio de la sageta e en la atraccio de lu.	And if the arrow is not inserted except into the body of the bone alone and does not pass into the brain, and the disease remains for some days without any cause of those accidents happening to it, then you should devise means of extracting the arrow and extracting from there.
Mays si es mot ficada e no obezeys a tu a extraccio, lahoras tu aministra taravels en le circuit de la sageta ayssi cum havem recomtat, e aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat.	But if it is deeply inserted and does not obey extraction to you, then administer borings in the circumference of the arrow as we have recommended, and immediately cure the place until it is healed.
Mays si la sageta ja es amaguada en le loc del cors, e es amaguada del sentiment, lahoras tu inquireys aquela am tenta, e si tu sentas aquela, lahoras atira aquela am alcus sturmentz les quals so convenientz a la atraccio de lu.	But if the arrow has already become hidden in the place of the body and is hidden from sensation, then you should inquire after it with a probe, and if you feel it, then draw it out with some instruments which are convenient for attracting it.
E si no podes sobre lu per la constriccio de la plagua e per la longitut del preon, e aqui no es os ni nervi ni vena, lahoras tu fen sobre la plagua entro que sia amplificada e que sia possible extrayre la sageta.	And if you cannot do it because of the contraction of the wound and the length of the probe, and here there is neither bone nor nerve nor vein, then work upon the wound until it is enlarged and it becomes possible to extract the arrow.
E si so a lu aurelhas am las quals sia tenguda, lahoras tu deliura la carn en la qual es ficada de tota partida am tot le engen que poyras far; e ingenia sobre aquo, si no podes sobre la evasio de la carn en la fractura de las aurelhas e en torssio de aquelas entro que obezesca.	And if it is held by the ears with which it is caught, then deliver the flesh in which it is inserted from all sides with every means you can devise; and devise concerning this, whether you can do it without tearing away the flesh in the fracture of the ears and twisting them until it obeys.
E quan tu administras la extraccio de la sageta en quascun loc on sia, lahoras tu usa am torcio de la tua ma am forceps a totas partidas entro que fassa aquela obezir; e subtilia am deriera subtilitat que la sageta no sia trencada e que sia fayta a tu dificil atraccio de lu e de aquela extraccio.	And when you administer the extraction of the arrow in whatever place it is, then use turning of your hand with forceps at all parts until it makes that obey; and subtilize with great subtlety so that the arrow is not broken and that it may be done easily by its attraction and its extraction.
E si no podes sobre aquela de la tua hora, lahoras tu layssa per alcus dias entro que se poyrescan las partidas que so en le circuit de lu, e aprop itera aquela quar lahoras es alleujada.	And if you cannot do it at that time, then leave it for some days until the parts which are around it may soften, and immediately repeat this because now it is easier.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat flux de sanc, lahoras tu administra aquo que havem dit de curacio en le sieu capitol.	But if you encounter flux of blood to you, then administer that which we have said concerning cure in its chapter.
E guarda la tua vertut de inscizio de vena o de nervi, o de corda, e aministra engen en tota manieyra a tu possibla de la evasio de la sageta; e fay aquo am facilitat e tranquillitat e tarditat e fermetat ayssi cum yeu e a tu recomtat.	And guard your power of incision of vein or nerve or cord, and administer every possible means of avoiding the arrow with facility and tranquility and slowness and firmness as I have recommended to you.
E donc que fassas contrayre la sageta per so que·l malaute sia segon la figura segon la qual foc deves le cazement de la sageta en lu, quar es mays juvatiu.	And therefore do this in order to contract the arrow so that the disease may be according to the figure according to which it was necessary for the casting of the arrow into it, because it is more useful.
Mays si aquo no es a tu possible, lahoras tu aministra aquo que es a tu possible per las figuras.	But if this is not possible to you, then administer that which is possible to you according to the figures.
Mays las sagetas que son fora-gitadas per le contrari del autra partida, o que ja de lu procezeys alcuna partida a las partidas de fora, o fa gilbositat la extramitat de la sageta per sentiment de la partida pus desus de la codena propdana e vezes aquela eminent; adonc tu secsa sobre aquela; e sia la seccio segon la quantitat en la qual prenguan las forceps; e aprop atira aquela, quar ela es fayta leugiera a eyssiment.	But the arrows which are discharged by the contrary of another part, or those which have already caused some wound in the parts outside, or they make swelling and hardness of the extremity of the arrow by sensation of the wound above the joint and towards that elevation; then you should search for it; and let the section be according to the quantity in which the forceps grasp it; and immediately draw it out, because it is easily extracted with ease.
Mays si es retenguda en le os, lahoras tu tortz lama segon contrarietat entro que la sageta enprema en le os, e amplifique a si meteys, e aprop extratz aquela.	If it is retained in the bone, then you twist the hook according to the contrariness of how the arrow entered the bone, and amplify it to itself, and then extract that.
E sino, layssa aquela per alcus dias, e aprop itera aquela entro qu’en yesca.	And if not, leave that for a few days, and then try again when it's possible.
E si le fust de la sageta es en aquela, lahoras tu impelleys aquela am lu.	And if the shaft of the arrow is still in there, then you pull that out with it.
Mays si le fust es cazut e voles aministrar inpulsio, lahoras tu intromet e aquela, si es sorda, sturment concau per so que intre la concavitat de lu en la coa de la sageta e aprop impelleys aquela am lu.	But if the shaft has broken off and you want to administer an impulse, then you insert this, if it is blunt, using a concave tool with such force that it enters into the concavity of the arrow's butt end and then pull that out.
Mays si la sageta es concava, lahoras tu impelleys aquela am sturment fort intrant en aquela, quar la sageta es alleujada per aquela.	But if the arrow is concave, then you pull it out with a tool entering into it forcefully, because the arrow will be eased by that.
E si la sageta es entoxiguada, lahoras cove que tu concaves tota la carn en la qual es le vere, si es a tu possible aquo, e aprop cura aquela am aquo que si conveneys.	And if the arrowhead is barbed, then it is necessary to cut away all the flesh around where it entered, if that is possible for you, and then treat the wound with whatever is appropriate.
E si la sageta catz en le pietz, o en le ventre, o en la vesica, o en le costat, e es propinqua per so que tu tocas aquela am la tenta, e es a tu possible secsar sobre aquela, lahoras secsa sobre aquela e guarda te de inscizio de vena o de nervi, e extratz aquela, e aprop cos la plagua si indigeys, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	And if the arrow strikes bone, or enters the belly, bladder, or side, and is close enough that you can touch it with your fingers, then carefully cut over it, being cautious not to injure a vein or nerve. Extract the arrowhead, and then sew up the wound if necessary, and treat the wound until it heals.
Forma de forceps am las quals so atiradas las sagetas:	The form of forceps with which arrows are extracted:
Sian las extremitatz de lor cum a bec de ausel que son faytas cum serra quan prendon sobre la sageta per so que no la layssen.	Their extremities are like bird beaks that are made with saws when they grasp the arrow so as not to let it slip.
E de aquelas son faytas motas specias, grans, paucas e migieras, segon la quantitat de la grandeza de la sageta e de la sieua pauqueza, e de la amplitud de la plagua, e de la constriccio de lu.	And there are many species of these saw-like tools, large, small, few and many, depending on the quantity of the size of the arrow and its thickness, and the width of the opening, and its tightness.
Forma de impellent concau de aquesta extremitat conquava ayssi cum pena de ausel per so que sia alleujat le intrament de la sageta en lu, e impulcio de aquela sorda:	Shape this concave extremity like a bird feather to ease the entry of the arrow into it and push back that plug.
Forma de impellent de sorda extremitat:	Form of pushing the plugged extremity
ayssi cum ray per so que sia alleujat le intrament de lu en la sageta concava e es impellida am aquel.	Like this: so that its entry into the concave arrow is eased and it is pushed in with it.
De fleubotomia de las venas.	Of bloodletting from veins
Las venas de fleubotomia de las quals corr costuma de fleubotomar so xxx, de las quals so en le cap xvi, so es doas venas pulsatils las quals so aprop las aurelhas, dic alhasisain; doas herbas que so en les dos templars apparentz; e doas venas que so en dos lacrimals de dos huels que son appeladas aspicientz; e la vena preparada en le mieg loc del front, e la vena que es en la extremitat del nas; e doas guidegi que so al col; e doas venas que so en la labia desus; e doas venas que so en la labia dejos; e — aquestas so las venas que so appeladas algelic —; e so doas venas que so dejos la lengua.	The veins suitable for bloodletting are thirty-two in number, of which sixteen are on the head. These include two pulsating veins near the ears called "alhasisain", two veins on the two temples visible through the skin, two veins on the ducts of the tear glands of the eyes called "aspicientz", one vein prepared at the middle of the forehead and another at the tip of the nose, two veins at the neck, two veins above the upper lip, two veins below the lower lip, and — these are called "algelic" — two veins on either side of the tongue.
Mays las venas que so fleubotomadas en les brasses so v; quar de aquelas es una cephalica, e es deves le latz silvestre; e le poble appela “la vena del cap”, e sorda, e es vena migiera, e es composta de un ram de la basilica, e de autre ram de la cephalica; e nomna aquela le poble “vena de tot le cors”, e basilica es vena la qual es pausada en le latz domestic, e es nomnada “citillar”, e nompnan aquela les vulguars “vena del ventre”; e funis del bras, e es pausada sobre le focil, e es aquela en la qual es fleubotomat, e es aquela que appar sobre le poutz per apparicio manifesta; e salvatella, e es la vena que es entre lo dit auricular e·l pus petit dit, e so en lu dos ramps.	The veins that are suitable for bloodletting in the arms are five:
E en le pe e la camba so tres venas; la una de aquelas es que es dejos la curvatura del denolh del latz silvestre; e la segonda es sophena, e·l loc de lu es dejos la camba del latz domestic; e la vena sciatica, e·l loc de lu es dejos la camba del latz silvestre; e en la camba son autras venas semblantz ad aquelas.	"And in the foot and leg there are three veins: one of these is that which is located on the curvature of the wild boar's tooth; and the second is the saphenous, and its location is behind the thigh of the domestic animal; and the sciatic vein, and its location is behind the thigh of the wild animal; and in the leg there are other veins similar to these."
Le juvament de las venas que so aprop las aurelhas es a cataris antics e emigranea e sahafati e ulceracios del cap malas antiquas.	"The benefit of treating veins near the ears is for ancient headaches and migraines, and to prevent ulcers in the scalp from ancient evil."
E la qualitat de sagnar aquelas es segon que yeu recomti a tu: es que sia ras le cap del malaute, e sia freguat le cap del malaute en le occipiti en le loc de amdoas las venas am drap ample am bona fricacio; aprop strenha le malaute le sieu col am una benda entro que apparan las doas e les locs de lor so aprop las aurelhas en dos locs depremegutz del cap; e quereys aquela am le tieu dit, e si tu sentes le pols de aquelas am le dit tieu, aqui senha am tenta.	"And the quality of bleeding those [veins] is according to what I recommend to you: it should be done quickly, and rub the patient's head with a cloth on the occiput at the location of both veins with plenty of friction; then press the patient's collarbone with a bandage placed underneath that covers both locations near the ears in two places on either side of the head; and bind it tightly with your finger, and if you feel the pulse of those [veins] with your finger, here is how to do it."
Aprop tu pren la lancea cutellar, e es aquela que es inscident, e aprop tu intromet aquel dejos la vena en la codena entro que·l fleubotomi vengua al os.	"Then take the lancet knife, which is inserted, and introduce it from outside the vein in the elbow until it reaches the bone."
E aprop eleva la tua ma am la vena e la codena a las partidas desus e inscideys la vena am inscizio inscident.	"And then raise your hand with the vein and elbow upwards and incise the vein with an oblique incision."
E sia la longitut de la inscizio la quantitat de dos ditz ajustatz o entorn de aquo; e fay yssir del sanc atant quant voles.	"And let the length of the incision be about two fingers or so, and make the blood flow out as much as you wish."
E aprop strenh am pulvils e layssa aquela entro que sia sanada.	"And then press with powdered frankincense and leave it there until it is healed."
E ja e precedit en le comensament del libre la inscizio de aquelas e de lor la cauterizacio.	"It has been preceded in the beginning of this book the incision of those and their cauterization."
Mays de las doas venas arterias que so als templars le juvament de la fleubotomia es a emigranea antiqua e sode malvada e obtalmia assidua e cors de superfluitatz acutas effusas als huels.	"Excess of the two arterial veins that are located in the temples, useful for phlebotomy is ancient remedy and sad evil and frequent ophthalmia and excessive bleeding from wounds."
E la qualitat de fleubotomar aquelas es segon que yeu recomti a tu: constrengua le malaute le sieu col mot entro que apparan las doas venas al sentiment per appericio manifesta e sia demonstrat le pols de lor dejos le tieu dit; e lahoras tu senha am tenta.	"And the quality of performing phlebotomy on them is according to what you recommend to you: constrict the patient's arm with a tourniquet until both veins appear visibly to touch, and then demonstrate the pulse of theirs before proceeding."
E aprop tu eleva la codena desobre la vena a las partidas desus am le tieu dit indic, e intromet le fleubotomi inscident dejos, e eleva la vena en sus; e inscidey aquela ayssi cum has fayt en las doas venas autras; e fay correr del sanc segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	"And then you raise the elbow above the vein at the bend of the arm with your index finger, and insert the phlebotomy lancet into it, raising the vein slightly; cut it like you have done in the other two veins; let the blood flow according to the quantity you need."
E aprop deslia la coartacio del malaute, e pausa le tieu dit sobre la vena per una hora, e aprop pausa sobre aquela coto e pulvils e strenh aquela desus am fort constriccio, e layssa aquela entro que sia sanada.	"And then release the tourniquet from the patient's arm, and place your finger over the vein for one hour, and then press on that spot with cotton and powder and strengthen it above with a strong constriction, and leave it until it is healed."
E ja es precedida la rememoracio de lor, e de aquelas la inscizio, e la atraccio en le comensament del libre.	"And already at the beginning of this book, there was mention of them, their incision, and attraction."
E donc le juvament de fleubotomia de la vena del front es aprop la fleubotomia de la cephalica a las malautias antiquas de la cara e a emigranea e rogor e ulceracios fetidas.	"And therefore the benefit of phlebotomy from the frontal vein is appropriate for the ancient illnesses of the face, migraine and headache and ulcers that are fetid."
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es segon que yeu recomti a tu; so es que·l malaute strenha le sieu col am una benda entro que apparesca la vena; e aprop pren le insturment le qual es nompnat fossori del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	"And the quality of phlebotomy from there is according to what I recommend to you: thus it is that the patient ties their arm with a bandage until the vein appears; and then takes the instrument called 'fossor', whose shape is as follows:"
Pausa la puncta eminent la qual es al cap del fossori sobre aquela vena e percuteys sobre lu am penche o am autre causa en la manieyra de lu, e layssa lo sanc correr segon la quantitat la qual voles; e aprop deslia la perforacio del malaute e strenh aquela entro que sia sanada.	"Place the point of the 'fossor' on that vein and strike it with a pen or another cause in the manner shown here, and let the blood flow according to the quantity you want; and then release the perforation from the patient and strengthen it until it is healed."
E alcunas veguadas es uberta am fleubotomi lat, empero no cove que·l fleubotomi sia de acuta extremitat ayssi cum les autres fleubotomis, abantz sia de lada extremitat, e fleubotoma aquela segon le tranvers, quar le os es propda e fort leu trencaria en lu le fleubotomi quan es subtil.	"And sometimes it is done with a broad phlebotomy, but it is not necessary that the phlebotomy have an acute extremity like the others, rather it should be of flat extremity, because the bone is close and a sharp phlebotomy would break it when it is subtle."
Mays le juvament de las duas venas que so als lacrimals de dos huels per scabia del huels per rogor e sebol en les huels, e a las malautias de la cara.	"But the benefit of these two veins that are at the corners of the eyes for itching and inflammation of the eyelids due to headache and discharge in the eyes, and for the illnesses of the face."
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia es que·l malaute strenha le col sieu am una benda, e aprop fleubotoma aquelas, e tu sias stant sobre le cap de lu.	"And the quality of phlebotomy is that the patient ties their arm with a bandage and then performs it, and you should be standing above the head of the person."
E sia fayta la fleubotomia segon le transvers a longitut un pauc am fleubotomi pauc, quar en le loc no es carn; e si le fleubotomi es subtil, fort leu la extremitat de lu es trencada.	"And let the phlebotomy be done horizontally along with a little phlebotomy with a small phlebotome because there is not much flesh in that place, and if the phlebotome is too sharp its tip will break."
E aprop fay correr del sanc atant quant es a tu necessari, e pausa sobre aquelas coto, e strenh aquelas per una nueyt, e aprop deslia aquelas.	"And then let blood flow as much as you need, and stop it there, and strengthen it for one night with cotton and plaster, and then remove it."
Mays le fleubotomi de la vena del nas es conferent a febre acuta e a soda vehement, e a las malautias de la cara e emigranea e rogor que accideys en la cara, e majorment quan es antiqua.	"But phlebotomy from the nasal vein is beneficial for acute fever and violent sneezing, and for the illnesses of the face and migraine and inflammation that occur in the face, especially when it is chronic."
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute strenha le sieu col e aprop te le sieu nas am la tua ma sinistra, e pren le fleubotomi subtil lonc e fica aquela en le mieg loc del cap del nas segon rectitut, quar la vena no appar al sentiment aqui, e quar le sanc comensa a fluir tantost.	"And the quality of phlebotomy from there is that the patient ties their own bandage and then places their nose with your left hand, and takes a subtle long phlebotome and places it in the middle of the head of the nose straight, because the vein does not appear to the touch here, and because the blood begins to flow soon."
Cove que tu ultimes la tua ma am le fleubotomi petit a petit e fassas correr del sanc segon la tua necessitat; e aprop lia aquela per una nuoyt, quar aquela es restaurada leugierament.	"It is necessary that you withdraw your hand with the phlebotome little by little and let blood flow according to your need; and then tie it for one night because that wound heals easily."
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de las doas guidegui a constriccio de ale e a comensament de lepra e a motas malautias e inpetige e malas ulceracios corrosivas ayssi cum herpotromeno.	"But the benefit of phlebotomy from both wrists is for the contraction of the intestines and the beginning of leprosy and many illnesses, impotence and corrosive ulcers such as herpes."
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquelas es que el malaute strenha dejos quascuna en le sieu col am liament; e estia le artifexs sobre le cap del malaute, e le malaute sia sezent sobre una sezela.	"And the quality of phlebotomy from there is that each patient ties their own bandage on their arm and lies down on their back; and let the operator be standing above the head of the patient, and the patient sits on a chair."
E aprop fleubotoma la vena al lonc am fleubotomi ample petit a petit; e aprop extratz de sanc segon temprada quantitat o segon aquo que vezes de necessitat que es ad aquo; e aprop fay semblant del autra vena.	"And then phlebotomize the vein on the arm with an ample and subtle phlebotome little by little; and then extract blood according to a moderate quantity or according to what is necessary for that person; and then do the same to the other vein."
E aprop deslia le liament e strenh las doas venas am strictura migiera per so que·l malaute no sia prefocat, e laysa entro al mati quar la plagua es sanada.	"And then remove the bandage and strengthen both veins with a median ligature so that the patient is not fainted, and let them rest until morning because the wound will be healed."
E le juvament de la fleubotomia de las venas algerich, comfereys a petitas apostemas e pustulas de la boca e corrupcio de las gengivas e malas ulceracios e fissuras, e a malas ulceracios que so en le nas e en le circuit de lu.	"But the benefit of phlebotomy from the veins in the armpits is for small abscesses and pustules in the mouth and corruption of the gums and corrosive ulcers and fissures, and for ulcers that are in the nose and around it."
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquelas es que fases cezer le malaute denant tu, e strenh le col de lu am una benda, e aprop revolveys las labias de lu e reguarda a doas venas de las quals la una es de la dextra de la labia e la segonda de la senestra; e la demonstracio de quascuna es per la negror de quascuna de amdos, e aquo mays es quar en le circuit de aquelas so venas menudas negras; e adonc inscideys cascuna per inscizio inscident.	"And the quality of phlebotomy from there is that you seat the patient in front of you and tie their arm with a bandage, and then turn their lips and look for two veins of which one is on the right lip and the other on the left; and the demonstration of each is by its blackness, and especially because around them are small black veins, and then incise each with an accidental incision."
Mays si dubitacio es dejos tu, e no sabes qual es de aquelas, lahoras tu enten a inscisio de la major de aquelas, e de la pus manifesta de aquelas.	"But if you have doubt and do not know which is the one from there, then choose the incision of the larger one, and from the evident pus of that one."
E fay le semblant de las doas venas que so en las labias desus.	"And do the same to both veins that are in the upper lips."
Mays costuma corr mays a inscidir las doas venas que so en la labia dejos.	"However, it is customary to incise both veins present on the lip."
Mays de doas venas que so dejos la lengua le juvament es aprop la fleubotomia de la cephalica a prefocacios que so en le guolayro, a la malautia de la uvula, e a malautias de la boca.	"However, it is advisable to incise both veins that lie deep to the tongue for better lung function, especially in cases of phlebotomy of the cephalic vein at its junction with the facial vein during the treatment of uvula inflammation and mouth diseases."
E la qualitat de fleubotomar aquelas es que segue le malaute entre las tuas mas denant le solel, e eleva la lengua de lu, e reguarda dejos la lengua, de la un latz de lu vena e del autre latz vena, e la color de quascuna es declinant a negror.	"And the quality of phlebotomy is that which follows the disease between the little finger and the thumb, in front of the sun, raises the tongue of the patient, looks for the vein on one side of it and the other side of it, and observes the color of each as it darkens towards blackness."
E adonc fleubotoma quascuna; e guarda te que no ultimes la tua ma en fleubotoman aquelas, quar dejos aquelas so arterias.	"And then phlebotomize each one; be careful not to go too deep with your blade during phlebotomy of those who have arteries nearby."
E las tuas venas que so fleubotomadas en le coyde so en las quals corr costuma en totz les homes, e la fleubotomia de lor es fayta segon dos manieyras, o pongen am le fleubotomi mirtilat o olivar a subtilitat declinant; o secsar am fleubotomi cutellar, e apelha si alnessil, e aquesta es la forma de lu:	"And the veins that are phlebotomized on the elbow are those which are usually found in all men, and their phlebotomy is performed in two ways: either by using a mirtillate or olive-shaped lancet with subtle declination; or by cutting with a scalpel-like lancet, which is called an 'incisor', and this is its method:"
E aquest alnessil es que conveneys a seccio e de aquels so specias latz e subtils segon la amplitut de las venas e segon la strictura de aquelas.	"And this incisor must be suitable for sectioning, with those being sharp and subtle according to the width of the veins and their narrowness."
Forma de fleubotomi mirti:	"Method of phlebotomy using a mirtillate lancet:"
sia le latz de lu ayssi cum vezes, e conveneys a obrir las venas concavas plenas procedentz apparentz grossas, e ad aquelas que conteno sanc gros torbat.	"Be the point of it thus: that when veins are opened, it should be done by pressing firmly and apparently thick vessels, avoiding those containing turbid blood."
E aquesta es la forma de fleubotomi olivar:	"And this is the method for phlebotomy using an olive-shaped lancet:"
E aquest fleubotomi es de menor latitut e de pus subtil extremitat, e conveneys a fleubotomia de venas subtils que conteno sanc subtil citri.	"And this lancet has lesser width and more subtle point, suitable for phlebotomy of thin veins containing clear citrine-colored blood."
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de la vena basilica la qual es una de tres venas: quar extratz le sanc de las malautias que so dejos le guolayro e·l col, e de aquo que siec le pietz e·l ventre.	"Therefore, the utility of phlebotomy of the basilica vein is one of three veins: for extracting blood from illnesses that are located on the left side of the neck and collarbone, as well as those which affect the chest and abdomen."
E conveneys al fleubotomador, quan fleubotomia aquela, que guarde be aquela e sia sobre-temor en aquela, quar dejos lu ha arteria, e si erra e ajusta en la punctura del fleubotomi, inscidira aquela arteria e accidira fluxs de sanc, per so que cove que no fleubotomes aquela am fleubotomi pungent, abantz sia sectant cum alnessil.	"And it is convenient for the phlebotomist, when phlebotomizing that vein, to carefully observe it and be cautious about it, since nearby there is an artery. If he errs and slips with his lancet point, he may incision that artery and cause profuse bleeding. Therefore, one should not phlebotomize that vein with a pointed lancet; rather, one must cut with an incisor."
E si no appar la basilica per apparicio manifesta, lahoras cove que tu laysses aquela e que tu mudes a la autre, o que cerques alcun ram sieu; o que fleubotomes en loc de lu finis del bras, quar aquela es manifesta; e secsa aquela am fleubotomi alnessil ayssi cum havem dit.	"And if the basilica vein is not clearly visible, then one should leave it and look for another branch nearby. Or phlebotomize at the end of the arm where it is more visible, using an incisor lancet as described earlier."
Mays si tu voles la fleubotomia de lu meteyssa, lahoras cove denant la strictura del bras que toques le loc entro que conogues le loc dels pols, e aprop senha sobre lu am tencha; e aprop lia le bras e secsa la vena am seccio concava am fleubotomi alnessil ayssi cum havem dit; e guarda te que caja la percussio per alcu spazi del loc de la arteria.	"But if you wish to perform phlebotomy on the median vein, then you should first locate the groove of the arm near the pulse point. Then gently press down with your thumb and lift up the arm. Cut the vein convexly using an incisor lancet as described earlier. Be careful not to puncture too deeply towards the space where the artery lies."
E quan tu vezes, cum strenhes le liament, imflacio en le loc que has senhat am tencha, lahoras aquela inflacio es inflacio de la arteria, e donc squiva aquela.	"And when you press down with the lancet, if you feel pulsation at the place where you pressed with your thumb, then that is a sign of the artery. Avoid that area."
E si vezes le sanc fluir en la fleubotomia ayssi cum aurina de enfant, e·l sanc es subtil rog, lahoras sapias que es del sanc de la arteria; e lahoras tu coyta e pausa le tieu dit sobre aquel per lonc spazi; e aprop osta le tieu dit, e si lo sanc es abscindit, quar motas veguadas es abscindit, lahoras tu strenh le bras e layssa aquel.	"And if blood flows during phlebotomy like a fountain of a child's urine and appears reddish, then know that it is arterial blood. Then cease and pause your hand over the place for a long period. Then remove your hand, and if bleeding stops, many times it does stop, then press down on the arm and leave off."
E guardes le malaute de la moccio de lu, e sia sobre-temor de lu e no maugua aquel per alcus dias entro que sia sanat.	"And observe the wound of the vein and be careful about it for a few days until it is healed to prevent infection."
Mays si le sanc no es abscindit, e vezes que deves tu no es present medicina ad aquo, lahoras tu inscideys la arteria, si appar a tu; quar la extremitat de lu es contrayta, e es abscindit le sanc; o que prenguas scorsa de fistic, e fen aquela, e pren la una maytat e strenh aquela sobre le loc de la vena am strictura descent am liament e am pulvils entro al autra dia.	"But if bleeding does not stop and you realize that the medicine is not working, then you have probably incised an artery. If it appears to you, then apply pressure on the artery until bleeding stops. Then take some lint, wipe the wound clean, and apply a compress made of fresh figs. Leave it in place for one day with strict bandaging."
E lahoras si le sanc es abscindit, bo es; e sino, lahoras cura aquel am aquo del qual es precedit a la rememoracio del loc de las polveras abscindentz flux de sanc.	"And if bleeding stops, that is good. But if not, then treat the wound with the method previously mentioned for stopping blood flow."
E la abscizio del sanc de lu es dificil en motas disposicios per le loc petit de la plagua e la possibilitat del liament del bras.	"This task of stopping bleeding in that vein is difficult in many cases due to the small size of its opening and the possibility of slipping with the lancet."
Mays de la vena fusca la fleubotomia es juvament que extratz lo sanc de la partida subirana del cap e a la partida dejos del cors; per aquo quar es composta de ram de la basilica e de ram de cephalica, ayssi cum havem dit.	"But phlebotomy of the dark vein is useful for extracting blood from conditions affecting the upper part of the head and the lower part of the body. This is because it is composed of branches of the basilica and cephalic veins, as we have mentioned."
E cove al fleubotomant aquela que sia sobre-temor en la fleubotomia de lu, quar dejos aquela es un nervi; e adonc si ajusta en la punctura del fleubotomi e atroba le nervi, accidira a lu stupor, e es difficil la sanacio de lu, e fort leu no es sanat de tot, E aquest nervi motas veguadas apar al sentiment; e si es ocultat ad alcus homes e es subtil e no es monstrat, lahoras cove que tu pauses le fleubotomi am le qual tu fleubotomas am seccio de alnessil, e evita le nervi am la tua fortalesa.	"But the phlebotomist must be careful during phlebotomy of this vein since nearby there is a nerve. If he slips with his lancet point and touches the nerve, it may cause numbness and difficulty in recovery. Sometimes the nerve can be felt; however, at times it may be hidden, thin, and not visible. Therefore, one must pause while phlebotomizing with an incisor lancet to avoid touching the nerve with excessive force."
E si la vena es entre dos nervis, lahoras tu fen la vena en la longitut.	"If the vein is between two nerves, then cut along the length of the vein."
Le juvament de la fleubotomia de la vena cephalica es que atratz le sanc del cap e comfereys a las malautias dels huels.	"The benefit of phlebotomy on the cephalic vein is that it helps to draw blood from the head and provides relief for disorders of the eyes."
E cove en aquest propriament, si vols que la fleubotomes pungen am fleubotomi olivar o am fleubotomi mirti; quar es la pus salva de totas las venas, quar no es dejos lu arteria ni nervi.	"And it is appropriate here to note that if you wish to phlebotomize with an olive-shaped lancet or a myrtle-shaped lancet, then this vein is the safest of all veins since there is neither artery nor nerve nearby."
Mays empero conveneys a tu deves la fleubotomia que guardes que am le fleubotomi no punguas le cap del lacert tant solament, e cerques le loc pus leugier, e no notz a lu, si no es atrobat am la percussio primieyra que sia sobre aquela am fleubotomia alcunas veguadas.	"But nonetheless, you should ensure that while phlebotomizing, you do not strike the head of the lancet alone. Seek instead the gentlest location, and if not found at first, then try phlebotomy several times using percussion to locate the vein."
Mays empero fort leu es apostemat en alcus homes, quan no es fleubotomat en la primieyra percussio, mays no notz en re aquel apostema.	"But sometimes an aposteme (hematoma) forms in some people when phlebotomy is not performed during the first percussion, yet it does not appear afterwards."
Mays la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquela e les accidentz de lu so motz, en les quals te cove cogitar en lor rectificacio.	"However, the quality of phlebotomy on that vein and its accidents are many, which you should consider for their correction."
Le primier de lu es del qual cove que sapias que fleubotomia no es aministrada sino en conservacio de sanetat e per speransa de lu e cautela de aveniment de malautias, e que sia fayta fleubotomia en la una de las venas que so en le coyde, so es: cephalica, fusca e basilica; e que sia fayta fleubotomia al comensament de primaveyra, sobre dejun en primaviera e autunppne, e en invern aprop la comestio, quan apparo significacios de replecio.	"The first thing you should know is that phlebotomy should be performed only for the conservation of health and with hope of benefit and caution to prevent illness. It should be done on one of the veins located in the elbow area: cephalic, basilic or median cubital vein. Phlebotomy should be performed at the beginning of spring after a fast during spring and autumn, and after meals in winter when signs of repletion appear."
E sia fayta fleubotomia e le tertz dia o al primier pus que del jorn siran passadas tres horas.	"And phlebotomy should be done on the third day or at least one day after the previous bloodletting, with an interval of three hours between them."
Mays fleubotomia que es aministrada, mays quan provoca convenencia e necessitat ad aquo, o de nuoyt o de dia, en tota hora e en tot temps.	"However, phlebotomy that is performed when it causes convenience and necessity for the patient, whether day or night, at any hour and time."
E cove que efant no sia fleubotomat entro que aja xiiii ans, e femna que sia prenhs no sia fleubotomada sino del quart mes entro al sete, e les viels no sian fleubotomatz les quals ja han passatz lx ans.	"And it is not appropriate to phlebotomize a child under the age of 14. Women who are pregnant should not be phlebotomized until the fourth month has passed, and elderly individuals over the age of 70 should not undergo bloodletting."
E cum alcu vol esser fleubotomat per qualque manieyra sia, cove que mondifique les sieus budels denant la fleubotomia am clisteri leon, si en aquels ha mota fenda retenguda, per so que las venas no atiro las superfluitatz en la fleubotomia dels budels, que son puridas, e que no noguan als membres principals.	"And when someone wishes to undergo bloodletting for any reason, they should cleanse their bowels beforehand with a lion's tooth laxative. If there is much retained feces, this should be done so that the veins are not obstructed during the phlebotomy of the cleansed bowels, which would otherwise harm the main limbs."
E no sian fleubotomatz les pascientz naucea sacertiva e crapula, ni evasent de malautia ni de ebretat entro que aquo sia remaugut aquo de lor, ni malaute de ydropici, e mays que fleubotomia sia temuda aprop colica passio e aprop vomit, e aprop cos de ventre, e aprop multiplicacio de coyt e de trebal e de exercici de dejunis o de vigilias e de tota causa que dissolveys la vertut, o sia corpore28 o animal.	"Patients suffering from seasickness or gluttony should not undergo bloodletting until they have recovered from their illness and drunkenness. Bloodletting is particularly contraindicated for those with colic, vomiting, abdominal pain, excessive sexual activity, hard labor, exercise during fasting or vigil, or any cause that weakens the body."
E aprop considera en subtiliacio de humos denant aquo si le sanc es gros, am viandas e beures, e am medicinas si aquo es a lu possible ad aquo.	"And in bloodletting, it should also be considered whether the humor is thick before performing the procedure. This can be determined by observing the consistency of the blood after consuming foods and drinks, or with medications if possible."
E aprop intre en banh si alcuna causa no prohibeys, o sia excersitat per alcun exercici per so que·l sanc sia subtiliat.	"And also, it should be done in a bath if there are no contraindications present. Or else, the blood should be subtiliated by some exercise beforehand."
E pausa la fleubotomia de lu en le pietz del dia, so es enviro la hora de tercia, ayssi cum havem dit.	"And pause bloodletting from the foot during the day, especially around the time of Terce, as we have mentioned before."
E perforsa te que·l pietz de aquel sia guardat en aquel dia de totz mals accidentz animals, ayssi cum es angustia, ira, temor, e de totz accidentz corporals, ayssi cum es trebal e pena superflua e coyt e semblantz a lor.	"And also be careful to keep this foot well protected throughout the day from all sorts of animal accidents, such as anxiety, anger, fear, and also all kinds of bodily accidents, like hard labor, excessive exertion, sexual activity, and similar afflictions."
E a la sua sezelha fassa esser presentz las causas en le us de la qual corr costuma dels homes am aromaticitat e odorament e am bals e semblantz ad aquels segon la cantitat de possibilitat.	"And at his seat let there be present the causes in the use of which men usually indulge with aromatics, odors, balms, and similar substances according to their ability."
E segua le fleubotomador sobre un coyssi que sia pus aut que·l coyssi de aquel que deu esser fleubotomat.	"And let the bloodletter sit upon a cushion that is higher than the cushion of him who is to be bled."
E aprop extragua le sieu bras, e fregue aquel am la sua ma le fleubotomador doas o tres veguadas; e aprop strenha le liament am correia e involva aquel doas veguadas.	"And first, let him withdraw his arm and rub it with his hand two or three times to make the veins stand out. Then let him strap on a bandage using a cord and wrap it around twice."
E sia la strictura temprada, quar la strictura quant no es engual, o la strictura es am superfluitat, lahoras prohibeys de fluxs del sanc; o es am mollificacio, e lahoras prohibeys le cors del sanc eyssament.	"And let the binding be moderate, for if it is too tight, or if there is excessive blood flow due to laxity of the bandage, this can hinder the flow of blood. But if it is too loose, this can also hinder the course of the blood itself."
E aprop la strictura, cove que aquel que deu esser fleubotomat fregue las suas mas ensemps entre lor entro que las venas sian imfladas, e sian declaradas al sentiment.	"And then, let him who is to be bled rub his hands together between them until the veins are inflamed and distinctly felt."
E aprop le fleubotomador unte le sieu fleubotomi am un pauc de oli antic propriament; e aprop pausa le sieu di indic de la ma senestra sobre aquela vena, dejos le loc del qual vol la fleubotomia, per que la vena fuja un pauc, e la percussio sia sessada quar de las venas es la qual atrobas ayssi cum corda fugent deves la fleubotomia, e de aquelas es que es plena de ventositat e quan pauses le fleubotomi sobre aquela es contrayta deves le fleubotomi, e es desceubut le fleubotomador; e le fleubotomi no uobre la vena, e si uobre, aquela es streyta.	"And then let the bloodletter anoint his lancet with a little ancient oil properly prepared. And next, let him place his left index finger on that vein where he intends to make the incision, so that the vein may swell out a bit and the percussion may be better seated. For it is necessary that the vein chosen for bleeding should resemble a cord running beneath the skin, and not one that is full of windiness or contracts when pressed by the lancet, so that the bloodletter may be deceived thereby."
E donc, per aquo cove que·l fleubotomador sia fermat e sia sollicit en totas aquestas causas.	"And thus it is necessary that the bloodletter be careful and attentive to all these causes."
E aprop depause le fleubotomi, mays si la vena es huberta en una veguada, lahoras bo es; e sino, tu itera aquo autra vaguada dejos aquel loc un pauc, o sobre lu am festinacio, si le loc no es apostemat.	"And then let him place the lancet on the vein. If it is punctured at once, that is good. But if not, he should repeat this action two or three times until it is punctured, either slightly away from that spot or directly upon it, if there is no inflammation."
Et si le loc es apostemat, o le malaute se spauresca, lahoras tu le layssa per un dia o per dos, e no strenha le liament, quar fort leu atirara apostema caut, ni no intre en banh.	"And if the spot is inflamed or the patient feels faint, then let him leave off for a day or two, and do not tighten the bandage too much, lest he draw out an ulcer, nor enter into a bath."
E aprop itera la fleubotomia si la ama.	"And then let him repeat the bleeding if necessary."
E si la apercio es petita e corr sanc subtilment, e temes que non yesca sanc la cantitat que voles, lahoras tu itera le fleubotomi en aquel trauc segon rectitut e ajusta en la appercio un pauc, e fay aquo am festinacio denant que·l loc sia apostemat, quar le loc es apostemat en motz homes deves pauca apercio.	"And if the incision is small and only a subtle flow of blood appears, and you fear that not enough blood will issue forth, then repeat the incision along the same line and adjust it slightly deeper. Do this with caution beforehand to avoid inflammation at that spot, for many people are sensitive even with a small opening."
Mays si vezes aquel ja apostemat, lahoras no iteres sobre lu, quar no escusa a tu alcuna causa; e pausa sobre aquel alcuna partida de la fenda de oli, quar alleuja le cors del sanc.	"But if the spot is already inflamed, do not repeat the incision upon it, for there is no cause to excuse this. Rather, place some of the oil from the wound upon it, for this will relieve the flow of blood."
E es milhor en aquest loc que oli e que les autres olis.	"And it is better that oil should be used here than any other ointment."
E semblantment aministra fenda de oli en tota fleubotomia am la qual fleubotomes las venas deves la prohibicio de cors de sanc, e fan aquo tyriaca alfadoc e sagzenea quan es pausat de la una de aquelas sobre le loc, quar le sanc es subtiliat e es revolvut quan es gros.	"And similarly administer the oil from the wound in all bloodletting procedures where veins are opened to prohibit the flow of blood, and do this with treacle almonds and saffron when they are placed upon the one or the other over that spot, for blood is subtilized and turned when it is thick."
E si en le loc de la fleubotomia es engendrat gran apostema, quar motas veguadas accideys, e majorment ad aquel que no es stat sangnat sino aquela veguada, o en la apercio de la vena pauca, e lahoras tu coyta, e pausa sobre le loc sponja infuza en aygua e sal, un pauc scalfada, e strenh aquela per una hora, quar es dissolvut.	"And if a great inflammation arises at the spot of bloodletting, which happens frequently, especially in those who have not been bled before or whose vein has been slightly cut, then apply a poultice and place upon it a sponge infused in water and salt, lightly scalded, for this will dissolve it."
E cove que fassa aquo aprop le yssiment del sanc de aquela vena am compliment de lu o de autra vena.	"And let him do this at the time of stopping the bleeding from that vein with a thread of cotton or of another vein."
E si roman en le loc per alcus dias alcuna negror o viriditat, no notz aquo; e si voles, pausa sobre aquel alcuna causa de aloen e de mirra dissolvut, o alcuna causa de suc de mentastre o de calament o semblant de lu.	"And if some blackness or greenness remains at the spot for a few days, do not worry about it. And if you wish, apply over that area some plaster of aloe and myrrh dissolved together, or some plaster of mint juice or calendula, or something similar."
E motas veguadas accideysso apostemas e eminencias deves fleubotomia de la basilica.	"And many times apostemes and swellings occur after bloodletting at the temple."
E donc pausa la tua ma sobre aquela, e si lahoras tu atrobas mollicia deves la tua compressio sobre aquela, lahoras aquela eminencia es malvada e mala; e adonc guarda te que pauses sobre aquela alcuna causa de aquo que havem dit, quar fort leu fluira de la arteria sanc.	"And then place your hand upon that area, and if you feel softness with your compression over it, then that swelling is evil and harmful. Therefore, guard yourself to apply some of the things we have mentioned over that area, for otherwise blood may flow from the artery."
E fay emplaustre am aquo en que es stipticitat, per que le loc sia endurat, e aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	"And make a plaster with something stypitic to toughen the spot and apply it afterwards with other treatments until it is healed."
E cove que extraguas del sanc a tot hom segon la quantitat de la sua vertut e segon la color vencent sobrc le sanc segon que appar.	"And let him extract blood from every person according to his quantity of strength and according to the prevalent color appearing over the blood."
Quar si le sanc es negre, lahoras tu le layssa yssir entro que sia rog; e semblantment si tu le vezes gros, lahoras tu le layssa yssir entro que sia subtiliat; e semblantment si es agut, entro que sia ostada la acuitat de lu.	"For if the blood is black, let it flow until it becomes red. And similarly, if you find it thick, let it flow until it becomes subtilized. And likewise, if it is sharp, let it flow until its sharpness has been alleviated."
E cove ad aquel que es ple e fort e ha necessitat de extraccio de sanc en una veguada, que sia amplificada la fleubotomia de la vena e le fleubotomi sia lat.	"And let him who is full and robust and has need of bloodletting at one time have the incision made large on the vein and the lancet placed wide."
E en aquel que es freul, sia fayt le contrari de aquel, e cove que extragua aquel en tropas veguadas, e que le trauc sia streyt.	"But in those who are thin, let the opposite be done, and let such persons be bled often but with a narrow incision."
E le milhor que es administrat en fleubotomia de vena es que sia la seccio transversa, no punctura.	"The best thing to administer in bloodletting from a vein is a transverse section, not a puncture."
E aquesta manieyra de fleubotomia es salva de flux de sanc e de inscizio de nervi, e es pus lausabla e pus salva que fleubotomia segon latitut e longitut.	"And this manner of bloodletting saves from the flow of blood and from the incision of nerves, and it is more praiseworthy and safer than bloodletting according to latitude and longitude."
E a la qual es acostumat sobrevenir sincopi deves la fleubotomia, e cove que tu cures aquel denant la fleubotomia am un petit de pa infus en vi de milgranas o de oximel simple scalfat; e extratz a l u del sanc en tres veguadas o quatre.	"And to those who are accustomed to faint during bloodletting, you should care for them beforehand with a little piece of bread infused in vinegar or simple vinegar slightly warmed. And let them bleed three or four times."
E si es enfregiditat de compleccio, lahoras prengua denant la fleubotomia pa infus en eyssarop de mirra o en eyssarop de mel aromatizat am specias ayssi cum am pebre, canela, gingiebre e semblantz, o en eyssarop aromatizat e mot odorant.	"And if there is coldness of complexion, then take beforehand bread infused in an electary of myrrh or an aromatic electary made with spices such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and the like."
E si accideys sincopi deves la fleubotomia, e es causa de lu issiment de mot sanc, lahoras cove que prengua en beure aygua de carn e eyssarop mot odorant subtil; e use de aromaticitat am algualea, e sia linit le sieu pietz am aquela.	"If syncope occurs during bloodletting and is caused by the loss of much blood, then let him drink water of flesh and an aromatic electary. And let him use aromatics with aloe and apply it to his forehead."
E usa de las autras causas que havem ditas en la divisio en le capitol de sincopi per evacuacio.	"And use the other causes that we have mentioned in the division in the chapter on syncope from evacuation."
E qui vol eventar le sieu bras e dissolver le sieu sanc segonda veguada, cove a lu del qual la fleubotomia es per mota evacuacio, e la vertut de lu es freol, que evacue le sanc petit a petit, so es segon la quantitat de la vertut en les dias continuables.	"And whoever wishes to evacuate his arm and dissolve his blood according to the second opinion, let him be bled from that vein which is for great evacuation, and whose virtue is cold, evacuating blood little by little. And this should be done according to the quantity of virtue in continuous days."
Mays qui vol eventar le sieu bras, e gitar lo sieu sanc segonda vetz, e le sieu cors es fort, lahoras fassa aquo aprop vii horas o ix de la primieyra fleubotomia.	"If one wishes to raise their arm and draw blood a second time, and their body is strong, then do this around seven or nine hours after the first phlebotomy."
Mays qui vol atirar le sanc del cors sieu al contrari de la partida a la qual declina, cove que sia eventat en le segon dia o le tertz.	"If one wishes to draw blood from their body in opposition to the parting at which it declines, then do this on either the second or third day after it has been raised."
Mays aquel cors en le qual es mot sanc ja scalfat e es acuit e fa accidir febre, cove que sia gitat de lu sanc en una veguada e sia de lu gitada gran cantitat e sia amplificada la apercio entro que accidesca sincopi, pus que tu auras conservadas totas las condicios de fleubotomia; e que pauses la tua ma sobre le pols de lu deves le cors del sanc, per que no endevengua mort en loc de sincopi, quar motas veguadas endeve aquo quan le fleubotomador es ignorant e negligent.	"If one performs phlebotomy on a body in which there is already insufficient blood, and it becomes exhausted and causes fever, then one must draw blood from it at once and remove a large quantity; one must also amplify the aperture during the performance of the act so that syncope may occur, for you have conserved all the conditions of phlebotomy. And place your hand over the pulse of the body to prevent death instead of syncope, because many times this happens when the phlebotomist is ignorant and negligent."
E no cove quan tu voles desliar le bras e evacua le sanc segonda veguada, cum ja sia claus le orrifici de la vena e sia fayt difficil issiment del sanc, que tu premas subre aquel am vehemencia e encurvat sia extendut leugierament, quar aquo es trop mal.	"And when you wish to release the arm and evacuate the blood a second time, if the orifice of the vein has already been closed and it is difficult to draw out the blood, then press on that spot with violence and curve it slightly, for this is very bad."
Habantz le layssa entro que sia fleubotomat segondament; o remau aquo am la acuitat del fleubotomi que es coagulat del sanc en le orrifici de la vena; o pausa sobre aquel de tyriaca alfarach, o de sagzenea, e comprem aquel am compressio leugiera entro que·l sanc sia fora yssit.	"Let there remain a little blood inside in case of a second phlebotomy; or remove that which has coagulated from the opening of the vein during phlebotomy; or place on it a plaster of myrrh and aloes, or of sage, and compress it with gentle pressure until the blood is fully evacuated."
E si la vena es apostemada, lahoras layssa aquela e no la toques entro que·l apostema sia sedat.	"And if the vein is inflamed, leave that alone and do not touch it until the inflammation has subsided."
E si necessitat te provoca a evacuar le sanc segondament, e no es excusacio, lahoras tu sagna aquel sobre aquel loc o en l’autre bras en autra vena.	"And if there is a necessity to evacuate blood a second time, and there is no excuse for not doing so, then do it on that spot or on the other arm in another vein."
E la vena apelada “funis del bras” es fleubotomada en loc de la fusca o de la basilica, quan no so atrobadas o so amaguadas, quar es composta de aquelas.	"And the vein called 'the funnel of the arm' is phlebotomized in place of the cephalic or basilic veins when these are not prominent or are hidden, for it is composed of those."
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute intrometa la sua ma en aygua cauda entro que·l focil se enrogezesca e que la vena apparia manifestament.	"And the quality of phlebotomy on him is that the patient immerses his hand in cold water until the vessel becomes rigid and the vein appears clearly."
E aprop sia strengut sobre aquel am liament am strictura migana; e aprop fleubotoma segon le tranvers petit, no latitudinalment ni segon la longitut.	"And it should be stretched out over that spot with a ligature having medium tightness; and phlebotomy should be done according to the transverse line, not latitudinally nor longitudinally."
E sia la apercio ampla e sia la tua fleubotomia am la qual tu fleubotomas aquela sobre la junctura de la ma un petit.	"And let the opening be wide, and your phlebotomy should be done with such care that you phlebotomize that spot on the junction of the hand a little."
E si es prohibit le fluxs del sanc, lahoras tu itera la ma en l’aygua cauda e layssa le sanc correr en la aygua entro que consieguas la tua necessitat.	"And if the flow of blood is prohibited, then immerse the hand in cold water again and let the blood run into the water until your need is satisfied."
Mays si tu eras en les dias d’estiu, lahoras tu yest excusat de la iteracio de la ma en l’aygua cauda, e le mes es pausat le cors del sanc en aygua cauda en temps de yvern.	"However, if you are in the days of summer, then you are excused from immersing your hand in cold water, and it is prohibited to expose the body to cold water during winter."
E la fleubotomia de aquesta vena es pus salva que de totas las autras venas, quar dejos lu no ha vena pulsatil, ni nervi.	"And phlebotomy of this vein is safer than that of all other veins, because it does not have a pulsatile vein nor nerves."
E la fleubotomia de la savatella de la ma dreyta es conferent a las malautias del fetge.	"And phlebotomy on the little finger of the right hand is conducive to diseases of the liver."
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que tu strenguas la ma am liament o am la tua ma, pus que tu l’as mesa en ayga cauda, entro que la vena sia imflada e sia be demostrada al vezement; e aprop fleubotoma aquela transversan; e si inscidas aquela de tot no nozera aquo en re.	"And the quality of phlebotomy on him is that you strengthen the hand with a ligature or your hand, since you have placed it in cold water until the vein becomes inflamed and is clearly demonstrated at sight; and then phlebotomize that transversely; and if some of that is not necessary, do not worry about that."
E conserve que no ultimes la tua ma am la fleubotomi, quar dejos lu so les nervis dels ditz denudatz de carn.	"And be sure not to bind your hand too tightly during phlebotomy, because thereby the nerves of the said digits are denuded of flesh."
E aprop itera la ma en l’aygua cauda e laysse correr le sanc en aquela, quar si tu no iteras aquela en l’aygua cauda, le sanc sira coagulat en lo orrifici de la vena, e es prohibit de flux.	"And be sure to immerse the hand in cold water again and let the blood flow into that, because if you do not immerse it again in cold water, the blood will coagulate in the opening of the vein, and it is prohibited to flow."
E cum es extrayt le sanc segon la quantitat de necessitat, lahoras tu pausa sobre la vena oli e sal, per que no sia consolidada coytadament; e semblantment cove que tu fassas en tot ram streyt.	"And when blood is extracted according to the quantity needed, then press on the vein with oil and salt so that it does not become consolidated too quickly; and do likewise in every case of phlebotomy."
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de aquela de la ma senestra, es que es conferent a las malautias de la melsa.	"However, the benefit of phlebotomy on that spot of the left hand is that it is conducive to diseases of the spleen."
E fay semblantment en la fleubotomia de lu ayssi cum has fayt en l’autra.	"And do likewise in the phlebotomy of him as you have done in the other."
E le juvament de la vena sephena de la fleubotomia es a las malautias que so en la partida dejos del cos, ayssi cum so malautias de la mayre, e a retencio de mestruas, et a las malautias dels ronhos e ulceracios de coyssas e de cambas antiquas, e a lor semblantz de las malautias.	"And the benefit of phlebotomy on the cephalic vein is for diseases that are in the parts of the body, such as diseases of the mother, and retention of menses, and for rheumatism and ulcers of old wounds and scars, and for similar diseases."
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute entrometa lo sieu pe en aygua cauda e fassa sobre aquel fricacio entro que be apparen las venas; e lia sobre la junctura del pe am correia; e le loc de la vena le talo apparent deves le dit pous, e de aquela so ramificatz en la facia del pe motz ramps.	"And the quality of phlebotomy on him is that the patient immerses his foot in cold water and makes friction there until the veins appear clearly; and he ties it over the junction of the foot with a bandage, and the location of the vein should be apparent near the said toe, from which it branches out into many ramifications on the face of the foot."
E donc fleubotoma le pus ample ram o dejos la camba deves le talo deves la agreguacio de lu, quar es milhor e pus sal.	"And then phlebotomize the most prominent ram or one near the scar on the heel below the aggregation of it, because that is better and safer."
E si fleubotomas aquela en la facia del pe, lahoras tu te guarda dels nervis que so dejos aquela sobre la facia del pe, e pausa la tua fleubotomia am la qual tu fleubotomas per le travers, quays cum si tu la volias inscidir.	"And if you phlebotomize that on the face of the foot, then be careful of the nerves which are near that on the face of the foot, and make your phlebotomy with such care that you phlebotomize it transversely, as if you wanted to incise it."
E sia le fleubotomi vosil.	"And let the phlebotomy be willing."
Mays si es prohibit le issiment del sanc; lahoras tu itera le pe de lu en l’aygua cauda e layssa correr le sanc en aquela entro que sia evacuat.	"However, if the issuance of blood is prohibited, then immerse the foot of him in cold water again and let the blood flow into that until it is evacuated."
E si le fleubotomador erra en la primieyra veguada, lahoras itera am le fleubotomi en sus un pauc, quar le loc es sal; e no temes de lu malician, mays que te guardes dels nervis ayssi cum havem dit.	"And if the phlebotomist errs in his first attempt, then repeat the phlebotomy with caution, because the location is safe; and do not fear any malice, but rather be careful of the nerves as we have said."
E semblantment fay de la sophena del autre pe engualment.	"And do likewise for the cephalic vein of the other foot equivalently."
E de la vena sciatica, le loc ayssi cum havem dit es deves le talo dejos la cavilha de la partida silvestra.	"And for the sciatic vein, its location is as we have said near the heel below the cavity of the external malleolus."
E le juvament de la fleubotomia de lu es a dolo de anca quan es per sanc caut.	"And the benefit of phlebotomy on it is for pain in the hip when it is caused by heat and blood."
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute intre en banh, e festine e strenha la cueyssa de lu del latz de la ancha entro desus le talo desus quatre ditz an una benda longua subtil, quar no appar sino per aquo.	"And the quality of phlebotomy on him is that the patient enters into a bath and makes haste and strengthens the skin of his thigh from the side of the hip above down to the heel over four fingers with a long narrow bandage, because only through that it appears."
E donc quan appar, lahoras tu fleubotoma aquela segon cascun engen que es a tu possible e segon le tranvers, e es milhor; o inscidas aquela per inscizio o secces aquela per seccio, quar le loc de lu es sal.	"And then when it appears, phlebotomize that according to each vein that is possible for you and transversely if possible, which is better; or incise that by incision or excise that by section, because its location is safe."
E ela es en motz homes mot ameguada; e si atrobas aquela, e no appar al sentiment de tot, lahoras fleubotoma alcun ram de lu, e es aquel que appar en le dos del pe enves le dit auricular e le anular.	"And it is found in many men very abundantly. And if you cannot find that, phlebotomize some branch of it, and that which appears on the back of the foot near the said little finger and ring finger."
E guarda te dels nervis, e fay correr del sanc la quantitat que voles.	"And be careful of the nerves, and let the blood flow in the quantity that you desire."
E aprop deslia la strictura e pausa sobre le loc de la fleubotomia coto e strenh le loc, quar leugierament es sanat.	"And then untie the bandage and press on the location of the phlebotomy gently and strengthen it, because it heals easily."
De ventozacio e de las qualitatz de uzar de aquelas.	"Of veins and their qualities in using them."
Ventozas so de corns, o de eram, o de veyre.	"Veins are of four kinds: varicose, ramified, or venous."
E ventozacio es fayta segon doas manieyras: la una de lor es am scarificacio e extracio de sanc, e l’autra es ventozacio ses scarificacio.	"And phlebotomy is performed in two ways: the first of them is with scarification and extraction of blood, and the other is phlebotomy without scarification."
E aquesta ventozacio que es ses scarificacio es segon doas manieyras, quar o es am foc o ses foc.	"And this phlebotomy that is without scarification is performed in two ways: with fire or without fire."
E a las ventozas que so administradas am scarificacio e extraccio de sanc son xiiii locs del cors, dels quals la un en lo qual so pausadas ventozas es alnocrati, e es la deriera partida del cap; e le mieg loc d’el de doas partz del col ensemp; e ventozas del mento dejos la mandibula pus dejos de la boca; e ventozas de doas spatulas; e ventozas de alohoster, e es sobre la fi de la coeta; e ventozas de dos focils, e so de dos brasses; e ventozas de doas cavilhas; e ventozas de doas cuoyssas.	"And the veins that are administered with scarification and extraction of blood are fourteen locations in the body, of which one is where varicose veins are paused, and it is the last division of the head; and the middle location of it on both sides of the neck is equidistant; and veins of the chin below the jaw below the mouth; and veins of two spatulas; and veins of Alooster, and it is above the end of the coccyx; and veins of two buttocks, and they are of two thighs; and veins of two malleoli; and veins of two legs."
E ventozacio no extratz le sanc sino de las venas menudas sparssas en la carn, e per aquo no catz la vertut per aquelas, ayssi cum es cazement per fleubotomia; ni no cove que ventozacio sia fayta am foc o ses foc en alcuna malautia fayta per replecio entro que le cors tot sia evacuat.	"Wounding should not remove blood except from small veins scattered in the flesh, and thus the virtue is not caught thereby, as it is through phlebotomy; nor is wounding to be done with fire or without fire in any illness caused bypletion until the whole body has been evacuated."
Mays si necessitat provoca a ventozacio per malautia o per continua, aministrem aquela en tota hora al comensament del mes e en la fi de lu, e en le mieg loc de lu e en qualque temps sia.	"If there is necessity to provoke wounding for illness or continual [condition], administer it at the beginning of the month and at the end of it, and in the middle of it, and at any time that seems fit."
La qual causa es quar dels homes es en les quals es sanc multiplicat entro que indigeys de extraccio de lu per ventozacio e atroba en le sieu cap graveza e soda; e de aquels es que atroba replecio e rogor en la sua cara e en le sieu cap, e en le sieu col; e de aquels es que atroba pruziment en la sua cara e en le sieu front e tenebrositat e hebetut en les sieus huels; e de aquels que gieta le loc de la sua ventozacio; e de aquels es que le lor ris es multiplicat; e de aquels es que atroba gustament de sanc en la sua boca, o que la lengua es apostemada e escup sanc; e de aquels es que lor dormir es multiplicat, e de aquels que vetz sanc en lo dormir rogor e antics e plaguas e autras causas a lor semblantz.	"This cause is why in men there are those in whom blood multiplies so that they need extraction of it by wounding and find heaviness and soddenness in their head; and there are those who findpletion and heat in their face and head, and in their neck; and there are those who find pressure in their face and forehead and darkness and dullness in their eyes; and there are those whose place of wounding is moistened; and there are those whose laughter is multiplied; and there are those who find the taste of blood in their mouth, or whose tongue is infected and spits blood; and there are those whose sleep is multiplied, and there are those who see blood in dreams with heat and ants and plagues and other causes according to their appearance."
E donc quan vezes en alcuna causa de aquelas, e propriament si es en le tertz o miga del mes, lahoras comandam ventozacio esser fayta pus que so passadas del dia dos o tres horas.	"And therefore when the above-mentioned causes occur in any particular case, and especially if it is in the third or middle of the month, we command wounding to be done after the two or three hours have passed since that time."
E juvament de ventozacio de la nuca es que quan aquela confereys a gravitat en le cap e ad aquo que es efondit als huels; mays cove que aquo sia aprop evacuacio de tot le cors.	"And the advantage of wounding the nape of the neck is that when it applies to heaviness in the head and falling down into the ears, it is necessary for this to be appropriate evacuation of the whole body."
E aquesta ventoza es en le loc de fleubotomia de la cephalica.	"And this wounding is in the place of trepanation of the cephalic region."
E no es legut que use de lu aquel que es de frega complecio, o en le qual es catarr, quar dona ad aquel gran nocument.	"And it is not permissible to use it for those who are of hot complexion or in whom there is catarrh, because this would cause great harm."
E per aquo no cove que uso de aquela les vielhs, e en les caps dels quals so malautias frejas.	"And therefore it should not be used for the old, nor for those whose heads are hot and sick."
Mays ad aquel que sobre aquela es continuant sobre lu es fayta oblivio; e per aquo cove que tu comandes al ventozador que depause la sua ma un petit am la ventosa a las partidas dejos, temen de la generacio de oblivio.	"But on those on whom it is continued after that, oblivion occurs; and therefore you should command the one doing the wounding to pause his hand for a little while at the partitions of the sides, so that generation of oblivion may be avoided."
Mays ventozacio de alkehel es en loc de fleubotomia de la vena fusca e de la basilica: e per aquo confereys a asma, e a la constriccio de ale e a la scissura del sturment de ale, e a tos, e a replecio.	"But wounding of the nape of the neck is in place of trepanation of the black vein and of the basilica: and therefore it causes asthma, and constriction of the lungs, and splitting of the instrument of flight, and coughing, and fullness."
E cove que sia enpellida la ventoza alkehel un petit, quar si es pausada dejos, engendra debilitat en le cors e en le stomac.	"And therefore it is necessary for wounding of the nape of the neck to be done quickly, because if it is paused at the sides it generates weakness in the body and stomach."
E la ventozacio de alhagdahan confereys a las dolors accident en le cap e a obtalmia, e emigranea, e prefocacio, e a dolors en las razitz de las dentz; e es en loc de fleubotomia de la basiliqua.	"And wounding of the temporal region causes accidental pains in the head and ophthalmia, migraine, and prefrontal headache, and pains in the roots of teeth; and it is in place of trepanation of the basilica."
E cove que comandes al ventozador que no prema la sua ma am scarificacio per que no inscida la arteria e accida fluxs de sanc.	"And you should command the one doing the wounding not to press his hand at the scarification lest he incise the artery and cause flow of blood."
E ventozacio dejos le mento comfereys a alcola en la boca, e a corrupcio de la gingiva, e a semblantz a lor de las malautias que so en la boca, e stan en loc de fleubotomia de aliheric que so en las doas labias.	"And wounding of the sides of the chin causes dryness in the mouth, corruption of the gums, and symptoms like those of diseases that are in the mouth; and it is in place of trepanation of Aleph which is on both lips."
Mays la ventozacio que es fayta sobre las doas spatulas confereys a caphatan, le qual es fayt per replecio de caliditat.	"But wounding that is done on the two cheeks causes headache, which is caused by fullness of heat."
E la ventosacio de las doas partidas dedintz dels focils confereys juvament de la fleubotomia de tres venas, so es de la basilica, fusca e cephalica, quar aquela atratz le sanc de totas aquelas venas pus manudas que so en la carn, e aquelas venas menudas de las autras venas pus grossas entro que pervengua la atraccio a las tres venas.	"And wounding of the two partitions between the teeth of the cheeks causes benefit from trepanation of three veins, that is, the basilica, black and cephalic veins; because that attracts blood from all those thick veins that are in the flesh, and those thin veins of the other thick veins through which the attraction reaches to the three veins."
E comanda al ventozador que trop no procezesca en scarificacio, quar le loc es denudat de carn, e dejos lu so nervis e arterias.	"And command the one doing the wounding not to proceed with scarification because the place is denuded of flesh and has nerves and arteries near it."
E es una ventoza am la qual es ventozat sobre alshosses e confereys a las emorroydas del cul e a las ulceracios pus dejos.	"And it is a wounding with which one wounds on the buttocks, and causes hemorrhoids of the anus and ulcers near them."
E cove que comandes al ventozador que sia gran ventoza, e que sia de eram, quar le loc indigeys de fort seccio; e fort leu so traucadas ventozas subtils e sia scarificat am scarificacio.	"And you should command the one doing the wounding to make it a large wounding and of iron because the place needs a strong section; and many subtle woundings are drawn out and it is scarified with scarification."
Mays ventozas de las cambas minueysso per minuicio manifesta, quar atiran le sanc de tot le cors, e comfereysso a dolors antiquas dels ronhos e de la mayre, e de la vesica; e provocan las mestruas, e comfereysso a bothor e ademil; e stan en loc de fleubotomia de doas sophenas, e alahorcoben, e de doas cavilhas.	"But woundings of the calves diminish pain manifestly by diminution because they draw blood from all the body and cause old pains of the kidneys and belly, and of the bladder; and provoke menstruation and cause boils and ademoma; and they are in place of trepanation of two sophenes, alar-cohen, and two cavillas."
Enpero mot debelitan tot le cors e fan accidir sincopi en motz homes.	"However much they debilitate the whole body and cause syncope in many people."
E de las ventozas alahorcoben le juvament es propda al juvament a las ventozas de doas cambas.	"And from woundings of Alar-cohen, the benefit is near to the benefit of woundings of two calves."
E la qualitat de la posicio de las ventozas es que pauses la ventoza al comensament vueda e sucguas per succio temprada, e no prolongues la posicio de las ventozas, mays pausa aquelas leugierament, e reman aquelas coytadament, e que las humors venguan al loc per adveniment engual.	"And the quality of the position of woundings is that you pause the wounding at the beginning and follow it by temperate suction, and do not prolong the position of woundings, but pause them gently and remain them carefully, so that the humors may come to the place by equal advent."
E no cesses iterar aquo e continuar entro que veja le loc ja enrojezir e inflar e que appara la rogor del sanc.	"And do not cease iterating this and continuing until you see the place already reddened and swollen and that the color of blood appears."
E lahoras tu scarifiqua e itera la succio pauc a pauc, e aprop considera en la dispozicio dels cors.	"Then scarify and iterate the suction little by little, and carefully consider the disposition of bodies."
Quar aquel home que es de tendra carn de rars pors, cove que tu le scarifiques una veguada e no pus, per que le loc no sia ulcerat.	"Because that person who is of tender flesh and many pores should you scarify once only, not more than once, lest the place be ulcerated."
E comanda al ventozador que amplifique la scarificacio e pronde un pauc, e atempre la succio am facilitat.	"And command the one doing the wounding to amplify the scarification a little and proceed gently with temperate suction."
E si en le sanc es grossitut, lahoras cove que scarifiques doas veguadas, quar en la primieyra veguada es uberta la via de subtiliacio al sanc e a la aquositat de lu.	"And if the blood is thickened, then you should scarify twice because in the first time the way of subtiliation to the blood and humidity of it is opened."
Mays en la segunda a la perscrutacio aquisida de la extraccio del sanc gros.	"But in the second one, percussion and acquisition of the extraction of thick blood are achieved."
E si le sanc es mot feculent, lahoras sia fayta scarificacio la tersa veguada per que consiegua le derier.	"And if the blood is very fetid, then let there be a third scarification to achieve the final result."
E derierament, quan volem extrayre le sanc pauc a pauc o un petit, abasta a nos una scarificacio.	"Finally, when we want to extract blood little by little or a little bit, one scarification suffices us."
E si volem extraccio de mot sanc, scarificam am mota scarificacio; e si nos conoyssem que·l sanc es gros, lahoras cove que scarifiquem per scarificacio preonda.	"And if we want extraction of much blood, we scarify with much scarification; and if we know that the blood is thick, then we should scarify with prolonged scarification."
E le terme de scarificacio en la qual es la profunditat de la codena tant solament.	"The term of scarification in which there is only the depth of a thread."
E si aquel del qual la codena es grossa, dura, fusca, e les sieus pors so streytz, cove que les locs de las ventosas sian untatz lenitius, apertius resolutius; si es en temps d’estiu, ayssi cum es oli de aloen o oli de violat, o oli de amellas dossas, o oli de cemensa de coja; e si es en temps ivern, lahoras oli narci, o oli de liri, o oli de camamilla, o de sanc, e ad aquels semblantz.	"And if that of whom the thread is thick, hard, black, and his pores are narrow, then the places for woundings should be anointed with lenient, aperient, resolvent oils; if it is in summer time, thus as olive oil or violet oil, or oil of almonds dried, or oil of cumin; and if it is in winter time, then narcissus oil, or lily oil, or camomile oil, or blood oil, and similar ones."
E si la superfluitat es grossa, freja, lahoras le oli sia amaranti, o oli de balsamita, o oli de aloen, o oli aneti, e a lor semblantz.	"And if the superfluity is thick and greasy, then let the oil be amaranthine, or balm oil, or olive oil, or neat oil, and similar ones."
Mays si le ventozador es de amples pors de tendra carn, lahoras cove que sia prohibit de oli, e cove que ad aquest les locs de ventozas de lor aprop la ventozacio sian lavatz am ayguaros o am aygua freja de solatrum, o am aygua de coja, o am aygua de bordolaguas, e semblantz ad aquelas.	"But if the wounder is of large pores and tender flesh, then let him be prohibited from oil, and let those places for woundings, near to the wounding, be washed with hot water or warm water of salt, or water of cumin, or water of borrage, and similar ones to those."
E aquel del qual le sanc es de mota humiditat, lava las suas ventozas am vi agre, o am aygua de mirt e sumac e semblant ad aquels.	"Those whose blood is overly moist should wash their nostrils with sour wine or water containing myrtle and sumac."
E de aquel del qual las superfluitatz son grossas, lava las suas ventozas am vi antic, o am aygua de sansuc, que es majorana, o de decoccio de anet, o de camamilla, e a lor semblantz.	"For those whose secretions are thick, wash their nostrils with old wine or water containing savory (satureja), parsley, coriander, or chamomile flowers."
E cove que la ventozacio sia guardada denant de banh; habantz cove que sia aministrada aprop issiment del banh per una hora o per doas, e cove que dorma aprop la ventozacio.	"Let vomiting be prevented before bathing; sometimes it should be administered near the time of bathing for one or two hours beforehand, and sometimes it should induce sleep."
Quid est quo oportet ut regatur ventosandus aus phlebotomatus ante ventosationem.	"What is necessary so that a phlebotomized patient may regulate their breathing before vomiting?"
Cove que consideras al comensament: lahoras si le ventozador o aquel que·s deu fleubotomar es coleric e ventz sobre lu sanc agut e imflamacio, lahoras cove que prengua causas infrigidantz, ayssi cum milgranas acetosas, e endivia an vi agre e laytuguas, e secanabin, e julep, e a lor semblantz.	"If the ventosator or phlebotomist is choleric and vents upon their blood being hot and inflamed, they should take cooling causes, such as sour apples, endive with vinegar and lettuce, secanol, and julep."
E pausa a lor viandas ayssi cum poletz, e carns de auzels serbiges, e viandas conditas am agras, e a lu semblantz.	"And pause their foods thus: poleta, roasted birds, highly seasoned foods, and the like."
E de aquel del qual la compleccio es freja, cove que prengua en beure eyssarop almiva, o eyssarop de alsecanabin de semensas, e sumac, e vi mot odorant migier entre viel et noel; e que a lu sia comendat que use de paucitat de beure e de mangar, e pausa las viandas de lu poletz e canabir e pissers e petitz auzels e colombat.	"One whose complexion is cold should take in drink that is hot and sweet, such as syrup of aloe or syrup made from cannabis seeds, sumac, and mead with a stronger smell between old and new wine. It is recommended to him that he use restraint in drinking and eating, avoiding foods of poultry, cannibalism (likely a typo), fish, small birds, and pigeons."
E cove que en lo dia de ventozacio e de fleubotomia le beure sia major que la vianda.	"On the day of venesection or phlebotomy, drink should outweigh food."
E cove que sia donat en beure en alcunas horas ad alcus homes tyriaca alpharac, o medicamentz de musc, so es muscada, o alcelita denant la ventozacio o denant fleubotomia o aprop, per so que·ls membres principals sian confortatz e que·l sanc sia subtiliat; e no cove que prenguan aquela scalfatz.	"It is necessary to give certain men triaca alharanza or musk medicamentum, that is, muscated wine before venesection or phlebotomy or appropriately, so that the principal members may be comforted and the blood may be subtiliated; and it is not necessary for them to take that drink."
Mays las ventozas que so ses scarificacio sian ventozas que so pausadas sus le fetge, e sobre la melsa e podagra, e sobre le umbelic, en les locs dels jonolhs, e la pixida del ancha, quar aquestz membres no suffertan scarificacio sobre si.	"Venesections that are not scars should be venesections made pausing the liver, and on the spleen and gout, and on the navel, in the locations of the joints, and the sole of the foot, because these members do not withstand scarification upon them."
E no es querit per aquelas sino atraccio de sanc de membre, ayssi cum pausam ventosa sobre mamilha en malautia de flux de sanc del sanc de las nars; e usam de aquela per que sia dissolvuda ventositat freja inviscade del membre, ayssi cum pausam sobre le ventre e l’umbelic; quar aquela rarifique le membre e scalfa lu e ramau la dolor quar resolveys ventositat.	"And it is not desired by those except attraction of blood from member, as such pause of venesection on the nipple in illness of flow of blood from nose; and they use that one for that blood vessels may be dissolved and thickened ones of the member, as such pause on the belly and navel; because that rarifies the member and scales it and removes the pain because it resolves ventosity."
E ja es pausada sobre les ronhos quan accideys en lor opilacio o poyra, quar per vertut de atraccio fort leu huobre opilacio e erradica le poyra de son loc.	"And it is already paused on the temples when there occurs in their obstruction or plethora, because by virtue of strong attraction it draws out obstruction and eradicate plethora from its place."
E semblantment fa quan es pausada sobre le fetge e la melsa deves ventositat en aquels enclausa.	"And similarly it does when it is paused on the liver and spleen for removing ventosity in those enclosed."
E aquestas ventozas so administradas vuedas amb succio tant solament; e alcunas veguadas so administradas am foc.	"These venesections are administered alone with suction; and sometimes they are administered with fire."
E alcunas veguadas so administradas plenas de aygua tebeza en las malautias de la melsa.	"Sometimes remedies rich in water are administered in cases of intestinal illness."
E aquo es per que la ventoza sia umplida e sia pus gran, so es aygua cauda sola o aygua en la qual sian cuytas herbas ad aquo convenientz.	"And this is why the stomach becomes full and larger: it is water that has been swallowed alone or water in which certain herbs have been cooked."
Forma de ventoza aministrada am foc: sia la amplitud del orrifici de dos ditz, segon que nos la havem formada; e la quantitat del preon sia la maytat de un palm; e sia en lo latz de lu, en le loc que es en le circuit, la maytat de lu, le trauc sia petit segon la quantitat que intre en lu una agulha.	"Form of stomach administration over fire: the diameter of the opening should be that of two fingers as we have formed it; the quantity of fuel used should be about half a palm; and on the side where it is located, about halfway up, the track should be small according to the amount that enters into it like a needle."
Sia fayta de eram rog o citri, de grosses marges, leon, enguals e terses per so que no leda le membre deves la sua posicio sobre lu.	"It should be made of iron or earthenware, with thick margins, lion-shaped, round and flat on top so that it does not slip from its position over the fire."
E sia al mieg de lu vergua transversa de eram o de ferr, on es pausada candela am lo foc.	"And there should be a transverse iron or steel hook in the middle of it, where candles are placed while cooking over the fire."
E ja sia aquesta ventoza gran major de aquela la qual havem recomtat; e la pauca mendre de aquela segon las malautias e la etat de aquel que usa de aquela.	"And already this stomach should be much larger than that which we have recommended; and the opening smaller according to the illness and condition of him who uses it."
E las ventosas dels efantz e extenuatz so autres que las ventozas dels joves e de grosses corssas.	"And the cupping glasses for infants and emaciated patients are different from those used for young adults with robust constitutions."
E la qualitat de pausar aquesta ventoza am foc sobre le membre es que extenda la meca am foc de lenha decentment denant una pauca candela de cera, e pausa aquela sobre le mieg de la vergua transversa en le mieg loc de la ventoza, per que le foc sia accendut enviro la partida dejos per que no sia comburit le cors del malaute.	"And the method of placing this stomach over the fire on the limb is as follows: spread out a suitable amount of burning wood properly in front of a small wax candle and place that on the transverse hook in the middle of the stomach, so that the fire surrounds but does not directly burn the sick person's skin."
E aprop sia pausada sobre le membre del malaute, e le dit sia sobre le trauc que havem dit, entro que quan tenem las ventozas e non indigem que osten le dit e que yesca la vapor sobre aquel trauc, lahoras la ventoza sira tantost dissolvuda.	"And then it should be placed on the limb of the sick person and held there over the track that we have described until when we see that the skin becomes reddened and begins to perspire, at that point the cupping glass will quickly dissolve."
E prop igneys la meca segon la sua manieyra, e itera aquela si indigeyssas de aquela.	"And then gradually increase the fire according to its nature, and repeat this if necessary until complete satisfaction is achieved."
Mays en ventosa que es aministrada en la malautia de plauressi, am aygua, en la qual no ha vergua transversa ni trauc, e no es aministrada sino que sia umplida de aygua, e es pausada sobre le membre tant solament.	"However, in the case of cupping used for treating pleurisy with water, which does not have a transverse hook or track and is only filled with water, it is placed on the limb alone."
E aquesta es la forma de lu: E aquesta ventoza quant plus es gran, tant es milhor, per que puya recebre gran quantitat de aygua.	"And this is how it should be done: The larger the cupping glass used for pleurisy with water, the better, because it can hold more water."
Capitol .xcvii.	"Chapter 97."
Sanguissuguas no so administradas en motz membres sino en les membres en les quals non es possible posicio de ventosas, per la parvitat de aquels, ayssi cum le pot e gingiva e semblantz a lor; o en membre denudat de carn, ayssi cum le dit e·l nas e lors semblantz.	"Bloodletting is not performed on most limbs except those where it is impossible to apply cupping glasses due to their small size, such as the toes and gums, or on bare skin like the fingertips and nose."
E la qualitat de usar de aquelas que si has trobadas sanguisugas que so en las ayguas dossas de poyredura mundas.	"And it is recommended to use those bloodletting devices that have been found in the water of muddy puddles."
E aprop sian layssadas le dia e la nueyt en aygua dossa entro que sian famolentas, e que no romangua alcuna causa en le ventre de aquelas; e aprop sia evacuat le cors en le comensament am fleubotomia e am ventozas; e aprop fregua le membre del malaute entro que s’enrojezesca; e aprop sian pausadas sobre lu.	"And then they should be left in muddy water day and night until they become hungry, ensuring that nothing remains inside their bellies. And then the body should be evacuated at the beginning with phlebotomy and cupping glasses, and the limb of the patient should be rubbed until it becomes reddened, and then the leeches should be placed on top."
E cum son umplidas e caso.	"And when they are full and satisfied."
E si es possible succio del loc am ventoza, es mays derier en juvament.	"If it is possible to suck out the location with a cupping glass, it is better in healing."
E sino, lahoras lava le loc am vi agre e aprop am mota aygua; e sia freguat e expremut.	"But if not, then wash the location with sour wine and hot water, and rub and squeeze it out."
E si es prolonguat le cors del sanc aprop le cazement de las sanguissuguas, e es aquo resudan, lahoras tu enfon un drap de li en aygua freja, e pausa aquel de sobre entro que sia abdida la resudacio.	"And if the blood remains in the wound after the leeches have fallen off, then take a cloth dipped in hot water and place it on top to absorb the remaining blood."
E si le sanc es multiplicat, lahoras polveriza sobre lu vitriol trissat, o guallas e semblantz a lor de las causas stipticas, entro que·l sanc sia abscidit; o sian pausadas sobre le loc las maytatz de favas excocicadas, e sian layssadas entro que las favas aderescan al loc, e es le sanc abscidit.	"If the blood is profuse, then sprinkle on it trisulfate of vitriol or powders made from adhesive herbs such as tragacanth and similar ones that are styptic, until the bleeding stops. Or place cooked broad beans on the location and leave them there until they adhere to the wound, and then the bleeding will stop."
E cove, si es necessaria, iteracio de sanguissuguas, quan es possible mudar aquelas.	"If necessary, repeat the leeching procedure when it is possible to change the leeches."
E si las sanguissuguas son prohibidas de suspenssio, lahoras sia freguat le loc am sanc recent o fique una agulha en les locs entro que yesca sanc; e aprop sian pausadas, quar aquelas quan sento alcun sanc tantost adarysso.	"If it is forbidden to suspend the leeches, then rub the location with fresh blood or insert a needle into the location until blood comes out. And then place them on top, because they immediately attach themselves when they sense any blood."
E quan voles que cajan, polveriza sobre aquelas un pauc de aloen trissat, o sal, o cendre, e cazo tantost.	"To make the leeches fall off, sprinkle a little powdered alum or salt or ashes on them and they will immediately detach."
Ayssi comensa lo prolec de la tersa partida: de restauracio.	"And so begins the prologue of the third part: On Restoration."
Aquest capitol es motas veguadas necessari en la art de medicina; e es restauracio de fractura e de dislocacio accident en les osses.	"This chapter is very often necessary in the art of medicine, and it concerns the restoration of fractures and accidental dislocations of bones."
O, filh, sapiatz que jactan se de aquest capitol les fols metges e les vulguars e aquels que degun temps no reguardero les libres dels Antics ni legiro de aquels una letra.	"Oh son, know that those foolish physicians and common people who have never taken the time to study the works of the ancients or even read a single letter from them boast about this chapter."
E per aquesta causa es fayt que aquesta manieyra dels scients in terra nostra es privat; e yeu no ho e obliat en aquo degun temps be de tot; e no he adhibit aquo que apres, sino per longitut de lectio dels libres dels Antics e studi sobre le entendement de aquels, entro que extrayssi la sciencia de aquels.	"And this is why the method of the ancients has been abandoned in our land. And I have not forgotten this at any time, and I have not included what follows except for the purpose of encouraging reading of the works of the ancients and study of their meaning, so that knowledge may be extracted from them."
E aprop adirigui a experiment e studi en la longitut de la mieua vida.	"And also direct your efforts and studies towards this throughout my lifetime."
E yeu ja he de aquo descrit en aquest capitol tot aquo que conte la mieua sciencia e sobre le qual es passat lo mieu experiment; pus que agui abreujat aquo a vos autres e deliuregui aquo de occupacio de elonguacio; e abreujegui aquo en la fi de abreujacio; et e monstrat aquo en la fi de declaracio; e formegui en aquo motas formas dels sturmentz que so administratz en aquel, cum es fayt per addicio de declaracio, ayssi cum he fayt en dos capitols precedentz.	"I have already described in this chapter everything that my knowledge contains and on which I have experimented. Since I have abbreviated it for you others and delivered it from the occupation of lengthening, and abbreviated it at the end of abbreviation, and shown it at the end of explanation, and formed many forms of instruments used therein, as is done through addition to explanation, as I have done in two preceding chapters."
Capitol primier.	"Chapter One"
Summae et collectiones ex esse fracturae ossium, ex eis quarum praemissio necessaria est, antequam incipiamus rememorationem membrorum fraftorum et diversorum si uniuscuiusque.	"A summary and collection of the essentials of bone fractures, from which a necessary introduction must be made before beginning a review of the various members that are broken."
Cove donc que diguam en le prohemi de aquest capitol las summas del sermo; e les capitols al entendament dels quals en le comensament es forsat le artifexs e a stacio sobre la veritat de aquels; so es vos e aquels que so promptz que sapian o aprenguan aquesta art nobla autres de vos.	"Therefore, I shall begin this chapter by stating the main points of my discourse, and the chapters that require explanation at the outset for the craftsmen and their apprentices who are eager to learn or understand this noble art."
E donc dic que quan accideys a alcu fractura o dislocacio o torcio o cazement, lahoras cove que tu te coytes al comensament am fleubotomia o aleyar aquel, o quascu ensemps, si no prohibeys alcuna causa, ayssi cum debelitat de vertut, o es aquel al qual accideys effant, o viel en decrepitat, o es temps de vehement calor, o de vehement freg.	"And so I say that when there occurs a fracture or dislocation or torsion or wound, then you should begin by performing phlebotomy on the patient or applying an emollient to them, or both at once if no contraindication exists, such as debility of power or if the patient is an infant or elderly or during extreme heat or cold."
E aprop sia content en vianda sieua de erbas frejas e de carns de auzels e de crabotz; e prohibem carns grossas e umplir si de viandas e de tota vianda que umple las venas de sanc, entro que siras segurat de apostema caut, e si no temes efusio de materia al membre.	"And also ensure that they are fed a suitable diet of hot herbs and poultry and crabs. Avoid fatty meats and foods that cause fullness, and especially avoid foods that fill the veins with blood to prevent cautious inflammation, and to avoid fear of excessive discharge in the limb."
E lahoras retorne le malaute al sieu regiment primier am le qual corr costuma de lu.	"And then return the patient to their usual routine as soon as they are able to tolerate it."
E donc cum le os trencat comensa esser restaurat, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia pascut de viandas nutritivas de nutriment mot e gros e greu en les quals sia viscositat, ayssi cum so viandas faytas de froment cueyt am aygua, e ris, e caps, e pes, e ventres de vacas, e huous, e peys fresc, e vi gros e semblants ad aquels, e am aquest regiment es fayta coagulacio de fractura pus leugierament e miels.	"And so when the broken bone begins to heal, then the patient should be fed nutritious foods rich in nutrients and viscous, such as dishes made from wheat cooked with water, rice, chickpeas, fish, beef liver, eggs, fresh cheese, thick wine and similar foods. And with this diet, coagulation of the fracture occurs more easily and gently."
E sapias que les osses trinquatz quan so en les homes que so en la primiera vilura e en los decrepitz, no es possible que sian continuatz e sian consolidatz segon lur natura per la exsiccacio dels membres de lor.	"And know that bones which are broken in men who are elderly or frail cannot be joined together and consolidated according to their nature due to the dryness of their limbs."
E son consolidatz e continuatz segon lor natura tot temps per la exsiccacio de aquels membres, e so continuatz e consolidatz aquels que so de lor en la fi de la lenitat, ayssi cum les osses dels petitz effantz.	"But bones are joined together and consolidated according to their nature in youth due to the moisture of those limbs. And they are also joined together and consolidated at the end of old age, just like the bones of young infants."
Mays empero natura ajusta e amnecteys sobre le os trencat de tota partida alcuna causa semblant a glut en le qual es grossitut que adhereys e strenh aquel entro que so ensemps conglutinatz e liatz ensemps, entro que venen la fi de fortitut e de fermesa, ayssi cum foc al comensament, entro que denguna causa no prohibeys aquel de las suas obres.	Nature adjusts and connects the broken bone with any similar cause, like glue, where swelling adheres and strengthens that which is conglutinated together, that which comes to an end of its strength and firmness, as fire at the beginning, unless some cause prevents it from its work.
E per aquesta causa es necessari que pauses las viandas del malaute, viandas en las quals so gravitat e viscozitat e grosseza, ayssi cum havem dit.	Therefore, it is necessary to pause the meals of the sick person, foods which are heavy and viscous and thick, as we have said.
Mota diversitat de fractura segon diversitat del membre.	A great variety of fractures according to the diversity of the limb.
E sapias que las specias de fractura son diversas segon la diversitat dels membres, quar fractura del os de la camba es diversa de la fractura del os del cap; e la fractura del os del pietz es divers de la fractura del os del dos; e semblantment totz les autres membres son diverses entre lor.	You should know that the species of fractures are diverse according to the diversity of limbs, for a fracture of the bone of the leg is different from a fracture of the bone of the head; and a fracture of the bone of the foot is different from a fracture of the bone of the hand; and similarly all other members are diverse among themselves.
E yeu venc am rememoracio de tota specia de fractura, expausada en le sieu capitol distincta del autre.	And you will find with remembrance all species of fractures, explained in their own chapter, distinguished from the others.
Mota diversitat de fractura en si meteyssa.	Great diversity even within the same fracture.
E son diversificadas las specias de fractura del os en lor meteyssas; quar es fayta fractura arcuada otra aquo que accidan en lu stellas; e alcunas veguadas es fayta fractura segon la longitut del os: e so las fracturas de lu satagia e astelhas e addicios procedentz e no-procedentz, ayssi cum es fayt en la pena quan es preparada a escriure, e es fractura am plagua e disrupcio en le cap, e es fractura fissura petita.	And the species of fractures of bone are diversified within themselves; for there is an arched fracture, other than that which occurs in stars; and sometimes it happens that there is a fracture according to the length of the bone: and these are fractures of the satire and astragalus and additional ones that do not proceed, as is done in the pen when it is prepared to write, and there is a fracture with swelling and disruption at the head, and there is a small fissure fracture.
E a tota specia es engen o turment propri en restauracio de lu segon que vindra rememoracio de lu distincta en les sieus locs.	And in each species there is a special torment proper to its restoration, which will come to memory with its distinct location in their places.
Mota senhal de fractura del os.	Many signs of bone fracture
E per aquo es conoguda fractura del os: es tortuositat de lu, e de aquel eminencia e appericio de lu al sentiment, e so de lu quan compremes aquel am la tua ma.	And for this reason bone fracture is known by its crookedness and by the prominence and sharpness of it to the touch, and also when you compress that with your hand.
E donc quan no es en le loc tortuositat apparent ni so no es feyt deves le tieu tocament quan toques le os am agitacio e le malaute no atroba gran dolor, lahoras no es aqui fractura.	And therefore when there is no apparent crookedness in the place nor is it done with your touch when you touch the bone with agitation and the illness does not cause much pain, then it is not a fracture.
Habantz es possible que sia tortuositat o petita fissura, adon no cove que tu mauguas aquel am la tua ma e am compressio de tot; habantz pausa sobre lu de las medicinas de las quals ve rememoracio aprop aquel moment le qual conveneys al loc; e aprop sia streyt per strictura subtil.	It is possible that there may be tortuosity or a small fissure, so you should not move it with your hand nor compress it at all; but pause over it and consider the medications of which you have remembrance at that moment which are suitable to the place; and especially if it is narrow for narrowing.
E sapias que·l loc quan es arcuat e no es scindit en dos o otra aquo que no accidan en lu satagie, cum es remauguda tota partida de la sua compar, lahoras cove que comenses de la tua hora a rectificacio de lu habantz que a lu accida apostema caut.	And know that the place where it is arched and not cut in two or otherwise than in the satire, when the whole part is removed from its company, then you should begin immediately with the correction of that having regard to what happens afterwards, for fear of apostume cauterization.
E si a lu accida apostema caut, lahoras layssa aquel per alcus dias entro que cesse le apostema; e aprop engualha aquel segon quascuna manieyra que podes de levitat e de engen.	And if it happens that there is cauterization of the apostume, then leave that alone for a few days until the aposteme stops; and meanwhile treat it according to every possible manner that you can devise to alleviate and cure.
E sapias que restauracio de lu e agulacio de lu es pus leugiera que del os en le qual accideysso sathagie.	And know that the restoration and healing of that is easier than that of the bone in which a satire occurs.
E aprop strenh aquel segon que vindra la rememoracio de lu.	And moreover strengthen it according to what you remember of it.
Mays si en le os so satagias, lahoras es necessaria extencio de aquest membre trencat de doas partz, si es la ma o le pe; o am la tua ma si le membre es petit; o am doas cordas o am una corda e la ma.	But if there are satiriasis in the bone, then it is necessary to extend this broken member from both parts, if it is the hand or foot; or with your hand if the member is small; or with two cords or with one cord and your hand.
E sia la tua posicio am la qual pauses le membre loc engual segon la sua figura natural, mentre que las partidas so extandudas del membre trenquat, lahoras te perforsa que fassas retornar aquelas addicios am engen e segon quascuna manieyra que poyras en lor locs.	And let your position be such that you hold the member in its natural place while the parts of the broken member are extended; then make sure to bring back those additions with healing and according to every possible manner in their places.
E guarda te segon la tua forssa que no accida sobre le malaute per la tua operacio delor ni lesio; e perforsa te segon le tieu poder que tu appliques la un os am l’autre son companho segon lors milhors formas.	And take care according to your ability that you do not cause any harm or injury to the illness through your operation on them; and make sure that you apply one bone to its companion in the best possible way.
E cove que en aquela hora aprofitablament tu toques am la tua ma aquel, e si vezes aqui alcuna causa diversa, rectifiqua aquel e enguala aquel per la quantitat de la tua vertut.	And it is necessary that at that time you should touch it with your hand profitably; and if there is any different cause here, correct it and treat it according to the amount of your power.
E exquiva vehement extenssio e compressio, ayssi cum fan mots fols metges que motas veguadas fan accidir apostema caut per la sua operacio, o fan accidir contraccio en le membre ayssi cum havem vist aquo per la operacio de lor motas veguadas.	And avoid violent extension and compression, as many foolish physicians do who often cause cauterization of the aposteme through their operation or cause contraction in the member as we have seen many times.
E aprop annecteys, aprop equacio e decent operacio e strictura de aquel membre, e repaus e tranquilitat; amoneste le malaute sobre aquo e fay le squivar que no maugua aquel en la hora de las suas vigilias e del sieu dormir, e ves la sua revolucio e agitacio, e deves la sua egestio, e deves totz les sieus movementz am tota la sua vertut; e aguarda se que la posicio del membre sia posicio am la qual sia asegurada la dolor, la qual causa es quar quan sent en la disposicio de la posicio del membre delor o lesio; lahoras cove que permutes aquel ad autra disposicio de aquela am la qual non senta dolor; e guarda am aquo que la posicio de lu aquela sia dreyta e engual, per so que al membre non accida tortuositat quan es restaurat.	And also connect it, apply pressure and operate decently on that member, and keep it at rest and peaceful; warn the patient about this and make sure that he does not move it during his watch or sleep, and observe its revolution and agitation, and treat all its movements with all your power. And wait until the position of the member is one in which there is no pain, for that is what causes the complaint when the position of the member causes injury; then change that to another position where there is no pain; and make sure that the position of that is correct and healing, so that the member does not become crooked when it is restored.
E la qualitat de la strictura del membre tranquat es aquela que yeu recomti; per que sapias que·ls membres trencatz so diversificatz en lor parvitat e en lor grandeza e en la forma de aquels.	And the quality of the healing of the broken member is that which I recommend to you; for you should know that broken members are diverse in their smallness and greatness and in their shape.
E de aquels que son petits ayssi cum le bras e·l dit e·l focil e semblantz ad aquels, lahoras cove que la envolucio sia de drap mol subtil.	And of those which are small, such as the arm, hand and foot, etc., then the wrapping should be made with very fine cloth.
Mays aquels que so grosses ayssi cum la cuoyssa o la camba, cove que en aquels sia envolucio lada e dura, quar la liadura lada connecteys le membre gran e strenh aquel de tota part am strictura engual, enayssi que en lu no intre macula.	But those which are large, such as the thigh or leg, then for these there should be a wrapping that is thick and hard, because a tight binding connects the large member and strengthens it from all sides with healing, so that nothing enters inside.
E aprop comensa, aprop la tua evacuacio de equacio, pausar liament convenient ad aquo, sobre le loc de aquela fractura am tres envolucios o quatre segon que·l membre mereys; e strenh la tua ma un petit am le liament.	And then begin your treatment of pressure, with suitable bandages according to the case on the site of that fracture with three wrappings or four according to how much the member deserves it; and strengthen your hand a little with the bandage.
E aprop ve am aquel a la partida pus sobirana del loc de la fractura, e strenh mens que no foc la tua strictura am la qual has strengut le loc de la fractura.	And then go with that to the upper part of the site of the fracture, and strengthen your hand more than before in order not to weaken your healing with which you have strengthened the site of the fracture.
E aprop elongua te am envolucio del loc de la fractura un pauc, e mollifiqua la strictura petit a petit, entro que prenguas del loc sa una gran partida.	And then extend yourself with wrapping from the site of the fracture somewhat and gradually soften the pressure little by little until you take one large part.
E aprop pren una autra benda e envolveys aquela autra veguada sobre le loc trenquat am envolucio, e aprop ve am las envolucios a la partida pus dejos de la fractura; e sia la tua operacio en la strictura de la envolucio e en mollificacio de aquela segon que havem dit en la envolucio primieyra desus.	And then take another bandage and wrap it again over the broken site with wrapping, and then go with those wrappings to the part lower than the fracture; and your operation should be in the tightening of the wrapping and in softening that according to what we have said about the first wrapping above.
E aprop pausa entre las volucios de stopa leon o drap am le qual sia engualada la tortuositat de la fractura, si en lu es tortuositat; e sino, no pauses en lu alcuna causa.	And then place between the wrappings of wool or cloth with which the crookedness of the fracture should be straightened if there is crookedness in it; and otherwise do not place anything in it.
E aprop pausa sobre lu autra benda, e aprop enguala sobre aquestas envolucios stelhas decentment faytas tantost, si en le loc no es imflacio o apostema caut, e lahoras pausa sobre lu aquo que sede le apostema aquel e que oste la imflacio; e layssa aquela per alcus jorns; e lahoras tu strenh sobre lu las stelhas.	And then place another bandage over it and then wrap those wrappings decently with suitable stitches so that the site does not become inflamed or cauterize with an aposteme; and if there is inflammation or aposteme there, then place over it what will heal the aposteme and remove the inflammation; and leave it like that for a few days; and then strengthen it with those stitches.
E sian las stelhas de la maytat de canna lada raza, e be formada saviament; o sian de fust de pi; o de ramps de palma ; e sia le ample de quascuna stelha segon aquesta forma e aquesta figura:	And let the stitches be made of thick linen thread, well-formed; or of pine wood; or of palm branches; and let the width of each stitch be according to this shape and form:
Empero cove que la astelha que es pausada sobre aquela fractura sia pus grossa e pus lada un petit que las autras astelhas, e la longitut de la stela segon qu’es legut al membre en magnitut e parvitat; e aprop strenh sobre las astelhas am autra benda segon la tua primieyra strictura; e aprop lia desus am fiel decentment segon que havem dit de strictura, e es que sia la tua strictura segon le loc de la fractura mes, e quant mes es alonguat de la fractura, es mendre la strictura.	However, it is necessary that the stitch which is placed over that fracture be thicker and wider than the other stitches, and the length of the stitch according to how much the member is large or small; and then strengthen those stitches with another bandage according to your first tightening; and then tie up above with thread decently as we have said about tightening, and so that your tightening should be according to the place of the fracture, and the more it is extended from the fracture, the less tight it should be.
E cove que les fils sian migiers en grossesa e subtilitat, e sian de li mol; e si les fils so grosses, ayssi cum yeu he vist per la operacio de alcus fols pausantz les lors fils de cordas de li tort, e es error gran, quan catz la strictura fora equalitat.	"And it is necessary that threads be medium in thickness and fineness, and be of linen; and if the threads are thick, as I have seen in some operations where foolish people used cords of tow, it is a great mistake, when they cause inequality in the stitch."
E eyssament fils subtils no so convenientz, quar tu no consaguiras per strictura am aquels aquo que voles, e no cove que entre astela e astela haja mens de un dit.	"And very fine threads are not suitable, because with them you will not achieve the desired narrowing, and it should not be less than a finger's width between each stitch."
E si le malaute es ledit per las extremitatz de las stelas aprop la strictura en les locs sas, lahoras pausa dejos aquelas de stopa leon o lana carmenada entro que aquo no li fassa lesio.	"And if the illness affects the ends of the threads near the stitch in the area without skin, then pause those made with tow or combed wool between them so that it does not cause injury."
Alcunas veguadas fractura es am plagua, e accideys disrupcio en la codena, e yeu vindre am rememoracio en aquela en le capitol segon singularitat.	"Sometimes breaking occurs with plague, and disruption happens in the thread, as I recall in that one in Chapter Two on peculiarities."
E sapias que ges tot membre trencat no es streyt am stelhas al primier dia; la qual causa es quar le membre, quan es gran, no cove que pauses sobre lu stelhas sino aprop v dias o vii o mays, segon la tua seguratat de adveniment de apostema caut.	"And know that not every broken member is immediately closed with stitches on the first day; the reason for this is that when the member is large, it is necessary to wait several days or even more, according to your certainty of the arrival of a dry crust."
E aquesta es la manieyra dels emplaustres am les quals les Antics restauravan, les quals so pausatz sobre fractura e dislocacio e torcio.	"And this is the manner of the emplastrum with which the Ancients restored them, which were applied over fractures, dislocation and torsion."
Manieyra de emplaustra comu abruejat de restaurament de fractura, convenient a motas compleccios e majorment a las femnas e als efantz, quar es de aquo sobre le qual no ventz calor ni freg: e es que prenguas de polvera de moli, e es la medula de la farina que pen deves le movement de la mola en las paretz del moli.	"Common method of emplastrum for the restoration of fractures, convenient for many complexities and especially for women and children, because it does not cause heat or rubbing: take some powdered mortar, which is the flour's marrow that remains when you remove it from the walls of the mill."
E comfeys aquel ayssi cum es, sino que cribelles aquel am album de huou, e pausa la comfeccio de lu no-spessa ni subtil; e aprop usa de aquela.	"And prepare it thus as it is, but sieve it with egg white and make the mixture neither too thick nor too subtle; and use that."
Autra manieyra de emplaustre restaurant fractura e dislocacio e torcio: recipe de assafetida, de lapdanum, de acacia, de enula, e migrach, que es razit de milgraner salvage, de totz ana drac. x; de mirra e aloen ana drac. v; alochil ana drac. xx; totz sian trissatz e cribellatz e sian mesclatz am aygua alichil o am album de huou si la compleccio del malaute es scalfada; e aprop usa de aquest emplaustre, quar es de bona composicio e restaura les osses trencatz leugierament, e confereys a motz homes.	"Another method of emplastrum for the restoration of fractures and dislocations and torsion: take asafoetida, laudanum, acacia, enula, and millet grain, which is wild radish, all in equal parts; myrrh five parts, aloe twenty parts, all ground and sieved and mixed with clear water or egg white if the condition is scaliness; and use this emplastrum, because it is of good composition and restores lightly broken bones, and benefits many people."
Autra manieyra de emplaustre le qual comfereys a fractura e torcio: recipe migrach e met de altea blanca ana drac. x; de mirra e de aloen ana drac v; de acacia drac. vi; de bol armenic drac. .xx.	"Another method of emplastrum which benefits fractures and torsion: take millet grain and white lead five parts; myrrh and aloe five parts each; acacia six parts; tragacanth twenty parts."
Totz sian trissatz en mortier am mota contricio, e sian cribellatz, e sian comfitz am aygua o am album de huou e sia administrat.	"All are ground in a mortar with much contrition, and sieved, and made into an emplastrum with water or egg white, and applied."
Manieyra de emplaustre a juncturas e osses separatz de lors locs, e seda dolor accident en aquels e a fissuras e fractaduras: sia presa lana sutza e sia submersa en vi agre e oli cuyt e sia pausat sobre le loc.	"Method of emplastrum for joints and separated bones from their places, and for pain that occurs in those parts and for fissures and fractures: take clean wool and immerse it in vinegar and hot oil, and apply it to the place."
Mays en aquest emplastre no es vertut de restauracio, de apostema caut e expelleys dolors propriament.	"But in this emplastrum there is not virtue of restoration, nor does it draw out apostemata nor properly expel pain."
Autra manieyra de emplastre que restaura os trancat: pren fuelas de figuier sort e fuelas de papaver salvatge; contereys tot e fay emplastre de lor.	"Another method of emplastrum that restores broken bones: take leaves of fig and leaves of wild poppy; count all together and make an emplastrum of them."
Manieyra de emplastre abreujat aministrat deves la restauracio de fractura de os e quan tu voles resolucio del romanent de apostema: recipe razitz de altea, de camamilla e flors de violes, de farina de ers, de totz ana partida i; sian totz trissatz e sian cofitz am vi, si·l membre no es scalfat.	"Method of emplastrum abbreviated administered for the restoration of bone fracture and when you want resolution of the remnant apostema: take roots of althea, camomile flowers, violet flowers, oatmeal, all in equal parts; all ground and made into an emplastrum with wine, if the member is not scaleless."
Mays si es scalfat, lahoras comfeys aquel am aygua de coliandre humit o am aygua e usa de lu.	"But if it is scaleless, then use that with water of humid coriander or simply with water."
Autra manieyra de emplastra pus fort en resolucio que aquest primier, quan accideys apostema dur deves la restauracio del membre: recipe de razitz de altea e de semensa de li, e de balaustia, e mellilot, majorana, flors de viol, de camamilla, de totz ana partida i engual; totz sian trissatz e sian cofitz am aygua de sauze o am aygua dousa o am vi, tot aquo segon la qualitat del membre e le repaus de la color de lu.	"Another method of emplastrum even stronger in resolution than the first one when hard apostema occurs during the restoration of the member: take roots of althea and its seeds, and of balm, melilot, marjoram, violet flowers, camomile, all in equal parts ground; all ground and made into an emplastrum with water of willow or sweet water or wine, everything according to the quality of the member and the color of its skin."
Mays Ypocras no diyssec en le sieu libre que sia pausat sobre le membre trenquat deves la restauracio de lu sino cerot fayt de cera e de oli e no autre causa; e recomtec que sia migier entre grossitut e subtilitat.	"But Hippocrates does not specify in his book that it should be applied to the broken member for its restoration, but cerot made of wax and oil and nothing else; and he recommends that it be midway between thickness and subtlety."
Mays a Gualia es vist que sian pausatz sobre le membre trencat deves la restauracio de lu e las causas en las quals es exsiccacio am petit de caliditat so ayssi cum mirra, enses e semblantz a lor de aquelas causas que havem recomtadas.	"But it is seen in Galen that they are applied to the broken member for its restoration and the causes of siccation with little heat are such as myrrh, incense and similar ones of those causes which we have recommended."
Manieyra de emplastre que comfereys a lesio e dolor: recipe migat, de cezes, de pels de home inscizes o pena de auzel, e de altea, e sal, partidas enguals; sian trissatz e cribellatz e sian cofitz, e sia fayt emplastre.	"Method of emplastrum that benefits injury and pain: take myrrh, of wax, of skin of a man cut or bird's feather, and althea, salt, all in equal parts; ground and sieved and made into an emplastrum."
Mays la quantitat segon la qual cove que romangua la liadura e aprop sia disliada, es que consideres si no es accidit dolor ni pruziment ni le os es trencat no es maugut de son loc, lahoras tu no deslies de motz jorns.	"But the quantity according to what remains of the fracture and properly should be removed, is that you consider if there is no pain or pressing nor the bone is broken it is not necessary to remove from its place, then you do not release too soon."
E si accideys al loc dolor vehement o prusiment o imflacio, lahoras tu te coyte o deslie aquel en la hora, e osta le emplastre de lu.	"And if there occurs at the place vehement pain or pressing or inflammation, then you cut or release it immediately, and remove the emplastrum from it."
E pren drap de li e spongia marina leon humida, e submergeys aquela en aygua tebeza, e am aquela lava le loc entro que cesse aquel pruziment e la dolor sia sedada; e aprop layssa repausar le membre per una hora; e aprop pausa sobre lu lana sutza submersa en vi agre e oli o oli rozat, e lia sobre lu per una nuoyt entro que sias segur de apostema caut, e que repause la imflacio del membre, e sia remauguda la dolor de lu.	"And take cloth of it and marine sponge moistened, and immerse that in hot water, and with that wash the inner place until that pressing ceases and the pain is sedated; then let the member rest for an hour; and then apply over it clean wool immersed in vinegar and oil or sweet oil, and lay it on it for one night ensuring apostema caut, and that the inflammation of the member has passed, and the pain from it has been removed."
E aprop itera aquela strictura subtil e emplastre petit e no·l strenhas per la tua constriccio primieyra, e subtilia am aquel entro que sia sanat.	"And then reiterate that subtle restriction and small emplastrum not too tight at the beginning, and subtly with that until it is healed."
E si vezes que le apostema e la rogor e la dolor e la imflacio e tots les accidentz ja so remaugutz de tot, e indigeysses de emplastre e de strictura, lahoras tu itera aquel ayssi cum has fayt al comensant engualment.	"And if sometimes when the apostema and the heat and pain and inflammation and all accidents are already removed from everything, you need an emplastrum and restriction, then repeat that as you have done at the beginning equally."
E si no accideys al membre alcuna causa de aquelas que havem ditas, lahoras no deslies aquel sino aprop tres dias o quatre o v o vii; e alcunas veguadas tot aquo es layssat per xx dias segon que a tu appar per la desliadura del membre, ayssi cum havem dit, entro que la fractura adhereys, e se acosta a la coagulacio de la carn sobre aquel.	"And if there occurs no cause in the member of those that we have mentioned, then you do not release it but let it rest for three days or four or five or seven; and sometimes all this is left for twenty days according to what you see by the release of the member, as we have said, until the fracture adheres and approaches the coagulation of the flesh on it."
E lahoras ajusta en la strictura mays que en la tua strictura primieyra tota, e ayusta en la engrossacio de la vianda del malaute, segon que es precedida la rememoracio de lu.	"And then tighten in the restriction more than your first restriction entirely, and adjust to the growth of the flesh of the sick, according to what is preceded by its remembrance."
Mays si tu vezes le loc de la fractura ja desiccar e extenuar mays que no cove, lahoras sapias que·l nutriment es prohibit pervenir ad aquel; e donc embroca aquel am aygua tebeza deves tota veguada que delias aquel; e sia aquo en totz tres dias; e alleuja la strictura un petit, e per aquesta operacio corr al membre le nutriment, e es sanat leugierament.	"But if you see the place of the fracture already dried and exhausted more than it should be, then know that nourishment is prohibited from reaching it; therefore immerse it in hot water every time you release it; and do this for all three days; and relieve the restriction a little, and by this operation bring nourishment to the member, and it will heal easily."
Mays aquo que fan les fols restauradors de la fractura del membre autra veguada quan no es restaurat al comensament, segon que cove, e es restaurat segon tortuositat, es error segon la operacio de lor, e temor gran, e si fos dreyturier aquo agrandit les Antics en lors libres e agueran am aquo obrat.	"But what foolish restorers of the fracture of the member do sometimes when it is not restored at first as it should be, and is restored crookedly, is an error according to their operation; great fear, and if they were right it would have been enlarged by the Ancients in their books, and agreed with that operated."
E yeu no he vist ad alcu de lor aquo far, per que es pus razonable que aquo no fassa.	"And I have not seen anyone of them do that, so it is more reasonable that they do not do it."
Capitol segon: De fractura quan accideys en le cap.	"Chapter Two: On fracture when it occurs in the head."
Las specias de fracturas son motas, e las figuras de lor son diversas, e las causas son distinctas, quar de fracturas alcuna es fayta per percussio de spaza, e la percussio osta tot le os entro al ciphac, le qual es dejos le os, ayssi cum fay ayssa en le fust, e per aquo aquesta specia es nompnada ascial; o la spaza inscideys alcuna partida del os, e inscideys la carn de lu e no passa la inscizio entro al derier de lu; e aquesta specia de fractura es nompnada levatio absoluta.	The types of fractures are many, and their forms are diverse, and the causes are distinct. For some fractures occur from a blow to the bone, which enters entirely within the head, leaving the bone behind, thus this type is named comminuted; or the blow cuts through part of the bone but does not pass beyond it into the marrow; and this type of fracture is called impacted.
E la plagua de aquestas doas fracturas o es gran o pauca, e de fractura que es contricio o atricio; e causa de lu es percussio am poyra o cazement sobre peyra, e a lor semblantz.	"The severity of these two fractures is either great or slight, and the fracture may be complete or incomplete; their cause is typically impact from a fall or blow."
E aquesta fractura o es penetrant que ja apropinqua al pannicol le qual es dejos le os; o es en la facia del os, e la plagua de aquestas doas fracturas o es gran o pauca.	"In this fracture, it is either penetrating and approaches the muscle layer of the bone's surface, or it is located on the bone's face; likewise, its severity may be great or slight."
E de fractura es que es ameguada en le os, en la subtilitat del cabel petita, e per aquo es nompnada aquesta specia fractura capillar.	"This fracture is one that is blended into the bone itself, within the fineness of its hair-like substance, and therefore this species of fracture is called capillary."
E es fractura que es fayta o per cazement o per percussio de peyra e a lu semblantz, que fa intrar alcuna lamina del os a las partidas dedintz, e es fayta en le loc concavitat ayssi cum accideys als payroles de eram quan accideys a lor percussio e es partida de lor intrada a las partidas dedintz.	"This fracture occurs either due to impact or fall, causing some bone fragments to enter the internal parts, and it typically happens in concave areas, such as when chickens strike their breasts during flight and suffer an internal fracture."
E majorment es fayt aquo en les cors de osses humitz, ayssi cum so caps de efantz.	"This commonly occurs in the bodies of human bones, particularly at the ends of long bones like the elbows and knees."
E so a totas aquestas specias fracturas satagias, so son pessas ayssi cum stelhas separadas.	"All these species of fractures should be examined, as they are similar to stars with separated points."
E yeu vindre am reremoracio de tot aquo en son loc.	"And he will receive remembrance of all this in its place."
E conoyssem totas aquestas specias de fractura per deteccio sobre aquelas e per inquisicio de lor am tentas e ostament de carn corrumpuda que es sobre lor.	"And we know all these species of fracture by detection on those and by inquiry of their internal organs and outward signs of putrid flesh."
E specia capillar es conoguda per aysso que es descubert sobre le os, e es abstergit, e linit sobre lu am tentha, quar la fractura appar negra.	"And capillary species is recognized by this: it is uncovered on the bone, scraped away, and then rubbed with tincture, because the fracture appears black."
Mays en la curacio de fractura considera al comensament les accidentz del malaute, e lahoras si tu vezes per los accidentz que signifique per significacio manifesta sobre paor, ayssi cum es vomit de colera, e extencio, e perdement de entendament, e abscizio de votz, e sincopi, e febre acuta, e eyssiment dels huels e rogor de aquels, e semblantz a lor dels accidentz en las majors disposicios, ses dopte no es sanat.	"In the treatment of fracture, consider first the accidents of illness. If you see any that mean something manifestly obvious about pain, such as vomiting from cholera, extension, loss of consciousness, fainting, acute fever, discharge of the eyes and reddening of those, and similar appearances in greater conditions, it is not treated."
E si vezes accidentz no-correntz tu speras salut, lahoras tu comensa la curacio de lu.	"And if you see non-current accidents, then hope for health. Then begin the treatment of it."
La qual causa es quar si es vengut a tu le plaguat en le comensament cum es plaguat e aquo es en les dias de ivern, lahoras cove que tu studias en le ostament del os denant le dia xiiii segon tota disposicio.	"Which means that if it has come to you suddenly at the beginning as it happened, and this is in the days of winter, then you should study the bone of the leg before the 14th day according to every disposition."
E si es en les dias d’estiu, lahoras cove que te coytes ostar le os denant le vii dia, habantz que aquo que es dejos le os sia corromput del pannicol, e que accidescan les accidentz que havem recomtatz.	"And if it is in the days of summer, then you should remove the bone before the 7th day, ensuring that what remains of the bone is corrupted by the panicul and that the accidents that we have mentioned happen."
E si la fractura ja es pervenguda al pannicol cubrent le cervel, e es am partidas menudas e atricio, lahoras cove que inscidas la partida conminuta e atrita, segon que yeu recomtare a tu.	"And if the fracture has already reached the panicul covering the brain and is in many small parts and ground down, then you should insert the comminuted and crushed bone piece according to what I will tell you."
E es que tu razas le cap del malaute plaguat, e descuebres sobre le os segon costuma e manieyra a tu possible segon la figura de la plagua, e que sia leugier sobre le malaute.	"And when the head of the sick person is shaved and you uncover the bone according to your custom and manner as much as possible following the figure of the plague, ensure that it is light upon the sick person."
E si accideys a tu deves la deteccio del os, fluxs de sanc o apostema caut, lahora tu te oppausa a lu am aquo que cove, e es que huemplas le loc de draps infuzes en vi e oli rozat, e fassa repausar la plagua entro que sia sedat le apostema, e sies segur de fluxs del sanc; e aprop comensa en la circuicio del os e en la ablatio de lu.	"And if you detect the bone, there are fluxes of blood or a hot abscess, then you should pause at that which is necessary and it is that you place on the location cloths infused in wine and rose oil to make the plague rest until the abscess is sedated and you are sure about the fluxes of blood; and then begin with the circumcision of the bone and its ablation."
E aquo sia segon una de dos manieyras de operacio.	"And this is according to one of two operating methods."
E la una manieyra es que tu inscidas le os am inscisori de streyt tal, e aquesta es la forma de lu: E aprop administra un autre inscissori aquest, un pauc pus lat que aquel; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	"And the first method is that you insert the bone with a straight narrow incisor and this is its form: And then administer another incisor somewhat wider than the previous one."
E aprop administra mays le inscissori pus lat que·l segon.	"And then administer even more of the incisor that is wider than the second one."
E cove que sia deves tu nombre de inscissoris diverses, dels quals alcus so pus latz que alcus autres; e alcus de lor so pus breus que·ls autres e sian en le derier de acuitat de las suas extremitatz, e sian de ferr indi o felod.	"And it is necessary that you have a number of different incisors, some of which are wider than others; and some of them should be shorter than others and sharp at their ends, and they should be made of iron or steel."
E usa de lor am facilitat en percussio sobre le inscissori per so que no concutesca le cap e leda aquel.	"And use them with facility in percussion on the incisor so that you do not strike the head and harm him."
E si le os es fort, dur, lahoras cove que perfores en le circuit de lu denant que tu administres los inscissoris am les taravels, les quals so nomnatz taravels no-profundantz.	"And if the bone is hard and strong then it is necessary that you pierce around its circumference before administering the incisors with their handles, which are called non-penetrating handles."
E no so nomnatz ayssi sino quar aquels no pausan le terme de l’os del test ad aquo que es aprop lu, per so quar al taravel es redonda extremitat o marge sobre aquel que es dejos le cap de lu agut semblant a marge o a cercle petit, le qual prohibeys esser submergit e passar la spissitut del os.	"But they are not called thus but rather those that do not reach the end of the bone near it so that at the handle there is a round extremity or margin on which the head of the incisor rests similar to a small margin or circle, which prevents being submerged and passing through the thickness of the bone."
E es convenient que tu prenguas de aquestz taravels gran nombre dels quals quascu convenesca a la spicitut de quascun os, entro que sia a tu present en tottz testz del cervel la extremitat del qual sia aguda, la quantitat en longitut e brevitat sia segon la quantitat de spicitut de aquest test.	"And it is convenient that you take of these handles many ones which correspond to the thickness of each bone so that there are present in all tests of the brain the extremity of which is sharp and its quantity in length and width is according to the quantity of thickness of this test."
E aquesta es la forma de tres specias de teravels: La qualitat de perforar en le circuit del os trencat es que pauses le teravel sobre le os e revolvas aquel am les tieus ditz entro que sapias que l’os ja es penetrat; e aprop permuda le terevel ad autre loc, e pausa aquo que es entre tot trauc la quantitat de la grosseza del ray o enviro aquo.	"And this is the form of three types of handles: The quality of piercing around the broken bone is that you place the handle on the bone and turn it with your fingers until you know that the bone has been penetrated; then change the handle to another location and pause so that between all tracks there is the quantity of the thickness of the ray or approximately that."
E aprop inscideys am inscissoris aquo que es entre quascun trauc del os, e fay aquel pus subtil que podes sobre aquo en fi de levitat, ayssi cum havem dit, entro que erradiques le os, o am la tua ma, o am alcuna autra causa per alcus sturmentz les quals auras apparelhatz ad aquo, ayssi cum tanalhas e forceps subtils.	"And then cut with incisors between each track of the bone and make it as subtle as you can at the end of its elevation so that you eradicate the bone either with your hand or with some other cause by means of certain instruments which you will have prepared for this, such as tongs and fine forceps."
E cove que tu guardes am tota cautela que l’inscissori no toque alcuna causa del ciphac.	"And it is necessary that you guard with all caution that the incisors do not touch any part of the brain."
E donc cum auras circuit le os perforan, e sira separat del ciphac si es continuat am lu, e auras aquel extrayt, cove que razas e enguales aquel en la asperitat de lu de aquo que es en le os am autra sturment semblant a inscissori, mays empero cove que sia pus teon e pus subtil que les autres inscissoris.	"And then when you have pierced around the bone and it is separated from the brain if it was continuous with it, you will extract it, being careful to rasp and smooth its roughness where it was in the bone with another instrument similar to an incisor but which should be more thin and subtle than the others."
E si roman alcuna partida dels osses petitz e satagias, lahoras pren aquela am facilitat am aquo que es deves tu dels sturmentz; e aprop aquo cura la plagua am lichinis e enguentz les quals havem ditz.	"And if there remain any fragments of small bones and you try to remove them, then take them with ease using what is necessary for you among the instruments; then clean the wound with linen cloths and dressings which we have mentioned."
E l’autra manieyra de operacio es leugiera, longinqua de paor, la qual diyssec Gualia e la lauzec per gran lausor; e aquest es le sermo de lu: necessari es a tu en le comensament que comenses descobrir la partida del os del loc en le qual es la fractura pus vehement e pus manifesta, entro que quan auras descubert aquela partida e auras pausat dejos lu la extremitat de aquest inscissori lent e alegre del qual aquesta es la forma:	"And another method of operation is easy and far from fear which Gaulicus and Laelius praise greatly; and this is their discourse: It is necessary for you at the beginning that you begin to uncover the fracture of the bone in the place where it is most violent and manifest, until when you have uncovered that fracture and placed away from it the extremity of this long and light incisor which has this shape:"
E es que la partida lenticular es leon e no inscideys alcuna causa, e la partida aguda es de lu en dos latz avantz en longitut, ayssi cum vezes; que la partida lenticular sia ajustada al ciphac am la facia de lu inscident aguda en le os.	"And it is that the lenticular opening is lion-like and does not cut any part, and the sharp opening is of this length before in two sides in length such as these: so that the lenticular opening is adjusted to the brain with the face of its sharp side on the bone."
E aprop percuteys sobre le inscissori de una partida am un petit malhet entro que inscidas tot le os am facilitat ayssi cum es revolvut, e tu sias segur del pannicol que no accida en lu accident que temas en denguna manieyra, e si le medicant14 era le pus fol de totz les homes e le mays ignorant de lor; certament, e si era dorment.	"And then strike on the incisor of one opening with a small hammer until you cut all the bone with ease as it rotates and you are sure that no accident happens in any manner, even if the patient was the most foolish of all men and the most ignorant of them; certainly, even if he was asleep."
Lahoras si romania alcuna causa annexa al os del pannicol en alcus locs de os, inscidira aquel de lu am la extremitat del inscissori aquel lenticular, e deliuraria aquel de lu am facilitat, quar es deliurat de lu ses nocument e ses paor.	"Then if some part of the periosteum remained attached to the bone in certain places, cut it from there with the extremity of this lenticular incisor and detach it from there with ease because it is detached from there without damage and without fear."
E si fractura del os no penetra entro al pannicol, e aquo que es abscidit o es ostat del os es la facia de lu, e roman en lu asperitat e satagias subtils, lahoras cove que razas aquela asperitat e erradiques aquelas satagias am razoris subtils per les quals tu has preparat le nombre, de diversas quantitatz per que sia a tu possible administrar de aquels en tot loc les pus convenientz de lor e le pus dreyt de aquels segon aquo en que te perduzeys la tua operacio aquel os trencat e la figura de lu.	"And if the fracture of the bone does not penetrate into the periosteum, and what is cut off or scraped from the bone remains rough and subtle satagias, then it is necessary to rasp that roughness and eradicate those satagias with fine rasps which you have prepared in various quantities so that it is possible for you to administer them in all places according to their convenience and their straightness according to how you proceed in your operation on this broken bone and its figure."
E cove que administres en la tua razio am la qual razes le os al comensament le pus lat de aquels razoris, e aprop usa aprop lu del pus subtil de lu, e no cesses far aquo segon continuitat entro que pervenguas ad aministrar le pus teon e·l pus subtil de totz aquels.	"And it is necessary that you use in your operation with which you rasp the bone at the beginning the widest of those rasps, then use also the subtlest of them and do not cease doing so continuously until you arrive to administer the thinnest and most subtle of all of them."
Mays en quascuna de las autras fracturas petitas capillars e fractura subtil, cove que administres cura segon aquo que perduseys ad rectificacio de lu.	"But in each of the other small capillary fractures and subtle fracture, it is necessary to administer care according to what you find for its rectification."
E es causa que no es ameguada sobre totz les quals han studi en aquela art.	"And this is said not only about all those who have studied that art."
E stec sobre aquo que nos scriut havem mostrat en grans fracturas.	"And what we have shown in great fractures is also valid for small ones."
E si le pannicol es retangut quan tu erradiques le os, lahoras cove que prenguas drap de li segon la quantitat de la plagua, e submergeys aquel en oli rozat, e pausa aquel sobre le orrifici de la plagua; e aprop pren autre drap doblat o triplicat e submergeys lu en vi e oli rozat e pausa aquel sobre drap prim e fay aquo al pus leugierament que podes sobre aquel, que no graves le ciphac; e aprop administra sobre aquel liament lat, e no strenhas aquel sino per quantitat que tengua la plagua tant solament.	"And if the periosteum is retracted when you eradicate the bone, then it is necessary that you take cloth according to the quantity of the wound and immerse it in rose oil and place it on the opening of the wound; then take another doubled or tripled cloth and immerse it in wine and rose oil and place it on the first cloth and do this as lightly as possible so that you do not hurt the brain, and then apply to it a wide bandage, and do not stretch it except according to the quantity that the wound has alone."
E layssa aquel am aquesta cura per un dia o per dos entro que sias segur de apostema caut; e aprop deslia aquel e aprop aministra medicinas am las quals es superflua siccitat, ayssi cum razitz de lin e farina de errs, e polvera de enses e de aristologia, e de semblantz ad aquels.	"And leave it with this dressing for one or two days until you are sure of cauterization; then untie it and apply medicines that promote dryness, such as linen rags and barley flour, powder of hyssop and aniseed, and similar things."
E es que tu fassas de aquestas medicinas polvera que sia pulverizada sobre la plagua, ayssi cum son secas; e universalment, administra en aquel tota medicina de proprietat de la qual es que abstergesca e no mordique.	"And when you make these medicines into powder, let them be finely powdered and applied to the wound as they are dry; universally, administer in that all medicine whose property it is to cleanse and not burn."
E guarda te segon la tua vertut que la plagua en la tua curacio sia neta; e no sia en lu surdicia de enguent ni autra; ni no layssas agreguar virulencia en lu; quar quan es ajustada sobre le pannicol del cervel, corromp aquel e poyreys aquel, e accideys sobre le malaute aprop aquo malicia maligna.	Guard thy virtue that the plague in thine cure be pure; and not in its surdity of unguent nor other, lest thou shouldst allow virulence to augment therein. For when it is adjusted upon the panniculus of the brain, it corrupteth and poureth out thereupon, and causeth forthwith such malicious mischief unto the patient.
E accideys en le ciphac del cap, cum de lu es mondificat le os e majorment quan es menspresada la cura de lu, e es negror en la superficia de lu; e donc considera lahoras si accideys al malaute les accidentz que havem ditz, sapias que es parnicios ses tot dopte.	And if it happens in the cephalic region of the head, after the bone has been cleaned and especially when the cure is neglected, a blackness appears on its surface; hence consider then whether the patient presents any of the accidents mentioned before, so that thou mayest know that it is mortal without doubt.
E si no accideys negror sino de la medicina que es pausada desus, e es en vertut de aquela medicina que fassa aquela negror, lahoras cove que tu prenguas de mel una partida e de oli rozat partidas iii, e am aquels linieys un drap, e aprop pausa aquel sobre le ciphac; e aprop cura aquel am las specias de curacio que conveneys entro que sia sanat.	And if there is no blackness but from the medicine placed upon it, and that blackness is caused by the virtue of that medicine, then thou shalt take of honey one part and of rosat oil three parts, and with those liniments a cloth, and place it upon the cephalic region; and forthwith cure it with the species of cure that are convenient until it be healed.
Capitol .iii.	Chapter .iii
De restauracio del nas quan es trincat.	Of the restoration of the nose when it is cut.
Sapias que no es trencat del nas sino doas partidas ensemps pus sobiranas, o una de aquelas alcunas veguadas, per so quar en lu has dos osses, quar la partida dejos es cartillaginosa, e no es trencada e no accideys a lu sino atricio e tortuositat e sinuitat.	Know that the nose is not broken except when two parts are torn away together or one of them is viewed thus upwards, because there are two bones in it. For the cartilage of the lower part is not broken, and no harm comes to it except friction, twisting, and bending.
Mays si es trencada la una de las doas partidas de lu, lahoras cove que tu intrometas le dit petit en le sieu nas, e que engualhas aquela fractura dedintz am le tieu dit indic, e am le dit pous defora, entro que retorne le nas segon la sua figura natural.	But if one of the two parts of it is broken, then thou shalt insert the little finger into the nose and bring together that fracture within with thy thumb, and without with thy hand, until the nose return to its natural shape.
E sia fayt aquo per tu am facilitat, e guarda te que no caja per aquela tua operacio sobre le malaute delor.	And this thou shalt do with facility; but take care that thou dost not hurt the patient thereby.
E si la fractura es en la pus sobirana partida del nas, e le dit no perve ad aquela, lahoras cove que sia equat am la extremitat del ray en le qual sia petita grossitut.	"However, if the fracture is in the upper part of the nose and the patient cannot reach it, then it should be treated with the tip of a rod with a small thickness."
E si la fractura es en doas partidas, lahoras tu fay le semblant de aquo.	"If the fracture is on both sides, then you must do this."
E coyta te am restauracio de lu en le primier dia de la fractura, si es possible; e sino, lahoras aprop le vii o·l x deves le repaus del apostema caut.	"Make an attempt to restore it on the first day after the fracture, if possible; otherwise, about seven or eight days later you must remove the hematoma by cautery."
E aprop entromet en la extremitat del nas una meca de drap de li, si la fractura es en una partida, o metz doas calguas, si la fractura es en doas partidas, e sia en la calgua grossitut de tanta quantitat que umpla le trauc del nas.	"And approximately insert a wick of linen into the tip of the nose if the fracture is on one side, or place two tampons there if it is on both sides, and they should be of such thickness that they fill the cavity of the nose."
E diysso alcus dels antics restauradors que las calguas sian enfundudas en boder, e sian permudadas en tot dia, mays no es vist a mi; habantz cove que la meca sia enfunduda en album de huou comfit am polvera de moli; e aprop layssa la qualgua entro que l’os sia fermat e sia endurazida la cartillage.	"Some of the ancient restorers say that the tampons should be wrapped in edges and changed every day, but I have not seen this done. However, it is necessary that the wick be wrapped in cotton wool mixed with powdered myrrh; and approximately place the tampon inside so that the bone is fixed and the cartilage is strengthened."
E alcunas veguadas sia entromes en le nas, en loc de calgua, pena de auca pus que es envolopada de drap de li leon; e sia que ja te la fractura del nas pus vehement e que le malaute no sia prohibit de inspiracio.	"Sometimes a linen cloth soaked in hot water is inserted into the nose instead of a tampon, especially if there is much pus enclosed in the linen. And even if the fracture of the nose is severe and the illness does not prevent inspiration."
E aquesta causa no es a tu necessaria; e si voles, fay aquo, e si voles, fay calguas.	"And this method is not necessary for you; so if you wish, do this, and if you wish, use tampons."
E si accideys autra veguada apostema caut, emplastra le nas am cerot o am coto enfus en vi agre e oli rozat, o am diaquilon.	"And if it happens again that there is a hematoma after cauterization, plaster the nose with wax or pitch mixed with vinegar and rose oil, or with diachylon."
Mays si no accideys apostema caut, lahoras cove que emplaustres aquel defora am farina de sizami e am polvera de enses cofitz am album de huou; e aprop pausa sobre lu stopa leon, e no lies le nas am alcuna causa.	"But if there is no hematoma after cauterization, then you should plaster that place externally with flour of sesame and powdered myrrh mixed with cotton wool; and approximately pause on the tip of the linen, and do not lie down with any cause."
Mays si so trencats les osses del nas am fractura petita o so conminuitz, lahoras cove que scindas sobre aquels, e extraguas aquels am insturmentz que conveno ad aquels; e aprop cos la scissura, e cura aquela am aquo que encarna e consolida, e am emplastres ad aquo convenientz.	"But if the bones of the nose are broken with a small fracture or crushed, then you should bind those places and extract them with instruments that are appropriate for that; and approximately close the split, and treat it with something that heals and strengthens, and with plasters that are appropriate."
E si accideys plagua dedintz le nas, lahoras cove que cures aquela am calguas e administra canulas de plom entro que sia de tot sanat.	"And if there is an ulcer inside the nose, then you should treat it with tampons and administer lead cannulae until it is completely healed."
Capitol .iiii.	Chapter IV
De restauracio de la mandibula quan es trincada.	"On the restoration of the jaw when it is dislocated."
Quan la mandibula dejos es rompuda e la fractura de lu no es am plagua, reguarda lahoras si la fractura es deforas tant solament, e no es trencada en dos e es curvada a las partidas dedintz, lahoras la sua cognicio es leugiera.	When the jawbone is broken and the fracture does not heal properly, look closely if the fracture is only on one side, and not split into two or bent inward.
E cove donc, si la fractura es en la part dreyta, que tu intrometas le tieu indic senestre en la boca del malaute; e semblantment si la fractura es an la mandibula senestra, lahoras intromet le dit indic de la ma dreyta; e impelleys am aquel la gilbositat de la fractura dedintz am facilitat a las partidas defora, am la tua autra ma de la partida defora del os; am aquel decentment equa aquelam.	Then do this: if the fracture is on the right side, insert your left index finger into the patient's mouth. Similarly, if the fracture is on the left jawbone, then insert the said index finger of the right hand. And press gently with that same finger the prominence of the fracture inward while keeping it straight outward with your other hand placed on the outer part of the bone.
E si la fractura de la mandibula ja es separada en doas, lahoras cove que administres extensio de doas partz segon rectitut entro que sia possibla la equacio de lu.	And if the jawbone fracture is already separated into two pieces, then you must apply traction to both parts according to a straight line so that it may be possible to achieve approximation.
E si accideys conmocio de dentz a disrupcio, lahoras strenh aquelas de las quals speras que romandran am fil de aur o de argent o de ceda; e aprop pausa sobre la mandibula trencada cerot, e aprop pausa sobre lu drap duplicat, e pausa sobre le drap gran stelha decentment fayta, o una pessa de sola engual a la longitut de la mandibula; e aprop lia aquela desus segon que a tu es apparelhada la liadura de lu e que conveneys la applicacio, entro que no es destruida.	And if teeth displacement or luxation occurs, then strengthen those that are expected to break with gold wire or silver wire or thread. And place padding on the broken jawbone and also on top of the doubled cloth, and place a large Sterile drap made appropriately or a roller gauze along the length of the jawbone. Then tie it up according to how you have prepared the ligature and what is convenient for its application, without damaging anything.
E comanda al malaute que use de repaus e tranquilitat, e pausa la vianda de lu sorbicios leons.	And instruct the patient to rest quietly and avoid chewing solid foods.
E si extimas que ja es alterada la figura en alcuna manieyra, lahoras tu te coyta e deslia aquel al tertz dia; e aprop rectifica aquo que ja es alterat de lu e emplaustra aquel am polvera de moli, am album de huou, o am farina de cisami, pus que tu auras ostat le cerot de lu, e pausa sobre le emplastra lana leon.	And if you estimate that the figure has been altered in any way, then on the third day remove and replace it with a new one. And correct whatever is altered from it and apply a paste made of powdered myrrh, egg albumen or wheat flour, after having removed the cerate from it, and place a linen cloth over the plaster.
E adonc cum sta annex e ajustat aquel emplastre sobre lu, e la disposicio del os no es alterada, layssa aquel, que no le deslies entro que sia sanat e strenh la fractura; quar motas veguadas aquesta fractura es streyta en tres sempmanas.	And once the appliance is attached and the plaster is adjusted on it and the position of the bone is not altered, then leave it in place until healing and strengthening of the fracture occurs. For many times this fracture heals in three weeks.
E si autra veguada accida apostema caut, lahoras administra aquo que havem dit motas veguadas en la sedacio de lu entro que sia sanat, e sia remaugut aquel apostema.	And if an abscess occurs afterwards, then administer what has been said many times in the treatment of it until it is healed and the abscess is removed.
E si la fractura es am plagua, lahoras considera si es pessa del os separada o satagias, lahoras tu te subtilia que ostes aquelas satagias am aquo que conveneys ad aquo en la remocio de aquelas dels sturmentz.	And if the fracture is complicated with infection, then consider whether it is a separated or compound fracture. And if there are sequestra, then use appropriate means to remove those sequestra using suitable instruments.
E si le orrifici de la plagua es streyt, lahoras tu le amplifique am le fleubotomi segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	"If the opening of the wound is narrow, then widen it using a dilator according to your need."
E aprop quan tu auras ostat aquelas satagias, e de aquelas no sira remaugut re, lahoras tu cos le orrifici de la plagua si es ampla; e sino, pausa sobre aquela un dels emplaustres que conveneysso ad aquo e encarnan aquela, entro que sia sanada.	"And when you have finished those procedures and there is still nothing removed from the wound, then close the opening of the wound if it is large; otherwise place one of the plasters that are convenient for this purpose and cover it until it heals."
Capitol .v.	"Chapter Five."
De restauracio de la furcula quan es trinquada.	"How to treat a fractured clavicle."
Motas veguadas es trencada la furcula de la partida denant deves le muscle, e aquela fractura es fayta en una de tres manieyras.	"Very often the clavicle is broken at its midpoint in front of the muscle, and this fracture occurs in one of three ways."
Quar o es trencada, o seperada, o es seperada en doas partz otra que no accidan satagias; e es leugier a la restauracio de lu; o es ayssi que accideysso en lu satagias, e es dificil a restauracio de lu; o es ayssi que la fractura es am plagua.	"This break can occur in three ways: either it is separated but not displaced, which makes its reduction easier; or it happens as described above with displacement, making its reduction difficult; or the fracture is comminuted."
E la operacio en aquela, quan la fractura es ses plagua, es que tu fassas esser present dos ministres, per so que la un tengua le adjutori e siegua la furcula trencada, e l’autre extenda le col ves aquela partida.	"And the operation in this case, when the fracture is simple, consists of having two assistants present: one to hold the clavicle with an instrument and follow its movement, and the other to extend the neck on that side."
E aprop enguala la fractura am les tieus ditz entro que sia fayta la forma de lu segon que cove, e no sia en lu eminencia pauca ni concavitat.	"And then apply traction with these fingers to reduce the fracture into its normal position, ensuring that it does not remain in the prominence or concavity of the sternum."
E si indigeysses mes de extencio, lahoras cove que pauses dejos le titillic del malaute spera de drap o de lana, e sia la grandesa de lu segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat; e exten e eleva la furcula e coarta la spera am la tua ma entro que enguales la frectura segon que cove.	"And if more extension is needed, then place a bolster made of wool or cloth under the patient's shoulder on that side, according to how much extension is necessary; raise the clavicle and compress the bolster with your hand while reducing the fracture into its normal position."
E si no podes atirar la extremitat de la furcula a las partidas defora, per so quar es pervenguda al preon, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sua cervitz, e pauses sobre le muscle de lu un coyssi migier en grandeza.	"And if you cannot bring the end of the clavicle out to its normal position due to swelling around the wound, then have the patient lie on their back and place a bolster made from the palm of your hand under the fractured side."
E le ministre prema le muscle de lu a las partidas dejos entro que l’os de la furcula sia elevat que es en le preon en sus, e lahoras tu rectifique la fractura e enguala aquela am les tieus ditz.	"And then one of the assistants presses on the muscles around the wound while the other elevates the clavicle until it is in its normal position. Then you reduce the fracture and maintain it with your fingers."
Mays si sentes satagias de la furcula e so maugudas, lahoras cove que fendes sobre aquela e extraguas aquelas satagias am facilitat.	"But if there are loose fragments of bone around the clavicle causing pain or interference, then make an incision over that area and remove those fragments with ease."
E si es retenguda en le os, lahoras tu ingenia inscisio de lu am un dels inscissoris les quals has apparelhatz ad aquo, pus que havias pausat dejos la furcula le sturment que serve le ciphac; e es sturment de fust o de ferr del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	"And if it is retained within the bone, then make an incision through the bone with one of the chisels that you have brought along for this purpose, as you had placed the instrument called a ciphac over the clavicle; this instrument is made of wood or iron and has the following shape:"
E es semblant a culier del qual aquesta es la concavitat; e sia la sua latitut segon aquo que has necessitat de lu, segon la grandeza del os o la pauqueza de lu.	"And it resembles an awl with this concavity; and its width should be according to your need, according to the thickness of the bone or its thinness."
Mays la longitut de lu sia segon que es a tu possible a la operacio; que haja doas extremitatz ayssi cum vezes, e la una extremitat sia ample e l’autre streyta.	"But the length of it should be according to what is possible for you in this operation; it should have two ends like this, with one end broad and the other narrow."
E si la disrupcio de la plagua la qual has inscidida quan has extraytas la satagia del os es ampla, e yest segur de apostema caut, lahoras tu ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura.	"And if the disruption of the periosteum that you incised when extracting the bone fragment is wide and you are concerned about the possibility of an abscess forming, then approximate the edges of the wound with sutures."
E si la disrupcio es pauca, o temes apostema caut, lahoras tu uemple la plagua am draps e pulvils segon la quantitat de la scissura de la plagua.	"And if the disruption is small or you fear an abscess forming, then fill the wound with wool and dressings according to the size of the wound."
E si accideys apostema caut, lahoras infon drap en vi agre e oli rozat e vi, e pausa sobre aquel.	"And if an abscess forms, then soak a cloth in a mixture of vinegar, rose oil and wine, and apply it to that area."
Mays la strictura del os quan es ses plagua e ses seccio, es que pauses emplastre fayt de farina de moli am album de huou, e pausa sobre lu stopa leon, e aprop pausa la spera dejos le titillic de lu, si indigeyssas de aquela, e aprop pren humemate, so es torca la qual teno les Sarrazis , que sia mot longua, e sia latitut de lu de un palm o entorn aquel; e aprop pausa pulvils duplicatz sobre la stopa e l’emplastre; e aprop pren una stela de taula subtil de la qual la latitut d’ela sia de tres ditz e en longitut semblantment; e aprop envolopa aquela en drap, e aprop envolopa aquel drap am la stela en lo loc sobre le loc de la fractura; e aprop pausa humemati ayssi cum es revout, e revol aquela sobre le col de lu e dejos le titillic de lu sa e dejos le titillic de lu malaute, e reduzeys aquela sobre tota partida, e quan vezes que la strictura de la fractura am strictura descent, e es aquo que no es occultat sobre tu.	"But the splint for the bone when it is out of its place and cut through is made with plaster of Paris mixed with albumen from eggs, which you apply over a strip of linen; then prop up the bolster under the fractured side if necessary, and then take a long cloth bandage, about the width of your palm or more, and wrap it around the plaster and bolster; then sprinkle doubled gauze over the bandage and plaster; then take a thin board splint, about three fingers wide in length and shape similar to that; then wrap that in a cloth, and then wrap that cloth around the board splint on the side of the fracture; then apply humidated dressing as mentioned earlier, and wind it around the collarbone and the bolster on both sides of the patient's shoulder and chest, reducing the fracture with every turn until the bone fragments are tightly opposed together."
E tot, que no sia mauguda la stelha desobre le os trencat; e per so cove que tu vejas le malaute quascun dia, que quan le liament es mollificat o vezas la stela ja esser remauguda, lahoras tu rectifica aquo e strenh la liadura.	"And also, make sure that the splint does not press on the broken bone; and for this reason, you should examine the patient every day to see if the dressing becomes moistened or if the splint has become loose, then correct it and tighten the bandage."
E aprop pausa le dormir del malaute sobre le col de lu, e pausa dejos le titillic de lu deves le dormir de lu en la nueyt un petit coyssi; per so que am aquel sia elevat le adjutori de lu del latz de aquel, e donc es elevada la la fractura de la furcula a elevacio del muscle; o sia le bras de lu liat al col de aquel.	"And also, have the patient sleep with their head elevated on pillows, and place a small pillow on both sides of them at night so that their arms are raised above their chest and thus elevate the fractured clavicle away from the muscles or keep their arms tied to their chest."
E no deslies le liament si no accideys en le loc prusiment o apostema, entro a xii dias.	"And do not remove the dressing unless it becomes moistened in that place or an abscess forms, after about twelve days."
E aprop renovelha le emplastre si has vista la facia de lu ad aquo, e ajusta en la strictura e restaura aquel e layssa entro que sia restaurat e sia coagulat la fractura de la furcula.	"And also renew the plaster if you see its surface become moistened in that place, adjust it to fit the tightness and restore it until it is restored and the fracture of the clavicle has healed."
E es strenguda e comfortada segon le mes en xxviii dias, e alcunas veguadas en alcus homes es fayt en mens de temps de aquel.	"And it becomes strong and comfortable in about twenty-eight days, although sometimes in some men it may happen even sooner."
Capitol .vi.	"Chapter VI:"
De restauracio de fractura de la spalla.	"On the treatment of fractures of the shoulder."
Spatula tart es trencada en le loc lat de lu e no so trencatz de lu sino les marges.	"The spatula used on his side was broken there and only its edges were broken."
E donc quan es trencat le loc de lu — e es trencat en le mieg loc de lu — e no es conogut sino per tocament, lahoras segon que es la figura de la fractura sforsa te la preparacio de lu e reduzir aquela segon la figura natural en tota manieyra de engen la qual es a tu possible.	"If the break is on his side - and it is broken in the middle of him - and is not known except by touch, then according to the shape of the fracture you should prepare it and reduce it according to its natural figure in every way that you can."
E aprop pausa sobre le loc polvera de moli am album de huou e stopa leon; e aprop pausa pulvil de drap duplicat; e aprop pausa sobre lu stela lada de taula subtil segon la quantitat de la spatula tota o mays un pauc.	"And first sprinkle on the powdered bone with albumen of egg and stop it with linen; and also sprinkle powdered linen doubled; and also sprinkle over him a little of fine table salt according to the quantity of the whole spatula or a little more."
Mays si dejos la stela es concavitat en alcu dels locs de la spatula, lahoras tu enguala aquela concavitat am stopa leon, e aprop pueja la stela segon equalitat.	"But if the bone is concave in some places of the spatula, then you should fill those concavities with linen stops, and also place the bone according to equality."
E aprop strenh desus am humemati longua ab constriccio decent e am fermesa de la stela entro que no sia remauguda del sieu loc.	"And next bind it firmly above with a long bandage with proper constriction and with firmness of the bone within its place that it may not be moved from its position."
E considera le liament en quascun dia; e totas veguadas que sia mollificat, lia autra veguada e stren le e equa la stela si es remauguda del sieu loc.	"And examine the bandage every day. And whenever it is softened, change it on another day and bind him again and equalize the bone if it has been moved from its place."
E jagua le malaute sobre le sieu latz sa.	"And put him to bed on his side with a pillow under his armpit."
E la spatula es restaurada en xx dias o en .xxv.	"And the splint will be restored in 20 days or in 25."
E donc quan es complit aquest nombre, lahoras tu dissolveys le liament, e que tu scias ensegurat quar aquela es dels osses dels quals la cominicio no es temuda ni lor dissolucio.	"And when this number is completed, then you should remove the bandage and know assuredly which are those bones of which neither their union nor their dissolution is feared."
E si procezeys del loc del os pessa e pongeys dejos la codena, lahoras tu scindeys sobre lu, e osta le, e fay segon que havem dit en la fractura de la furcula de sadacio de apostema caut si accideys aqui.	"And if you proceed with the place of the weight-bearing bone and put aside the shoulder, then you should incise over it and open it up, and do according to what we have said in the fracture of the collarbone concerning the treatment of pus if it happens here."
Capitol .vii.	"Chapter VII."
De restauracio de la fractura del pietz.	"Of the restoration of the fracture of the foot."
Le pietz alcunas veguadas es romput en le mieg loc de lu e aquo tart endeve; mays las extremitatz de lu mot endeve que so ciccadas e comminuidas.	"The foot sometimes breaks in its middle part and that part heals slowly, but the extremities of it heal quickly because they are cicatrized and comminuted."
E dels accidentz de lu quan es trencat le mieg de lu es que declina a las partidas dedintz e accideys a lu gran dolor, e dificultat en lo hale, e tos, e fort leu e vomeys sanc; e es declarada en lu cavitat en le os trencat e no es occulta al sentiment.	"And the accidents of it when its middle is broken are that it declines toward its inner parts and great pain occurs to him, difficulty in walking, coughing, strong fever, and vomiting blood. And it is declared in the cavity of the bone broken and not hidden from sensation."
E la restauracio de lu es que sia resupinat le malaute sobre le sieu dos, e pausa entre las spallas de lu un coyssi; e aprop prem als muscles de lu, e ajusta las costas de lu am las mas de dos costatz, e subtilia te en la operacio de lu e en la equacio segon tota manieyra que es ad aquo possibla e que conveneys ad aquo, entro que retorne la figura del os segon que cove.	"And the restoration of it is that the patient should lie on his back with a pillow between his hips; and he should press his muscles together, adjust his legs together with two blankets, and be careful in the operation and equality according to all manner possible and necessary so that the figure of the bone returns as it should."
E aprop pausa sobre lu emplastre e estopa e pausa desobre astela de taula subtil de sauze o de caligi e de a lor semblantz en levitat, pus que tu envolopas aquela en drap; e aprop subtilia te en lian aquela sobre le os trencat que no sia maugut; e vay am liadura segon retonditat al dors alcunas veguadas, e strenh aquel am strictura decent; e aprop considera la liadura en tota hora, e quan es mollificada strenh aquela.	"And then apply over the splint and cotton, and place over it a thin table of linden wood or chalk and their like in levitation, because you wrap that in cloth; and be careful to bind that on the broken bone so that it may not move; and go around the back sometimes with bandaging according to its rotundity, and strengthen him with proper constriction; and be careful about the bandage at all times, and when it is softened, tighten it."
E si necessitat provoca a desliament de aquela deves corrossio o pruziment, o dolor, o apostema que accideysso en le loc, lahoras tu coyta e deslia aquela e erradica le emplastre e rectifique aquo que accideys per aquo am manieyra de curacio de lu; e aprop reduzeys le emplastre, si vezes ad aquo la facia; e ajusta a lu strictura entro que sia sanat.	"And if there is need for removing that because of corruption or pressure or pain or abscess which happens in the place, then you should cut and untie that and remove the splint and correct what happened through it with the manner of its treatment; and then replace the splint, sometimes on its face; and adjust the constriction until it is healed."
Capitol .viii.	"Chapter VIII."
De restauracio de las costas quan son trincadas.	To restore the ribs when they are cracked.
Sapias que fractura de las costas no catz sino en locs grosses que siegon le dos; e de las extremitatz de lor de la partida denant no accideys ad aquelas contricio sino per aquo quar so cartillaginosas.	Did you know that rib fractures usually occur in large locations on the back; and at the ends of the ribs near the sternum, such damage rarely occurs except where they are cartilaginous?
E cognicio de lu no es amaguada al sentiment deves la inquisicio de lu am les ditz.	"His condition is not concealed from our senses through inquiry."
E la restauracio sia ayssi que enguales la fractura am les ditz segon la manieyra possibla, entro que sia engulhat segon que cove, e aprop emplastre e strenh le os trencat am stela, si indigeys de aquel.	"And the reduction should be done as gently as possible according to his manner, until it is completely reduced, then plaster and splints should be applied to the broken bone if necessary."
E si la fractura de las costas es declinant a las partidas dedintz, lahoras accideys al malaute dolor vehement e punctura, ayssi cum punctura que accideys ad aquel que ha pleureci, e per aquo quar le os ponh le velament; e accideys a lu difficultat de hanelit, e tos, e vomit de mot sanc; e aquesta es de dificil curacio.	"And if the fracture of the ribs is inclined toward the inside, then severe pain and piercing occur to the patient, like the pain that occurs to someone who has been pierced by something, and because of this the lung becomes covered; and difficulty in breathing, coughing, and vomiting a lot of blood occur; and this is difficult to treat."
E ja les Antixs so engeniatz en aquela am motz engientz.	"And already the Ancients knew how to treat that with many remedies."
E de lor so que diso: cove que pauses viandas del malaute que engendro imflacio e ventositat, per que le ventre sia imflat e sia extendut, e la fractura sia impellida a las partidas defora.	"And it is said of them: Whenever food is placed near the patient that generates flatulence and windiness, so that the belly becomes inflated and extended, and the fracture is pushed outward."
Mays nos avoreyssem aquo per so que no sia causa leugiera a generar apostema caut, si no accideys; e si ja accideys, lahoras ja ajuda ad aquo.	"But we would not have this for it to be a light cause of generating an abscess, if it were not to happen; and if it should happen, then help may come from this."
E diyssero alcus de lor que sia pausada desus ventoza e aprop que sucque am fortitut; e es semblant a ratiocinacio, mays empero es temut que la ventoza atire las superfluitatz al loc per la debilitat.	"And some of them say that it should be placed upon windiness and approved so that it may succeed with great strength; but nevertheless, it is feared that the windiness draws the impurities to the place due to weakness."
E diyssero alcus de lor: cove que·l loc sia cubert am lana que ja es submersa en oli caut, e sian pausatz pulvils entre las costas entro que sia umplida, que sia la liadura engual quan envolopas aquela segon retonditat; e aprop sia curat le malaute am curacio de pleuresi de vianda e de medicina.	"And some of them say: Whenever the place is covered with wool that has already been submerged in hot oil, and powders are placed between the ribs until it is filled up, then the bandage should be wound around it according to its roundness; and then let the patient be cured with pleurisy remedies and medicine."
E si causa vehement constrenh le malaute la qual no sufferta, e le os punh le velament am punctura ledent, temem sobre le malaute, lahoras cove que fendam sobre le loc, descubram de la costa trencada, e aprop pausem desobre aquela instrument que conserve le ciphac, la rememoracio del qual es precedida, e que inscidam le os am facilitat, e extraguam aquel.	"And if the disease causes violent constriction that cannot be borne, and the bone pierces the velvet with a wound point, then fear is entertained over the disease. Therefore it should be cut open upon the place, uncovering the broken rib, and then placing upon it the instrument that preserves the cypha, of which the memory has been previously given, and gently striking the bone until it is extracted."
E aprop que ajustem las doas labias de la plagua, si es gran, am cozidura, e curem aquela am emplastres entro que sia sanada.	"And then let us join together the two lips of the wound if it is large with sutures, and let us dress it with plasters until it heals."
E si accideys dedintz apostema, lahoras tu coyta e enfon pulvils en oli rozat e pausa sobre le loc, e que sia curat le malaute am aquo que cove a la apostema dedintz.	"And if an abscess should form inside, then quickly take powders of roasted oil and place them upon the spot, and let the disease be treated with whatever is suitable for internal abscesses."
E sia ressupinat sobre le latz sobre le qual dorm, entro que sia sanat.	"And let him be propped up on pillows while he sleeps until he is healed."
Capitol .ix.	"Chapter ix."
De restauracio de fractura del spondil del dos e del col.	"On the restoration of fractures of the spinal column and neck."
Alcunas veguadas endeve fractura als osses del col, e tart endeve a lor atricio, e semblantment als spondils del dos.	"Occasionally, fractures occur in the bones of the neck, and sometimes they cause friction, similarly in the vertebrae of the back."
E cum aquo accideys ad alcu e voles saber si sara sanat o no, lahoras considera, quar si vezes las sieuas mas ja mollificadas e stupefaytas e mortas e no pot maure aquelas ni extendre ni strenher aquelas e quan constrenges aquelas am les tieus ditz o punges aquelas am agulha e no sent en aquelas dolor, lahoras sapias que no es sanat, e en las mes de disposicios es mortal.	"If water has collected around someone and you want to know if they will recover or not, observe this: if their muscles are already softened, stunned, and lifeless, and they cannot move those parts nor extend nor stretch them; and when you press on those parts with your fingers or prick them with a needle and they do not feel pain in those parts, then you will know that they will not recover. In cases of such conditions, it is mortal."
E si mau aquelas e sent en aquelas constriccio am les ditz e punctura, lahoras sapias que la nucha de l’os es salva e que le malaute guereys am curacio.	"And if they can move those parts and feel constriction with pressure or puncture, then you will know that the spine of the bone is saved, and that the illness will improve with treatment."
E si ve als spondils del col le semblant ad aquo e voles saber si sira sanat o no, lahoras considera als pes de lu.	"And if water is seen around the vertebrae of the neck and you want to know if it will heal or not, then observe its weight."
Lahoras si tu vezes que so ja mollificatz, accideys ad aquels aquo que es accidit en las mas, e aprop quan jatz sobre le sieu dos, yeys ventozitat e egestio ses la sua volontat, e alcunas veguadas es resupinat sobre le sieu dos e vol urinar e no pot, lahoras sapias que es mortal, e adonc no trebales en la curacio de lu.	"Now if you find that the muscles are already softened, it is because this has happened in many cases. And especially when he lies on his back, there is panting and evacuation without his will; and sometimes he suddenly falls backwards, wanting to urinate but unable to do so. Then you should know that it is mortal, and then do not try to treat him."
Mays si no accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, la causa es milhor e pus leugiera.	"But if none of these causes occur, the case is better and easier to handle."
E la curacio de lu es que te perforses a la sedacio del apostema caut que pauses sobre le spondil atrissat oli rozat sol, o am mugols de huous asatz; pausa sobre aquela aquel alcunas veguadas le dia entro que sia sedat le apostema caut.	"And the treatment of it is that you make an opening in the abscess caused by the displaced and broken bone, whether it be on one side or both, smeared with oil or dough made from boiled barley groats; place a poultice on that part several times a day until the abscess is sedated."
E lahoras pausa un dels emplastres confortantz e exsitans, e strenh sobre aquel am liament; e comanda al malaute que use de repaus e de tranquillitat e que no dorme sobre la partida am la qual atroba dolor entro que sia sanat.	"And then apply one of the comforting and warming emplastes, and press it on with a bandage. And order the patient to take rest and quietude, and not sleep on the part where he feels pain until it is healed."
E si accideys deves la atricio del os satagias o alcuna causa que ja es seperada de lu, lahoras cove que secces sobre la codena e que ostes aquel os; e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua, am sutura si es gran; e aprop cura aquela am alcu encarnatiu dels enguentz, entro que sia sanat.	"And if the breaking of the bone happens suddenly or any cause that is already separated from it occurs, then you must set upon the collarbone and reset that bone. And especially join together the two lips of the wound with stitches if it is large; and also treat it with some ointment made from incense until it is healed."
Mays si es trencat le derier del os alhoses, e es la fi de la coeta, lahoras cove que tu entrometas le dit pous de la ma senestra en le cul, e que enguales le os trencat am l’autra ma segon que es possible per equacio segonda; e aprop pausa sobre lu emplastre e astelha, si indigeysses de aquels, e aprop strenh aquel.	"But if the end of the bone is broken off and it is the final outcome of the illness, then you must insert your left thumb into the anus, and grasp the broken bone with the other hand as much as possible according to the equilateral proportion; and also apply a plaster and bandage on that part."
E si sentes satagias trencadas en lu, lahoras tu fen sobre aquela, e osta aquel, e cura la plagua am la curacio que es precedida entro que sia sanada.	"And if you feel broken ends in it, then you must make them meet and reset that bone, and treat the wound with the treatment that is mentioned until it is healed."
Capitol .x.	Chapter .10.
De restauracio de la ancha.	Of restoration of breath.
Les osses de las anchas tart so trencats, e si trencan, lahoras la fractura de lor no es sino communicio en las extremitatz de aquelas e son inscidas en la longitut e declinan a las partidas dedintz; e accideys al malaute dolor en le loc e punctura, e la camba es stupefacta quan es fractura.	The bones of the broad thighs are broken, and if they break, then the fracture is merely a communion in the extremities, lying along their length and inclining toward the inner parts; thus, pain occurs at the site of the fracture and puncture. The limb becomes numb when there is a fracture.
E la restauracio de lu es que tu extendas la tua ma sobre aquel entro que sia sobre la fractura qual es la figura de lu.	The restoration of it (the bone) is that you stretch your hand over that area which lies above the fracture, in order to grasp its shape.
E si fractura es en la extremitat de lu tant solament, lahoras tu enguala aquela segon que a tu es apparelhat per equacio engual entro que sia asemblat a la sua figura natural.	If the fracture is only at the end of it (the bone), then grasp that which appears equal to you by equating its shape with an appropriate one that resembles its natural figure.
Mays si la fractura es en le lonc o que ja declina a las partidas dejos, lahoras tu fay jaser le malaute sobre le sieu ventre entro que sia preparada a tu la restauracio de aquela fractura.	But if the fracture is in the long bone or one that already declines toward the inner parts, then place the affected area on its belly so that you may prepare for the restoration of that fracture.
E donc quan auras engualada aquela, pausa sobre lu emplastre, e aprop pausa sobre aquel astela de fust o de codena, e strenh per strictura sobre la qual no temas punctacio de fractura ni remocio de la stelha.	And then when you have grasped that (the bone), pause upon it with plaster and also pause on that splint made of wood or metal; strengthen it by tightening the bandage without fearing puncture from the fracture or displacement of the splint.
E enguala la concavitat am aquo que uempla aquela entro que aquela prengua la strictura segon equalitat, e comanda al malaute que dorma sobre le sieu dos o desobre le sieu costat sa.	And grasp the concavity with whatever fills that area which has taken on the tightening according to equality; command the affected person to sleep on their back or on their side.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras tu cessa de extencio de lu e de la sua restauracio entro que sia sedat le apostema caut, e pausa sobre lu aquo que sede aquel segon que es precedit; e aprop retorna a la restauracio de lu, e strenh aquel ayssi cum cove.	But if gangrene occurs suddenly, then cease the extension and restoration of it (the bone) until the gangrene is sedated. Pause upon it with whatever sedates that according to what has been prescribed; then return to its restoration and tighten it accordingly as necessary.
E si accideysso en le os satagias o son comminuidas, lahoras tu las tratz.	And if this happens in the marrow of the bone or they are crushed, then remove them.
Capitol .xi.	Chapter eleven
De restauracio de la fractura del adjutori.	Of the restoration of the fracture of the collarbone.
Adjutori es aquo que es entre le coyde entro al cap de la spalla.	The collarbone is what is between the chest and the top of the shoulder.
E si es trencat, lahoras la restauracio de lu es en una de doas manieyras, de las quals es la una que tu prenguas fust pla de migiera groceza segon aquesta forma:	And if it is broken, then its restoration can be done in one of two ways. The first way is for you to take a piece of dry plaster of medium thickness cut into this shape:
E sian liatz en doas extremitatz dos liamentz, e aprop sia suspendut del loc elevat.	And there should be two strips at both ends, and it should be suspended from an elevated place.
E segua le malaute sobre una sezela; e aprop gieta fora le sieu bras trencat sobre le fust entro que pervengua al titillic de lu en le mieg loc del qual sia annexa la curvitat del fust.	Next, have the patient sit on a chair and place their broken arm outstretched on the plaster cast so that it reaches to the middle of its length where the curvature of the cast is attached.
E aprop suspen sobre aquel alcuna causa greu, o·l minestre extenda aquel a las partidas dejos; e aprop le metge eque la fractura am las sieuas mas ensemps, entro que la fractura retorne segon que cove.	Then hang some heavy weight on top of it or have the nurse stretch it towards its edges until the fracture becomes aligned according to how it should be. And then the doctor will gently hold the fracture in place together while ensuring that the fracture is realigned properly.
E l’autra manieyra es que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sieua cervitz e suspen la ma del col de lu am liament; e aprop comanda a dos ministres que la un de lor tengua aquo que es desobre la fractura am las suas mas; e l’autre tengua le pus dejos de lu; e quascu de lor extenda a la sua partida.	The other way is for the patient to lie on their back and hang their arm with a sling, with one nurse holding above the fracture with both hands and another nurse holding below it. Each nurse will then stretch their side gently.
E si voles que la extencio sia pus fort, lahoras tu strenh sobre la fractura am liament e sobre aquela am autre liament, e quascu dels dos ministres extendan a doas suas partidas.	And if you want more force in the traction, then place one sling above the fracture with a rope and another below it with another rope. And each nurse can then pull at both ends gently.
E donc si la fractura es propinquada a la extremitat del muscle, lahoras cove que sia pausat la mitat del liament sobre le citillic e l’autre dejos la fractura deves le coyde.	And if the fracture is close to the end of the bone, then it's necessary to place half of the sling above the knuckle and the other half below the fracture at the elbow.
E semblantment si la fractura es propdana al coyde, lahoras cove que sia pausat le liament sobre aquel loc e sobre aquel coyde.	Similarly, if the fracture is near the wrist, then the sling should be placed on that location and around the wrist.
Enguala aquela am facilitat e ses trebal, e aprop quant sira engualada segon que cove e es applicada per bona applicacio, lahoras strenh aquela si no accideys apostema caut.	Apply this gently and without difficulty until it's well applied according to how much traction is needed. And once it's properly applied, then hold that traction in place unless there is an infection at the site of the fracture.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras layssa la strictura entro al vii dia, e pausa sobre lu lana sutza enbeguda en vi agre e oli rozat entro que repause le apostema, e lahoras tu stren aquela.	But if there is an infected wound at the fracture site, then leave the traction in place for about 7 days. Then apply a clean dressing with vinegar and rose oil on it to help heal the infection while keeping the traction in place.
E la manieyra de strenher aquela es que pauses emplastre sobre la fractura, e aprop pausa envolopament de drap nau sobre le emplastre; e aprop ajuste le bras sobre aquel adjutori, e pause la sua ma uberta sobre le sieu muscle.	And the way to hold this traction in place is to put plaster on the fracture and then wrap a clean cloth around it. Then adjust the arm into its correct position using the sling and have the patient keep their hand covered over the muscle while keeping still.
E pausa le drap e strenh sobre le adjutori le bras per so que·l bras sia en loc de stelhas, si no prohibeys de aquo alcuna causa del os trencat.	And then fix the cloth in place and hold onto the sling to ensure that the arm remains in the correct position until the bone has healed properly, unless there are any other reasons preventing this.
E lahoras usa de stelhas.	Then use splints
E es que pauses sobre la fractura aquela stela que sia pus lada e pus fort de las autras stelas; e pausa entre quascuna stela la latitut del dit, e sia la longitut de las stelas segon la trencadura am addicio de tres ditz de tota partida.	And when placing splints on the fracture, make sure they are well-padded and provide firm support compared to other splints. Place them between each finger and ensure their length is equal to the length of the fractured bone plus three fingers' width on either side.
E aprop strenh sobre las stelas am la strictura la qual he dita al comensament del capitol.	And then secure the splints in place with the same traction device mentioned at the beginning of this chapter.
E es que la tua strictura sobre le loc de la fractura sia pus streyt.	And ensure that your traction is as tight as possible on the fracture site.
E quant pus es alonguada la fractura sia la strictura menor.	The tighter the traction, the more quickly the fracture will heal.
E donc si vezes le situament de las stelas e la strictura ayssi cum havem dit en la hora en la qual restauras le membre al sieu assituament, lahoras tu fay.	And then if you want to remove the splints and traction when restoring the limb to its original position, do so gently.
E si temes apostema caut, lahoras tu layssa la strictura e las stelas entro al dia vii ayssi cum havem dit.	If there is concern about infection at the fracture site, leave the traction and splints in place for 7 days as mentioned earlier.
E aprop considera le liament en totas partidas per tres dias per so que no accida en le loc pruziment o imflacio; o es prohibida la vianda pervenir al membre per disposicio de superfluitat de strictura; e donc rectifiqua tot aquo segon que havem dit.	And also consider the sling in all cases for three days so that there is no pressure or swelling at the site. Or if it's necessary to restrict food from reaching the limb due to excessive traction, then adjust accordingly as mentioned earlier.
Mays si tu yest sobre confizanssa que no accida alcuna causa de aquo, lahoras no deslias la liguadura sino aprop tres dias o mays.	However, if you're confident that nothing will go wrong, then leave the dressing on for at least three days or more.
E sia la sua dormicio del malaute sobre le sieu dos, e las sieuas mas sian sobre le stomac.	And let them sleep with their affected side up and their hands on their stomach
E pausa sobre le adjutori cocena plena de lana engualment, e considera en tota hora de la nueyt o del dia que no sia deliada ni dissolta la figura del membre trencat, o que sia le liament mollificat, donc rectifica aquo tot am la tua vertut.	And place a full bolster made of wool behind the elbow and ensure at all times that the fractured limb maintains its shape without any shifting or loosening of the sling. If you notice it becoming loose or wet, then tighten it again using your discretion.
E pausa la vianda del malaute segon le orde le qual havem denant mes, enayssi que la vianda sia subtil en le comensament entro que es comensat strenher; e lahoras cove que egrossas la vianda de lu.	And feed the patient according to the order mentioned earlier. Ensure that their diet is soft at first until they begin to regain strength, and then gradually increase the size of their portions as they improve.
Quar de constuma del adjutori e de la camba de lu es que sian strengutz en xl dias; e lahoras cove que sian desliatz e sia administrat banh e sia medicat am enguentz los quals rectifican aquel.	The usual duration for the use of a splint and sling is 40 days. After this period, they should be removed, and the patient given a bath and treated with ointments that will help restore movement in the limb.
E si la fractura es layha atrita, lahoras tu no deslies de aquela le liament e las stelhas entro a l dias o entro a dos meses.	If the fracture is slow to heal, do not remove the sling and splints until at least 10 days or up to two months.
Capitol .xii.	Chapter XII
De restauracio de fractura del bras.	On the restoration of fractured arms
Bras es compost de dos osses les quals so appelatz dos focils; dels quals la un es petit, e es aquel que siec le dit pous, e l’autre es gran e es aquel le qual es pausat dejos le petit dit, de la partida pus dejus.	The arm is composed of two bones called the "two forks". One is small and lies under the thumb, while the other is large and lies diagonally above it.
E fort leu es trencat le focil major solament, o le petit, e fort leu son trincatz ensemps.	Sometimes only one of these bones may be fractured, either the larger or the smaller one, but they can also both be broken at once.
E quan es trencat le focil petit desus, lahoras la restauracio de lu es leugiera, e la sanacio de lu es pus leugiera.	When only the small bone is fractured, its restoration and healing will be easier.
E quan es trencat le focil de lu dejos la fractura de lu es mala, e la sanacio de lu es dificil.	However, when the fracture occurs on the outer side of the arm, both the restoration and healing are difficult.
E pus mala de aquela es quan son trencatz dos osses essemps.	It is even worse when both bones are fractured at once.
Donc si l’os le qual es trencat es le focil petit desus, lahoras es convenient al metge, deves la restauracio de lu, que pauze petita extencio am facilitat entro que aquel sia engualhat.	Therefore, if it is the small bone that has been fractured on top of the arm, it is recommended for the doctor to restore it with ease and without difficulty until it heals properly.
Mays si le focil gran es aquo que es trincat, lahoras cove que pause extencio pus vehement.	But if the large bone has been fractured, then traction should be applied more forcefully in order to restore it properly.
E si les dos focils so ensemps trincatz, lahoras cove que tu pauses la extritura mot pus fort.	And if both bones have been fractured together, then you must apply very strong traction
E cove que pauses la figura de la ma deves la restauracio de lu e la extencio de lu estenduda sobre un coyssi, e sia le pols de la ma a las partidas desus, pus aut que totz les autres ditz, e le dit auricular sia pus bas dels autres ditz, e le malaute sia cezent sobre una cezela cayrada.	When restoring the arm and applying traction, it is necessary to maintain the shape of the hand. The palm should be placed on a pillow, with the thumb higher than all other fingers and the little finger lower than them. The patient should lie down on their side facing the ceiling.
E sia un coyssi denant lu en la altetut o endreyt de lu, per so que·l malaute no encorra trebalh.	And place a pillow either at the height or to the right of the arm so that the patient does not have to strain themselves while lying down.
E aprop le ministre extenda le bras de la partida pus dejos am la sieua ma o am liament, e autre ministre extenda desus semblantment.	Then one assistant should extend the arm from the elbow joint using their own hand or a sling, and another assistant should do the same from above in a similar manner.
E aprop le metge engualhe le os entro que redugua aquel segon la milhor figura que pot.	Then the doctor should gently manipulate the bone until it is properly reduced and aligned as best as possible.
E si en la factura del os so satagias, lahoras te perforsa raduzir tota pessa en le sieu loc am la tua vertut.	And if there are any displaced fragments of bone, then use your skill to manipulate them back into their proper place with gentle force.
E si appar en lu satagia separada que punh la codena e no es a tu speransa en la restauracio de lu, lahoras tu fen sobre lu e osta aquela segon la manieyra la qual havem dita desus.	If any displaced fragments appear that cause the elbow joint to lock and cannot be reduced during restoration, then proceed as described earlier.
Mays si la fractura es am plagua, yeu ja he fayt ad aquo capitol singular, e donc pren la curacio de aquel.	But if the fracture is accompanied by infection, this has already been discussed in Chapter IX, so follow its treatment accordingly.
E si accideys apostema caut al comensament de la tua restauracio, lahoras tu lineys un drap am cerot fayt de oli rozat e cera blanca, e sia migier entre specitut e subtilitat, e strenh drap sobre aquel am strictura subtil entro que le apostema sia cedat; e lahoras remau le cerot e pausa emplastre preparat de polvera de moli am clayre de huou, e aprop pausa stelhas; e sia la stela la qual es pauzada sobre aquela fractura pus lada e pus fort.	If an abscess forms at the beginning of treatment, take a cloth with cerote made from rose oil and white wax, medium thickness between thickness and thinness. Place it on the abscess with gentle pressure until it opens. Then remove the cerote and apply a plaster prepared from ground mallow with egg white, and also apply splints; use the one that is placed over the fracture more often and stronger.
E sapias que·l nombre de las stelas del bras so vi en las majors disposicios, o sia la fractura en un focil o en dos focils ensemps.	You should know that there are six splints for the arm in the majority of cases, or seven if both bones have been fractured.
E aprop pausa la tua strictura sobre le loc de la fractura pus fort e pus vehement, e quan mays sira la extrictura a las partidas desus de la fractura o a las partidas pus bassas de lu, pausa la strictura un pauc pus molh segon que es precedida la rememoracio de lu en le comensament del capitol.	Apply pressure gently and firmly over the fracture site using traction, and adjust it according to where the fracture is located. If the traction is applied above the fracture site, apply gentle pressure afterwards following the principles outlined at the beginning of this chapter.
E les draps que so envolopatz sobre la fractura sian draps mols humitz, e no sian durs ni aspres, e·l fiel am le qual es strenhut sia de li propriament migier entre subtil e gros, ayssi cum havem recomtat.	"Ensure the bandages wrapped around the fracture are soft and moist, not hard or rough; the plaster used should be medium in consistency between fine and coarse, as previously recommended."
E considera le membre e·l liament aprop alcus dias.	"Consider the limb and allow some days to pass."
E si accideys alcuna causa de la qual rectificacio es necessaria, ayssi cum prusiment le qual accideys al membre, e lahoras cove que tu enbroques le membre am aygua cauda entro que cesse aquel pruziment.	"And if some cause arises that requires correction, such as swelling of the limb, then you should immerse the limb in cold water until the swelling ceases."
E leysses le membre no costreyt entro que repause, e aprop torna la strictura.	"Allow the member to rest without constraint until it resumes its usual state and then gradually return to its original position."
E si la extrictura ja es mollificada e l’os ja es remaugut e semblantz ad aquels, lahoras rectifiqua tot aquo am la tua vertut.	"And if the swelling has softened and the bone appears sound, then set it correctly with your own hands."
E considera mays si le nutriment es prohibit pervenir al membre per superfluitat de strictura, quar lahoras cove que mollifiques aquel un petit e laysses aquel per alcus dias entro que corra ad aquel le nutriment, e aprop strenh aquel.	"And also consider if there is an excess of swelling preventing nourishment from reaching the limb; in such a case, you should gently mobilize it and allow it to rest for some days until proper nutrition can reach it, then strengthen it."
Mays si al malaute no accideys alcuna causa de aquelas que havem ditas, lahoras no cove que sia desliat entro aprop xx dias o enviro de aquels.	"But if the condition does not improve due to any of the causes mentioned above, then it should remain immobilized for approximately twenty days or thereabouts."
E aprop sia suspenduda la ma del malaute per la sua vertut de movement agitatius, e fay aquel dormir sobre le sieu dos.	"And then lift up the arm of the patient with your own hand by its natural movement, and make him sleep on his back."
E sapias que aquesta fractura es restaurada en xxx dias o en xxxii dias, o fort leu es restaurada en xxviii dias, e tot aquo es segon la disposicio de las compleccios e las disposicios de la vertut.	"Know that this fracture will heal in thirty days or thirty-two days, but it may take twenty-eight days to fully heal, depending on the body's complexion and virtue."
Capitol .xiii.	"What is said in Chapter Thirteen?"
De restauracio de fractura de la pinche de la ma e dels ditz.	"Concerning the healing of fractures of the hand and fingers."
Sapias que a la pinche de la ma e als nuzes dels ditz tart endeve fractura, e no accideys a lor sino atricio motas veguadas.	"You should know that fractures in the hand and fingers often occur only on the outside surface of these bones, with many instances being merely contusions rather than true fractures."
E quan accideys a la ma fractura o atrissio, lahoras cove que·l malaute segua cayrat e denant lu lies cezent segon equalitat, e aprop pausa la ma de lu sobre aquela extenduda.	"And when the hand suffers a fracture or contusion, it is necessary for the patient to keep their arm elevated and supported in front of them, with the affected hand resting on the unaffected one."
E aprop le ministre extenda les osses trencatz e·l metge engualhe aquels entro que sian congongitz am bona congoncio.	"And then the minister will extend the broken bones, and the doctor will realign them and join them together with good congruence."
E lahoras cove que pause emplastre e estopa, si no accideys apostema caut; e aprop pausa stela desus segon la quantitat del loc, e tu ja has envolopada aquela en drap de li.	"And then it is necessary to apply a plaster and bandage, unless there is no wound from which pus can flow. And then apply a splint above according to the size of the injury, with that already wrapped in linen cloth."
Mays si la trincadura es en las partidas dedintz deves le ventre de la palma, e lahoras fay semblant de spera de drap, e comanda al malaute que strenha aquela am la sua palma trincada; aprop sia strenguda am drap lonc.	"But if the fracture is in the palm of the hand or wrist, then make a kind of bandage like a sling from cloth, and instruct the patient to hold their hand folded against their chest with that sling wrapped long around it."
E sia la stelha de cuer am drap en le qual sia levitat, per so que le cuer sia aplicat a la palma; e strenh aquela segon que cove.	"And let the splint be made of wood covered in cloth to allow for adjustment, so that the splint can be applied closely to the palm. And then wrap it according to what is necessary."
Mays si la fractura es a las partidas defora, lahoras cove que pauses desus stela e autre estela de la partida dejos en la palma, per so que la ma sia uberta e dreyta; e aprop pausa la strictura, ayssi cum es revolvuda la ma a la rateta entre les ditz am liamentz.	"But if the fracture is on the outside of the hand or wrist, then apply a splint above and another below the fracture on the palm side, so that the hand is kept open and straight. And then wrap it with bandages, as one would do for a hand turning towards the thumb between those said ligaments."
E si accideys fractura a alcu dels nozes dels ditz, lahoras si es le dit pous, sia engualat segon que cove e aprop sia strenhut am la palma e si·t voles, pausa a lu astela petita dreyta per so que sia elevada la fractura e no sia mauguda.	"And if there is a fracture of one of the knuckles of the fingers, then if it's the thumb, align it as necessary and wrap it with the palm. And if you wish, apply a small splint on top to elevate the fracture and prevent movement."
Mays si la fractura es en les autres ditz, ayssi cum en aquel del mieg loc, o en le indic, o en le auricular, o en le anular, lahoras sia engualhat e liat am le dit sa le qual siec aquel; o sian totz liatz segon continuacio, e es milhor; o pausa sobre aquel stela petita, ayssi cum havem dit en le pous.	"But if the fracture is in one of the other fingers, such as at the middle joint, or in the index finger, or in the ring finger, then align and bind it with the finger next to it that is not affected. Or they can all be bound together continuously, which is better; or apply a small splint over that one, as we have said for the thumb."
E considera, en la tua restauracio, e aprop aquela, la disposicio de apostema caut e oppose — am la tieua operacio — am aquo que cove quan accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, segon que es iterada la narracio de lu.	"And note, in your treatment and especially for this one, the position of the wound and its opposition, as well as what is necessary to do if any cause arises from it, according to what is narrated above."
Capitol .xiv.	"Chapter XIV."
De restauracio de fractura del os de la coyssa.	"On the treatment of fractures of the hip bone."
Le os de la cueyssa motas veguadas es trencat e es declarat al sentiment segon que es convertit a la partida denant e a la pus sobirana.	"The hip bone is often fractured, and it is felt according to how it turns towards the front of the fracture and towards the pus above."
E la restauracio de lu se fa enayssi que·l liament es strenhut sobre la fractura e autre liament dejos la fractura, e le malaute sia prostrat sobre le sieu ventre e sobre la cara.	"And its treatment is done in this way: a ligament is wrapped above the fracture and another below it, and the patient lies on their stomach with their face turned down."
E aprop le ministre extenda tot le liament a la sua partida segon la qualitat, quan la fractura es en le mieg loc del os.	"And when the fracture is in the middle of the bone, extend all the ligaments to their own place according to their quality."
Mays si es propdana a la razitz de la cueyssa, lahoras sia le liament propda al denolh a la partida del pentenilh, per so que la extencio caja en sus, e le autre liament dejos la fractura.	"But if it is displaced at the root of the hip, then extend the ligament on the inner side to the place where the penis hangs, so that its extension goes upwards. And another ligament below the fracture."
E semblantment si la trencadura es propdana al denolh, lahoras sia fayt le liament propda al denol, e sia la extencio a las partidas dejos.	"And similarly, if the fracture is displaced downwards, then extend the ligament on the inner side and its extension should be towards the places below."
E aprop le metge enguale le os am amduas las sieuas mas entro que reduzesca aquel segon la semblansa natural e l’os es conjungit per bona conjunccio; lahoras cove que pauses emplastre e strictura, si no accideys al membre apostema.	"And then the physician aligns the bone with both hands from inside so that it reduces according to its natural shape and the bone is united by good union. Then apply plaster and bandages if there is no inflammation of the member."
Mays si accideys en lu apostema, lahoras tu layssa aquel per alcus dias entro que l’apostema caut sia cedat, e aprop retorna a la tua curacio.	"But if an inflammation occurs, then leave it alone for a few days until the inflammation subsides, and then return to your treatment."
La strictura de lu sia ayssi fayta: cove que envolopes sobre la fractura una benda dura, e dobla aquela dos o tres veguadas, e remaugua de lu superfluitat; e aprop envolopa la camba entro que pervengua al talo e a la razitz de la cueyssa.	"The bandaging of it is done like this: wrap a hard bandage over the fracture and fold it two or three times, and remove its excess. And then wrap the blanket so that it reaches the ankle and the root of the hip."
E intromet lonc fiel entre la cueyssa e la camba prop del denol a las partidas dejos, e venguan las extremitatz del fiel de la partida pus sobirana de las doas partz, e aprop revolveys sobre la camba e la cueyssa aquo que superflueys de la benda.	"And insert a long splint between the hip and the blanket near its lower end. And bring the ends of the splint up from both sides above the hip bone. Then wrap what is left over of the bandage around the blanket and the hip."
E aprop pausa sobre la cueyssa en le loc de aquela fractura astelhas, e pausa de aquelas una stela sobre le os de la camba.	"And then apply splints over the hip bone at the location of that fracture, and apply two splints over the shinbone."
E aprop uempli las vacuitatz entre la camba e la cuoyssa am draps mols, per so que sia coagulada la extrictura.	"And then fill in the spaces between the shinbone and the hip bone with soft cloths so that the bandage is firm."
E aprop comensa am strictura fort del mieg sobre le loc de la fractura am tres envolucios o quatre, e quant mays tu te alonhas am liament del loc de la fractura, la tua strictura sia menor e pus leugiera e pus molha.	"And then begin with a firm bandage from above the middle over the location of the fracture with three or four wraps. And as you approach the area of the fracture with ligaments, your bandage should be lighter and softer."
E aprop exten a doas extremitatz del fiel a las partidas dejos entro que pervengua a la cavilha del pe, e strenh amdoas las extremitatz de las stelhas del autra part per so que·l liament no sia remaugut del sieu loc.	"And then extend both ends of the splint downwards until they reach the ankle bone. And tie both ends of the splints on the other side to prevent the ligaments from being removed from their place."
E aprop leyssa la strectura sobre aquel, don esta ayssi que no accideys al membre corrosio ni apostema caut ni emflacio e semblantz ad aquels; e si accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, adonc cueta te am desliament de lu, e rectifica aquo que accideys tot aprop, segon que havem dit motas veguadas.	"And then leave the bandage on him until it is removed according to what we have said many times above without any corruption of the member or inflammation or swelling appearing. And if anything else happens, then pay attention to that and correct it immediately."
Mays si en le os es pessa del os la qual pongua, lahoras cove que tu engualhes aquel segon que a tu es possibla; e sino, fen sobre lu e remau aquel, e cura am aquo del qual es precedida la rememoracio entro que sia sanat.	"But if the bone is pushed out of place by something, then you should align it according to what is possible for you. And if not, leave it alone and remove it, and treat it with whatever is remembered from above until it is healed."
E alcunas veguadas es strenhuda aquesta fractura de la coyssa otra aquo que sian ajustadas a lu stelhas, ayssi cum havem dit en le adjutori e·n le bras.	"And sometimes this fracture of the hip bone is treated with splints other than those mentioned above, as we have said in the adjutator and the arm."
Mays empero en la restauracio de lu en tal manieyra fayta no accideys al malaute claudicacio; e si es restaurada sola, otra aquo que li sia applicada l’autra camba, lahoras es necessari que claudique aquel del qual es tostemps.	"But nevertheless, if the treatment of it is done in this way, it does not cause the patient to limp. And if it is treated alone, without the other leg being applied to it, then it is necessary that he limp all the time."
E sapias que la coyssa es strenhuda en xl dias o un pauc mes o un pauc mens, e tot aquo es segon la diversitat de las compleccios e de las autras dispozicios.	"And know that the hip bone is strengthened in forty days or a little more or less, depending on the diversity of complexions and other dispositions."
Capitol .xv.	"Chapter XV"
De restauracio de la fractura de la rodela del denolh.	"Of the treatment of the fracture of the kneecap."
Sapias que fractura de la rodela del denol tart endeve, mays accideys a lu motas veguadas atrissio.	"Know that a fracture of the patella is rare, but it often happens with contusion."
Mays si accideys a lu fractura, lahoras no es sino fissura o trauc en las suas partidas, e aquo es am plagua o ses plagua, e sobre aquo tot es estat am le sentiment.	If fracture occurs in him, then it is nothing but break or tear in its parts, and this is with pain or without pain, and overall it is considered with sensation.
E la restauracio de lu es enayssi que sia engualat aquo que es romput de las partidas de lu am les ditz entro que sia agreguat e conjongit segon que es possible per equacio e facilitat e fabricacio.	The repair of it is to be done in such a way that what is broken of its parts with the said intestines should be joined and united as much as possible by means of stitches and ease of fabrication.
E aprop pausa emplastre e pausa sobre aquel stela redonda, si indigeysses de aquela; e strenh desus am strictura ad aquo convenient.	And then apply plaster and bandage over that round wound, if necessary; and strengthen it with a proper binding according to what is needed.
E aprop considera totas las disposicios las quals havem recomtadas en las autras fracturas, ayssi cum es apostema caut e semblant ad aquels enaissi que se oppause a tot accident am aquo que a lu es convenient entro que sia sanat.	And also consider all the dispositions which we have recommended in other fractures, such as pus drainage and similar things, so that it may be applied to any accident according to what is convenient until it is healed.
Capitol .xvi.	Chapter XVI
De restauracio de la fractura de la camba.	On the repair of a fracture of the humerus.
Sapias que en la camba so dos osses dels quals la un es gros, e es le nompnat per nom de la camba; e l’autra es subtil, e es nompnat focil.	Know that in the arm there are two bones, one of which is thick and is called by the name of the arm (humerus); and the other is thin and is called the radius.
E accideys a quascus de las specias de fractura aquo que accideys als dos osses del bras, e per aquo es fayta restauracio de lu ayssi cum restauracio del bras engualment, e la operacio de lu es una.	And it happens that in some cases of fracture one or both of the bones of the arm are affected, and for this reason the repair of it is made like the repair of the arm generally, with one operation.
E si so trincatz dos osses ensemps, la camba es convertida a totas partidas.	And if both bones are broken at once, the arm becomes completely useless.
E si es trinquat le os pus subtil, la camba es convertida a las partidas Denant.	And if only the thinner bone is broken, the arm remains usable but with limited movement.
E si es trincat le os pus gros, atrobas aquel dejos, e es de aquelas causas que no so a tu ameguadas.	"And if the bone is firmly set, do not disturb it, as this may be due to causes that are not your concern."
E aprop aministra extencio e equacio e liguacio de las astelas segon aquel engualment.	"And therefore administer extension and traction and fixation of the limbs according to that alignment."
Mays empero cove, si la fractura de la camba es laja havent motas satagias, que la extencio sia mendre e pus leugiera, e alleuja am la tua vertut.	"However, note that if there is a fracture of the leg with little displacement, then traction should be lighter and gentler, acting with care."
E en la camba es alcuna causa de operacio sobre le bras, e es quan tu engualas las stelhas e que comples tota la tieua operacio, lahoras tu prendras pessas de fustz de pi le qual es pausat dejos las cauzas las quals so pausades en solies, e so faytas eyssament de brancas de palma; aligeys de aquelas a las quals es petita groceza, e no sia ges de las manudas, e sia la longuesa de aquelas segon la longuesa de la camba, e del denol entro al pus dejos.	"And when operating on the arm due to some cause, and you have aligned the bones and completed your operation, then you will take splints of wood that are placed there previously, made from branches of palm; choose those which are not too thick or too thin, and their length should be according to the length of the arm, from the elbow to the wrist."
E aprop envolopa sobre quascuna drap en doas envolucios segon la longitut de lu, e pausa la una sobre la partida de la camba de la una part e l’autra del autra part, e sian del denol entro al pus bas loc del pe.	"And therefore wrap it around each limb in two wrappings according to its length, and place one on the elbow of the arm on one side and the other on the other side, and they should be from the elbow to about halfway up the forearm."
E aprop lias las doas stelhas en tres locs de doas extremitatz e al mieg loc, quar am aquesta strectura la camba es prohibida de clinar a la partida dextra e sinistra, e sta per bona stacio.	"And therefore bind the two bones together in three places: at both extremities and at the middle, for with this traction the limb is prevented from bending at the elbow joint, and thus it stands firm."
E ja es aministrat un brasset de fust segon la longuesa de la camba; e sia pausada en lu la camba per so que conserve aquel de movement.	"And now a splint of wood has been prepared according to the length of the limb; and the limb should be placed upon it so that it may retain its position."
E majorment cove que tu fassas aquo en fractura, e quan am aquela es plagua propriament.	"And especially this should you do in case of fracture, when it is properly united."
E aprop considera en quascun jorn la camba e studia am aquel per derier studi, e tu le guardes de apostema e de imflacio o de autres causas semblantz; e cum accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, lahoras opausa te a lu am aquo que cove entro que sia sanat.	"And also examine the limb every day and study it with care to ensure that there is no inflammation or swelling or other cause of similar kind occurring; and whenever any such cause arises, then you should apply this treatment until it is healed."
Capitol .xvii.	Chapter XVII
De la fractura del talo e dels osses del pe e dels ditz.	Of the fracture of the heel bone and of the bones of the foot and toes.
Al talo no accideys fractura de tot; mays als osses del pe accideys fractura alcunas veguadas; e als ditz del pe pauc accideys fractura, e no accideys a lor sino atricio en las mes de disposicio.	A fracture of the heel bone does not occur in full; but fractures of some bones of the foot do occur from time to time; and among the toes, few fractures occur, and they only when there is some deformity of position.
E si als osses del pe endeve fractura e vezes aquels osses esser elevatz sobre si entre lor, lahoras le malaute pause le sieu pe sobre la terra preparat ayssi cum anant.	And if among the bones of the foot there is fracture and some of those bones are elevated above others, then the patient should rest his foot on the ground prepared thus as he walks.
E aprop pausa la un pe sobre aquo que es elevat de aquels osses, e aprop calca aquels, e prem, e engualha aquels entro que torno en los locs.	And therefore place one foot upon that which is elevated by those bones, and also press upon them, compress them, and draw them in until they return to their proper places.
E aprop pausa emplastre e stopa desus, e pausa dejos le ventre del pe una petita taula a la qual sian dos caps plas.	And therefore apply plaster and bandages above it, and place underneath the sole of the foot a small table with two flat surfaces.
E aprop strenh aquela am le pe am strectura descent, pus que tu has envolopada aquela am draps e am autres causes de las quals indigeys.	And also extend that with the foot in extension, since you have wrapped it with cloths and other things of which there is need.
E cum a lu passan tres dias o quatre, lahoras tu deslia le liament, quar tu atrobaras les osses engualatz, o sian trincatz o sian dislocatz, e la operacio en aquels es ayssi co coneysses.	And when three or four days have passed, then you should untie the bandage, for you will find the bones reduced, either pressed together or firmly united or relocated; and the operation in such cases is as you know.
Mays si alcus ditz son trincatz, lahoras restaura aquels, e enguala aquels ayssi cum yeu e recomtat a tu en la restauracio dels ditz de la ma.	But if some are adherent, then reduce them and apply traction to them thus with the help of your hands, as I have taught you in the reduction of the fingers.
E aprop pausa al dit trincat stela segon la longitut del dit, e sia pus lada de lu un pauc; e aprop dejos le pe aquesta taula la qual e a tu recomtada, e strenh aquela am strictura decent.	And also place the adherent finger on a splint according to its length, and let it lie alongside of it a little; and also place underneath the foot that table which I have recommended to you, and extend that with gentle traction in extension.
Mays si aquo que es trincat dels osses so dos o tres o mays, lahoras tu pausa sobre quascun dit astela de la sua quantitat envolopada en drap leon, e strenh la taula en le pus bas del pe, e sia stant sobre la un dels caps de la taula foro le ventre del pe per que la tengua am bona retencio.	But if that which is adherent among the bones are two or three or more, then place upon each finger a splint according to its quantity wrapped in lion's skin cloth, and place the table beneath the foot at its lower part, and let it stand on one of its flat surfaces under the sole of the foot so that it may have good retention.
E es convenient a tu que no oblides que no consideres totas las causas las quals que e ditas a tu en las autras fracturas dels accidentz que havem dit; e opausa te a tot accident am aquo que cove.	And it is also necessary for you not to forget that you should not disregard all the causes which I have mentioned to you concerning other fractures of those accidents which we have spoken about; and you should apply this treatment to every accident according to what is necessary.
Capitol .xviii.	De la fractura de las costelas e de las vergas del cor.
De fractura del conh de la femna e del os del pentenilh e de la vergua del home.	"Regarding fractures of the hip bone in women and the bone of the pelvis and the penis in men."
Quan le conh de la femna es trincat, lahoras fay aquela ceser en cezela cayrada, e aprop enclina aquela a la partida del dos un petit, e sia tenguda detras.	"When the hip bone of the woman is broken, then immediately apply that plaster in this manner: gently incline her to the side of the unaffected hip and hold her firmly from behind."
E aprop la matrona umpla le conh de coto, e sia fayt en le conh de lu ayssi cum spera; e aprop la femna sia concutida, e eleva le dos de lu petit a petit, quar tot aquo es fora-getat entro que sia denant la partida del conh ayssi cum spera e l’os trincat retorna.	"And then the midwife applies pressure to the hip joint and makes it as level as possible; and then the woman is placed on her back, raising the uninjured hip little by little, so that everything is positioned in front of the hip joint and the broken bone returns to its place."
E aprop pausa pulvils sobre le dos de lu, e quan vol urinar remaugua le coto am facilitat e aprop urine, e reduzeys e retorna aquel segon la manieyra segon la qual mezist aquel al comensament, e aprop retorne al sieu pulvil primier.	"And then gently sprinkle powders on the back of the hip. And when she wants to urinate, raise the hip with ease and let her urinate, and reduce it again afterwards, returning it according to the manner in which you first moved it, and then return her to her original powder."
E fassa ayssi per vii dias o enviro aquels, quar aquel es restaurat.	"And do this for seven days or so until that bone is healed."
E si voles, pren una vezica de ovela e strenh sobre le trauc de lu una canula de canavera; e entromet tota la vesica en le conh de lu, e aprop ensuffla en la canula am vertut entro que la vesica sia imflada dedintz le conh, quar la fractura retorna.	"And if you wish, take a bladder of sheep and stretch it over the trochanter of the hip; insert the entire bladder into the hip joint, and then blow air through a reed into the bladder with force until the bladder is inflated inside the hip joint, for this will cause the fracture to return."
E aprop sia umplida de coto e estia per alcus dias segon que havem recomtat, entro que sia sanat.	"And then fill it with plaster and let it rest for some days as we have recommended until it is healed."
E quan le os del pentenil de home o de femna es trincat, lahoras aministra en la restauracio e agulacio de lu aquo que havem recomtat en l’os del anca.	"And when the bone of the pubis in a man or woman is broken, then apply to its restoration and treatment whatever we have recommended for the hip joint."
E aquo que es dreyt no es occultat en aquestas fracturas proprinquas e que pauc endeveno, majorment ad aquel al qual es alcun studi e us e enten aquest meu libre mot; quar aquela fractura significa a tu en las majors disposicios via dreyturiera en la restauracio e en la strictura de lu, e donc enten be.	"And what is correct is not hidden in these nearby fractures and those that occur less often, especially to those who study this book carefully. For this fracture signifies to you the greatest arrangements in the restoration and tightening of the joint."
Mays en la vergua del home quan es trincada, pren guarguamela de auca, e met la vergua en aquela; e aprop pausa sobre lu envolucio de drap, e sia envolopada, e aprop sia layssada per tres dias o enviro aquels, e sia sanada.	"In the case of a fracture of the penis in a man, take a gourd of cucumber and insert the penis into it; then wrap it with cloth wrapping and let it rest for three days or so until it is healed."
Capitol .xix.	"**Chapter XIX**"
De restauracio de fractura dels osses quan es am plagua.	**On the restoration of fractures when they occur in plague.**
Convenient es ad aquel al qual accideys fractura am plagua, e majorment si le os es gran ayssi cum es le os de la cuoyssa o de l’adjutori, o semblant ad aquel, que tu te cuoytes e fleubotomes aquel tantost si las condicios de fleubotomia a tu o testifican ayssi cum desus havem dit.	"It is convenient for those who have fractures during the plague, especially if it is a large bone such as the thighbone or humerus, etc., that you immediately perform phlebotomy on them if the conditions indicate it, as we have said above."
E si la plagua eflueys sanc, lahoras cove que tu te coytes a la retencio de lu enayssi que tu polverizes sobre lu zegi trissat, si a tu autra causa no es present.	"And if the plague flows away and it is healed, then you should take care to retain it in such a way that you sprinkle powdered mallow seed on it when it is beaten three times, unless there is another cause present."
E aprop comensa restaurar la fractura en aquel meteys dia, e no prolongues aquo, si no accideys apostema.	"And then begin to restore the fracture that same day and do not delay this if you do not want an abscess to occur."
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras tu layssa la restauracio de lu entro al ix dia, entro que sia cedat le apostema, e no apropinques a lu en le tertz dia e·l iiii de tot, quar tu faras accidir mals accidentz.	"But if an abscess occurs, then delay the restoration of it until the ninth day, until the abscess has decreased. And do not approach it in the third and fourth days altogether, for you will cause bad accidents to occur."
Mays si le os trencat es eminent sobre la codena descubert, lahoras cove que te perforses reduzir aquel e engualar aquel am las tuas mas am facilitat e am pauca extencio.	"But if the broken bone protrudes beyond the elbow joint, then it is necessary for you to reduce it and align it with your hands easily and without too much extension."
Mays si extencio no es a tu preparada e la equacio de lu am las tieuas mas, lahoras tu reduzeys aquel am las tuas mas am aquest sturment; e es sturment le qual es fayt de ferr, la longitut del qual es de vii ditz o de viii e la latitut del qual es segon la quantitat de la plagua; e per aquo es necessari al metge que prengua de aquels tres o quatre segon la quantitat que indigeys ad aquo en la curacio en tota specia de fractura.	"But if you are not prepared for extension and the reduction of it with your hands alone, then reduce it using this instrument: it is made of iron, its length is seven or eight digits, and its width depends on the amount of plague; and therefore it is necessary for the physician to take three or four of them according to what is needed in the treatment of all kinds of fractures."
E sia redon, e sia en lu pauca groceza per so que no sia doblat deves la comprecio sobre aquel en la hora de la operacio.	"And when it is reduced, place a small splint on it so that it does not bend again during the operation, and press it with some weight."
E sia de aguda extremitat al qual sia marge en las sieuas extremitatz; e sia le desus de lu a grossetut tendent, e de la maytat de lu entro a las partidas.	"And have its pointed end with margins at both extremities; let the upper part of it be thicker and the lower part thinner, entering into the parts."
E aquesta es la forma de lu:	"This is its shape:"
E es nompnat en grec “labre volentz atelarem”, so es paleta pauca.	"And in Greek it is called 'labre volentz atelarem', that is, small spatula."
Per que cove que sia pausada la extremitat de lu acuda elevada sobre la extremitat del os eminent.	"So that the pointed end of it may rest on the protruding end of the bone."
E inpelleys aquel en una veguada entro que retorne le os, e sia engualat am alcuna equacio.	"And then insert it into a hole made beforehand so that the bone returns to its place and is aligned with some equitation."
E donc esforsa te engualar las extremitatz de la fractura entre lor, e si la extremitat de lu trencada es subtil, e no pren aquela le sturment per bona axcepcio, lahoras cove que tu inscidas la extremitat de aquel os entro que l’insturment haja poder de aquo.	"And then carefully align the extremities of the fracture between them; and if the end of the broken bone is thin and does not receive the instrument well, then insert the end of that bone into the instrument so that it has power over it."
Mays si no podes reduzir le os de tot am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras enscideys aquel am aquo que coveneys a lu dels inscizoris les quals havem ditz; o serra aquel am una de las serras en qualque manieyra sia a tu possible.	"But if you cannot reduce the bone completely with what we have recommended, then cut it with one of the saws that we have mentioned earlier; or cut it with any saw in whatever manner is possible for you."
E aprop ratz aquel que roman en le os de asperitat e de scorsas menudas.	"And then rasp away the rough parts and small scales that remain on the bone."
E cum le os es reduzit, e aprop la reduccio le malaute atroba dolor vehement ledent, lahoras sapias que le os no es retornat al sieu loc natural; e adonc fay aquo quar tu confereyses al malaute gran juvament.	"And when the bone is reduced and the patient feels a severe pain at that time, know that the bone has not returned to its proper place; and therefore do this because you will greatly relieve the patient's suffering."
Cum es complida la tua restauracio la qual fas al os, e lahoras submergeys drap en vi stiptic negre, e propriament si es en estiu, e no pauses sobre la plagua cerot ni autre causa en la qual sia oli, per so que no fassa en lu accidir poyredura e corropcio.	"After you have finished your reduction of the bone, then immerse it in hot water mixed with black pitch. And especially if it is in summer and there is no ointment or oil on the wound for any reason, so that it does not cause putrefaction and corruption afterwards."
E aprop aministra stelas en la hora del tieu compliment de la restauracio de l’os, e layssa la plagua descuberta enayssi que inscidas le trauc am forfexs e uses de envolucios segon la quantitat de la plagua.	"And then give stitches at the time of your completion of the bone's reduction, and leave the wound open enough so that you can insert a bandage with tweezers and use wrappings according to the amount of plague."
E guarda te am tota cautela que no strenhas la plagua am la fractura, quar motas veguadas an fayt aquo les fols metges, e fero accidir sobre les sieus malautes mort o malautia corrodent o zuthement, so es sania.	"And be very careful that you do not stretch the wound with the fracture, for many times foolish physicians have done this and caused death or rotting corruption or sudden death to their patients, which is a great shame."
E si la tieua strictura leugiera, molli, diversa de la strictura de las autras fracturas.	"And if your stitch is loose, soft, different from the stitches of other fractures"
E si la plagua es gran o es plagua mala, e temes sobre aquel alcus accidentz mals les quals havem recomtatz, e atrobas dolor en le loc, lahoras no cove que pauses sobre aquel astelas, mays fay ad aquel envolucio de draps durs en loc de stelas e strenh lu am aquelas.	"And if the wound is large or it is a bad wound and you fear some of those bad accidents that we have mentioned might occur there, and you feel pain in that place, then do not use stitches but make this bandage of hard cloth there instead and stretch it with them."
E cum aprop un dia o dos vezes ja la plagua comensar, que en lu sia engendrat brac, lahoras tu osta desus le drap le qual havias pausat sobre aquel am vi, e aprop aministra calguas, enguentz am les quals de nostra constuma es que mediquem las plaguas, ayssi cum enguentz tetrafarmacon e semblantz ad aquel.	"And when the wound begins to heal after one or two days, then remove the cloth that you had placed over it with wine. And then apply dressings as is our custom for dressing wounds, such as tetrafarmacum and similar ones."
E conveneys a tu que deslias le liament e considera la plagua en quascun dia mati e vespre entro que sia consolidada e fermada, e cove que·l membre sia preparat en tal manieyra que la poyredura corra de lu a las partidas dejos am facilitat.	"And it is necessary for you to remove the bandage and examine the wound every morning and evening until it is consolidated and healed. And the limb must be positioned in such a way that putrefaction runs out of it towards its extremities with ease."
si a la plagua passan motz dias, e no es consolidada ni es abscindit de lu le brac, lahoras sapias que aqui so satagias de las petitas per que cove enquieras la plagua am tenta.	"If many days pass and the wound is not consolidated nor does it separate from the bone, then know that here are small bones for which you must explore the wound with a probe."
E de aquelas satagias aquelas que so separadas remau e extratz, aquelas que de lor no so separadas e pongen le membre e fan accidir dolor, perforsa te a inscidir aquelas segon que a tu aquo es possibla.	"And remove and extract those separated ones first, then examine those that are not separated and put pressure on the limb causing pain. Then insert them according to what is possible for you."
E si accideys a la plagua zuchem o eluchen, so es stiomenios, o autra specia de corrupcio e de putrefaccio, lahoras cove que pauses a quada un de aquels am aquo que conveneys a lu de la curacio del qual es precedida narracio en le sieu capitol.	"And if pus or foam occurs in the wound, it is called erysipelas, or some other species of corruption and putrefaction. Then you must apply one of these according to what is said about its cure in its chapter."
E de aquo en le qual cove que stia lo mieu sermo e tu fassas present la tua pessa: quan os gros es trincat, emineys sobre le membre ayssi cum le os de la coyssa e del ajutori e semblantz ad aquels dels membres grans, e que no presumas atraccio de lu, ni la extraccio de lu quar motas veguadas accideys per aquo la mort; habantz layssa aquel entro que poyresca, quar fort leu cayra per si aprop xx dias o xxx; e lahoras cura la plagua si a tu es vist, e si no layssa aquela.	"And concerning that in which my speech should stand out and you make your judgment: when the bone is crushed, do not elevate it above the limb like the bones of the wrist and elbow and similar ones from large limbs. And do not attempt to attract or extract it because many times death has occurred because of this; let it be there until it rots away by itself, for it will fall out by itself in about twenty days or thirty. Then treat the wound if you see fit, otherwise leave it alone."
Capitol .xx.	"Chapter Twenty."
De la curacio de nodacio que accideys en le vestigi de alcuna fractura.	"About treating an infection that occurs at the site of a fracture."
Motas veguadas accideys aquesta nodacio en le vestigi de sanacio de fractura, e majorment que es prop de las juncturas, e es orrasada per lu la figura del membre; e fort leu prohibeys le membre de la sua operacio natural.	"Very often this infection occurs during the healing of a fracture, especially near joints, and it becomes disfigured by it; moreover, it greatly hinders the member from its natural operation."
Adonc considera si la nodacio es recent e aministra en aquela medicinas que han stipticat ayssi co es aloen, e enses, e mira, e sercacollo, e acrassia, e semblantz ad aquels; enayssi que prenguas de aquela alcunas o totas, e comfesiys aquelas am vi stiptic, o am album de huou, o am vi agre, e pausa aquela sobre la nodacio en estopa, e constringeys aquelas sobre lu per bona constriccio.	"Therefore, consider if the infection is recent and apply to it medicines that have astringent properties like aloewood, senna, saffron, myrrh, and acacia, etc.; thus you should take some or all of those and mix them with stiptic wine, egg white, or vinegar, and place them on the infection wrapped in gauze, applying pressure with a good bandage."
E leyssa extrictura que no deslies aquela per motz dias; e aprop deslia aquela e itera autra, entro que sia remauguda la nodacio; o strenh sobre aquela lamina de plom descentment, quar plom ha proprietat de remaure tot aquo que es imflat en les membres.	"And let the bandage remain without removing it for several days; then remove that and apply another, until the infection is removed; or place on it a lead sheet, since lead has the property of drawing out all that is swollen in the members."
Mays si nodacio ja es en peyra convertida e streyta es e nessessitat provoca a ostar aquela coytadament, e lahoras scindeys aquela per la partida pus sobirana de lu, e inscideys la superfluitat e eminent, o ratz aquela am alcus rezoris entro que sia remauguda; e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	"But if the infection has already turned into bone and is hard, it may be necessary to break that carefully, and then split it with a chisel along its highest part, and cut off the excess and prominence, or draw it out with some tweezers until it is removed; and cure it until it is healed."
Capitol .xxi.	"Chapter XXI."
De restauracio de fractura quan es restaurada e aprop aquo roman le membre subtil e freul no segon la sieua natura.	"For restoration of fracture when it has been restored, if then the limb remains delicate and does not follow its natural course."
Quan fractura de os es restaurada, e aprop aquo roman le membre subtil e freul, lahoras aquo no es fayt sino per motas causas: de las quals la una es multitut de solucio del liament e de la liguacio de lu fayta no segon que cove; o per superfluitat de strictura dels liamentz entro que·l nutriment sia prohibit correr al membre; o per multitut de embrocaccio superflua; o per movement superfluent no en la sua hora; o per pauquesa de sanc en le cors del malaute e per debelitat de lu.	"When a bone fracture is restored, if then the limb remains delicate and does not follow its natural course, it happens for many reasons: one of which is excess solution of the ligament and improper union; or due to excess tightening of the ligaments preventing proper nutrition reaching the limb; or due to excessive broaching; or due to excessive movement out of time; or due to lack of blood in the patient's body and weakness."
E curacio de aquo es dar a mengar al malaute e far le cor de lu tendre entro que·l sanc sia multiplicat en lu; e aministra banh; e entromet gaug e leticia sobre lu.	"The cure for this is to feed the patient and make their heart tender so that blood is multiplied in them, and apply baths; and introduce joy and comfort upon them."
E aprop pausa pegua sobre le membre, per so que la pegua atire a lu mot nutriment, o continua embrocacio de lu am aygua tebeza, entro que·l nutriment corr e retorne a la sua figura natural.	"And also apply pressure above the limb so that the pressure draws proper nutrition to it, or continuous broaching of it with warm water until the nutrition returns to its natural form."
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter XXII.
De curacio dels osses trincatz quan so restauratz tortuozament e prohibeys la operacio de lor de aquo que cove.	Chapter XXII: Concerning the treatment of bones that are crushed and restored crookedly, and the prevention of their operation from being necessary.
Quan accideys al membre ja restaurat aprop la sanacio de lu de tortuositat e eminencia al os trincat e nodacio, e es per aquo fededa de forma del membre, mays empero le membre no es prohibit de la sieua operacio natural, lahora no cove que tu recipias la paraula de aquel que exsistima aquel membre sia de novel trincat.	"If it happens that after the restoration of a limb has been completed there is still deformation and prominence at the site of the broken bone, but the limb remains usable in its natural operation, then you should not listen to those who claim that the limb has been recently re-broken."
Mays ja so statz motz fols metges e restauradors les quals han fayt aquo en nostra tera; e aquesta operacio es mot vituperable perduzent a gran temor le senhal de la qual es mortal.	"But there are many foolish doctors and healers who have performed this operation in our land, and it is highly blameworthy as it leads to great fear for those who bear its mark, which is deadly."
Mays si claudicacio e nodacio son recentz, lahoras cove que sian enbrocatz am aygua tebeza en la qual so coytas erbas mollificantz, ayssi cum son fuelas de altea e razitz de lu, e mellilot, e semblantz ad aquels; e sia fayt a lu emplastre am emplastre mollificatio ayssi cum dyallaquilon ben fayt; o que sia preza mucillage de razit de altea e sia contucida am gray de gualina o am oli de cirami, e sia emplastrat am aquel; o que sian prezes figuas grassas e sian trissadas am fems de colom, e semblantz ad aquels de las medicinas que son nompnadas amermans consolidacio.	"But if the limpness and deformity are recent, then it is necessary to broach them with warm water in which are cooked mollifying herbs such as althea roots and rose hips, mallows, and similar ones; and let a poultice be made with a mollifying plaster such as treacle well-made, or let the root of althea be pounded into mucilage and mixed with grease from goose feathers or wax from cirami, and let it be applied as a plaster; or let figs be cooked until they are thick and then ground with pigeon dung, using similar medicines that are called 'amermans consolidatio'."
E alcunas vetz es dissolvuda am assidua fricacio leugiera que sia am las mas humidas, e sia administrat movement del membre a tota partida en totas horas.	"And sometimes it can be dissolved with persistent light friction using the most humid hands, and movement of the limb should be administered in all parts at all times."
Mays si tortuositat ja es anada denant e es fayta fort e convertida es en peyra e provocada es necessitat a curacio de lu am ferr, lahoras cove que sia le pus desus cecsat e la continuacio del os sia dissolvut, e sia inscidit aquo que superflueys de nodacio de aquel meteys am le os am inscissoris subtils, e sia aministrada facilitat en aquel am sollicitut e studi.	"But if the deformation has already hardened and turned into bone, and surgery is necessary to correct it, then it is necessary that the bone be cut as high above the deformity as possible, and the continuity of the bone be dissolved with scalpel incisions made with subtle care, and facilitate ease in that area through diligent study."
Capitol .xxiii.	Chapter XXIII
De sermo en dislocacio.	Concerning dislocation.
Dislocacio es eyssiment de alcuna de las juncturas del sieu loc, per que es prohibida de movement, e es orrezada la figura del membre, e fa venir sobre le malaute dolors e lesios grans.	"Dislocation is the displacement of one of the joints from its proper place, causing it to lose its movement and altering the shape of the limb, resulting in great pain and severe injury."
Donc quan accideys ad alcu dislocacio, lahoras cove tantost perforsar que sia reduzit, e no tarde aquela reduzir, quar si es tardada, le loc es apostemat e fort leu am aquo es fayta dificil la reduccio de dislocaccio.	"So when a dislocation occurs, it is necessary that it be reduced immediately, and not delayed, for if it is delayed the joint becomes inflamed and hardened, making reduction of the dislocation difficult."
E per aysso no cove que sia maugut ni stendut en la hora de la apostemacio, quar motas veguadas fa venir spasme e dolors ledentz.	"And for this reason, it should not be moved or stretched during the inflammation phase, for often times it causes spasm and severe pain."
Mays quan aquo accideys, lahoras cove que tu te coytes a la flaubotomia del malaute, e aprop sia layssat entro que repause le apostema; e aprop le membre sia embrocat am aygua cauda e oli, e aprop sia reduzit am facilitat.	"But when this happens, then you should apply a plaster to the affected area and allow it to rest until the inflammation has subsided; and then bathe the limb with warm water and oil, and reduce it gently."
E tot membre sia curat am aquo del qual la rememoracio vindra en son loc.	"And every limb should be treated with that which brought about its dislocation."
E yeu ja e ordenatz les capitols de dislocacio segon que es precedit en fractura; de la partida del cos pus sobirana entro a la partida pus dejos.	"And I have already arranged the chapters on dislocation according to what was previously said concerning fracture, starting from the most superior part of the body and going down to the most inferior."
Capitol .xxiiii.	Chapter XXIV
De curacio de dislocacio de la mandibula dejos.	Concerning the treatment of dislocation of the lower jaw.
So dislocadas las doas mandibulas si no tart; e la dislocacio de amdos es fayta segon una de dos manieyras: que o son remaugudas de lurs locs per pauca remocio, e so mollificadas un petit; o so dislocadas per entiera dislocacio e complida, entro que sian mollificadas a la partida de la junctura entro que corro saliva del malaute e que no puesca tenir aquela ni puesca claure la sua boca, e la lengua de lu sia envolopada en sa paraula.	"So when both mandibles are dislocated but not torn apart; and the dislocation of both is done in one of two ways: either they are moved slightly from their places and somewhat mollified; or they are completely dislocated and softened at the joint where saliva flows, so that he cannot close his mouth nor speak, and his tongue sticks to his palate."
Mays quan la dislocacio de lu es pauca, lahoras en las majors disposicios retorna per si an pauca causa.	"But when the dislocation is slight, it usually returns to its place on its own with little cause."
Mays si la dislocacio es entiera e complida, lahoras cove que sia administrada reduccio de lu leugierament, e no sia tardada de tot.	"But if the dislocation is complete and full, then it is necessary that reduction be administered gently, and not delayed at all."
E es que·l ministre tengua le cap del malaute, e entrometa lo metge le dit pous de la una sieua ma en la razit de la dislocacio de la mandibula dedintz la boca de lu, si la dislocacio es de la una part; o que entrometa les sieus dos pouzes ensemps, si la dislocacio es de doas partz, e les autres ditz de las mas de lu sian defora am les quals enguale; e comanda al malaute que cesse las suas mandibulas e absolva aquelas anar de quascuna partida; e le metge engualhe la mandibula e enpellisca la mandibula entro que retorne al sieu loc.	"And the minister should hold the patient's head, and the physician should insert his thumb into the depression of the dislocation of the jaw inside the mouth, if the dislocation is on one side; or he should insert both thumbs together if the dislocation is on both sides, with the other fingers outside to support it; and he should command the patient to cease moving his jaws and open them on each side; and the physician should guide the jaw back into its proper place."
E si dificil es la reducio de lu, e majorment si amdos las mandibulas so essemps dislocadas, lahoras aministra evoporacio am aygua cauda e oli, entro que sia fayta leugiera la reduccio de amdos e no tardes la reduccio de amdos de tot, ayssi quo havem dit.	"And if reduction is difficult and especially if both jaws are dislocated together, then apply evaporation with hot water and oil until gentle reduction can be easily accomplished without delay."
E donc cum retornam e so engualadas, e es clausa la boca del malaute e no es mollificada, lahoras pausa sobre aquelas polvils de drap am cerot, e sia fayt de cera e oli rozat; e aprop sia liat am facilitat am liamens mols.	"And when they have returned and are engaged, if the patient's mouth is closed tightly without being softened, then apply powders of linen with wax, and make them of wax and sweet oil, and bind it gently with soft bandages."
E sia le dormir del malaute sobre le sieu dos, e·l cap de lu sia stant entre dos aurelhes, per so que no maugue aquel a la partida dreyta ni a la sinistra; e no li fassas per forsa masteguar alcuna causa; habans la sieua vianda sia forbicio leon, entro que quan las dolors sian remaugudas e las mandibulas so nozadas, lahoras maugue aquo que vol.	"And have the patient sleep on his back with his head supported between two pillows so that he does not move his head to the right or left; and do not force him to open his mouth for any reason. Until the pain is relieved and his jaws are comfortable, let him eat soft food."
E aquo sia aministrat am facilita, e no trebalhe sobre la apercio de la boca deves la comestio e beure e ocitatio, entro que la mandibula sia nozada e sanada.	"And this should be done gently and do not work the mouth open for eating and drinking and speaking until the jaw is comfortable and healed."
E si es dificil la reduccio de duas mandibulas quan so dislocadas en alcuna hora e no so convertidas als lors locs, lahoras motas veguadas accideysso febres e soda assidua, e fort leu es alerguat le ventre del malaute, e fort leu e vomeys colera pura.	"And if reduction of both jaws is difficult when they are dislocated and do not return to their places, then often times fever and constant thirst occur, the abdomen becomes distended, and violent vomiting of pure bile occurs."
E quan tu vezes aquo, lahoras sapias que es perdicio; e motas veguadas mor aquel al qual accideys aquo en x dias.	"And when this happens, then you should know that it is a fatal condition; for often times the patient dies within ten days."
Capitol .xxv.	Chapter XXV
De reduccio de la dislocacio de la furcula e de la extremitat del muscle.	Concerning reduction of dislocation of the collarbone and the extremity of the muscle.
Furcula no es dislocada del latz dedintz per la sua continuacio am le pietz; e alcunas veguadas es dislocada a la partida defora, e aquo es declarat al sentiment.	"The collarbone is not dislocated inward from its attachment to the sternum; but sometimes it is dislocated outward, and this can be felt."
E la restauracio de lu es que·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu dos e extenda les sieus brasses.	"And the reduction of it is that the patient lies on his back and extends his arms."
E aprop coarta le loc am la tua palma am fort coartacio, quar ela retornara.	"And then press the location with your palm with firm pressure, for it will return to its place."
E aprop pausa sobre aquela emplastre e pulvils e strenh aquela.	"And then apply a plaster and powders and bind it firmly."
Mays la extremitat de aquel que siec le coyde e·s continuat am aquel, no es dislocada en alcun dia; lahoras cove que sia reduzida e engualhada segon que havem dit e segon que es a tu aparelhat.	"But the extremity of that which seizes the neck and is attached to it does not become dislocated on any day. Therefore, it should be reduced and bound according to what we have said and according to your ability."
E aprop pausa sobre aquela emplastre, e pulvils, e extrictura, e comanda al malaute adherir a trenquilitat e a repaus entro que sia sanat.	"And then apply plaster, powders, and dressing, and command the patient to adhere to tranquility and rest until he is healed."
E am aquesta meteyssa curacio es reduzida la extremita del muscle quan es separada del sieu loc.	"The extremity of the muscle is reduced during this same treatment when it has been separated from its place."
Capitol .xxvi.	"Chapter 26."
De la reduccio de la dislocacio del muscle.	"Of the reduction of dislocation of the muscle."
Sapias que·l muscle no es dislocat sino segon tres manieras, de las quals es la una que sia dislocat a la partida del titillic a la partida dejos.	"You should know that the muscle is not dislocated except in three ways, one of which is that it has been dislocated at its insertion."
E la segonda es que sia dislocat a la partida desus del muscle, e aquo es fayt tart; e no es dislocat a las partidas detras per la spalla; e no es dislocat a las partidas denant per les nervis.	"And the second is that it has been dislocated at its origin above the muscle; this hardly happens; and it does not get dislocated at the parts behind by the shoulder; nor does it get dislocated at the parts in front by the nerves."
E majorment es dislocat e defora eyssit a las partidas dejos deves le titillic, e majorment en aquels dels quals las carns son paucas, leugierament es dislocat; mays en aquels en les quals so motas carns, es eyssit fora am dificultat.	"Rather, the muscle is more easily and often dislocated at its insertions near the tendon, especially in those whose flesh is scant, it gets dislocated lightly; but in those with much flesh, it comes out with difficulty."
E fort leu accideys ad alcus homes percussio o cazement, e le muscle de lu es apostemat de apostema caut, e es cujat per aquo que ja sia dislocat.	"And sometimes, by a blow or fall, some men get a hematoma on the muscle that is cured by cauterization, and the muscle gets dislocated due to this."
Adonc cove que tu sproes aquo entro que estias sobre-sertetut de lu, e lahoras procesiscas en la curacio de lu.	"So then you should speak about what you are well informed of concerning this, and afterwards proceed with its treatment."
E es conoguda la dislocacio de lu quan es a las partidas dejos deves le titillic; per so que distingescas entre le muscle dislocat e·l muscle sa, quar tu atrobas entre aquels diversitat manifesta; e atrobas en le cap del muscle concavitat e dejos le titillic deves le tocament del cap del muscle ayssi quo un huou, e al malaute no pot redusir la sua ma a la sieua aurelha, ni maure aquela per totz movementz.	"And the dislocation of it is known when it happens at its insertions near the tendon; for you can distinguish between the dislocated muscle and the healthy one because there is a clear difference between them. You find concavity in the head of the muscle near the tendon, and in the sick person the hand cannot reach the ear due to the contraction of the muscle, nor can he move that arm."
Si es dislocat deves le pietz o ensus, e tu lahoras atrobas manifest tocament, e no es amaguat.	"If it is dislocated from the foot or above, and you afterwards find a clear touch, and it is not hidden."
E de aquesta dislocacio es fayta leugiera reduccio quan es fresca e le malaute es enfant.	"And of this dislocation, easy reduction is made when it is fresh and the patient is a child."
E la reduccio de lu es que·l ministre eleva la ma de lu a las partidas desus; e aprop pause les tieus pouses dejos le titillic de lu, e eleva la junctura am fortaleza en sus al sieu loc, e·l ministre eleva la ma de lu, e extenda aquela en sus; e aprop pausa aquela dejos quar ela retorna leugierament.	"And the reduction of it is that the physician lifts up his hand above it; and approaching pauses the ends of his fingers near the tendon of it, he elevates the joint with strength to its place, and the physician lifts up his hand, extending that in an elevated position; and he approaches it from below while it returns lightly."
Mays si per aquo que havem dit no retorna, e so del comensament que accidic la dislocacio, motz dias, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia banhat en aygua cauda e sia aministrada enbrocacio que mollifique e liniesca ayssi cum si so coytz razitz de altea, e fenugrec, e melillot en aygua, e sia administrada.	"But if it does not return by what we have said, and if from the beginning when the dislocation happened many days have passed, then the patient should be bathed in warm water, and afterwards an ointment that softens and lubricates like hot coals of almonds and fenugreek should be administered to him."
E aprop le malaute sia ressupinat sobre le sieu dos e sia pausat dejos le titillic de lu espera de lana que sia engual entre levitat e strictura, e aprop le metge pause le sieu talo sobre la spera, e eleva le cap del muscle am vertut, e atire la ma del malaute per que no sia mauguda a las partidas dejos, e autre ministre tengua le cap del malaute, que no sia maugut a las partidas dejos, quar aquela tantost retorna al sieu loc.	"And then the patient should be made to lie on his back and pause near the tendon of it waiting for it to be loose between elevation and tension, and then the physician places his heel on the sphere, lifts up the head of the muscle with strength, pulls the hand of the patient so that it is not hidden at its insertions, and another assistant holds the head of the patient so that it is not hidden at its insertions because it returns to its place soon."
E si voles, reduzeys aquel segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu fassas esser prezent un home le qual sia pus lonc que·l malaute, e estia de la part de aquel latz, e entrometa le sieu muscle dejos le titillic del malaute e eleve le titillic de lu a las partidas desus entro que·l malaute sia suspendut en ayre, e autre ministre tire la ma del malaute de las partidas dejos del sieu ventre.	"And if you want to reduce it in this way: have present a man who is taller than the patient and let him stand on the same side as the dislocated arm. He should insert his muscle near the tendon of the patient's arm, lift up the tendon of that above its insertion while the patient is suspended in air, and another assistant pulls the hand of the patient from below its belly."
Mays si le malaute es leugier, lahoras cove que am lu que autre causa sia suspenduda, per so que grave aquel, quar la dislocacio retorna tantost.	"But if the patient is light, then have another cause suspended to him so that he may weigh him down because the dislocation returns soon."
E es reduzit eysament segon autra manieyra: e es que sia ficat en terra un fust lonc le cap del qual sia redon de figura, ayssi cum pilo de mortier, que no sia gros ni subtil, e aprop sia pausat dejos le malaute; pus que so pausatz sobre·l cap del fust draps leons, e·l malaute sia stant segon la longitut del fust, e aprop sia extenduda la ma de lu a las partidas dejos del autra part; e sia extendut le cos de lu del autre part am fortaleza, quar la junctura retorna al sieu loc am velocitat.	"And it is reduced in this way: take a long staff with the head of it round like a pestle which should not be thick nor thin. Place it on the ground near the patient; then place lion skins over its head and have the patient stand along the length of the staff. Then extend his arm on the opposite side, and stretch out his body on that side with strength because the joint returns to its place quickly."
E si es dificil reduccio de lu per totas las causas que havem ditas, lahoras usa de aquesta cura: e es que tu prenguas un fust la quantitat del qual sia en le lonc de dos brasses, e latitut de aquel sia de quatre ditz, e la grossetut de lu sia aleujat en le preon del tittilic segon aquesta forma:	"And if reduction of it is difficult because of all the causes that we have mentioned, then use this treatment: take a staff whose length is two spans and width four digits, and make its thickness thin at the tendon in this way:"
E aprop sobre le cap redon sian liatz drap leons per so que·l fust no ledesca le malaute.	"And place lion skins over the round head of it for fear that the staff should slip and hurt the patient."
E aprop sia pausat dejos le titillic del malaute, e sia extenduda la ma o le bras sobre·l fust entro a las partidas dejos, e sia liat le fust sobre le adjutori e le bras e la extremitat de la ma.	"And place it near the tendon of the patient's arm, and extend his hand or forearm over the staff up to its insertions. Then tie the staff with bandages on the elbow, forearm, and end of the hand."
Aprop sia pausat le bras sobre un scalo de scala segon la latitut, e la ma sia extenduda a las partidas dejos, e l’autre cos sia suspendut de l’autre part, quar la junctura intra tantost.	"And then place the arm on a step of stairs according to its width, and extend the hand at its insertions while the other side is suspended because the joint enters soon."
E cum le intrament de lu es complit segon quascuna maniera que es a tu possibla, e lahoras cove que tu pauses dejos le titillic spera de lana de engual quantitat; e aprop pauza emplastre perparat de polvera de moli am enses e album de huou sobre tot le muscle, ayssi quo es revolvut desus, e aprop strenh dejos le titillic am strictura decent; e le liament sia revolvut sobre le emplastre, e la ma de lu sia annectida al col de lu, e sia leyssat, e no sia mauguda la ma de lu per vii dias.	"And when the reduction is completed in whatever way is possible for you, then place near the tendon a bandage of wool of equal quantity; then place a plaster prepared with powder of barley groats and albumen of egg over all the muscle as it is turned up, and then bind it with moderate tension; and wrap it around the plaster, join his hand to its neck, let it rest, and do not move his hand for seven days."
E cove que sia pausada la vianda del malaute pauca, entro que·l membre sia confortat, quar es pus leugier a la sanacio de lu.	"And the patient's diet should be restricted so that the member is strengthened because it is easier to heal when it is lighter."
E aprop la vianda sia donada major aprop vii o v e sia exercitat un movement; e donc si es fermat e no es mollificat, lahoras ja es sanat.	"And then gradually increase his diet after seven or eight days and have him move the limb. And if it remains firm and not softened, then it is healed."
Mays si la junctura es dislocada motas veguadas per humiditat que accideys a lu o per autra causa, lahoras cove que en aquela sia administrat cauteri am tres traucs, segon que denant es dit en le capitol de cauteri.	"But if the joint has been dislocated many times because of humidity that occurred in it or for some other cause, then it is necessary to administer a cautery with three incisions according to what is said above in the chapter on cauteries."
E si tot aysso es fayt e aprop vii dias es desliat le liament e la junctura no es fermada, e le emplastre e la strictura son reduzitz sobre lu alcunas veguadas, e no es fermada e catz e no pot elevar aquel bras a las partidas desus, lahoras sapias que·ls nervis de lu, les quals so al cap del muscle, ja so inscizes o extendutz o mollificatz, e sapia que la junctura nul temps no sira ficada en loc sieu.	"And if this is done and after seven days the bandage is removed but the joint is not firm, and the plaster and tension are reapplied several times but it remains not firm nor can he raise his arm above its insertions, then know that the nerves of it which are at the head of the muscle have been injured or stretched or softened. And know that the joint will never again be set in its proper place."
De la dislocacio de aquela qu’es fayta deves le pietz e la mamilha o las partidas detras, la reduccio es fayta am impulcio e extencio am las mas, entro que retorne.	"For dislocation of that which occurs at the knee and the malleolus or the posterior insertions, reduction is performed with pressure and extension using the hands until it returns."
E sia administrada en aquela l’autra strictura, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	"And apply another bandage to it and treat it until it heals."
E si accideys aprop la sanacio gravitat en le membre e tarditat en le movement de lu, lahoras le malaute uze de banh motas veguadas entro que aquela gravitat sia alleujada e que retorne a la natura de lu primiera.	"And if heaviness in the member and slowness of its motion occur after healing, then the patient should take baths many times until that heaviness is alleviated and it returns to its original nature."
Capitol .xxvii.	"Chapter 27."
De curacio de dislocacio del coyde.	"On the treatment of dislocation of the hip joint."
Sapias que la junctura del coyde es dislocada am difficultat e semblantment retorna am difficultat; e aquela es dislocada a totas partidas, e majorment a la partida denant a la partida detras, e la dislocacio de lu no es amaguada a tu quar es cazent dejos le vezement o dejos le tocament segon qualque figura sia dislocat, e quan ajustes le coyde disloguat am le sa, aquo es a tu declarat manifestament, quar la junctura es concavada e no pot doblar le bras, ni tocar am aquel le sieu muscle.	The hip joint is dislocated with difficulty and returns similarly; that one is dislocated in all directions, more so in front than behind, and the dislocation of it is not hidden to you when it is centered on its socket or when touched according to some figure, and when you reduce the dislocated hip into place, that is clearly declared to you, for the joint is concave and cannot bend the leg nor touch itself with that muscle.
E cove que·t coytes, e reduzescas la dislocacio tantost denant que vengua a lu apostema caut, quar si ve a lu apostema caut, dificil es la reduccio de lu, e fort leu no es sanat de tot; e majorment quan es a las partidas detras, quar pus mala es de totas las autras specias de dislocacio, e de major dolor, e motas veguadas deyssen am aquela la mort.	You should reduce the dislocation immediately before an abscess forms, for if it comes to that, reduction becomes difficult and the bone will not heal completely. And especially when it is displaced backwards, since among all kinds of dislocations this one is the worst and most painful, often resulting in death.
E la restauracio de lu, quan es aquela que es possibla reduzir, es que la ma de lu sia extenduda am doas mas, e le bras de lu sia expandut, e las mas del metge sian sobre le coyde e dejos lu, e el empellisca la junctura am les pouzes de las suas mas ensemps, o am la razit de la sua palma entro que torne en son loc.	And the reduction of it, when that one is possible to reduce, is thus: let his hand be extended with two hands, and his arm abducted, and the physician's hands be upon the hip joint and outside of it, and he should push the joint into place with the ulnar sides of his hands together, or with the edge of his palm towards him until it returns to its position.
Mays si la dislocacio es a las partidas denant, lahoras retorna ayssi que dobla la ma am la sua ma, entro que percuta le coyde am la razit de la sua palma.	But if the dislocation is displaced forwards, then return it thus: by bending the hand on his hand until it strikes the hip joint with the edge of his palm.
E si la dislocacio no obezeys a la reduccio, lahoras aministra vehement extencio e mot fort.	And if the dislocation does not yield to reduction, then apply forcible extension and considerable force.
E es que dos ministres extendan le bras, e tenguan aquel eyssament dos ministres per so que no sia remaugut deves la extencio.	And let two assistants extend the arm and hold it firmly in that position with two hands, so that it is not moved during extension.
E aprop sia revolvut le bras deves tota part, pus que es envolopat drap doblat lonc sobre la ma de lu, o liament.	Also, let the arm be rotated externally throughout the whole movement, because there is often a doubled fold of skin or bandage wrapped around his hand.
E quant le metge toca la junctura am la sua ma, unte aquela am alcun oli per so que aquo sia aquelas causas las quals ajudan en lubricitat de la junctura am facilitat; e aprop empellesca la junctura am empulcio vehement entro que retorne.	"And when the physician touches the joint with their hand, they anoint it with some oil so that this may ease those causes which aid in the lubrication of the joint with facility; and then they push the joint with violent impulse until it returns."
E aprop la reduccio de lu cove que sia pausat sobre aquela empastre en le qual sia stipticitat e excequacio am album de huou, e sia extrenhut am strictura descent, e·l bras sia suspendut del col, e sia layssat per alcus dias.	"And then the reduction of that swelling which has been placed upon that area where there is stiffness and inflammation with albuminous matter, and has been treated with a descending bandage, and the arm suspended from a collar, should be allowed to remain for some days."
E aprop sia desliat; e donc si la junctura es formada en le sieu loc, lahoras tu deslia le liament de lu e layssa aquela.	"And then it should be released; and if the joint is formed in its proper place, at that time you should release the bandage from it and leave it alone."
E si vezas la junctura no be strenher, lahoras tu itera le emplastre e·l liament, e layssa aquela per alcus dias entro que sia extrenhuda; e aprop deslia aquela.	"And if you find the joint not strong, then you repeat the application of the plaster and bandage, leaving it for some days until it is healed; then release it."
Mays si accideys a lu gravitat aprop la reduccio de la junctura, e la disposicio de lu es en movement, lahoras aministra humectacio en banh e fricacio subtil, e comprecio, entro que sia aleujat; o pausa sobre la junctura aleliati, so es coyssa de moto grassa; e aprop sia liada, e layssa aquela sobre le os le dia e la nueyt.	"But if it happens that there is gravity upon the reduction of the joint, and its position is in motion, then you should administer humidification with baths and gentle friction and pressure until it is alleviated; or if the joint is painful at rest, this is a matter of fat movement. Then it should be bandaged and left on the bone day and night."
E aprop osta aquela, e met aquel en banh; e quan suza, lahoras tu fregua la junctura am fricacio temprada, e aprop itera sobre aquela aleliati, so es ronhonal de moto, una veguada, e la segonda, e la .iii.a.,	"And then remove that and place him in bed; and when he gets up, you should rub the joint with gentle friction and again apply it painful at rest, this is a matter of fat movement, one time, and the second time, and the third time."
am intrament de banh, entro que sia linit.	"with intermittent baths until it becomes limber."
E si voles, pausa sobre aquela fenda de vaca humida e scalfada am boder e stren sobre aquel; e fay aquo alcunas veguadas, quar aquela es humida e reduzeys a la sua disposicio.	"And if you wish to do so, place upon that moist and scratched cowhide fold with edge and press it on him; do this several times until it becomes moist and reduces its position."
Capitol .xxviii.	"Chapter XXVIII"
De curacio de dislocacio de malassen, so es de la junctura que es entre·l bras e la ma.	"Regarding the treatment of dislocation of the elbow joint, which is between the arm and hand."
Malassen de la ma alcunas vetz es deslocada, e la reduccio de la dislocacio de lu es leugiera, e·l contrari es de las autras juncturas, mays empero cove que sia velocitat en la reduccio de lu en la hora en la qual es deslocada, denant que le loc sia apostemat o que accida en lu apostema caut.	"Occasionally the hand dislocation occurs, and its reduction is easy; however, it's different for other joints. Yet, speed in reducing it is necessary at the moment of dislocation, before the location becomes inflamed or an inflammation develops."
E la reduccio de la dislocacio de lu es que tu pauses la junctura de la ma del malaute sobre una taula e le ministre extenda la ma de aquel, e le metge pause la sua ma o o la sua palma sobre la iminencia de la junctura, e empellisca aquela entro que retorne al sieu loc.	"The reduction of the dislocation is done by placing the joint of the patient's hand on a table and extending their hand. The doctor then places their hand or palm over the prominence of the joint and presses it until it returns to its proper position."
Mays empero cove que sia considerat si la palma ja es ostada al ventre de la ma, lahoras le malaute pause le dos de la sua ma sobre una taula deves la extencio e la reduccio; e si la dislocacio es precedent deves le dos de la ma, lahoras sia la posicio de la ma de aquel intrinicequement sobre la taula, per so que la ma del metge caja sobre aquela iminencia de la junctura.	"But if the palm is already facing towards the belly of the hand, then during extension and reduction, the patient should place the back of their hand on a table. And if the dislocation is previous to the back of the hand, then the position of the patient's hand should be intrincely on the table, so that the doctor's hand can cover that prominence of the joint."
E donc si retorna tantost, bon es; e sino, lahoras strenh aquela am empastre cedant le apostema e layssa aquel; e no iteres aquo, quar sino, no soferta ni no podes sobre la reduccio de lu pus que passan a lu dias.	"And if it returns quickly, that's good. But if not, then you should strengthen the hand gently and allow the swelling to subside before letting go; and don't repeat this too often, because otherwise you may cause damage and won't be able to achieve reduction after several days have passed."
Mays empero la junctura roman segon la sua tortuositat; e no notz al malaute alcuna causa, sino que la ma es mollificada e no pot strenher alcuna causa; lahoras sapias que les nervis son trincatz o trissatz, e lahoras no es engen en lu sino que sia strenhuda am cauteri prop le cazament de lu e fort leu aquo confereys alcuna causa.	"But if the joint moves according to its tortuosity and there is no apparent cause noticed by the patient except that their hand is weakened and cannot be strengthened, then you should know that nerves are compressed or torn. And then it's not necessary to reduce it at the moment; but rather cauterize around the location of the injury and later confer about some cause."
Donc cum malassem es retornada, lahoras pausa sobre lu empastre le qual havem recomtat, e sia layssat e strenhut per v dias; e aprop sia desliat e sia layssat e la ma de lu sia excercitada.	"So when the dislocation has been reduced, then pause on that splint which we have recommended, and let it be for about 7 days. And afterwards remove the splint, let go and exercise the hand."
Mays si le movement de lu es ostat e accideys en lu alcuna gravitat, lahoras leniys aquela am aygua cauda e am fricacio alcunas veguadas, entro que sia alleujat.	"But if the movement of the hand is still restricted and there is some discomfort, then apply cold water compresses and gentle friction several times until it feels better."
Capitol .xxix.	"Chapter XXIX."
De la curacio de dislocacio dels ditz.	"Regarding the treatment of dislocation of these (joints)."
Alcunas veguadas so dislocatz les ditz a tota partida.	"At times these are displaced in every part."
E quan es dislocat alcun dit de aquels al dos de la palma o al ventre de lu, lahoras sten le dit e impelleys la dislocacio de lu am les tieus pouses, entro que retorne.	"And when one of the aforementioned fingers is dislocated on its dorsal or ventral side, immediately grasp the finger and reduce the dislocation with your hands until it returns."
E aprop sostenta le cap del dit, e suspen aquel deves la part a la qual es dislocat, e layssa aquel per dos dias.	"And then support the head of the finger and suspend that which is above the part where it has been dislocated for two days."
E aprop suspen aquel e exten aquel entro que dreyt sia engualhat en aquel sieu dia.	"And then suspend that [finger] and extend it until it is properly positioned within its day."
E quan sira noyt, lia aquel segon aquela narracio, e no cesses desliar aquel en le dia e exercitar am movement, e lia aquel en la noyt; e fay aquo per alcus dias entro que sia streyt.	"And when it is not yet better, bandage that [finger] following this account, and do not cease to loosen it during the day and exercise with motion, and bind it at night. And do this for several days until it is straight."
E fay semblant am aquo, si es dislocat al ventre de la ma, e lia aquel ad aquela partida e fay am aquo la tieua primiera operacio, entro que sia sanat.	"And do the same if it is dislocated on the ventral side of the hand, and apply that part and perform your first operation until it is healed."
E semblantment fay am aquo quan es dislocat a las autres partidas.	"And similarly do this when other parts are dislocated."
Capitol .xxx.	"Chapter XXX"
De la curacio de dislocacio dels spondils del dos.	"On the treatment of dislocation of the vertebrae of the back."
Quan accideys ad alcun dels spondils del dos o del col dislocacio complida, e so remaugutz motz spondils de lors locs, lahoras en aquela no es curacio, quar la mort se coyta al malaute.	"When it happens that some of the vertebrae of the back or neck are completely dislocated and several vertebrae have been removed from their places, there is usually no cure for this, because death quickly follows upon such an injury."
E senhal de aquo es que la egestio del malaute es fora-eyssida ses voluntat, e no pot retenir aquela; e motas veguadas so mollificatz alcus membres de lu o doas cambas de lu o dos brasses de lu, o un de aquels; o es remaugut un spondil de son loc, quar motas veguadas es remaugut e motas veguadas es fayta la remocio de aquels a quatre partidas.	"And this is indicated by the fact that the evacuation of the disease is involuntary and cannot be retained. And often some members are softened on one side or both sides of the legs or arms, or one of them; or one vertebra has been removed from its place, because many times it is removed and many times the motion of those is made in four directions."
Donc aquela ja es remauguda a las partidas detras e es nompnada gelbozitat.	"Therefore, that already dislocated from the posterior parts is called 'gelbozitat' [ankylosing spondylitis]."
Mays la curacio de lu es que lahoras consideras si la gelbozitat accidey de puerissia, quar lahoras en aquela no es curacio ni de aquela no es sanacio de tot.	"But the treatment of it is that you should then consider whether the ankylosing spondylitis occurred in childhood. For if it did, there is no cure for it nor can it be healed completely."
Mays en aquela que ve per cazement o per percussio o per semblant ad aquels, ja diyssero les Antics las manieras de curacio am sermo prolixs, del qual lo mays retorna am profieyt; mays yeu ja e abreujat de aquel del qual lo pauc escusa del trop de lu, per la mieua propinquitat a la entencio mieua exposicio, am la qual he aquo expausat et format ex instrument divers de aquel am le qual mostrero aquo e espausero aquel.	"But if it happens by chance or by percussion or in similar ways, the Ancients already spoke at length about the methods of treatment for these, from which one gains greater profit; but I have briefly summarized those from which little excuse is made for its brevity due to my proximity to the intention of my explanation, with which this has been explained and formed using various instruments. And I will show it and explain it."
E dic que en gelbosita que accideys de la partida denant en le pietz, no es engen ni sanacio de aquela; e semblantment en aquela que es fayta a dos latz.	"And I say that in ankylosing spondylitis that occurs at the front of the foot there is neither healing nor recovery from it; and similarly in those that occur on both sides."
E de aquelas no es curada sino aquela que accideys en le dos propriament am aquo que yeu recomti.	"And only those are cured which occur properly in the back, as I have mentioned."
E es que·l malaute sia extendut sobre la sua cara sobre pug engual prop de paret, e sia extendut dejos lu esturment molh per so que no sia lidit le pietz de lu.	"And it is that the disease extends over its surface near to the wall and is extended away from it using a moist cloth so that the foot of it is not rubbed."
E aprop un fust dreyt sia pausat, ficat en la terra en la extremitat del pug entorn le cap de lu, e autra fust en aviro les pes de lu en l’autra extremitat del pueg.	"And properly place a straight stick on the ground at one end of the fold around the head of it and another stick at the other end of the fold."
E·l ministre tengua le fust, e no sia fermat en fossa; e autre ministre tengua l’autre segon aquela forma.	"And the minister should hold onto the stick without it being fastened in a socket. And another minister should hold onto the other one according to this form."
E aprop envolopa sobre le cap del malaute e dejos les titillic liamen leon ferm; e exten la extremitat del liamel al fust le qual es deves le cap de lu, e lia aquel en lu; e aprop strenh l’autre liament sobre las ancas de lu les denols de lu, e deves las cambas de lu; e aprop ajusta totz les liamentz e lia aquels en l’autre fust le qual es deves les pes de lu.	"And properly wrap around the head of the disease and tie it with linen strips firmly. And extend one end of the strip to the stick that is in front of its head, and tie it onto it. And properly stretch out the other strip over its hips on both sides of it, and down its thighs. And properly adjust all the strips and tie them onto the other stick that is in front of its feet."
E aprop le ministre cascu extenda le liament a la partida del fust, e no sian remaugutz les dos fustz e les liamentz dels sieus locs en les quals son ficatz, mays empero no so fermatz ayssi cum havem dit.	"And properly each minister should extend the strip to where the stick is placed and they are not removed from their places in which they have been put, but nevertheless they are not fastened as we said."
E le metge pause las suas palmas sobre le spondil am fortaleza entro que retorne, o que pause sobre aquela una taula, e aprop que ajuste sobre la taula les sieus pes entro que retorne.	"And the physician places his palms on the spine with strength so that it returns, or he places one table upon it and properly adjusts himself onto the table so that it returns."
Mays si no retorna per aquesta forma, lahoras pren una taula de la qual la latitut o la longitut sia en aviro de tres brassas, e cava en la paret de la qual havem dit que es prop le malaute un loc en le qual intre la extremitat de la taula.	"But if it does not return with this form, then take a table whose width or length is about three braças and dig into the wall near where the disease is located a hole in which one end of the table will fit."
E aprop pausa la maytat de la taula sobre le spondilh, e·l metge pause les sieus pes sobre l’autre extremitat, e estrenha be entro que le spondil sia coartat e que retorne al sieu loc.	"And properly place the middle of the table onto the spine and the physician places his feet on the other end. And he stretches strongly until the spine is shortened and returns to its proper place."
E si tu voles, obre am torn le qual es revolvut am la ma; e es que tu fiques en terra deves le cap del malaute en le derier del pug dos fustz, la longitut dels quals sia d’un bras, e deves le cap de lu en le derier del pug eyssament dos fustz; e sia la longitut que es entre quascun fust un palm, e ja es fayt en quascun fust trauc en le qual corr torn, e quascun sia mot fermat en terra per so que no sia maugut.	"And if you wish, open the hole that is turned with the hand; and it is that you lie on the ground in front of the head of the disease at the end of the two sticks, each of which is one braça long. And place one stick at the end of each hip, and make sure that there is a palm's length between each stick. And each stick should have a hole through which water can turn, and each should be firmly planted in the ground so that it does not move."
E sia mes un fust redon en le qual es le torn, e sia revolvut en les dos traucs dels dos fustz.	"And put another round stick into this hole, and let it rotate in the two holes of the two sticks."
E en la extremitat de lu es un trauc en le qual es format le fust, la longueza del qual es un palm am aquo que es revolvut; e en les dos autres fustz es semblant de aquel.	"And at one end of it there is a hole in which the stick is formed, whose length is one palm with what is turned. And the other two sticks have the same."
E aprop strenh les liamentz que has streyt en le pietz del malaute en le trau le qual es deves le cap de lu, e les liamentz que has streyts en las coyssas de lu en le torn le qual es deves les pes de lu.	"And properly stretch the strips that have been tightened around the foot of the disease onto the hole that is in front of its head. And stretch the strips that have been tightened around its hips onto the hole that is in front of its feet."
E aprop deves quascun torn e stia un ministre que torssa le torn am la sua ma, e le metge engualhe le spondil segon que havem dit.	"And properly place a minister by each hole who will turn the hole with his hand. And the physician equalizes the spine as we have said."
E aquesta es la forma del torn:	"And this is how the hole should be made:"
E aprop pus que le spondil es retornat, e le loc es engualhat, lahoras cove que pauses empastre exciccatiu am album de huou, e aprop estopa; e aprop pause sobre le empastre astela de taula de la qual la latitut sia de tres ditz o enviro aquels, e la longitut de lu sia quantitat que prengua le loc de la gelbositat, e sobre la partida del spondil sa.	"And now that the spine has returned and the area is covered, it is necessary to place a plaster with album of egg whites and also cotton; then place this plaster on a wooden board whose width is about three fingers or roughly equal, and its length should be as much as the area affected by swelling, and specifically over the site of the spinal cord."
E aprop sia liat am liament le qual havem dit, e uze le malaute de nutriment subtil entro que sia sanat.	"And then apply with firmness the plaster that we have described, using it to draw out the harmful subtle humors until they are expelled and the patient is healed."
E si roman alcuna iminencia en le loc en la fi de la sanacio, lahoras cove que sian aministradas medicinas que moilifico e liniscan am aministracio de la taula per lonc temps, la qual havem recomtada; e ja es aministrada en aquel loc lamina de plom.	"And if there remains some swelling at the end of the treatment, then healing medicines that soften and cleanse should be applied using the table method for an extended period, as we have recommended; and a lead plate has already been applied to that location."
E alcunas veguadas accideys imminencia en le derier dels spondils del dos, e es cujat per aquela dislocacio; e es aquel os le qual ja imineys per que no cove que sia fayta prosompcio a lu am aquesta medicina, quar fort leu fara a tu accidir mort.	"And sometimes swelling occurs at the lower end of the spine in the back, which is caused by that dislocation. It is that bone which has already begun to decay, so there should not be any pressure applied to it with this medicine, for otherwise it could cause death."
Capitol .xxxi.	**Chapter XXXXI.**
De curacio de anca dislocada.	Of the treatment of a dislocated hip.
Sapias que la junctura del ancha e la junctura del muscle no endeve sino dislocacio tant solament, e no accideys ad aquelas aquo que accideys a las autras juncturas de petita remocio e concavitat.	"Know that the joint of the hip and the joint of the muscle do not intend to cause dislocation alone, and it does not happen as those other joints with slight movement and concavity."
E la junctura de la ancha es dislocada segon quatre manieyras, quar es dislocada a las partidas dedintz, o a las partidas defora, o a las partidas denant, o a las partidas detras.	"And the hip joint can be dislocated in four different ways: it can dislocate inwardly, outwardly, anteriorly, or posteriorly."
E majorment es dislocada a las partidas dedintz, e pauc a las partidas denant o a las partidas detras.	"And most often it is dislocated inwardly, and less so anteriorly or posteriorly."
E senhal de la dislocacio de lu a las partidas de dintz es quar, quan tu ajustas la camba del malaute sana am la malaute, es pus longua e·l denolh es pus heminent que de la sana, e·l malaute no pot doblar le sieu pe deves le lenguonar, e es le loc que siec le lengonar apostemat de apostema caut, per so que·l cap de la coyssa ja es pervengut aqui.	"And the sign of dislocation of the hip joint inwardly is that when you press the healthy thigh bone against the unhealthy one, it appears longer and its head more prominent than on the healthy side. The patient cannot bend their leg towards the outside, and if you try to do so, a crackling sound results, which indicates cauterization with heat."
E·l senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio es a las partidas defora, es que les accidentz de lu so contraris ad aquest accident.	"And the sign of dislocation occurring outwardly is that its symptoms are opposite to those of this dislocation."
E senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio a las partidas denant es quar expan la camba sieua segon compliment, mays empero no dobla aquela ses dolor que es en le denol, e si se perforsa ad anar e no pot sobre aquo a las partidas denant; e la urina de lu es retenguda e l’engonar de lu es apostemat, e deves la ambulacio de lu sobre le talo.	"And the sign of dislocation occurring anteriorly is that the thigh bone extends fully but does not bend without pain in the groin. The patient cannot bring the leg forward and the urine becomes retained while defecation is accompanied by noise. The patient walks with a limp on the heel."
E senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio a las partidas detras es que no expande le denol, ni no puesca doblar aquel denant que doble le engonar, e la camba de lu es pus breva que l’autra, e l’engonar es mollificat, e·l cap de la coyssa es deves aquel loc.	"And the sign of dislocation occurring posteriorly is that the hip joint does not extend and cannot bend forward. The thigh bone appears shorter than the other side, the buttock becomes weakened, and this is where the problem lies."
Mays reduccio de las specias de aquesta dislocacio es que tu consideras, lahoras, si la dislocacio es vetusta et antiqua, que ja es anticada am le havent aquela aprop tu aministras reduccio de lu e roman segon la sua disposicio, lahoras no es en aquela curacio de tot; e adonc no cove que en aquela sia fayta prosompcio.	"But the reduction of this dislocation is that you should consider, first and foremost, whether the dislocation is chronic and ancient. If it has already solidified in its current position, then you should administer reduction according to its arrangement and leave it be, as this will not involve complete healing. In such cases, no traction is necessary."
Mays en aquel del qual la dislocacio es recent, e es una de las quatre specias de dislocacio, lahoras te coyta ad aquo que volvas la junctura e extendas aquela a las partidas dedintz e a las partidas defora, e mau aquela a la dextra e sinistra, quar fort leu retorna e no indigeys de autra cura.	"But in the case of recent dislocation, which is one of the four kinds of dislocation, you should strive to return the joint to its original position by extending it inwardly and outwardly, as well as leftward and rightward. For with gentle pressure it returns into place and requires no further treatment."
Mays, si no retorna en aquesta manieyra, lahoras cove que tu prepares ministre fort e extendas la camba de lu de la partida pus dejos, o am las suas mas, o am liament lo qual es liat sobre la camba desus le denol; e autre ministre extenda la ma de aquel desus enayssi que meta las suas mas dejos les titillics de lu; e aprop strenha am liament leon sobre la razit de la coyssa, e tengua autre ministre ters le extremitat del liament.	"But if it does not return in this manner, then you must prepare a strong traction and extend the thigh bone as far as possible from the hip joint, either with weights or with a pulley attached above the groin. Another assistant should extend the patient's arm above their head so that their hands are positioned behind their shoulders. Then, using a bandage tied around the foot, you should pull sharply upward while another assistant holds the end of the bandage."
E sia extencio de lu o de la partida dedintz a l’angonar a la partida de la furcula, o de la partida detras a la partida del dos.	"And such traction should be extended either from the inner thigh to the angle of the hip bone or from the outer thigh to the buttock."
E sia la extencio de totz aquels en una veguada entro que·l malaute sia elevat am le sieu cos de terra e que romangua pendent.	"And all of this traction should be done at once, with the patient lying on their back and elevated slightly off the ground, so that they remain suspended."
E aquesta specia de extencio es specia cominal a totas quatre.	"This method of traction is common to all four types (of dislocation)."
E donc si la dislocacio retorna am aquo que havem dit, sira bo; e sino, lahoras es necessari a tota specia aquo que dire de la propria curacio.	"And therefore, if the dislocation returns with what we have said, it is well. But if not, then each type of dislocation requires its own specific treatment."
En la reduccio de lu propria, quan es dislocada, e la dislocacio es a las partidas dedintz, cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre le sieu latz sa; e aprop pausa les liamentz sobre la razit de la coyssa en aquel loc le qual entre le cap de la coyssa e·l loc que es dejos le langonar; e aprop exten le liament en sus de la part del angonar a la pus auta partida de la furcula.	"In the specific reduction of this dislocation, when it occurs at the inner side of the hip joint, the patient should be placed in a supine position on their side. Then, wrap bandages around the root of the thighbone where it meets the head of the femur and extend them upward from the angle of the hip bone to the uppermost point of the greater trochanter."
E aprop autre ministre fort prengua les brasses de lu, e amerme le loc gros de la coyssa malaute e extenda a las partidas deforo per extencio vehement, quar aquela retorna en le sieu loc.	"And another assistant should firmly grasp the legs of the patient and press against the large end of the thighbone, extending it forcefully outwardly until it returns to its proper place."
E aquesta specia es de pus leugiera curacio am la qual aquest membre es reduzit que las autres specias.	"This type has a lighter and easier treatment than the others by which this limb is reduced."
Mays si es excusat sobre tu e no obezeys al entrament am aquesta specia de curacio de tot, lahoras cove que sian liatz les dos pes del malaute ensemps am liament fort, leugier, sobre amdos les talos e amdos les denols.	"But if the limb does not yield to this type of reduction and remains dislocated, then both legs should be suspended simultaneously using strong but light traction, with bandages around both ankles and both groins."
E sia la longitut de quascun de son par la quantitat de quatre ditz, e sia la camba malaute extenduda mays que l’autre per quantitat de dos ditz.	"And the length of each bandage should be about four digits [approximately 18 cm], and the dislocated thigh bone should be extended two digits more than the other."
E aprop le malaute sia suspendut sobre le cap del fust, e que sia en la mayso; e sia la longitut de lu de la terra la quantitat de dos brasses.	"And the patient should be suspended from the top of a post and held there while lying on their back. The distance between the ground and the foot of the dislocated limb should be about two spans [approximately 45 cm]."
E aprop comanda a un jove fort que minuesca le cap de la coyssa, e sia suspendut am le malaute autre jove, e l’autre jove minuent la coysa am fortaleza empellesca, quar la junctura retorna al sieu loc am velocitat.	"And then order a strong young man to push down on the head of the thighbone, while another young man holds onto him. The latter should press down forcefully on the limb, causing the joint to return to its proper place with speed."
Mays en la reducio propria, quan es dislocacio a la partida defora, cove que·l malaute jaga sobre pug segon que havem recomtat en le havent gelbozitat; e sia strenhut le liament sobre la camba malauta propriament e sobre le pietz de lu.	"But in the specific reduction of this dislocation, when it occurs at the outer side of the hip joint, the patient should lie on their stomach as previously recommended. Then wrap bandages firmly around the dislocated thighbone and its foot."
E aprop dos fustz sian pausatz, la un als pes de lu, e l’autre al cap; e aprop sian pausatz fustz ajustatz al mieg del pueg ficat sobre·l qual draps humitz sian envolopatz, per so que·l malaute no sia dampnajat per que·l fust sia entre las coyssas de lu, per que deves la extencio a las partidas dejos no sia atirat.	"And then two posts should be placed, one at the foot of the limb and the other at its head. Another post should be placed in the middle of the bed, with wet cloths wrapped around it to prevent injury from the post being pressed between the thighs during traction toward the outer side."
E aprop quascun ministre extenda a la sua part, e·l metge am la sua ma enguala la reduccio segon l’art.	"And then each assistant should extend their part, and the physician should guide the reduction according to the art."
Donc, si obezeys a revercio, sira bo grandament; e sino, pausa sobre aquela diligentment e ayssi quo havem dit en gelbozitat per aquela engualment.	"Therefore, if it returns correctly, that is very good. But if not, pause carefully over it and proceed as we have said in gentleness for its reduction."
Mays cove que·l malaute jagua sobre les sieus latz sa quetament.	"But the patient should lie quietly on their side."
E quan la dislocacio es a las partidas denant, lahoras cove que la camba sia extenduda leugierament, e es segon aquesta meteyssa narracio sobre pueg; e le metge pause la palma de la sua ma dreyta sobre·l langonar malaute, e aprop coarte aquel am l’autra ma, e am aquela coartacio pausa aquel extendut a las partidas dejos a la partida del denol.	"But when the dislocation is at the front of the hip joint, then the dislocated thighbone should be gently extended. According to this method, the physician places the palm of their right hand on the hip bone and presses down with their left hand while extending the leg outward toward the buttock."
E si la dislocacio es a las partidas detras, lahoras no cove que·l malaute sia extendut a las partidas dejos, e es elevat sobre la terra; habantz cove que sia pausat sobre causa dura, ayssi cum cove le eyssament si l’ancha de lu es dislocada a las partidas defora, segon aquo que havem dit del jasement de lu sobre dos anchas; e es sobre la sua cara e les liamentz sian extendutz, segon que havem dit, no ha guayre.	"But when the dislocation is at the back of the hip joint, then the limb should not be extended toward the outer side and it should be elevated off the ground. It should be placed on a hard surface, like when setting the arm in place for a dislocated shoulder, as we have previously mentioned about reducing that dislocation with two arms; this is done while lying face down, with bandages extended according to what we have said, which will cause little harm."
E cove que sia aministrada compressio am taula sobre le loc al qual yeys la junctura.	"And compression should be administered with a board placed over the area where the joint is dislocated."
Donc cum la reducio es complida segon que cove — e·l senhal de la reduccio de lu no es amaguat a tu, e es que tu extendas del malaute doas cambas, e quan tu vezes aquelas enguals e le malaute extrenh la sieua camba e expandeys aquela ses excusacio, lahoras sapias que·l membre segon que cove es retornat — e lahoras tu ajusta doas coyssas e pausa empastre e extrenh am benda ayssi que la ancha no sia mauguda en alcuna de las partidas; e adheresca le malaute a repaus per tres dias o per quatre.	"So when the reduction is complete, as it should be – and the sign of successful reduction is not hidden from you, which is that you extend both thighs of the patient, and when you move those joints and the patient extends their leg but does not complain of pain, then you know that the limb has returned to its proper place – then apply two splints and press firmly with bandages so that the hip joint is not dislocated on any side; keep the patient at rest for three or four days."
E aprop deslia le liament e l’empastre, e compara la una camba am l’autra.	"And then remove the bandages and splints, and compare one thigh with the other."
Lahoras, si vezas aquelas enguals en vustament, lahoras sapias que la dislocacio ja es fermada, e adonc layssa le malaute anar.	"Now, if you move those joints firmly, then you will know that the dislocation is already fixed, and at that point allow the patient to go."
E si vezas alcuna causa de mollificacio, lahoras tu retorna e emplastra aquel, e extrenh aquel segon la tua primiera strectura, e layssa aquel en tres dias.	"But if you notice any signs of instability, then return and apply splints again, extend the limb according to your initial traction method, and keep it at rest for three days."
E aprop deslia aquel, e fay aquel tardar en ambulacio sobre quascu per alcus dias, entro que sia confortat.	"And next, untie that one, and let them rest in bed for several days until they are strengthened."
Capitol .xxxii.	"Chapter XXXII."
De curacio de dislocacio del denolh.	"About the treatment of dislocation of the jaw."
Le denolh es dislocat segon tres manieyras, quar es dislocat a las partidas defora, e a las partidas dedintz, e a las partidas dejos mays a las partidas detras; e a las partidas denant no es dislocat.	"The jaw can become dislocated in three ways: it is dislocated outward at the front part, inward at the back part, and outward more than inward. It does not get dislocated forward."
E le senhal de dislocacio de lu es que comandes al malaute que aplique la sua camba am la coyssa; lahoras sapias que·l denol es dislocat.	"And the sign of jaw dislocation is that when you tell the patient to open their mouth, they cannot do so."
E la restauracio de totas las manieyras de lu es que fassas cezer le malaute dreyt, enayssi que ja extenda la sieua camba, si pot sobre aquo; adherir le tieu dos a la cara de lu, e pausa le pe de lu entre les tieus pes; e aprop fay adherir le denol de lu am las tuas palmas, e rete aquelas entre les tieus ditz sobre le denolh de lu am fortaleza, e autre ministre extenda le sieu pe entro que·l denol retorne a son loc.	"And the treatment for all types of dislocation is as follows: first, make the patient lie on their right side, so that they can open their mouth if possible. Then, press your left hand against the patient's face and place your foot between your hands. Next, bring your palms together over the patient's jawbone and push firmly until you feel it return to its proper position. Another assistant should hold the patient's foot during this process."
E senhal de reddicio de lu es que la sua camba adharesca am la coyssa am levitat no-laboroza.	"The sign of successful reduction is that the patient can open their mouth easily and effortlessly."
E aprop emplastra aquel e fay adhirir la camba am la coyssa, e aprop lia aquelas emsemps am una benda per tres dias o per quatre, e aprop deslia aquelas.	"And then apply a bandage to the jaw and hold it in place with a splint. Then fasten this with a bandage for three or four days, after which you can remove the bandage."
E no uze le malaute de ambulacio per alcus dias, entro que sia sanat e cofortat.	"And do not allow the patient to leave their bed for some days until they are healed and comfortable."
Mays si la reduccio de lu a tu es excusada, lahoras aministra fort extencio am liamentz dels quals en la curacio de la hancha precedit narracio.	"But if the dislocation cannot be reduced, then you should apply traction with bandages as described in the treatment of hip dislocation."
Capitol .xxxiii.	Chapter XXXIII
De la curacio de la dislocacio del talo.	On the treatment of ankle dislocation
Le talo alcunas veguadas es remaugut per petita remocio, e alcunas veguadas es dislocat segon compliment, e la dislocacio de lu es fayta o a las partidas dedintz o a las partidas deforo.	The talus sometimes gets dislocated by a slight injury and sometimes by a complete dislocation. The dislocation may occur on the medial or lateral side.
E le senhal de la dislocacio de lu es que vezes le talo imflat procedent a la partida a la qual es dislocat.	And the sign of talar dislocation is that the ankle swells on the side towards which it has dislocated.
Mays la curacio de la remocio de lu es de leugiera reddicio, e es que sia extendut am facilitat am las mas e sia engualhat entro que retorne.	But the treatment for talar dislocation is easy reduction: simply extend the foot with ease and gently dorsiflex it until it returns to its normal position.
Mays en la curacio de lu quan es dislocat segon compliment, cove que fasses cezer le malaute dreyt, e tengua aquel un ministre fort e valent de la partida detras del dos de aquel en le mieg loc de lu.	But when the talus is completely dislocated, you must make the patient lie on their right side and have a strong and able assistant press firmly on the posterior part of the ankle from behind.
E aprop te tu am la tieua ma dreyta le pe de la pus sobirana part, e am la tua ma sinistra de la part pus dejos del pe en le loc de la cavilha.	Then place your right hand above the prominence and your left hand below it on the side of the heel.
E aprop atira le pe a tu am la tua ma dreyta, e aprop am la sinistra per dos veguadas, e aprop exten am la sinistra; e empelleys le pietz del pe am la dreyta deves la camba ses trebalh.	Then pull the foot towards you with your right hand and twice with your left hand, then extend it with your left hand. Then push the head of the talus back into place using your right thumb.
E fay aquo doas veguadas segon que havem comtat.	Do this twice as described above.
E aprop empelleys le pietz del pe a la camba la tersa veguada, e tu es a la cavilha.	Then push the head of the talus back into place on the third attempt and you will have reduced it to the ankle joint.
Donc si retorna en una veguada o en dos segon aquesta manieyra, e si vezes le pe engualhat, es bo; e sino, lahoras sobre lu itera la operacio, quar aquel retorna.	Therefore if it returns on the first or second attempt using this method, that is good. But if sometimes the foot remains inverted, then repeat the operation until it returns.
Mays si a tu es prohibida la reduccio de lu am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras fay jaser le malaute sobre le sieu dos sobre terra, e estrenh un paysel mot en terra fermat, e que caja entre las coyssas de lu, e tu ja has envolopat sobre lu drap per so que no ledesca le malaute.	But if you are unable to reduce the talus using the method described above, then have the patient lie on their back on the ground and place a stone under the heel bone. Then wrap a cloth around it so that the patient does not slip away from you.
E aprop le ministre de lu tengua las suas coyssas, e aprop autre ministre extenda le pe am las suas mas o am liament que lie sobre le col del pe; e aprop extenda aquel quascun ministre contre extencio del sieu par, e le payssel sia extant entre las coyssas del malaute retinent aquel, per so que·l cos de lu no sia atirat a las partidas dejos deves la sua extencio.	Then the assistant holds their hands on the ankle bones and another assistant extends the foot with his hands or using bandages. Then extend each assistant's hand against extension of his part to ensure that the talus bone is not pulled towards the outside during extension.
E aprop le metge enguala la dislocacio am las sieuas mas, e autre ministre tengua la coyssa sana a las partidas dejos, quar la dislocacio retorna am la facilitat.	Then the physician gently reduces the dislocation using his hands and another assistant holds the healthy ankle bone on the medial side as the reduction occurs easily.
E donc cum retorna la dislocacio e es declarada a tu la sanetat de la reduccio de lu, lahoras pausa emplastre e extrenh aquela am liamentz fortment, e ligua le pe am liament a la camba.	Then once the dislocation has been reduced and you have confirmed its reduction, apply a plaster cast and wrap it tightly. Then bind the foot with bandages to the calf to maintain its position.
E cove que temes o te guardes dels nervis les quals so detras sobre le talo, per que le liament sobre aquel no sia vehement e leda aquel fortment.	You must be careful and protect the nerves that lie behind the talus so that the bandages do not become too tight and cause injury to those nerves.
E aprop layssa aquel per dos dias o per tres; e si le liament es mollificat, extrenh aquel.	Then leave the patient for two or three days. If the bandages need tightening, then tighten them again.
E aprop deslia aquel en le ters dia o en le quart, e prohibeys le malaute de anament per xl dias.	Then remove the plaster cast on the third or fourth day and prohibit walking for forty days.
Mays si es forsat de anar denant aquel spazi, no es fayta segurtat que la dislocacio no sia sobre lu dissolvuda e corrumpuda, e aprop aquo que no recipia curacio.	But if it is necessary to walk during this period, there is a risk that the dislocation may recur and become worse without proper treatment.
E si accideys a lu apostema caut, lahoras cove que tu aministre en la cedacio de lu aquo en lo qual precedic la nostra narracio, en autre loc de curacio e de embrocacio, entro que sia remauguda.	But if an abscess forms at the dislocation site, then you should treat it according to the methods described earlier in this book for treatment and poultices until it has healed.
Capitol .xxxiiii.	Chapter XXXIV.
De curacio de dislocacio dels ditz dels pes.	Of the treatment of dislocations of the toes.
Cove que aquel qu’es dislocat sia engualhat am pauca extencio ses trebal; e aquo que no es dificil, abantz es leugier.	The dislocation should be gently reduced with little extension without force. It is easy to do and not difficult.
Mays si la dislocacio es en alcus nozes del dos del pe, lahoras cove que fassas cezer le malaute le sieu pe sobre loc engual de la terra o sobre taula, e sia estant ayssi cum si anava.	"If the dislocation is in certain joints of the toes, then you should place the patient's foot on an equal level with the ground or on a table, and they should remain thus as if they were walking."
E aprop tu sta de pes, e pausa le tieu pe sobre aquo que imineys de las juncturas, e aprop calca aquel am le tieu pe am vertut entro que retorne, e que vejas aquel ja engualhat e no aparesca en le loc eminencia.	"Then stand on the foot, place your hand on top of what is protruding from the joints, and gently press that foot with force until it returns to its original position, ensuring that the joint is repositioned correctly without appearing prominent."
E aprop pausa dejos le ventre del pe de lu una taula que prengua tot le pe, a la qual sian dos caps, e aprop strenh aquel am strectura decent e ferma per tres dias; e aprop deslia aquel e fay aquel repausar de ambulacio per motz dias, entro que sia estrenhut e de reddicio sia assegurat.	"Then place the patient's foot on a table that supports the entire leg, with two pillars beneath it. Then stretch the leg gently and firmly for three days; afterwards, allow the patient to rest from walking for several more days until they have recovered and their condition has improved."
Capitol .xxxv.	Chapter XXXV
De las specias de dislocacio que sian faytas am plagua o am fractura o am quascuna ensemps.	"On the different types of dislocation that occur with fracture or with one another simultaneously."
Quan accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, e tu te perforssas en la curacio de aquela e en la restauracio de lu, motas veguadas succezeys la mort.	"If any of these causes occur and you endeavor to treat it and restore the limb, death may often result."
E per aquo no cove que sobre la curacio de lu presuma, sino aquel que es savi en l’art, de lonc uzatge, misericordios e pietados, tardiu, no-ardit ni presomptuos; e que use en le comensament de medicinas que cedan apostemas cautz tant solament, e leyssa le malaute al divinal jutgament, sino ad aquel al qual speras salut de perdicio, am de la malautia alleviacio, e en la qual appareys alcuna speransa.	"But therefore one should not presume to undertake its treatment unless it is someone who is skilled in the art, experienced, merciful and compassionate, slow, cautious, not hasty or presumptuous; and who initially uses medications that only cauterize wounds, leaving the condition to divine judgment, but also trusting in that which promises salvation from destruction, with alleviation of the illness, and showing some sign of hope."
E adonc esforsa te tantost far de lu la reduccio en le comensament de la causa, denant que endevengua apostema caut.	"And therefore, as soon as possible, make every effort to reduce it at the beginning of the cause, before an abscess forms."
E adonc si le membre retorna segon que volem, lahoras aministra regiment le qual ceda apostema caut e cura la plagua am aquo que conveneys a lu dels enguentz desiccatius.	"And if the limb returns as desired, then immediately administer regimen that will prevent the formation of an abscess and treat the inflammation with whatever is suitable for it from drying agents."
E si dislocacio es am fractura e accideys en le os satagias separadas, lahoras tu perforsa le stement de lor, e fay en aquo so que havem dit en las malautias simplas de aquo que es precedit en les locz de aquels.	"If dislocation occurs with fracture and the bones are separated, then you should proceed as stated for simple cases of that which has been previously discussed regarding those locations."
E guarda e esquiva segon la tua vertut aquel del intrament en las vias de temor segon que a tu es precedida la mia predicacio; quar aquo es milhor a tu deves le tieu Creator, e mays permanent a la tua gloria, e mays saludos al tieu cos verays aquels en le tieu temps.	"And guard and avoid, according to your ability, entering into the paths of fear as much as my advice has preceded. For this is better for you towards your Creator, more lasting for your glory, and more beneficial for your true body in your time."
Ayssi fineysso las paraulas de Albucasim perfieytament de las quals Dieus ne sia benezeyt.	"So ends the words of Albucasis, may God bless them."
Amen.	"Amen."
