Ayssi comensan las paraulas de Albucasim .	Thus begin the words of Al-Bukharī
O, filhs, pus yeu he a vos complit aquest libre, le qual es le derier de la sciencia de medicina, per le compliment de lu so consequit la fi en lu, e per las exposicios de lu, e per las declaracios de lu, es a mi vist que yeu complesca aquel a vos am aquest tractat, le qual es partida de la operacio am ma, so es cyrurgia.	O children, since I have fulfilled this book for you, which is the last of the science of medicine, and by its completion its end has been reached, and by its chapters and its explanations it seems to me that I should supplement it with this treatise, which deals with manual operations, i.e. surgery.
Quar la operacio am ma es prostrada en nostre regio e en nostre temps de tot privada, entro que fort leu peric la sciencia de lu, e le vistigi de lu es ostat; e no romasero de lu sino alcunas petitas descripcios en les libres dels Antics, les quals mudero las mas e endevenc ad aquels error e heyssitacio entro que son clausas las entencios de lu e es elonguada la forsa de lu e l’art.	For the art of manual operation is prostrate in our region and time, almost entirely neglected, so that its science has perished, and its traces are hidden; and nothing remains of it but a few brief descriptions in the books of the Ancients, which have been altered by their owners, leading to errors and misinterpretations such that the meanings of these descriptions are obscured and the force and art of this manual operation are prolonged.
E es vist a mi que yeu vivifique aquela am ordenacio de aquest tractat en aquela segon la via de exposicio e de declaracio e de abreviacio; e per que vengua am las formas dels ferramentz de cautheri e dels autres instrumentz de la obra cum sia per addicio de la declaracio, e per preparacio de lu, la qual causa es necessaria.	And it seems to me that I should revive this with the arrangement of this treatise according to the method of exposition, explanation, and abbreviation; and let it come with the forms of cautery tools and other instruments of the work, as well as their addition in the explanation, and their preparation, which is necessary for this cause.
Mays la causa per la qual no es atrobat bo artifex am la sieua ma en aquest nostre temps, es quar la art de medicina es longua, e que cove le sieu actor denant aquo esser excercitat en la sciencia de anotomia la qual recontec Gualia entro que sapia les juvament dels membres e las formas de aquels, e la conjunctio e la separacio de lor; e haia la conoyssensa dels osses, dels nervis e dels lacertz, e·l nombre de aquels, e la egrecio de lor; e de las venas pulsatils e de las quietas, e dels locs del eyssiment de lor.	But the cause why there is not found a good artisan of manual operation in this our time is that the art of medicine is long, and its practitioner must first be exercised in the science of anatomy, which Galen understood to mean knowing the joints of the members and their shapes, as well as their conjunctions and separations; and having knowledge of the bones, nerves, and tendons - their numbers and arrangements; and of the pulsating veins and quiet ones, and the places where they emit.
E per aquo ditz Ypocras que am u nom es mot, mays en l’obra petit, e majorment en la art de la ma.	And thus says Hippocrates with his own name that it is not a little thing in work, but especially in the art of manual operation.
Mays nos ja avem dit de aquel en l’introit de aquest libre; quar qui no es scient aquo que li avem dit de anotomia, no es evacuat que no caia en error per la qual siran mortz les homes, ayssi cum yeu he vist trops de aquels, quar alscus son formatz en esta sciencia e gettan se de aquela ses sciencia e ses experiment.	But we have already said in the introduction of this book that whoever is not knowledgeable about what we have said regarding anatomy will certainly fall into error, which has caused many deaths among men, as I have seen many times; for some are formed in this science and yet depart from it without knowledge or experience.
Quar yeu vi un metge folh e enperit aver incidit un apostema escrophilos en le colh de una femna, e incidic alcunas arterias del colh per que fluic gran sanc entro que la femna cazec morta entre las mas de lu.	For I saw a foolish and inexperienced doctor incision an escrophulous abscess in the neck of a woman, and cut some arteries of the neck so that much blood flowed out, causing the woman to die suddenly.
E vi un autre metge que pres que el traguera una peyra d’un home le qual avia procesit en sa etat, e la peyra era gran, e venguet a lu e trayssec aquela peyra am un tros de la vesiqua, per que aquel home al tertz dia es mort.	And I saw another doctor who took it upon himself to remove a stone from a man who had reached that state, and the stone was large, but he came and removed that stone with a piece of bladder, so that the man died on the third day.
E yeu ja apelat fuy a estrayre aquela, e vi que per la grandesa de la peyra e per la disposicio del malaute conogui subre lu que morira.	And I had already predicted that he would die, and saw that because of the size of the stone and the disposition of his illness.
E vi un autre metge le qual prenia stipendic de un duc de nostra terra per cyrurgia, e endeven a un crastrat negre le qual era deves lu fractura en la coyssa de lu; e perparec le metge am la sua ignorancia, estrayssec la fractura, sobre la plagua, am pulvinas e astelas am forta strectura, e no layssec a la plagua espiracio.	And I saw another doctor who was paid twelve ducats from our land to perform surgery, and he undertook the case of a blacksmith who had fractured his thighbone; but because of his ignorance, the doctor prepared the fracture with splints and wedges with great force, without leaving room for expansion.
E aprop le desliet segons los sieus desiriers, e aprop le relieg, e aprop le leyssec per alcus jorns e comandec que nos deslies le liament; e estec ayssi entro que la coyssa e·l pe foro apostematz, e pervenguet a perdicio.	And he set the bone according to his desires, and set it in traction, and left it like that for some days, commanding that they loosen the bandages; but it was done in such a way that the thighbone became inflamed with pus, leading to its ruin.
E yeu fuy apelat a lu, e aparelhegui a desliar le liament, e conseguida es tranquilitat e enayssi amermet de sas dolors.	And I was called to him and prepared to loosen the bandages, but there was no calm or relief from his pains.
Mays empero ja corrupcio era confermada en le membre, per que no pogui refrenar aquela, e no cessec perambular la corrupcio en le membre entro que·l malaute peric.	But the corruption was already established in the member, so that I could not stop it, and the corruption continued to spread throughout the limb until the patient perished.
E vi un autre metge le qual perforec un apostema cancros, e fo ulcerat aprop alscus dias, entro que foc magnificada la malicia de lu am lo senhor de lu.	And I saw another doctor who pierced a cancerous abscess, and it became ulcerated within a few days, causing the evil to spread throughout the man's body.
La qual causa es quar le cranc caut es pur de humor melencolic, lahoras no cove que pervengua a lu am ferr de tot, sino que sia an membre le qual suffertes que de tot fos hostat.	This is because the cancerous ulcer is full of black bile, so it should not be treated with fire alone, but rather with something that can counterbalance it in the affected member.
E per aquo, filhs, necessari es a vos que la operacio am ma sia devisada en dos devesios: so es en operacio a lu qual es associada salut, e en obra am la qual es perilh en las majors disposicios.	And therefore, my children, it is necessary for you that manual operation be divided into two parts: one for operations that are associated with health, and another for those where danger lurks in the most severe dispositions.
E yeu ja he exsitat aquo en tot loc de aquest libre en le qual venc opperacio en la qual es error e temor; per que necessari es a vos que guardetz aquo e layssetz aquel, per que les folhs no atrobo via a parlar e a vos desonestar.	And I have already mentioned this throughout the entire book wherever an operation involving error and fear is discussed, so that you should guard against it and leave it alone, so that foolish men do not find an opportunity to speak and dishonor you.
E donc prenetz las vostras armas am sollicitut e am proteccio de Dieu , e les vostres malautes am falicitat e am fermetat.	Therefore, take up your arms with diligence and protection from God, and treat your illnesses with happiness and firmness.
E usatz de la milhor via per la gracia de Dieu perdusent a salut e a lausabla successio, e laysatz las malautias terriblas de difficil sanacio, e ostatz las vostras armas de aquo que vos fa temer, per so que ysitatio en vostra fe e en le vostre nom no vos evasisca: quar mays es remanent a la vostra gloria, e pus aut en le mon e en derier a las vostras sanctitatz.	And use the best way to achieve health and success with the grace of God; leave behind difficult illnesses that are hard to cure; show your arms against what makes you afraid, so that your faith and your name may not waver. For it is more pleasing to remain in glory, and thus it will be later on earth and in heaven for your sanctity.
Gualia ja diyssec en alcunas sieuas monicios:	For as I have said in some of my books:
“No mediquetz malautia mala, per so que mals metges no siatz nompnatz”.	“Do not treat serious illnesses unless you are skilled doctors.”
E yeu ja he devesit aquest libre segontz tres capitols.	And I have already divided this book into three chapters.
Comensa la divisio del libre, e primier de la primieyra partida.	Here begins the division of the book, and first the first part.
Le primier capitol ordenat del cap entro·s pes, en las formas dels instrumentz e en les ferrementz dels cauteris, e de aquo que necessari es en la opperacio.	Chapter One is ordered here concerning the weights of the instruments, their forms and the irons for cauterization, and what is necessary in surgery.
La divisio de la segonda partida.	The division of the second part.
Le segon capitol, de siccio e perforacio, e de ventosas, e de plaguas, e de extractio de sagetas e de semblantz ad aquelas, tot capitolat e ordenat de las formas dels instrumentz.	Chapter Two on dry and wet cupping, perforation, and extraction of arrows and similar instruments, all ordered with their forms.
Divisio de la tersa partida.	Division of the third part.
Le tertz capitol, de restauracio e de dislocacio, e de curacio de torcio e de semblantz ad aquels; capitol ordenat del cap entro·s pes, e de las formas dels instrumentz.	Chapter Three on reduction and dislocation, and treatment of torticollis and similar conditions; ordered with weights and forms of instruments.
De cauteri am foc e am medicina aguda e rememoracio de la opperacio.	On cautery with fire and sharp medicine, and a reminder of the operation.
Am aquel comensa le tractat de tot le libre.	With that begins the treatise of the entire book.
Cove que yeu digua la qualitat dels juvamentz de aquel cauteri e dels noccumentz de lu, e en qual compleccio sia prohibit cauteri.	It is necessary that I speak about the qualities of those who perform cautery and its instruments, and in what complexion it is prohibited to perform cautery.
Donc dic que·l sermo de la qualitat del juvament de cauteri e del noccument de lu es sermo lonc e prolixs, e subtil per sciensa, e secret amaguat; e ja de lu a parlat gran multitut de savis, e de lu se son desacordatz, et a mi abasta un petit dels sermons de lor, temen perlonguacio.	Therefore I say that the discourse on the qualities of the surgeon performing cautery and its instruments is long and complex, subtle by science, and secret. Many wise men have already spoken about it, and they disagree among themselves; but for me, a brief mention will suffice to avoid lengthiness.
E donc dic que cauteri comfereys a tota compleccio universalment la qual es am materia o ses materia, exceptat dos compleccios, las quals son compleccios caudas ses materia .	And therefore I say that cautery is beneficial for all complexions universally, both with matter and without matter, except for two complexions which are dry without matter.
En la compleccio cauda e secca am materia se desecordero; quar alcus dyssero que cauteri es juvatiu ad aquela, e les autres dyssero le contrari de aquel, que cauteri no es convenient en malautia la qual es per qualiditat e per siccitat, quar natura del foc es qualiditat e siccitat, e enconvenient es que malautia cauda e secca am aquo que es caut e sec sia sanada.	In the dry and hot complexion with matter, opinions are divided. Some say that cautery is beneficial for it, while others say the opposite, that cautery is not suitable for illnesses caused by heat and dryness, since fire has the qualities of heat and dryness, and it would not be appropriate to treat a dry and hot illness with something that is also hot and dry.
E diysec aquel que ditz le contrari de aquel, que per cauteri es fayt juvament en tota malautia cauda e secca que ve en les cors dels homes, quar quan tu comparas le cors de home e las humiditatz de lu a la compleccio del foc, atrobas le cors de home freg.	"And he says that which is contrary to that, that by cautery it is done rightly in all dry and hot illnesses that come into the bodies of men, because when you compare the body of man and its humidity to the composition of fire, you find the body of man cold."
E yeu dic per le sermo de aquel, que esperiment aquo ja a mi alscunas vetz a descubert.	"And I say according to the speech of that one, that I have experienced this many times in practice."
Mays empero no cove que vengua sobre aquo aquel que ja es exproat e excersitat en le capitol de cauteri per derier exercici, e a conogut la diversitat de la compleccio dels homes e la disposicio de las malautias en lor meteyssas, e las causas de aquelas, e·ls accidentz de lor, e l’espasi del temps de aquelas.	"But it is not necessary that he should come upon this who has already been examined and practiced in the chapter of cautery by recent exercise, and knows the diversity of the composition of men and the condition of illnesses in their members, and their causes, accidents, and duration."
Mays en las autras compleccios, no es sobre vos temor, e majorment en las malautias fregas e humidas, quar ja totz les metges se son acordatz sobre aquels, e no so desecordatz en le juvament am cauteri en aquelas.	"But in other compositions there is less fear of you, and especially in hot and humid illnesses, because all doctors agree on these and are not disagreed about the judgment with cautery in those."
E sapiatz, filhs, que del secret de curacio per cauteri am foc e de la bontat de lu, so sobre cauteri am medicina comburent, es quar le foc es simple, la accio del qual no perven sino al membre le qual es cauterizat e no notz al autre membre am lu ajustat sino am petit nocument.	"And know, my son, that concerning the secret of curing by cautery with fire and its goodness, it is about cautery in burning medicine, because fire is simple, whose action only reaches the member that is cauterized, and does not harm the other member joined to it except with little damage."
Mays la accio de medicina comburent perven ad aquel en les membres le qual de lu alunhat, e fort leu fa venir en le membre malautia de dificil sanacio e fort leu ausit.	"But the action of burning medicine reaches those members which are close to it, and often it brings illness to the member with difficult healing, and often it departs."
Mays le foc, per la sua sublimitat e de la sua substancia bontat, no fa aquo sino que superfluisca E ja es a nos conogut per experiment e per longitut de servitut de studi am l’art sobre le veritat de las causas; e per aquo yeu so excusat de la longitut del sermo E si no fos que no es legut al mieu libre en aquest pausero a vos secret amaguat am le foc, e la qualitat de la operacio de lu en les cors e de la sieua expulcio per la qual expellis las malautias, am sermo philosophic demostratiu, le qual siria acuit en las vostras pessas.	"But fire, because of its sublimity and goodness of substance, does not do this except to superfluate. And it is already known to us through experience and the length of service in study with the art about the truth of causes; and for that reason I am excused from the length of the sermon. And if it were not that my book is not read by you in this pause, to you would be hidden the secret concerning fire, and the quality of its operation on hearts and its expulsive power through which it expels illnesses, demonstrated with philosophical speech, which would sharpen your wits."
E sapiatz, filhs, que els se desacordan del temps en le qual es convenient far cauteri e pausan le milhor temps de primaveyra.	"And know, my son, that they disagree about the time in which it is convenient to perform cautery and consider the best time to be in spring."
E yeu dic que cauteri es convenient en tot temps, per so que le nocument per le temps accident es submergit en le juvament de aquo que am le cauteri es atirat, e majorment si le cauteri es per dolors o de dolors necessaries, fortz e fistinas, las quals no suffertan tarditat per so que es temut de aquelas que vengua malicia, que es major que petit nocument entrant per lo temps.	"And I say that cautery is convenient at all times because the harm caused by accidental time is submerged in the benefit of what is attracted by cautery, and especially if the cautery is for pains or necessary remedies for pains, strong and fistulas, which cannot tolerate delay because it is feared that malice may come, which is greater than little harm entering through time."
E aysso no catz en vostras pessas, o, filhs, aquo no estiman sino le poble vulguar e les fols metges, so es que ad aquela malautia que es sanada per cauteri no es redicio tot temps, e pausan aquel consequen.	"And also do not keep this in your minds, my son, for that is not esteemed except by the common people and foolish doctors, because it is said that there are illnesses that are cured by cautery at any time, and they pause there."
E la causa no es ges ayssi quo els cuydan per aquo, quar cauteri no es sino en loc de medicina la qual altera la compleccio e esicca las humiditatz las quals son causa per que veno las dolors.	"And the cause is not as they think for this reason, because cautery is only in place of medicine that alters the complexion and dries out the humidity which are the cause of pain."
Mays empero cauteri superflueys sobre la medicina per volicitat de la sua valitut e vertut de la sua operacio e grandesa del sieu senhor.	"But nevertheless cautery is superfluous over medicine because of the volatility of its value and virtue of its operation and greatness of its lord."
E es possible que la sua malautia retorne en alcuna hora del temps, segon la compleccio del malaute e la locacio de la sua malautia, e la vertut de lu, e aquo que es preparat en le cors de lu de la agreguacio de las superfluitatz en lu, e aquo que es pervengut a lu en la sua acquisicio en viandas e semblantz de aquelas causas; sino que la malautia en la qual sia aministrat cauteri sia malautia subtil en membre de paucas superfluitatz e humiditatz, ayssi cum cauteri de dent per dolor e semblantz ad aquel, possible es que en lu no retorne aquela dolor, mays aquo se fa en petitz.	"And it is possible that its illness returns at some hour of time according to the complexion of the sick person and the location of his illness, and the virtue of cautery and what has been prepared in his body from the aggregation of superfluities therein, and what has been brought to him in its acquisition through foods and similar causes; but the illness in which cautery is administered is a subtle illness in members with few superfluities and humidities, thus like cautery for toothache and similar ones it is possible that that pain does not return in him, but this happens rarely."
E mays sermo vulgar es que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina, e es sermo dreyturier, no ad aquo que els entendo en lu, quar els crezo que no es curacio que aprofieyta am medicina ni am autra causa aprop cauteri.	"And moreover common speech says that cautery is the last remedy of medicine, and it is true speech because there is nothing else that they understand in it, because they believe that there is no cure that profits by medicine nor by any other cause before cautery."
E la causa es en contrari de aquo; e la entencio que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina no es sino quan administram las manieyras de curacio en alcunas malautias, e aquelas medicinas no conferieysso, e aprop en la fi de la causa aministra hom cauteri, e aprofieyta ad aquela.	"And the cause is contrary to this; and the intention that cautery is the last remedy of medicine is only when administering the means of cure in certain illnesses, and those medicines do not confer benefit, and therefore cautery is administered at the end of the disease, and it profits there."
E lahoras de aqui cat16 que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina, no segon la entencio la qual entendo les vulgars e trops dels fols metges.	"And from here on I say that cautery is the last remedy of medicine, not according to the intention which the vulgar and many foolish doctors understand."
E diyssero les antics que cauteri am aur es milhor que cauteri am ferr, e no diyssero aquo sino per la equalitat del aur e sublimitat de la sua sustancia.	"And they said in ancient times that cautery with gold is better than cautery with iron, and they did not say this except for the equality of gold and the sublimity of its substance."
E diyssero que le loc de cauteri no fa brac, cum aquo no sia absolutament vertat, quar yeu ja he aquo proat e he atrobat que aquel no fa aquo sino en alcus cors ses les autres, e cauteri am aquel es bo e milhor que am ferr ayssi quo els diyssero; mays empero quan tu fas cauteri am foc am de aur, no es a tu declarat, quar es egnit segon la quantitat que tu vols per la rugor de l’aur, e quar prepara a recebre freg; e si ajustas sobre lu ignicio se fon l’aur per le foc, e caso en le foc alcunas laminas per que le artifex catz per la occupacio de aquel.	"And they said that the place of cautery does not make a scar, as it is not absolutely true, because I have already proved and demonstrated that this is only done in some bodies without the others, and cautery with gold is good and better than with iron as they said; but however when you perform cautery with fire with gold, it is not declared to you, because it becomes ignited according to the quantity that you want due to the heat of the gold, and prepares to receive friction; and if you adjust over it ignition the gold will be melted by the fire, and some thin sheets fall into the fire for the occupation of the artisan."
E per aquo es fayt cauteri am ferr deves nos pus leugerament e pus propdanament a rectitut de operacio.	"And therefore cautery with iron should be done more gently and more prudently to the correctness of operation."
E yeu ja he ordenat aquest capitol en le cauteri segon capitols, et he ordenat aquels del cap entro les pes, per so que aleugo le demandant aquo que vol de lu.	"And I have already ordered this chapter on cautery according to chapters, and I have ordered those of the head among the feet, so that later when asking for something about it, you can find what you want."
De cauteri de dolor de cap per frigiditat e humiditat.	"On cautery for headache due to coldness and humidity."
Le capitol primier.	Chapter one.
Aquesta cauterizacio confereys a la humiditat e frigiditat sobre le servel accident de la qual so doas causas, so es causa de soda e multitut de flux raumatic, apelat corissa, del cap a las partidas dels huelhs e de las aurelhas fluent, e multitut de dormir, e de dolor de dentz e del guolayro, e universalment de tota malautia que ve per fregiditat, ayssi cum paraliticament, sodo e apoplexio, e semblantz en aquelas malautias.	"This cautery confers benefit to the humidity and coldness on the second accident of which these two causes are the root, such as excess of phlegm and flux calledorrhea from the head to the parts of the eyebrows and ears flowing, and excess of sleep, and toothache and headache, and universally all illnesses that come from coldness, such as paralysis, soddenness, and apoplexy, and similar ones in those illnesses."
La forma de aquesta cauterizacio es aquesta, que primieyrament comandes al malaute que sia evacuat am medicina lacsativa le cap mondificant, per tres o per quatre nueytz, segon que exhigeys la vertut del malaute e la edat de lu e la sua costuma.	"The form of this cautery is as follows: first command the patient to be evacuated with laxative medicine purging the head for three or four nights according to what you require based on the virtue of the patient, his age and his habit."
E aprop comanda li que raza le sieu cap am razor, e aprop fay aquel sezer entre las tuas mas sobre una banca cayrada e que pause las suas mas sobre le pietz sieu.	"And then command him to shave his head with a razor and then make him sit between your hands on a cushioned bench and have him hold his breath."
E aprop pausa la razit de la tua palma aprop le pous sobre la razit del nas entre les huels sieus.	"And then place the blade of your palm next to the bridge of his nose between his eyebrows."
Mays empero, cum le tieu dit del mieg loc es pervengut, signa aquel loc am tenta, e aprop igneys le cauteri olivar del qual aquesta es la forma:	"But however, when your finger has reached the middle place, mark that spot with a point and then heat the olive cautery which is of this form:"
E aprop pausa aquel sobre le loc senhat am tenta, a manieyra que descent, am la qual la tieua ma sia constrengida petit a petit, e tu revolveys aquel.	"And then place it on the marked spot in such a way that it descends slowly while your hand becomes gradually contracted and you rotate it."
E aprop leva la tua ma leugerament e reguarda le loc, e si veses ja del os esser descubert alcuna quantitat del cap, ayssi cum la quantitat de gra de errs, lahoras eleva la tua ma, e si no torno la tua ma am aquel ferr, am autre de aquel, si es enfrigidat, entro que sia vist del os aquo que yeu he dit a tu.	"And then raise your hand lightly and look at the spot and if you see that some of the bone is already exposed on the head like the size of a grain of barley, then raise your hand; but if it does not return to its place with that iron, take another one which has cooled down so that what I have said to you can be seen."
E aprop pren un petit de sal e disolveys aquel sobre le loc e leyssa aquel per tres jorns.	"And then take some salt and dissolve it on the spot and leave it there for three days."
E aprop pausa sobre lu coto enbegut en boder e leyssa aquel sobre lu entro que sia destrusida la scara del foc.	"And then place a piece of cotton dipped in honey around the edge and leave it there until the scar from the fire has healed."
E aprop cura le loc am anguent tetrafarmacon entro que sia sanat.	"And then treat the spot with fourfold ointment until it is healed."
E ja diyssero que quant la plagua roman uberta, tant mielhs geta le brac, per que es milhor e mays juvatiu.	"And it was said that when the wound remains open, it is better to bind the arm, for it is thus better and more healing."
E diyssero alcus de lor que sia cauterizada la codena entro al os, e sia tengut le cauteri entro que sia adhurida alcuna partida de la specitut del os.	"And some of them said that the spine should be cauterized within the bone, and that the cautery should be held until it burns any part of the spinal cord."
E aprop sia ras aquo que es adhust del os, e aprop sia curat.	"Therefore it should be scraped with this bone which is burnt, and therefore it should be treated."
E diyssero autres que am lo cauteri pervengua al derier, entro que enprema en le os forta enprecio entro que le os caga, e aquesta es la forma de alphecati petit:	"And others said that when the cautery reaches the end of it, it should press firmly onto the bone until the bone cracks, and this is the method of small cauterization."
E estiman de aquel loc expiran la vapors del cap.	"They consider that place where the vapors of the head expire."
E sia tenguda la plagua uberta per lonc temps, e aprop sia curada entro que sia consolidada.	"And if the wound remains open for a long time, it should be treated until it is consolidated."
Mays a mi no so vistas aquestas doas specias de cauteri de tot, sino en alcus homes segon via de temor; e layssa aquel, deves mi, milhor es am salut, quan es; quar le cap es develitat per solucio de continuitat de lu ayssi cum havem testificat en les autres membres, e majorment quan le cap del malaute es de freul natura.	"More than that, I have not seen these two kinds of cauterization in any person, except in some men according to their fear; and let it be, it seems better with health when they are; for the head is weakened by the solution of continuity from such a wound as we have testified in other members, and more so when the head of the sick man is of weak nature."
E la specia de cauteri primieyra es mays salva e milhor deves mi; e de aquela husi e am aquela obra am salut.	"And the first kind of cauterization is safer and better in my opinion, and for that reason it is healthier."
Capitol segon.	"Chapter Second."
Del cauteri del cap.	"Of the Cautery of the Head."
Quan en tot le cap accideys dolor cronica e longua e aquo es en le malaute prolonguat, e usa de gerras e de cochias e de capipurges e de emplaustres e de guatz e de cadels e de gualinas e de semblantz, e majorment si ja es cauterizat am un cautere le qual recontam e no aprofieyta a lu deguna de aquelas causas, lahoras considera quar si le cap del malaute es de fort creacio en la sua natura; e no es freul et atroba mot gran freg, lahoras aquel cauterisa am autra cauteri dejos aquel un pauc.	"When there occurs chronic and long-lasting pain in the entire head, and this is prolonged illness, and remedies are used such as lotions, poultices, compresses, plasters, bandages, cataplasms, and similar things, and especially if it has already been cauterized with a cautery that does not prove beneficial for any of those causes, then consider whether the head of the sick person is of strong constitution in its nature; and if it is not weak but rather robust, then cauterize with another cautery, but not too much."
E aprop cauterisa aquel sobre le corn del sieu cap am cauteri entro que la codena es partida.	"And properly cauterize there on the horn of his head with a cautery until the bone is broken."
Incisa la codena e sia descuberta del os la quantitat la qual havem recontat e cauteriza aquel am un cauteri en la partida deriera del cap en le loc le qual es apelat vas, — e es aquel loc en le qual es pausada ventosa.	"Incise the bone and expose the quantity of bone that we have mentioned, and cauterize there with a cautery at the last part of the head where it is called 'vas', which is the place where cupping glasses are applied."
Et alleuja la tua ma en aysso, e no descobras le os, quar le malaute per aquo atroba mot gran dolor diversa de la dolor de totz les autres cauteris del cap.	"And ease your hand in this, and do not expose the bone, for by doing so it causes much more pain than all other cauteries of the head."
E yeu diyre aquest cauteri en son loc, quar cove que·l cauteri am le qual so cauterisatz les corns del cap e le occiput es pus subtil cauteri que aquel am le qual es cauterisat le mieg loc del cap; e aquesta es la forma de lu.	"And I tell you this cautery in its place, for it is necessary to use the cautery with which one cauterizes the horns of the head and the occiput, which is more subtle than that with which one cauterizes the middle part of the head; and this is the form of it."
Capitol ters.	"Chapter Third."
De cauterisacio de emigranea no-antiqua.	"Of Cautery for Non-Classical Migraine."
Quan endeve en la partida del cap dolor sodo, o es stenduda dolor entro al uelh, sia evacuat am medicinas le cap mondificantz, e sia aministrada l’autra curacio, la qual yeu he dita en las devesios de las malautias; e tot no aprofieyta, lahoras cauterisacio en lu es en dos manieyras: o cauterisacio am medicina acuta comburent, o am ferr.	"When there occurs sudden pain in the part of the head or a prolonged pain within the ear, let it be evacuated with medicines that clear the head, and let the other treatment that I have mentioned in the sections on diseases be administered, and if it does not help at all, then cautery is to be performed in two ways: either cautery with an acrid burning medicine or with iron."
Mays cauteri am medicina comburent es que tu prenguas una dolsa de alh, e escorgas aquela e abcindas las extremitatz de lu de amdos les caps.	"But cauterizing with a burning medicine is to take one handful of saltwort, and grind that up finely, and separate the extremities of it on both sides."
E aprop incideys le loc de la dolor en la templa am una lanceta lada entro que sia en lu feyt loc dejos la codena, entro que sia occultada.	"And properly incise the location of the pain in the temple with a sharp lancet until it reaches the bone, but so that it remains concealed."
E aprop strenh sobre lu am stopada per descent constreccio, e layssa aquel per le spazi de tres horas; e aprop deslia le e tratz le alh, e laysa la plagua per dos o per tres jorn, e aprop pausa sobre lu coto submergit en boder entro que le loc fassa brac.	"And then strain over it with a tight bandage by means of continuous compression, and leave that for the space of three hours; and properly remove the bandage and squeeze out the saltwort, and let the wound heal for two or three days, and then compress again on the submerged spot until the place becomes hard."
E aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia sanat.	"And finally cure it with an ointment until it is healed."
E si tu voys, fe aquo am alcunas medicinas comburentz las quals yeu he scriutas en le douse tractat de medicinas comburentz.	"And if you wish, do this with some burning medicines which I have written about in the second book on burning medicines."
Mays la cauterisacio am ferr segon aquesta manieyra: igneys per cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma:	"But cautery with iron is performed in this way: first, heat a cautery of the following shape:"
e es apelat claus clavilhs, quar le cap de lu es ayssi cum forma de clavel en le qual es alcuna curvitat, e·n le mieg loc de lu es eminensia petita.	"And it is called 'clavis clavorum', for the head of it is like the shape of a nail with some curvature, and in the middle part of it there is a small elevation."
E aprop pausa sobre loc de la dolor, e rete la tua ma — per que no sia adhurida la arceria la qual es dejos — e revol le ferr petit a petit am velocitat.	"And then place it on the location of the pain and hold your hand steady—so that the cautery does not stick to what is left—and turn the hot iron gently with speed."
E si la quantitat de lu que es adhurida per la specitut de la codena ayssi quo la maytat de lu, e elava la tua ma per so que la arteria no sia adhurida la qual es dejos, per so que no vengua flux de sanc.	"And if much of it sticks to the bone in this way, then raise your hand for fear that the artery which is left should not stick, lest blood flow."
E aprop enbibeys coto en aygua de sal e pausa aquel sobre le loc, e layssa aquel per tres dias; e aprop pausa coto mulhat am boder, e aprop cura am enguent entro que sia sanat.	"And then immerse the spot in saltwater and place it there, and leave it for three days; and then compress it with mustard plaster, and finally cure it with an ointment until it is healed."
E si voys, cauterisa am la extremitat del cutellari segon cauteri, e guarda te de incisio de arteria en aquesta emigranea propriament no-antiqua.	"And if you wish, cauterize with the point of the cutting instrument according to this cautery, and beware of incising an artery in this migraine which is properly non-ancient."
Capitol quart.	"Chapter Fourth."
De cauterizacio d’emigranea antiqua.	"Of Cautery for Ancient Migraine."
Quan tu curas emigranea am aquo que havem dit de la curacio precedent, e aquo que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias, e no aprofieyta la curacio, e vezes per la malautia que no abasta a lu aquo que havem dit del primier cauteri am medicina o del cauteri am foc, lahoras cove que tu igniscas le cauteri cutellar entro que sia albificat, pus que significas sobre le loc de la dolor am linha de longuesa de la qual sia la maytat del dit, o quays aquel; e depausa la tua ma per una veguada e strenh aquela entro incidiscas la arceria e pervengua entro al os.	"But when you are treating migraine with what we have said about the previous treatment and also what we have said in the sections on diseases, but that treatment does not help, and if the disease is such that it does not respond to what has been said about the first cautery with medicine or cautery with fire, then heat the cutting cautery until it becomes red-hot, since you will mark out the location of the pain with a line of its length, or else guess where it is; and then place your hand for a moment and press down hard until you incise the artery and reach the bone."
Empero necessari es a tu que guardes de la continuacio de la mandibula, la qual es mauguda deves la masticacio, e que le lacert no sia adhurit e le nervi le qual mau aquela, e que no s’endevengua espasme.	"However, it is necessary for you to guard against damaging the continuation of the mandible, which is moved during mastication, and that the cartilage should not stick and the nerves which move it should not be damaged, and that no spasm occurs."
E si es sobre la custodia e cautela de flux de sanc de l’arteria que es abciza, quar en la abcizio de lu es temor, e majorment ad aquel le qual ignora aquo que fa e no es studios e esproat; e layssa la operacio en lu al comensament.	"And if it is about the caution and care regarding the flow of blood from the artery that is opened, since there is fear in its opening, especially for one who does not know what he is doing and is not studious and skilled; and let the operation begin."
E yeu vindre am rememoracio del regiment de flux de sanc accident de la arceria segon la sieua manieyra, en le sieu loc de aquest libre.	"And I will bring to mind the regulation of accidental bleeding from an artery according to its manner in its proper place in this book."
E si veses de aquesta malautia que no abaste aquest cauteri e veses le cors del malaute tollerable, cauteriza aquel en le mieg loc del cap ayssi cum havem recontat, e cura la plagua entro que sia sanada.	"And if you see that this disease does not respond to this cautery and that the patient's constitution is tolerable, then cauterize him in the middle of the head as we have described, and cure the wound until it is healed."
E si voys, aministra le cauteri le qual havem dit en le capitol de streccio de arceria am cauteri havent dos cotels, e es milhor cauterizacio aquesta e mays conferent.	"And if you wish, administer the cautery which we have mentioned in the chapter on arresting bleeding with cautery using two tweezers, since this is better cautery and more effective."
Capitol .v.	"Chapter Fifth."
De cauterisacio de las dolors de aurelhas.	"Of Cautery for Earaches."
Quan en la aurelha ve dolor per freg e es curat am causas lacsativas e am l’autra curacio la qual he dita en la divisio, e no es remauguda la dolor, lahoras igneys le cauteri, e es aquest le qual ha nom puncta, del qual aquesta es la forma:	"When in the ear there is pain from friction and it is treated with laxative causes and other treatments which I have mentioned in the section on diseases, but the pain does not subside, then heat the cautery, and this is called 'punctum', of which this is the shape:"
E aprop puncta aprop la ignicio, e sia menat al enviro de tota la aurelha ayssi cum roda es revolguda, o en le circuit de quascuna essemps si la dolor es en quascuna.	"And then make punctures around the ignition, and let it be moved around the entire ear like a wheel is turned, or in the circuit of each one if the pain is in each."
Alonga te am le cauteri de la razit de la aurelha pauc a pauc pus que aias senhat le loc am tenta.	"And go along with the cautery of the radius of the ear little by little until you have felt out the spot with the tip."
E si le cauteri de detz puntz en tota aurelha, e quays aquela, e aprop cura les locz entro que sian sanatz.	"And if you make ten punctures all over the ear and it still hurts, then treat the spots until they are healed."
Capitol .vi.	"Chapter Six."
De cauterizacio de turtura.	"The cautery of a tumor."
Turtura la qual es curada e am cauterizacio no es sino de las specias las quals veno per flecma, segon que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias.	A tumor that is cured by cautery is only one of the species which comes about from blood, as we have said in the divisions of diseases.
Esquiva cauterizacio de la specia que endeve per siccacio o per spasme del nervi.	"Avoid cautery of the species that occurs due to dryness or spasm of the nerve."
Quan tu curas aquela specia de turtura am jerras e capipurgi e guarguarismes, e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas le malaute am tres cauteris: la i deves la razit de la aurelha, e·l segon un petit dejos le sieu templar, e le ters deves la conjunccio de doas labias.	When you cure that species of tumor with herbs and capperdines and guarguarisms, and your treatment does not work, then you must cauterize the disease with three cauteries: one at the root of the ear, the second a little below the temple, and the third at the junction of the two lips.
E pausa lo tieu cauteri per le contrari de la partida malauta, quar mollificacio no ve sino en la partida que apar sana.	"And pause your cautery where it meets its opposite, for softening occurs only in the part that appears to be healed."
E la forma de cauterisacio es que cauterizas aquel am le cauteri en le dreyt de la extremitat de la aurelha pus sobirana un petit sobre le corn del cap, e en le templar autre, la longuesa del qual sia segon la longitut del dit pous, e depausa la tua ma am cauteri entro que sia comburida la quantitat de la maytat de la specitut de la codena.	"And the manner of cauterization is that you cauterize it with a cautery in the right of the tip of the ear, a little above the horn of the head, and on the temple, its length being according to the length of the aforementioned finger, and then pause your hand with cautery until about half of the substance of the cautery is consumed."
E aquesta es la forma del cauteri, e es specia del cutellari, la forma del qual es denant mesa.	"And this is the manner of the cautery, which is specific to surgeons, and its form is flat on one side."
Mays empero pus subtil es que aquel un pauc ayssi co vesas; e cove que cotel en lu de superflua groceza un pauc.	"But nevertheless it is more subtle than that which you have seen; and it is necessary to cut away excessive roughness with a knife."
E aprop cura le loc am aquo que es denant procezit entro que sia sanat.	"And then cure the place with what is usually applied until it heals."
Capitol .vii.	Chapter VII.
De cauterizacio de apoplextia antiqua.	Of the cauterization of ancient apoplexy.
Quan apoplextia es antiquada e curas aquela am aquo que havem dit e no confereys la tua medicacio e le malaute no ha febre, lahoras cauteriza aquel am quatre cauteris: sobre totz les corn del sieu cap; e am cauteri e le mieg loc del cap, ayssi cum havem dit; e am cauteri en le coguot.	When apoplexy is ancient and treated with what we have said, and the patient's medicine does not agree, then cauterize them with four cauteries: over all the horns of their head; and with a cautery on the middle of the head, as we have said; and with a cautery in the throat.
E la manieyra del cauteri es fayta segon que es desus dit.	And the manner of cauterization is done as has been said above.
E ja es cauterizat sobre la boca del estomac; e es mays derier; e aprop sia curat am aquo que procezeys.	And once cauterized over the mouth of the stomach, it becomes more severe; and then it should be treated with what proceeds from you.
Capitol .viii.	Chapter VIII
De cauterizacio de obblivio fayta per flacma.	On cauterization for forgetfulness caused by phlegm.
Cove que sian donatz al malaute en le comensament jerras grans e pilulas le servel mondificantz.	Let the patient be given large jars and pills to swallow at the beginning.
E aprop ras le cap tot del malaute e pausa sus le coguot de lu emplaustre de cetre descrit en le tractat dels emplastres.	"Then shave the patient's entire head and place it on the cushion described in the treatise of plasters."
E pausa aquel alcunas veguadas, quar aquel es manieyra de cauteri.	"And pause that some times, for that is the manner of cautery."
E fay aquo segon aquel meteys orde le qual ja he dit.	"Then do this according to that method which I have already described."
E donc si per aqueles sanat bo es; e sino, lahoras fay a lu tres cauteris en la deriera partida de sieu cap, les quals sian deysendentz de la partida pus sobirana del cap entro a la partida pus dejos del col.	"And then, if he is healed well with these, otherwise do three cauteries on the last part of his head, which should be descending from the most elevated part of the head towards the lowest part of the neck."
E pausa entre quascun cauteri la grossetut del dit, e aprop cura lo cauteri am aquo que es procedit.	"And pause between each cautery the thickness of a finger, and then dress the cautery with that which is produced."
Mays si tu vos addicio e le malaute es aquo tollerant, lahoras fay a lu cauteri en le mieg loc; e si voys major addicio, lahora cauteriza aquel sobre les dos corns.	"But if you want to add and the illness is tolerant of it, then do one cautery in the middle place; but if you want greater addition, then cauterize those over both horns."
Aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat; e sia le cauteri olivar segon la forma denant donat.	"Dress that while it is healing; and let the cauteries be olive-shaped according to the form given before."
Capitol .ix.	"Chapter IX"
De cauterisacio de parazili e de mollificacio de tot le cors.	"Of Cauterization of the Parietal Bone and of Softening of the Whole Body."
Cove que tu procesiscas en mondificacio del cap am jerras e am aquo que havem dit; e aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap, e am cauteri sobre totz les corns del cap, e am cauteri sobre la deriera partida de lu, e am tres cauteris sobre les spondils del col.	"Therefore, if you proceed in moistening the head with compresses and with that which we have said; and then shave the head of the patient, and then cauterize it with one cautery in the middle place of the head, and with one cautery over all the horns of the head, and with one cautery over the last part of it, and with three cauteries over the spine of the neck."
E si es necessari en la malautia de mollificacio del cors de trops aquel e les malautes tollerantz e la malautia es fort, lahoras cauteriza aquel am quatre cauteris sobre les spondils del dos, e dererament am cauteri entro que sia comborit de la codena mot de lu, e aleva la tieua ma.	"And if it is necessary in the illness of moistening the body too much and the illnesses tolerate it and the illness is strong, then cauterize those with four cauteries over the spine of the back, and afterwards with one cautery where the muscle of the neck has been fought, and raise the hand higher."
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat, e aquest sia cauteri olivar.	"And then dress that while it is healing, and let this be an olive-shaped cautery."
Capitol .x.	"Chapter X"
De cauterisacio de epilemcia.	"Of Cauterization for Epilepsy."
No es cauterizat le epilemtic sino aquella epilemcia es per flecma.	"It is not cauterized in epilepsy unless the epilepsy is due to phlegm."
E donc cove que mondifiques le cervel de lu al comensament de lu am yeras e am l’autra curacio la qual havem dicta en la divisio quan le malaute es gran e es tollerant la exceperacio de las medicinas.	"It is necessary that you clean the patient's brain at the beginning of treatment and in another cure, as stated earlier when the patient is severely ill except for their refusal of medicine."
E si es enfant le qual no sufferte las medicinas, lahoras aministra guarguarissmes e mastiguatoris le servel mondifican, denant aquo per motz dias, am bonifficacio de las viandas.	"And if it is a child who does not tolerate medicines, then administer purgatives and masticatories to aid digestion, beforehand for several days, with care in food preparation."
E aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop cauteriza aquel am un cauteri en le mieg loc del cap segon la manieyra precedent, e am autre cauteri en le occiput de lu, e sobre quascun corn del cap sieu cauterisa.	"And then shave the patient's head and cauterize it with one cautery in the middle of the head according to the previous method, another on the back of the head, and cauterize each horn of the head separately."
E si le malaute es fort e es tollerant, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteris les quals he ditz, en havent paraliticament e mollificacio del cors sobre les spondils del col e les spondils del dos.	"And if the patient is strong and tolerates it, then cauterize them with those same cauteries mentioned earlier, having first paralyzed and softened the body over the vertebrae of the neck and back."
E sia cauteri olivar segon qu’es precedit.	"And apply cautery with olive oil as previously described."
Mays si le malaute es enfant, lahoras pausa cauteri subtil segon aquesta manieyra.	"But if the patient is a child, then pause cauterization using this method."
Capitol .xi.	Chapter XI
De cauterizacio de melencolia.	On cauterization for melancholy.
Quan las causas de melencolia so humiditatz corrompudas e flacma gros, lahoras cauteriza aquel am les cauteris les quals havem ditz en le havent paralisi.	When the causes of melancholy are corrupted humidity and thick phlegm, then cauterize them with those same cauteries we have mentioned earlier, having first caused paralysis.
E si la causa de melencolia es superfluitat declinant a melencolia, e le cors del malaute es humit, lahoras da ha beure aquo que mundifica le cervel de lu segon aquo que ha precedut en la divisio.	And if the cause of melancholy is declining excess and the body of the patient is humid, then give them to drink that which cleanses the brain according to what has been mentioned earlier in the division on this topic.
E aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop fay tortora decentment fayta de li sobre le cercle, e aprop depausa aquela en le mieg loc del cap.	And also shave the patient's head, and then apply a plaster made from tortoise appropriately prepared around its circumference, and then place it in the middle of the head.
E le malaute sia sesent cayrat, e sia tengut de tota partida.	And let the patient keep quiet, and be held down on all sides.
E aprop pausa liniment; et es pus digne de boder antic de ovelhas.	And then apply a liniment, and afterwards it is appropriate to apply an ointment made from sheep's fat.
E escalfa aquel sobre le foc per calefaccio temprada per mesura, le qual le dit sufferta quan es mes en lu.	And warm this over the fire with moderate heat according to the measure that the patient can tolerate when it is applied to them.
E aprop vuo’ aquel en le mieg loc del cap de lu en le cercle, e leysa lu entro que sia enfregidat.	And then place it in the middle of the patient's head within the circle, and let it remain until it has cooled down.
E fay aquo am le malaute en tota semmana una veguada, am le autre regiment de lu bo entro que sia sanat; o si vols, cauteriza aquel fazen petitz puntz segon lo mays de lu, sino que tenguas la ma am un cauteri ayssi ordenat: aquesta es specia de cauteri la qual humecta le cervel am equalitat.	And do this with the patient once a week until they are healed, with the other regimen of lu being followed for their health; or if you wish, cauterize them with small points according to their condition, but always keep your hand on such an ordered cautery: this is a species of cautery which moistens the brain evenly.
E aprop pausa aquel coto enbegut en boder o en grays de gualina.	And then apply that ointment compounded in wax or grease of swans.
Capitol .xii.	Chapter XII
De cauterisacio de aygua descendent en le huel.	On cauterization for water descending into the eye.
Quan a tu es declarat le comensament de aygua en le huel per les senhals les quals yeu he ditz en la divisio, lahoras comensa e dona en beure al malaute aquo que mondifique le cap de lu, e guarda aquel de totas humiditatz.	When it has been declared that water is beginning to descend into the eye according to the signs which I have mentioned earlier in the division on this topic, then begin and give the patient to drink something that cleanses their head, and keep them from all humidity.
E fay aquel suzar en banh en degu per alcus jorns.	And have them sit in a warm bath for several days.
E aprop comanda a lu que raza le sieu cap, e cauteriza aquel am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap; e aprop cauteriza aquel am dos cauteris sobre dos templas si es le comensament de ysement de aygua en dos huels, o de la un latz si es comensamen de l’aygua en un huel.	And then command him to shave his head, and cauterize it with a cautery in the middle of the head; and also cauterize it with two cauteries on both temples if it is the beginning of water descending into both eyes, or on one side if it is only one eye.
Incideys am cauteri totas las venas e arcerias las quals so dejos la codena; e sian les cauteris en aquela lonh en la latitut de las templas.	Make incisions with a cautery along all the veins and arteries that are near the neck, and let the cauteries be in that length at the level of the temples.
E guarda te de fluxs de sanc quan es cauterizat; e si veses de lu fluxs de sanc, osta le am alcuna medicina, la qual es a tu possible.	And be careful not to cause fluxes of blood when cauterizing, and if you see any fluxes of blood, stop them with some medicine that is available to you.
E yeu vindre am savieza la qual es en extraccio de arcerias e am abscizio de aquelas e cautela de fluxs de sanc.	And I will come with skill in the extraction of arteries and the removal of those, and caution regarding fluxes of blood.
E alcunas vetz es cauterizat en le cervitz dejos dos osses am dos cauteris dererament produzitz.	Sometimes it is cauterized on both sides of the two bones near the neck with two very pointed cauteries.
Capitol .xiii.	Chapter XIII
De cauterizacio de lacrimas antiquas.	On cauterization for old lacrimation (excessive tearing).
Quan lacrimas dels huels so antiquas assuduament e per las venas e arterias las quals so en le loc manifest del cap defora e es verificat que aquo es superfluitatz frejas flecmatiquas, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteri le qual havem recontat en le capitol de comensament de aygua cazent en les huels, e am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap e am dos cauteris en la cervitz dejos dos templas, e am dos cauteris en la cervitz dejos dos osses.	When lacrimation from the eyes is excessive and continuous, through the veins and arteries that are in the manifest location of the head externally, and it has been verified that this is a superfluity of bloody humors, then cauterize it with the cautery which we have mentioned in the chapter on the beginning of water descending into the eyes, and also with one cautery in the middle of the head and two cauteries on either side of the temples, and two cauteries on either side of the two bones.
E si indigeyses de addicio, lahoras cauteriza aquel en tot latz de la coa del huel sobre la extremitat del sobrecilh am petit cauteri.	And if you need to add more, then cauterize it also on all sides of the cheekbone over the extreme end of the eyebrow with small cauteries.
Capitol .xiiii.	Chapter XIV
De cauterizacio de fetor de nas.	On cauterization for bad odor from the nose.
Quan tu medicas aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no aprofieyta la tua medicacio, lahoras tu aparelha e dona en beure al malaute las cochias per tres noytz; e aprop ras le cap de lu, e cauteriza le am cauteri migier am cauteri olivar.	When you try to treat it with what we have mentioned in the division and your treatment does not succeed, then prepare and give the patient cochlias (shellfish) to drink for three nights; and also shave his head, and cauterize him with a medium cautery and an olive cautery.
E aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri clavelh am dos cauteris sobre les dos sobrecilhs dejos les cabels un petit.	And also cauterize it with a clove cautery with two cauteries on both eyebrows just above the hair.
E guarda te de la arceria que no incindas aquela.	And be careful not to cut that artery (the nasal artery).
E del cauteri clavilh aquesta es la forma.	This is the form of the clove cautery:
Capitol .xv.	Chapter XV
De cauteri de mollificacio de palpebras dels huels.	On cauterization for relaxing eyelids.
Quan la palpebra del huel es mollificada per malautia o per humiditat, lahoras cauteriza aquela palpebre1 am un cauteri am aquest cauteri lunar; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	When the eyelid is relaxed due to illness or humidity, then cauterize that eyelid with a cautery using this lunar cautery, and this is its form:
E si vos, cauteriza aquel sobre les dos sobrecils un petit am dos cauteris en tota partida, e sian elonguatz de las timporas.	"If you wish, cauterize that above both eyebrows using two cauteries placed apart, away from the temples."
E sia la longitut de quascun cauteri segon la quantitat del sobrecil.	"And let the length of each cautery be according to the quantity of the eyebrow."
E no premas trop la tua ma am le cauteri, mays segon la quantitat que la tersa partida de la palpebre sia adhurida.	"Press not too hard with the cautery, but according to the amount that one-third of the eyelid should be burnt."
Capitol .xvi.	Chapter XVI
De cauteri de la palpebre del huel quan les pels so convertitz a las partidas dedintz e punho le huel.	"Regarding cauterization of the eyelashes when they grow inward and strike the eye."
Quan les pels del huel son convertitz a las partidas dedintz ayssi que pungo le huel, cauteri en aquels es segon dos manieyras, quar cauteri o es am fer o es am medicina comburent.	"When the eyelashes grow inward and touch the eye, cauterization should be performed in one of two ways: either by cautery or with medicated fire."
Si am cauteri de lu am foc, comanda al malaute denant aquo que leyse les sieus pels ayssi cum aquels les quals les mundan, entro que sian prolonguatz e engualhatz; e si punho aquel deves le lor naysement, lahoras tu strenh les huels de lu am una benda per so que no sia maugut entro que·ls pels sian nascutz.	"If cauterization with fire is chosen, tell the patient beforehand to lengthen his eyelashes like those that are plucked out, until they become long and hard. And if they touch the corner of their eyes, then stretch the eyelids with a bandage so that they may not be harmed while the eyelashes grow."
Donc cum siran nascutz e engualhatz, lahoras pausa le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop senha sobre la palpebre dels huels de lu am tenta, am senhal le qual sia segon la figura de fulha de merta, e sia le comensament del senhal prop dels pels.	"When they have grown long and hard, then place the patient's head on a high table, and holding a tent-like instrument over the eyelids with one hand, make an incision with a scissor-like tool near the base of the eyelashes."
E aprop pausa coto enbegut en album de huou o en mucillatge de ptilli sobre le huel.	"And then place cotton soaked in egg white or mucilage of pomegranate seeds on the eye."
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu.	"Then ignite the cautery of which this is its shape."
E aprop cauteriza sobre la figura la qual as senhada, petit a petit, em motas veguadas, entro que sia comburida la superficia de la codena la qual es ayssi cum fuelha de mirta, tota aparent propriament.	"Then cauterize the figure that you have drawn, gradually in several views until the surface of the cord appears like the leaf of myrtle."
E senhal de sanetat de la tieua obra es que tu vegus la palpebre de l’huel ja esser contrayta e·ls pels de lu esser elevatz deves la punctura del huel.	"The sign of health of your work is that you see the eyelid of the eye already contracted and its hairs raised above the puncture."
E donc eleva la tua ma e laysa aquel per tres jorns, e aprop pausa sobre lu coto am boder entro que sia eredicada la scara.	"Then raise your hand and leave that for three days. Afterwards, pause over that place with the border until the scar has disappeared."
E aprop cura aquela am enguent entro que sia sanat.	"Then dress it with ointment until it is healed."
Mays si retorna per les pels alcuna causa aprop lor naysement e la palpebra es mollificada, lahoras fay autra vetz le cauteri sobre aquel tot ayssi cum avias fayt primieyrament.	"But if the hairs return for some cause, then remove them again and if the eyelid becomes softened, do the cautery once more just as you had done initially."
Mays si les pels so en la palpebra dejos, lahoras cauterisa aquela entro que sia elevada al sieu loc natural e sia engualhat e que les pels no punhan le huelh.	"But if the hairs do not return on the eyelid, then cauterize it until it is raised to its natural position and covered up so that the hairs do not touch the eye."
Mays le cauteri am medicina comburent aquest es que comandes al malaute que leyse les pels entro que sian prolonguatz e engualhatz, e aprop sia fayta de carta de drap la forma de fuelha de mirtra.	"But during cauterization with medicine, order the patient to let their hairs grow until they are prolonged and covered up, and then make a paper or cloth shape like the leaf of myrtle."
E aprop pren de sabo conogut e de caus viva ana unc. i, o quays aquo, e aprop mescle3 aquelas causas be, e fay aquo am festinacio per so que no sia enfregidat; e aprop expandeys de aquo sobre la carta la qual es fayta ayssi cum forma de fulha de mirtra, e pausa aquel sobre la un huel od amdos; e pausa dejos le huel coto enbegut en album de huou, e el cap del malaute sia en le tieu se.	"Then take known soap and live coals separately. Take both quickly, mix them well together with haste so that they do not cool down. Then spread this mixture onto the paper which has been made in the shape of a myrtle leaf, place it on one or both eyes. Let the eye area be covered with cotton wool soaked in egg albumen and let the patient lie still with their head on their back."
E pausa le dit sobre le medicina e prem aquela un petit e no la mauguas entro que lo malaute senta la mordicacio de la medicina, quar mordicacio es en lu ayssi cum de foc.	"Then place your finger on the medicine and press it gently without moving it until the patient feels the biting sensation of the medicine, for this sensation is like that of fire."
E donc cum percevera aquo que el atrobo mordicacio, lahoras leyssa la medicina e mau aquela am le tieu dit; donc cum cessa la mordicacio, lahoras remau la medicina he lava le huel am aygua; e lahoras considera si vezes la palpebra ja es levada ayssi cum es lavada deves la costriccio am foc o am incisio, quar lahoras esta be; e si no torna sobre aquela de la medicina sobre le loc en le qual no ha empremut la medicina e no se denigra entro que sia engualhada la tua operacio e sia contrayt le huel.	"Then when you perceive that the sensation of biting has begun, then remove the medicine and wipe it with your little finger; then when the sensation of biting has stopped, then remove the medicine and wash the eye with water. Then observe if sometimes the eyelid is raised as it should be washed away by the contraction with fire or incision, for then it will be well done. And if not, apply the medicine again to the place where the medicine did not adhere, until it becomes covered up completely."
E aprop pausa sobre lu coto am boder entro que sia eradicada la codena de la adhustio, e aprop cura aquel am enguent deafinicon o am autre entro que sia sanat.	"Then place your finger on the site with its edge until the thread of adhesion is eliminated, then heal it with ointment or with another means so that it is healed."
E es necessari a tu, deves la tua operacio que guardes am pervigil diligencia que en le huel no caia re de la medicina, e si la palpebre aprop alscus dias es mollificada e alcuna causa dels pels punh en le huel, lahoras itera la tua medicina sobre aquel loc le qual de la palpebre es mollificat, e propriamen ayssi quo as fayt al comensament, e aprop enaviro lu entro que sia sanat.	"And it is necessary for you to guard with vigilant diligence that no residue of the medicine falls into the eye. And if the eyelid becomes softened after several days and some cause of the hairs touches the eye, then apply your medicine again to that place where the eyelid is softened, exactly as you did at the beginning. And then avoid it until it is healed."
E aquesta es la forma de fuelha de mirtra.	"And this is the shape of a myrtle leaf."
E sapias que les huels dels homes son diversificatz segon la magnitut e la parvitat, e donc segon aquo es fayta la tua contraccio.	"And know that men's eyes are diverse according to their size and smallness, and therefore your contraction should be made accordingly."
E no sira amaguada la via de rectetut ad aquel al qual es studi en aquesta art.	"And it will not be hidden from those who study this art correctly."
Capitol .xvii.	"Chapter XVII."
De cauterizacio de fistula que es en le lacrimal de l’huel.	"Of the cautery of a fistula that is in the tear duct of the eye."
Quan tu curas fistula am aquo que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas aquela segon aquesta manieyra: comanda al malaute que pause le cap sieu en le tieu se, e tengua le cap de lu alcun ministre entre las tieuas mas en tal manieyra que no sia maugut ni agitat am le sieu cap.	When you treat a fistula as we have mentioned in our division of diseases and your treatment does not succeed, then you must cauterize it in this manner: Command the patient to place their head on their left side, and hold their head with some servant between your hands so that it is not moved or agitated by their head.
E aprop pausa coto enfus en album de huou o en mucellage de ptilli sobre le huel de lu.	And then place cotton soaked in oil or wool grease on the wound.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma:	"And then ignite the cautery whose form is as follows:"
le qual sia conquau, ayssi cum es forma de cana o de pena de voltor, de la una extremitat am la qual es fayta lo cauteri.	"whose shape is hollow like a reed or an eagle's feather pen at one end where the cautery is made."
E si voys, sia penetrant entro a la autra extremitat.	"And if you wish, it should be penetrating within the other extremity."
E si vols sia sort ayssi cum tenta.	"And if you want it to come out like this:
Mays empero aquel que es concau es milhor a la tieua obra.	"However, that which is cauterized is better for one's work."
E aprop prem la fistula si es uberta, e tra de lu sania et exsicca aquela.	"And then press the fistula if it is open and remove from it pus and moisture."
E si no es uberta, lahoras obre aquela e extratz la poyredura de lu.	"But if it is not open, then open it and squeeze out the pus."
E aprop pausa sobre lu le cauteri le qual sia be ignit, e te am aquel la tieua ma un petit deves le cauteri del huel a la partida del nas, per so que no erre la tua ma o le malaute sia enquietat, e lahoras pausa le cauteri en le grays del huel e corrompas aquel.	"And then place the cautery, which should be well ignited, on it, and hold it with your hand but a little below the cautery at the opening of the nostril, so that you do not burn your hand or cause the patient discomfort. Then pause the cautery in the gristle of the nostril and cauterize that."
E donc si al comensament del tieu cauteri perve entro al os, bo es; e sino, lahoras itera le cauteri una veguada o dos, si mestiers era; e layssa aquel ayssi per tres jorns, e aprop pausa sobre aquel coto am boder e enviro lu am enguent exsiccatiu entro que sia sanat.	"And then if at the beginning of your cautery it enters the bone, that is good. But if not, then repeat the cautery once or twice if necessary, and leave it like that for three days, and then apply a cloth with dry ointment around it until it is healed."
Mays si eran passatz xi dias e no es sanat, lahoras pausa sobre lu medicina aguda corrosiva entro que l’os sia descubert e sia ras segon que conveneys en le sieu capitol.	"But if eleven days have passed and it has not healed, then apply a caustic medicine that will expose the bone and rasp it according to what is convenient in its chapter."
E es autra manieyra de cauteri de fistula la qual alscus primiers diysero: enten al loc de la fistula e fen aquela e aprop pausa en aquela fissura camaen subtil del qual es la forma de lu: E fon en aquela la quantitat de i unc de plom fundut; e te la tua ma am camaem am bona retencio, e no sia maugut le malaute per so que le plom fundut no pervengua al huel de aquel; e cove que pausas sobre le huel del malaute coto enfus en album de huou o en aygua, quar plom adhureys le loc de la fistula e sana aquela per sanacio meravilhora.	"And here is another method of cauterizing a fistula that was first described: enter the opening of the fistula and dig into it with a thin camphor stick that has this shape: And on that, pour in the quantity of one dram of molten lead. Then hold it with your hand with good retention, so that the molten lead does not reach the skin of the patient; and cover the area around the opening of the fistula with powdered egg whites or water, because the lead adheres to the location of the fistula and heals it wonderfully."
E si la fistula es sanada am aquo que havem dit del cauteri e de la curacio, bo es; e sino, lahoras es necessari aministrar trauc del nas e reduzir la fistula al cors del nas segon que vindra en son loc propri.	"And if the fistula is healed with what we have said about cautery and treatment, that is good. But if not, then it is necessary to perform a tracheostomy and reduce the fistula into the throat according to what will come in its proper place."
Capitol .xviii.	"Chapter xviii."
De cauterizacio de la fendedura des potz.	"On the cautery of the opening of the buttocks."
Motas veguadas accideysso fissuras en las labias, e majorment en las labias dels enfantz.	"Fissures often occur on the lips, more commonly in infants."
Donc cum tu curas aquelas fissuras am aquo que nos havem dit en las divisios e no aprofieyta la tua cura, lahoras igneys le cauteri petit cutellar segon aquesta forma que s’ensiec:	"So when you treat those fissures with what we have said in the divisions and your treatment does not help, then use a small cautery knife in this manner that is shown to us:"
E sia la conquavitat de lu segon la subtilitat de cotella.	"And it should be concave like a needle's tip."
Aprop pausa aquel init cuytadament en aquelas fissuras entro que·l cauteri pervengua al preon de las fissuras.	"Approach the incision carefully into those fissures until the cautery reaches the center of the fissure."
E aprop cura aquel am cerotz entro que sia sanat.	"And then dress it with cerote until it is healed."
Capitol .xix.	Chapter XIX
De cauterizacio de fistula en la boca.	"On the cautery of a fistula in the mouth."
Quan en la razit de uvula o en le paladar o en las razitz de las dentz endeve apostema e aprop fa brac, e aprop es rompuda, e aprop es antiquada, e corr brac e es fayta fistula, e aprop tu curas aquela e no aprofieyta a curacio, lahoras cove que tu igniscas cauteri segon la quantitat que sia receubuda en la fistula, e aprop met aquel ignit en le trauc de la fistola, e te la tua ma entro que pervengua le ferr ignit al preon de lu, e al derier de lu fazen aysso una veguada o dos; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que nos havem dit de la curacio entro que sia sanat.	"When an abscess forms on the uvula or palate or on the roots of teeth and it breaks open, and it becomes old, and pus flows out forming a fistula, and you treat it but it does not heal, then you should cauterize with fire according to the size received in the fistula. Then put that burning iron into the track of the fistula, and hold your hand so that the hot iron reaches the center of it. And after doing this once or twice, then dress it with what we have said for its treatment until it is healed."
E donc si la sania es abscindita e es sanat, bo es; e sino, lahoras es necessari de descubrir le loc e hostar le os corrumput segon que vindra en son capitol.	"And if the bone is resected and it heals, then that is good. But if not, then it is necessary to discover the place and remove the rotten bone according to what comes up in its chapter."
Capitol .xx.	Capítol sobre la reduccion de luxaciones en les articulacions.
De cauterisacio de las dentz e de mollificacio de las angivas.	"Treatment of teeth by cauterization and softening of veins."
Quan las angivas son mollificadas per humiditat e las dentz son maugudas, e curas aquelas am medicinas e no confereys, lahoras pausa le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop igneys le cauteri la forma del qual vindra aprop aysso, enayssi que tu pauses la quanula sobre la dent e entromet en aquela le cauteri ignit festinantment, e te la tieua ma un petit entro que·l malaute cente la calor del foc a la razit de la dent esser pervenguda.	"When veins are softened by humidity and teeth are aching, if you treat them with medications and they do not improve, then pause the head of the patient on your thigh, and promptly bring the cautery instrument here described, so that you place the cautery cup over the tooth and insert it quickly into that area, removing your hand a little before the patient feels the heat of the fire reaching the root of the tooth."
E aprop leva la tua ma, e aprop itera le cauteri alcunas veguadas segon que vols.	"And promptly remove your hand, and again apply the cautery several times according to what you desire."
E aprop le malaute huompla la sua boca de aygua de sal e tengua aquela per una hora, e pueys stupa aquela, quar la dent mauguda es fermada e la gengiva mollificada es strenguda e la humiditat corrompuda es exsiccada.	"And then the patient should rinse his mouth with salt water and keep it for an hour, and afterwards spit it out, because the aching tooth is fixed, the softened gum is strengthened, and the humidity that causes decay is dried."
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter XXI.
De cauterisacio de dolor de dent.	On the cauterization of toothache.
Quan dolor de dent es per fregiditat, o en lu es freg o verm, o no comfereys la curacio am medicina, lahoras cauteri en aquela es segon dos manieyras: o cauteri am boder de vacas, o cauteri am foc.	When tooth pain is caused by coldness or decay, if it does not yield to medicine, then cautery in that case is done in two ways: either cautery with the border of a cow's horn, or cautery with fire.
Cauteri am boder es que tu prenguas boder de vacas e bulhas aquel en culhe de ferr , e aprop pren coto e envolopa le sobre la extremitat de la tenta, e aprop enmergeys aquel am boder bulhit, e pausa aquel sobre la dent dolorosa festinantment entro que sia enfregidat.	Take the border of a cow's horn, heat it in the fire; then quickly take it out and wrap it around the end of an iron rod. Then heat that border-horn quickly, and apply it to the aching tooth without delay while it is still hot.
E aprop itera aquela alcunas veguadas entro que la vertut del foc pervengua a la razit de la dentz.	And repeat this several times until the power of the fire reaches the root of the teeth.
E si voys, submergeys lana o coto en le boder desus dit, e pausa aquel sobre la dent dolent, e pausa sobre aquel ferr ignit entro que·l ferr pervengua al preon de la conquavitat de la dent.	If you wish, dip wool or cotton in the border mentioned above and place it on the aching tooth, then hold over it a red-hot iron until the iron reaches the front of the concavity of the tooth.
Mays empero la cauterizacio am foc es que tu atendas a la quannula de eram o de ferr, e sia en le cor de lu alcuna grocesa e la acuitat del foc no pervengua a la boca del malaute.	But in any case, the cautery with fire must be done carefully and slowly, making sure that neither the coal nor the iron is too hot to touch, so as not to cause injury to the mouth of the sick person.
E aprop igneys le cauteri la forma del qual vindra, e pausa aquel sobre la dent e te la tua ma entro que·l cauteri sia enfregidat; e fay aquo alcunas veguadas quar la dolor sira remauguda o en aquel dia o en l’autre dia.	Then heat the cautery to its proper shape and apply it to the tooth while you hold your hand over your mouth until the cautery has cooled. Repeat this several times, either on that day or the following day, until the pain has subsided.
E cove que per empressio de aquel cauteri que·l malaute umpla la sieua boca de bon boder e tengua aquel per una hora e aprop scupa le; e aquesta es la forma del cauteri.	And it is necessary that after this cautery, the sick person should rinse his mouth well with good water and hold it for one hour, then spit it out. This is the shape of the cautery.
E cauteriza am qual que tu voys extremittat segon que a tu es possible.	And cauterize according to your will, as far as it is possible for you.
E aquesta es la forma de la cannula:	And this is the form of the cannula:
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter XXII
De cauterizacio de extrophulos.	Of cautery for external fistulas.
Quan extrophulos so de flecma e de humors fregas e no so hobedientz a digistio per medicinas e tu voys la digistio de aquelas leugerament, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri conquau la forma del qual es aquesta seguen, havent dos extremitatz hubertas per que yesca le fum deves le cauteri per l’autra extremitat, e pausa aquel ignit sobre aquel apostema una veguada, e autre si indigeyses de aquel, entro que pervengua al preon del apostema.	When external fistulas are filled with phlegm and humors, and do not heal despite medication, and you wish to cauterize them slightly for digestion's sake, then heat the cautery to its proper shape, which has two sharp points, so that smoke can exit from one point while the other is heated. Apply it once or twice, as needed, until it reaches the front of the fistula.
E si l’apostema es pauca, lahoras pausa le cauteri segon la quantitat del apostema, e aprop leyssa le per tres jorns e pausa sobre lu coto enfus en boder entro que sia remaugut aquo que·l foc ha comburit.	And if the fistula is small, then apply the cautery according to its size. Leave it alone for three days and then wash the area with warm water until what was burned by the fire has healed.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent e tentas e draps entro que sia sanat.	Then dress it with ointment, bandages, and cloths until it is healed.
E la forma de la cannula o deu cauteri a tal es comveyter.	And the form of the cannula or cautery for this purpose is as follows:
Capitol .xxiii.	Chapter XXIII.
De cauterizacio de rauquiera de votz e de constriccio de ale.	"For the cautery of ulcers of the throat and for the constriction of the windpipe."
Quan las humiditatz veno sobre le quanal del pulmo, e majorment quan aquo es am fregiditat de compleccio, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia evacuat al comensament am medicinas laxativas, e aprop cauteriza aquel deves la razit del golayro en le loc depremegut.	"When humidity comes over the channel of the lung, especially when it is accompanied by coldness of temperament, then at first medicines which have a laxative effect should be given to the patient, and also the region around the uvula should be cauterized in the depressed area."
E guarda te que no pervenguas am le cauteri al golayro ni no comburas de la codena de lu sino un pauc.	"And be careful not to go too far with the cautery on the uvula or burn the root of it, but only a little bit."
E cauteriza aquel am autra cauteri deves la junctura del col en le derier espondil de lu.	"And burn it with another cautery on the joint of the neck at the last vertebra."
E·l cauteri de lu sia clavilh sego la maniera precedent.	"And the cautery should be made according to the manner previously described."
E aprop cura aquel am aquo que es precedit entro que sia sanat.	"And then cure it in the same way that was described earlier so that it may heal."
Capitol .xxiiii.	Chapter XXIV
De cauterizacio de malautia del pulmo e de tos.	Concerning the cautery for illness of the lung and cough.
Quan tos e malautia de pulmo so de humiditatz fregas e le malaute no ha febre ni tisic e es malautia antiqua, lahoras cauterisa aquel am dos cauteris sobre la furcula en les locz depremegutz leontz e buoytz; e am autra cauteri en le mieg loc del pietz entre dos mamillos; e sia le cauteri clavilh segon la forma precedent.	When there is coughing and lung disease from moist phlegm, and the illness has no fever or spitting, and it is an old illness, cauterize it with two cauteries on the furcula at the depressed locations of the shoulders and elbows; and with another cautery in the middle of the chest between the two breasts; and let the cauteries be made according to the previous manner.
E si vols, sia la tua cauterizacio punctan am le cauteri que es apelat puncta, la forma del qual precedeys en la ponctacio de dolor de aurelhas.	"And if you wish, let your cautery be puncturing with the cautery called punctum, whose form is described in the punctuation of earache."
E sian puntz entro cays ad aquels; e aprop cura aquel am aquo meteys que es precedit entro que sia sanat.	"And they should be punctured to those locations; and then cure it with what was described earlier so that it may heal."
E ya sia le cauteri haventz tres ramps quar cauterizacio es am aquel: am una veguada podes far tres cauteris segon aquesta forma:	"And if you have the cauteries without branches, for cautery there are three: with one device you can make three cauteries according to this form:"
Capitol .xxv.	De cauterizacion de dolor de cap.
De cauterizacio de titillic que es le cap del ajutori.	"On cauterization of the titillic, which is the head of the helper."
Quan le cap del ajutori es dislocat per causa de humiditatz lubricas e no es fermat en la hora del sieu retornament deves la sua dislocacio entro que sia a lu aquo costuma de retornar, e aprop per un petit movement es deslocat ayssi que s’endeve, ayssi cum nos havem testificat, lahoras cove que primieyrament redusiscas la dislocacio, e aprop le malaute sia reversat sobre le sieu dos o sobre le latz sa; e aprop eleva la codena la qual es en la partida dedintz del citillic a las partidas desus am les ditz de la tua ma sinistra, si la junctura es dislocada a las partidas dedintz.	"When the head of the helper is dislocated due to slippery moisture and isn't secured during its return, it's necessary to reduce its dislocation before it can return. First, gently lift up the shoulder blade that sits behind the titillic towards the top using your left hand if the joint is dislocated inwards."
E aprop igneys le cauteri havent dos caps; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	"And similarly, the cautery has two heads; this is its shape:"
E aprop cauteriza la codena entro que penetre aquela entro al autre latz; e vindra la figura de cauterizacio lahoras de iv caps cauteris.	"And also cauterize the shoulder blade until it penetrates into the other side. And now comes the figure of cauterization with four cautery heads."
e so aquel subtils segon la quantitat de tenta; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	"and thus that subtle one according to the quantity of the tentacle; this is its shape:"
E alcunas veguadas es ajustat segon aquest comte i per que son les cauteris .viii.	"And sometimes it is adjusted according to this count and for that reason there are eight cauteries."
E aprop pausa sobre le cauteri porys cuytz am sal, e aprop fay adherir le malaute a trenquilitat, e lo membre no sia maugut per alcun temps entro que sia confortat.	"And also pause on the cautery for about five minutes with salt, and then make sure the dislocation is adhering to tranquility, so that the limb may not be moved for some time until it is comforted."
E si la dislocacio es a las partidas desus e tart es fayt aquo, lahoras cauteriza sobre le muscle am cauteri clavilh o am motz cauteris puntan, quar la junctura es confermada e la humiditat es romauguda e le malaute es sanat.	"And if the dislocation is upwards and tart has been done, then cauterize on the muscle with a claw-shaped cautery or with pointed cauteries, because the joint is confirmed and the moisture is removed and the dislocation is healed."
Capitol .xxvi.	"Chapter XXVI."
De cauterizacio del stomac.	"On cauterization of the stomach."
Quan veno en l’estomac freg e motas humiditatz entro que aquel extrazo de la sua compleccio e so multiplicatz raumases a lu, e si tu continuas las manieyras de curacio e no confereyso, lahoras cove que le malaute sia sobre le sieu dos ressupinat, e extenda las suas mas e las suas coysas, e aprop cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris: an un cauteri dejos le pietz per la quantitat d’un dit am cauteri clavilh, e am dos cauteris dejos del dos costatz del cauteri, entro que vengua la figura de cauteri triangulada; e elonga entre els que no sian ajustatz que faran poyredura.	"When there is heat and much humidity in the stomach that exceeds its capacity and if you continue with careless treatment without confirmation, then it's necessary to place the patient on their back and extend their arms and legs, and then cauterize them with three cauteries: one on the left side of the navel with a claw-shaped cautery about the size of a finger joint, and two on either side of the ribcage so that the figure of a triangular cautery is formed; and elongate those that are not properly placed to prevent burning."
E si la profunditat del cauteri la quantitat de les dos terses de la grocesa de la codena.	"And if the depth of the cautery equals two-thirds of the thickness of the shoulder blade."
E sia la figura del cauteri segon aquesta forma ses addicio, E si vols, cauteriza am gran cauteri en le mieg loc del estomac segon aquesta forma; et aquest sia un cauteri segon la forma de cercle segon aquesta forma:	"And if you want to use this cautery figure as an addition, then cauterize with a large cautery in the middle of the stomach according to this shape. And this is one cautery according to the circular form according to this shape:"
E sia cauterizat l’estomac punctan ad aquel que de aquest cauteri es spaventat: e es que tu senhes sobre l’estomac punt segon la quantitat que voles am tenta, e aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri en les puntz; e aprop cura aquel am la curacio qu’es precedita entro que sia sanat.	"And the stomach should be punctured with that one who is afraid of this cautery: And you should prick the stomach with a tentacle according to the quantity you want, and then cauterize those points with a cautery; and then treat it with the cure that is previously mentioned until it is healed."
Capitol .xxvii.	"Chapter XXVII."
De cauterizacio del fietge fret.	"On cauterization of the fatty liver."
Quan endeve en le fietge dolor per fregiditat o per humiditat o per grossa ventositat entro que de la sieua normal compleccio sia getat per egressio superflua, e es curat le malaute am aquo que havem dit e no comfereys, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sua cervitz, e senhes am tenta tres cauteris segon aquesta forma et aquesta quantitat meteyssa sobre le fietge dejos dels ipocondres, la hon perve le decubit de home.	"When there is pain in the liver due to coldness or excess humidity or windiness causing it to exceed its normal capacity and if the condition has been treated with what was mentioned previously without confirmation, then it's necessary for the patient to lie on their back with their head elevated, and prick three cauteries according to this shape and quantity measure on the liver on the right side of the hypochondrium where the ribcage curves."
E sia l’espazi le qual es entre quascun cauteri segon la grossetut del dit, e sia le cauteri segon la longitut del cors dreyta.	"And the space between each cautery should be according to the thickness of a finger, and the cauteries should be according to the length of the right side of the ribcage."
E no compremas la tua am le cauteri mot.	"And do not press down with the cautery too much."
E si la quantitat de aquo que es adhurit la quantitat de la maytat de la specitut de la codena, e no y sia pus ajustat; e si le malaute stant sobre les pes de lu; e si no es estant, lahoras sia jassent, le qual ja ha extendudas las suas coysas, e eleve les sieus brasses.	"And if the quantity of what is cauterized equals the width of the specificity of the shoulder blade and it is not properly adjusted; and if the condition is standing on its feet; and if it is not standing, then let it lie down, having already extended their arms, and elevate their elbows."
E es aquesta la forma del cauteri:	"And this is the shape of the cautery:"
E a tu es possible que cauterizes aquestz cauteris am cauteri cutellar, quan es am tu subtilitat e prudencia en l’art.	"And if it is possible for you to cauterize these cauteries with a scalpel cautery, then do so with subtlety and caution in the art."
E guarda te que trop no procesiscas en la cauterizacio, e sia adhurida la specitut de tota la codena per que sia adhurit tot le cors e pervengua entro als budels, quar la codena aqui es subtil; e sapias aquo.	"And be careful not to proceed too much in the cautery, and make sure to cauterize the entire shoulder blade so that all of the body is cauterized and enters into the vessels, for the shoulder blade here is subtle; and know this."
Capitol .xxviii.	"Chapter XXVIII."
De perforacio de apostema del fietge am cauteri.	"On perforation of an abscess of the liver with a cautery."
Quan endeve excitura o apostema en le fietge e voles saber si aquel apostema es en le carn del fietge o en la tunica de lu, lahoras si es en la carn del fietge, le malaute atrobo gravitat e dolor ses acuitat.	"When there is an ulcer or abscess in the liver and you want to know if that abscess is in the flesh of the liver or in its capsule, then if it's in the flesh of the liver, the patient will have severe pain and heaviness without sharpness."
E si es en la tunica del fietge, am la dolor es acuitat gran e vezes que ja afatiguatz les metges la cura de lu.	"And if it's in the capsule of the liver, there will be sharp and intense pain that often causes physicians to tire of treating it."
Donc cove que·l malaute sia enversat sobre la sieua cervit; e aprop senha le loc de l’apostema am tenta; e aprop igneys le cauteri le quel es asemblat a rag, la forma del qual a precedit en l’autra pagina.	"Therefore, the patient should lie on their back; and then prick the location of the abscess with a tentacle; and then ignite the cautery which is shaped like a rake, the shape of which was previously shown on another page."
E cauteriza am aquel i cauteri entro que tota la codena sia comborida, entro que pervengua al ciphac, entro qu’en yesca sania.	"And cauterize with that cautery until all of the abscess is burned away, so that it reaches to the cauda and so that it heals in a manner like embers."
E aprop cura aquel per curacio dels autres apostemas entro que sia sanat.	"And then treat it with the usual cure for other abscesses until it is healed."
E no cove que de aquesta forma de cauteri use sino aquel del qual le estudi en l’art de medicina es prolonguat, e en las mas del qual motas malautias an conogut; mays aquest am esperiment alcunas veguadas sia ardit sobre aquesta operacio, mays empero leyssa aquela deves nos, e es miels.	"And only those who have prolonged their study in the art of medicine and have encountered many illnesses should use this form of cautery. Although some may have experimented with it a few times, yet it is better to leave that to those who know, and not to attempt it oneself."
Capitol .xxix.	"Chapter XXIX."
De cauterizacio de plauresi.	"Of cautery for pleasure."
Diyssero les antics cauteri de las razitz de aristologia a plauresi frega segon aquesta manieyra esser fazedor, e es aquest que tu prenguas de las razitz de aristologia longa secca una razit pun longua que es trobada, e sia de la grossetut del dit.	"They said that the ancient cauteries of the roots of aristology for pleasure were made according to this manner: and it is this, that you take from the roots of aristology a dry root pointed at one end, and thick as a finger."
E aprop submergeys aquela en oli e eysen aquela al foc, e aprop cauteriza per un cauteri en aquel loc le qual es entre la continuacio de la furcula am le col; e am dos cauteris petitz dejos guidazi, un pauc declinans a la partida que es dejus la barba, e am dos cauteris en aquo que es declinant entre la quinta costa e la cizena, declinant un pauc a las partidas detras; e am autre cauteri en le mieg loc del pietz; et am autre sobre l’estomac, et am tres cauteris de las partidas detras; et am un cauteri en aquel loc le qual es entre las dos spallas, e am dos cauteris dels dos latz del pietz, dejos le cauteri le qual es entre doas spallas.	"And you should immerse that in oil and then heat it on the fire, and then cauterize with a cautery at that place which is between the continuation of the furcula and the neck; and with two small cauteries, one inclined slightly towards the right side below the beard, and with two cauteries inclined between the fifth rib and the sixth, inclined slightly towards the back; and with another cautery in the middle of the chest; and with another on the stomach; and with three cauteries on the back parts; and with one cautery between the two shoulders; and with two cauteries on both sides of the chest, below the cautery which is between the two shoulders."
E no cove que compremas la tua ma am le cauteri, ans sia en le manifest de la codena en obra.	"And you should not hold your hand over the cautery, but rather let it be done in open air."
E ja diyssero alscus antics que so alscus dels homes les quals uson de cauteri de ferr semblant a ray e igneysso aquel, e meto aquel en aquel loc le qual es entre las costas, entro que pervenguam am aquel ad aquel apostema e sia foragetada sania, ayssi cum havem dit en l’apostema del fietge.	"And they said that the ancient cauteries of those men which use to cauterize with an iron instrument similar to a rod and heat it in that place which is between the ribs until it arrives at that aposteme and let it be opened, as we have said in the aposteme of the liver."
Mays en aquesta perforacio am cauteri no es ses temor, quar hu mor tantost ho accideys en le loc fistula a la qual no es sanacio.	"But in this perforation with cautery there is no fear, because even if it happens suddenly, it occurs in the place of a fistula which is not healing."
Capitol .xxx.	"Chapter XXX."
De la cauterizacio de la melsa.	"Of the cauterization of the melon."
Quan tu curas la malautia de la melsa am aquo que havem dit de la curacio en la divisio e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cauteri en lu es segon tres manieras, las quals totas son dreyturieras, de las quals la una es que fassas tres cauteris o quatre linhan segon la longitut de la melsa segon la figura dels cauteris del fietge, la figura dels quals ha precedit.	When you treat the illness of the spleen according to what has been said about its treatment in this division and do not deviate from your treatment, then cauterization on it is done in three ways, all of which are correct. One way is to make three or four cauteries along the length of the spleen according to the figure of liver cauteries, whose shape has already been described.
E sia entre quascun cauteri la grossetut d’un dit o un pauc mes, e la manieyra del cauteri sia la manieyra la qual havem dita en le cauteri del fietge engualment.	And between each cautery the thickness should be that of a finger or slightly more, and the manner of cauterization should be done in the same way as described for liver cauteries.
E no compremas la tua ma am le cauteri; e le malaute sia eves sobre lo sieu dos.	Do not press your hand against the cautery; let the illness be evident on its own spot.
E es autra manieyra de cauterizar, so es que tu igniscas le cauteri haventz dos vertimentz, la qual causa havem dita en le capitol de dislocacio del muscle, e elava la codena la qual es en le endreyt de la melsa la hon perve le jazer del malaute sinistre.	And another method of cauterization is that you ignite the cautery having turned it twice in its own length, which causes a movement that has been described in the chapter on dislocation of muscles, and raise the coat that lies over the spleen where the seat of left-sided illness resides.
E sia la tua elevacio am la qual elevas la codena segon la longuesa del cors, per que sian faytz cauteris segon la latitut del cos.	And your elevation should be such that you raise the coat along the length of the body so that cauteries can be made according to the width of the body.
E aprop entromet les dos vernimentz, ignitz mot, en aquel entro que am aquels penetres la codena de la autra part.	And having inserted both vermifuge ends, ignite it quickly in that opening where you have pierced the coat from the other side.
E aprop extrayt le cauteri; e donc son faytz quatre cauteris.	"And then extract the cautery; thus four cauteries are made."
E si voys, cauteriza am cauteri havent tres vernimentz.	"Furthermore, cauterize with a cautery having three openings."
E aprop tu cura le cauteri pus que aia laysat de getar brac per trops jorns, quar mays es comferent que las autras causas precedentz en la curacio.	"And then cure the cautery since it has been lying there for too many days, because it is more harmful than other causes of injury in the treatment."
Capitol .xxxi.	"Chapter XXIX."
De cauterizacio de ydropici.	"On cauterizing hydrocele."
Cauteri no catz en ydropici sino en alcinte3 propriament.	"A cautery should not be placed on the scrotum except properly prepared [albeit]."
Quan tu curas le ydropic am las manieyras de curacio las quals havem ditas en la divisio e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que aquel cauterizes am quatre cauteris en le cercuit del embelic e am un cauteri sobre l’estomac, e am autre cauteri sobre le fietge, e am autre cauteri sobre la melsa, e am dos cauteris entre les spondils del dos, e un cauteri en lo dreyt del pietz, e am autre cauteri sobre l’estomac.	"When you cure the hydrocele with the methods of treatment that we have mentioned in the division and your treatment does not confer, then it is necessary to cauterize him with four cauteries around the navel, one cautery on the stomach, another cautery on the liver, another cautery on the spleen, two cauteries between the shoulders blades, one cautery on the right side of the buttock, and another cautery on the stomach."
E la quantitat de la profunditat del cauteri sia propdana a la spicitut de la codena.	"And let the quantity and depth of the cautery be proportionate to the thickness of the skin."
E aprop layssa le cauteri ubert per so que gete brac per lonc temps.	"And remove the cautery immediately after it has been applied, lest it remain there for too long a time."
E no evacuas le malaute de curacio aprop le cauteri am aquo que cove per que sian agreguadas a lu doas entencios, e sira festinada a lu am ajutori sanacio.	"And do not remove the patient from treatment immediately after the cautery has been applied, lest he should lose two intentions, and healing will be delayed."
La forma del cauteri am lo qual es cauterizat lo ventre sia clavilh segon que la forma de aquel es desus precedent, e es aquel am le qual es cauterizat le dos sia olivar segon qu’es precedent a la sua forma.	"The form of the cautery with which the belly is cauterized should be claviform according to its preceding form, and that with which the back is cauterized should be olive-shaped according to its preceding shape."
Capitol .xxxii.	"Chapter XXXII."
De cauterizacio de pes e de las coyssas.	Cautery of feet and thighs.
Quan les pes so apostematz en ydropitz e so repletz de aygua sitrina, cove que cauterisas les pes sobre le dos del pe in nocrati aquo que es entre le auricular e le anular, e eleva la tua ma am le cauteri e no torses aquel; e aprop eleva la tua ma, e no retornes aquela de tot, quar l’aygua satrina rezuda.	When the feet are swollen with dropsy and full of serum water, it is necessary to cauterize the backs of the feet near the area between the little toe and the big toe, raising your hand above the cautery and not twisting that; and raise your hand, and do not return that until all the serous fluid has been removed.
Es le cauteri segon aquesta forma: E aprop fay sobre las doas coyssas dos cauteris, e en quascuna coysa sia feyt cauteri am la extremitat del cauteri cutellar.	The cautery is done in this way: Then make two cauteries on both thighs, and on each thigh make a cautery with the pointed end of the cautery.
E sia le cauteri segon la longitut de la coyssa: i dejos le denolh e l’autre jos le mieg loc de la coyssa; e sobre quascuna coyssa dos cauteris.	And let the cautery be made along the length of the thigh, leaving one below the kneecap and another below the middle point of the thigh; and on each thigh make two cauteries.
E layssa la plagua uberta ses curacio per lonc temps per so que alcuna aygua resuda de lu.	And let the wound remain uncovered until healed for some time to prevent any serum from remaining in it.
E aprop cura le am aquelas causas las quals havem ditas.	Then treat him with those causes which we have mentioned.
Capitol .xxxiii.	Chapter XXXIII
De cauterizacio de cos de ventre.	Of cautery of the belly.
Quan cos de ventre es per freg e per humiditat entro que debelice las vertutz, so es la vertut digestiva e retentiva, las quals so en l’estomac e en les budels, e es curat aquo am las manieyras de curacio e no confereys, e vezes le malaute suffertan cauteri de vertut exhiberant, lahoras cauteriza aquel am gran cauteri sobre le sieu stomac segon que a precedit en la cauterizacio del estomac, am le cauteri del cercle e am quatre cauteris en le cercuit del embelic subtils, am cauteri clavilh subtil; e am cauteri sobre le alcatin sobre alozis gran, o am dos cauteris.	When the belly is affected by friction and humidity within, which weakens the virtues, so is the digestive virtue and retentive virtue weakened, which are in the stomach and intestines, it is cured with these means of treatment and not otherwise; sometimes the illness suffers cautery of virtue being exhibited, at that time cauterize him with a large cautery on his stomach according to what has been mentioned in the cauterization of the stomach, with a circular cautery and four subtile cauteries around it, with a pointed cautery; and with cautery on the bladder over the pubis, or with two cauteries.
E si vezes las humiditatz exhuberants e le malaute aquo tollerant, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre le pentenilh e sobre les budels, e fort leu ajustant dos cauteris sobre l’estomac e prop dels inguonas, quar es curacio perficent de juvament de la qual no erras.	And if sometimes the excessive humidities and the illness are tolerating it, at that time cauterize him on the navel and on the intestines, and strongly joining two cauteries on the stomach and near the groins, for this is a perfect cure by which you will not err.
Capitol .xxxiv.	De cauterizacio de budels per malaute del flac e per colica.
De cauterizacio de emorroydas antiquas.	"Of the cautery of hemorrhoids."
Quan so en la natura derier emorroydas antiquas o una de humors grossas fregas o de humiditatz corrompudas, e son curadas am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no confereys la tieua curacio, lahoras cauterisa am tres cauteris sobre le pus dejos spondilh del dos petit e petit triangular, e am cauteri desus le ombelic cays per dos ditz.	"When there is a final hard hemorrhoid or one of thick humors rubbed on it or corrupted moisture, and they are cured with what we have said in the division, then cauterize them with three cauteries over the buttocks near the two small triangular ones, and place another cautery above the navel."
E si doptas que l’estomac de lu sia enfregidat e la vianda de lu no sia degerida, e la cara de lu vezes apostemada, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre l’estomac am gran cauteri segon que es precedit; e am un cauteri sobre fietge, e am autre cauteri sobre la melsa de lu am cauteri clavilh, e leyssa le cauteri per alcun temps ubert, e aprop cura lu entro que sia sanat.	"If it seems that the stomach is cold and the food undigested, and the face appears pale, then cauterize that area on the stomach with a large cautery as previously mentioned; place another cautery on the liver, and yet another cautery on the spleen using a pointed cautery, leaving the cauteries in place for some time until the inside is healed."
Capitol .xxxv.	"Chapter XXXV."
De cauterizacio de atheyl aprop la abscizio de lor.	"Of the cauterization of chilblains near their ulceration."
Quan tu abscindes atheyl, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri que es asemblat a ray.	When you cut the artery, then ignite the cautery that is assembled like a ray.
Aprop entremet aquel ignit en aquel atheyl abscis, e ultima la tieua ma entro que pervengua le cauteri al orifici de la vena de la qual ve la sanc.	Bring that ignited cautery to the cut artery and seal its end until you see blood flowing from the vein it connects to.
E fay aquo una vetz o doas, quar si achieyl son trops, lahoras cauteriza quascun de lor segon que havem recontat, e aprop cura aquels am aquo que confereys a lor dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And do this once or twice, because if there are too many (arteries), then cauterize each one separately according to what we have discussed, and afterwards cure those that you can with what you have at hand until they are healed.
E si cauterizas am gran cauteri sobre alquatin, es mays derier en juvament.	And if you cauterize with a large cautery over certain parts, it is more dangerous in judgment.
Capitol .xxxvi.	Chapter XXXVI
De cauterizacio de fistolas que son faytas en la natura derie en las partidas de lu.	Of the cauterization of fistulas that are made naturally in the skin.
Quan la natura no obeziys a la obra la qual havem recomtada en son loc, e·l pacient es espaventat per aquo, sia sanat am cauteri.	When nature does not obey the work which we have recommended in its place, and the patient is frightened by this, it should be healed with cautery.
Donc quan ad alcun ve fistola en la natura derier, e es antiquada, corro sania de lu e humiditatz corrompudas, e donc aquo que es pus digne que cove es que proes aquela am tenta subtil, e aprop conoys la quantitat de la profunditat de lu am la devant dita tenta.	Therefore, when there is some fistula formed naturally in the skin, and it is old and corrupted with matter and corrupt humidity, then what is more proper than to probe that with a subtle tent, and also know the quantity of its depth with the aforementioned tent.
Aprop igneys le cauteri que es semblant a ray.	And then ignite the cautery that is like a ray.
E aprop met aquel cauteri ignit en aquesta fistula, e segon la quantitat en la qual intrec la tenta.	And then insert that ignited cautery into this fistula, and according to the quantity in which the tent entered.
E itera sobre aquela le cauteri entro que sian comburitz aquels cors corrumputz tost una veguada o dos o tres, segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	And keep the cautery on that until those corrupted tissues are consumed once or twice or three times according to your necessity.
E guarda te de combustio de nervi e de vena; o si fistula va al cors de la vesica o al cors del budel, lahoras guarda te de totz aquels locz; e no fassas aquo sino quan la fistula es en loc carnos e cogitas que no es penetrant.	And be careful not to burn the nerves and veins; or if the fistula goes into the body of the bladder or the body of the bowel, then be careful about all those places. And do not do this unless the fistula is in a fleshy place and you think it is not penetrating.
E aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat.	And then heal that place until it is healed.
E si le loc es sigillat, e so abscindidas de lu las materias, e roman ayssi per lonc temps, lahoras sapias que ja es curat entierament.	And if the place is sealed up and all the matter has been removed from it, and it remains like that for a long time, then know that it is entirely healed.
E si las materias no so de lu ostadas, lahoras sapias que es penetrant o en le preon de lu os corromput, o cays aquo de aquelas causas de las quals vindra rememoracio en son loc.	And if the matter has not been entirely removed from it, then know that it is penetrating or in the presence of some corrupted bone, or because of those causes which will be mentioned later.
Capitol .xxxvii.	Chapter XXXVII
De cauterizacio dels ronhos.	On the cautery of warts.
Quan en les ronhos endeve dolor per freg o per grossa ventozitat, e per aysso le coyt del malaute es amermat, lahoras cove que cauterizes aquel sobre les ronhos am cauteri sobre quascun ronho am cauteri clavilh del qual precesic la rememoracio.	When pain invades the lungs due to heat or excessive windiness, and thus the patient's heart is weakened, then it is necessary to cauterize that area over the lungs with a pointed cautery on each lung, using one that has been prepared beforehand.
E fort leu cauterizam am le segon un petit dejos, per que vindran tres cauteris liniatz, e donc siran mays deriers en juvament.	And then cauterize with the second one a little further down, so that three lines form, and then finish off with the others for better effect.
Capitol .xxxviii.	Chapter XXXVIII
De cauterizacio de la vesica.	Of cauterization of the bladder.
Quan accideys en la vesica debelitat e mollificacio per freg e per humiditatz ayssi que·l malaute la urina no retengua, lahoras cauteriza aquel en la partida pus dejos sobre la vesiqua, la hon comensan les pels del pentenilh, e cauteriza am un cauteri en la partida dreyta, e am autre en la senestra de lu.	When debility and softening occur in the bladder due to heat and humidity so that the patient cannot retain urine, then cauterize there near where the pubic hairs begin, cauterizing with one cautery on the right side and another on the left.
E sia la longitut de quascun cauteri segon la cantitat dels not del pous; e cauteriza aquel am cauteri en la partida pus bassa del dos, o am dos cauteris si es necessitat.	And let the length of each cautery be according to the amount of heat in the bladder; and cauterize there with one cautery near the lowest part of the back, or with two if necessary.
E sia cauteri clavilh segon que es procesit.	And let the cautery be pointed according to what is appropriate.
Capitol .xxxix.	Chapter XXXIX
De cauterizacio de la mayra.	Of cauterization of the uterus
Quan veno en la mayra freg e humiditatz, e per aysso es prohibida enpreignacio, e son corrompudas las mestruas de lu, e es tardada la provocacio de lor, e accideys dolor deves le haveniment de lor, lahoras cove que·l loc sia cauterizat am tres cauteris en le circuit del ombelic, ayssi cum havem dit en le cauteri de la vesica; e am cauteri sobre le loc pus dejos del dos, o am dos cauteris, e sia le cauteri clavilh.	When there is heat and humidity in the uterus, causing infertility, corruption of menstruation, delay in their onset, and pain during their occurrence, then that area should be cauterized with three cauteries around the navel region, as we have described for bladder cautery; and also cauterize above the lowest part of the back with one pointed cautery or two if necessary.
Capitol .xl.	Chapter XL
De cauterizacio de la dislocacio de l’anqua.	Of cauterization for dislocation of the ankle
Quan humiditatz moucozas so efundudas a la partida de la anqua, e so faytas causas del yssiment del sieu loc, e senhal de lu es que la coyssa es prolonguada sobre l’autre quan so comparadas entre lor.	When moisture or mucus is effused around the ankle joint causing dislocation there, and a sign of this is that one bone is prolonged over another when they are compared with each other, then:
E le loc de la dislocacio es atrobat en lu quays boyt.	"The location of the dislocation can be found in the thigh bone."
Adonc cove que cauterizas le malaute sobre la partida de la anqua de lu am cauteri a sercle semblant, pus que tu auras senhat am tenta en le cercuit de la partida ayssi cum es revolguda, e per so que la partida caia el mieg loc del cercle.	"Then you must cauterize the patient on the edge of the anus opening with a circular cautery device, because when you have felt around the circumference of the opening like this, and because the opening falls in the middle of the circle."
E sia le cauteri del qual precedit la forma en la cauterizacio del estomac.	"And it should be the same cautery device as mentioned earlier used for cauterizing the stomach."
E si aquest cauteri no es a tu present, lahoras cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris am cauteri olivar gran.	"If this cautery is not available to you, then cauterize with three olive-shaped cauteries."
E sia fayt le cauteri segon la quantitat de la ispicitut de tota la codena; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	"And perform the cautery according to the size of the inflammation throughout the entire spine. Afterwards, carefully dress that wound which has been healed."
Capitol .xli.	"Chapter Forty-one."
De cauterizacio de la vena sciatica.	"Regarding the cautery of the sciatic vein."
Quan dolor ve en la partida de anqua, e so causa de lu freg et humiditatz, le malaute es curat am aquo que havem dit e no confereys, e aquo es antiquat, lahoras cove que tu lacses le malaute de humors grosses am pillulas fetidas o am pillulas artificials o semblantz; e aprop cauteriza aquel.	"When pain occurs in the sciatic nerve due to friction and moisture, the patient is cured with what has been said above and not otherwise. First, you should remove excess humors from the patient using foul-smelling pills or artificial pills. Then cauterize it."
E la manieyra del cauteri en aquela es segon dos manieyras: o cauteri am medicinas comburentz, o cauteri am foc.	"And the manner of cautery in this case is according to two methods: either cauterizing with burning medicines, or cautering with fire."
Sira segon dos manieyras scientas, de las quals es la una que cauterizes aquel sobre la partida de l’ancha de lu am tres cauteris triangulatz segon aquesta forma; e fay am aquels bona profunditat.	"According to two known methods: one is to cauterize the area over the hip joint with three triangular cauteries arranged like this, ensuring good depth."
E sia le spazi le qual es entre cascun cauteri la quantitat de la grossitut del dit e si le cauteri olivar o gran.	"And let the space between each cautery be equal to the thickness of a finger, and if the cautery is oval or round."
Mays alcunas veguadas sia le cauteri sobre le mieg loc sobre le cap de l’anquan per que son quatre cauteris.	"But sometimes it may happen that the cauteries are placed directly over the hip joint, in which case there will be four cauteries."
E si vols, cauteriza am le cercle del qual es precesida la forma en la cauterizacio de la dislocacio de l’anqua, la i que sia cercle continent e comburey la ispicitut de tota la codena.	"And if you wish, cauterize with the circle that precedes the shape of the cautery in the case of dislocation of the hip joint, so that it may contain and burn the entire length of the tendon."
E aquesta es la manieyra de cauteri in ciatiqua quan dolor es adherent al anqua e no es estenduda entro a la coyssa.	"And this is the manner of cautery for sciatica when pain adheres to the hip and does not extend into the groin."
Mays si es estenduda entro a la coyssa, lahoras cauteriza aquel am dos cauteris sobre la coyssa sobre le loc al qual envireys le malaute que es la dolor; e am un cauteri sobre la cavilha per quatre ditz un pauc deves la part cilvestra.	"But if it extends into the groin, then cauterize there with two cauteries over the groin at the point where the pain is felt, and one cautery over the knee on the outer side about four fingers below."
E si le cauteri cutellar, e sia la profunditat del cauteri segon la quantitat de la ispicitut de la codena.	"And if the cautery is made with a knife, then the depth of the cautery should be according to the length of the tendon."
E si le malaute envireys que la dolor es estenduda entro al loc prop les ditz des pes, lahoras cauteriza aquel aqui on envireys am cauteri per tres puntz o quatre o mays si indigeys de aquel.	"And if the pain extends to the lower leg near the ankles, then cauterize there where it extends with three or four cauteries or more as needed."
E si le malaute envireys dolor esser dejos le donolh ves la coyssa, lahoras cauteriza aquel aqui am un cauteri cutellar.	"And if the pain radiates down the front of the thigh near the groin, then cauterize there with a knife cautery."
E guarda te en tota cauterizacio que no ultimes am le cauteri en tant que comburas nervi o gran arceria, e que per aquo a tu es sobre le malaute mal noccument o contraccio.	"And in all cauteries, be careful not to end with the cautery on any nerve or large artery, lest you cause harm or contraction to the limb."
E yeu ja e vist un e autre de aquels les quals cauterizero sobre la cavilha e ultimero en la cauterizacio, e la cama foc inflada entro que la tumor aconseguit lo pe, e foc perforat e corromput tot le pe.	"And I have seen some of those who cauterize over the knee and end with the cautery there, and the leg became swollen to such an extent that the swelling reached the thigh, and it was punctured and corrupted throughout."
E aprop accidic fort solucio de ventre, e aprop aquo la mort.	"And moreover, in appropriate cases of diarrhea, this remedy is also useful for that purpose."
E si la dolor es en dos partidas ensemps cauteriza quascuna segon aquesta manieyra.	"And if the pain is on both sides at once, then cauterize each side according to this manner."
E diysero les savis alcus en la cauterizacio de anqua cauteri del qual aquesta es la manieyra: fay semblant a cercle de ferr del qual le cercuit sia la maytat de un palm; e sia deves le sieu orrifici segon la grossesa de un os de datil o mens un pauc.	"And some authorities say that in cauterizing the hip joint, the cautery should be made like this: it should resemble a circle of iron whose circumference is about the width of one's palm, and its point should be as thick as a finger bone or slightly less."
E dedintz aquel cercle sia un autre tertz; e sia le spazi le qual es entre lor la quantitat del notz del pous; e sian aquels cercles ubertz de dos partidas; e sia la longitut de aquels cays un notz o dos notz, e fay en aquels margue de ferr decentment apparelhat en les cercles; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	"And within that circle there should be another one-third of it; and the space between them should be about the width of a hazelnut shell; and those circles should be made of two parts; and their length should be about one or two nutshells, and they should be filled with suitable iron filings."
Aprop sia ignit en le foc entro que s’enrogesisca e gete scintillas, e aprop sia pausat sobre la partida del anqua, le malaute colcat sobre le latz sa.	"Then heat it in the fire until it becomes hot and begins to emit sparks, and then place it on the part of the hip where the pain is felt, with the point of the cautery lying on the flat surface."
E donc cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris redontz en una veguada.	"And thus cauterize there with three cauteries in one session."
E aprop layssa aquel per tres jorns; aprop emplastre aquel am boder e layssa la plagua uberta per trops dias; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	"And then leave it alone for three days; or apply a plaster there with grease and leave the wound uncovered for too many days; or else treat it with ointment until it is healed."
Diys Albucasis : o, filhs, de aquesta specia de cauteri pauc havem usat per la terror del reguardament de lu, e per aquo que paucs havem trobatz les quals reguardan sobre lu.	"Albucasis says: 'O son, we have used this kind of cautery very little because of the fear of causing harm to it, and therefore we have found few cases that require it.'"
Mays dels bos cauteris a lu qui les sufferta, et atroba am aquel le loc de lu.	"Nevertheless, some patients undergo burns from these cauteries, and find them useful in that part of the body."
Mays cauteri am medicinas adhurentz es que tu fassas dos cercles haventz armula perforada en la qual deyssen le guaffo de la porta de ferr; sia la longuitut de la paretz en la nauteza de lor sian dos nozes o quays aquels.	"However, cauteries with medicated ends should be made in this way: two circles are made having a hole bored through them into which the iron doorstop is placed; let the thickness of their walls be about two nutshells or somewhat less."
E si le spazi le qual es entre quascu la quantitat de la grossitut del dit; e sian ubertz dejos e desus, e sian que contenguan se entre lor segon aquesta forma:	"And if the space between each one is about the thickness of a finger; and they are open below and above; and if they contain this shape between them:"
E aprop pausa sobre la partida de la anqua le malaut jasent sobre le latz sa, e comprem la tua ma sobre la partida de la anqua; e aprop pren de aygua cauda e fon la entre dos cercles, e la qualiditat de aquela sia am le foc petit a petit, e te aquela per la quantitat de una hora, e sufferta le malaute la mordicacio e la adhustio de lu — quar aquel atrobo mordicacio ayssi cum de foc — entro que cesse la mordicacio.	"And then place the cautery on the part of the hip where the pain is located, with the point of the cautery lying on the flat surface; and press your hand firmly upon the part of the hip; and then take boiling water and pour it between the two circles, and gradually heat that water over a fire for about an hour, until the patient feels the sensation of heat and biting, as if from fire — for this causes biting like fire — until the biting sensation ceases."
E aprop eleva la tua ma am le instrument et abstergeys l’aygua cauda de tota la anqua am aygua dousa.	"And then raise your hand with the cautery and wipe off all the boiling water from around the hip joint with lukewarm water."
E aprop leyssa aquel per tres jorns e pausa sobre aquel boder entro que sia la negror de la adhustio remauguda, e leyssa aquo per alcus jorns, e correra de lu poyredura; aquest es derier en juvament.	"And then leave it alone for three days and apply a plaster there until the blackness of the burn is gone, and leave that on for a few more days, and then apply poultice."
E aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	"Then treat it with ointment until it heals."
E si la dolor es extenduda entro la coyssa o la camba, fay a lu estatua en lu que contengua aygua segon que es feyt en la anqua engualment.	"And if the pain extends to the thigh or buttock, do as was done for the hip joint."
E aquesta es la manieyra de aygua cauda, e yeu ja he scrit aquela en le tractat de la rectificacio de medicinas.	"This is how hot water is prepared, and I have already written about this in my treatise on the correction of medicines."
Recipe de alcali e de caus no extinta de amdos ana partida una, e trissa les e pausa en una ola nova de la qual la partida dejos sia perforada per un petit trauc, segon la quantitat que intre en lu ray.	"Take quicklime and unslaked lime in equal parts, mix them together, grind them finely, and place them in a new earthenware vessel with a small hole bored through its bottom part, according to the amount that is needed."
E pausa dejos le fons de la ola autra ola enveyriada, e gete sobre aquel alcali e caus viva de aygua doussa la qual cobra aquels per un dit, e pus que tu compremes aquels am la tieua ma per bona compressio, e leyssa la hola que deyssenda de lu aygua aguda en la partida dejos a la ola enveyriada.	"And place another inverted earthenware vessel under the first one, and pour over it cold water mixed with quicklime and unslaked lime until it covers them by about the thickness of a finger; then press them firmly with your hand, and allow the hot water to drain from the hole in the bottom of the first vessel into the inverted second vessel."
E aprop ajusta tota aquela aygua, e geta la sobre autra caus viva e autre alcali renovelatz, quar aquela lahoras sira de mot forta acuitat, la qual es aministrada en motas operacios de medicina e en cauterizacio dels autres membres, quar operacio fa de foc.	"And then strain all that water, and pour it over fresh unslaked lime and quicklime again, because that water will now be very hot and can be administered in many medical operations and in the cautery of other limbs, as this operation works like fire."
E so de las medicinas alcunas am las quals es cauterizat ancha, ayssi cum tezizic e mel anacrat e caus am sabo enayssi que sian mesclatz.	"And here are some medicines with which the hip joint is cauterized, such as pitch and honey mixed with vinegar and quicklime, well combined."
E Gualia recontet de un home dels antics la operacio e la curacio am la qual es curada dolor de anqua e de vena sciatica, e magnifiquet mot be esser de aquel, e diys que no hac necessitat de autra curacio, e quar es sanat per una veguada ayssi cum recomtec, quar fort leu aquel intrec en banh e eysic ja sa d’aquel.	"Guido of Arezzo recounts an operation and cure with which pain in the hip joint and sciatica were treated by one of the ancients, and he greatly praises it, saying that no other treatment is necessary, for it was healed in a single session, as he himself had experienced."
Et es que sia pres de certarragi vert, e si no es atrobat vert, sia presa figua recent; e mot sia trissada am un pauc de grays e sia pausat sus la anqua en la qual es la dolor, o en la coyssa, o en la camba, e sia liat.	"And if you have difficulty obtaining centaury seed, fresh figs can be taken instead; they should be ground with a little salt and applied to the hip where the pain is felt, or to the thigh or buttock, and bound on."
E sia layssat per la cantitat de tres horas o per la quantitat que·l malaute centa cedacio de la adhustio.	"And it should be left on for about three hours, or until the pain ceases due to the heat of the plaster."
E aprop met aquel en banh e donc quan le cors de lu sia enrozat, entromet aquel en le sol, quar la dolor cessa e es sanat.	"And then remove it from the body and wash it off with warm water; then put it back on again while it is still warm, because this will relieve the pain and cure it."
E sapias que no cove que alcu use de cauteri am aquestas medicinas sino aprop la evacuacio del cors.	"And know that these medicines should not be used for cautery, but rather only for evacuation of the body's humors."
Mays ja Escorides diysec que quan am fenda de cabra la vena stretica es cauterizada, aprofieyra a lu mo be; e sia le cauteri am lu segon aquesta manieyra: sia presa lana e sia enbeguda en oli antic, e sia pausat entre le pous del pe e entre le fossil.	"But Dioscorides says that when the sciatic nerve is cauterized with a hot iron, it should be done carefully; and this is how he recommends cautery:
E aprop pren fenda de cabra secca e emflasma aquela am foc entro que sia fayta carbo; e aprop pausa lu sobre la lana e leysa la entro que sia estengida.	Take dry goat hide, warm it over fire until it's heated through; then place it on wool and lay it upon the patient so that it's evenly spread.
E aprop itera aquo, e no cessas far aquo entro que·l scintiment de la mordicacio pervengua entro al anqua e repausa la dolor.	And continue doing this until the sensation of the bite reaches the ankle and the pain subsides.
Et aquesta manieyra de cauteri es apelat cauteri de vaquas.	This method of cauterization is called cauterization by firebrand.
Capitol .xlii.	Chapter XLII
De cauterizacio de dolor de dos.	Of cauterizing pain in the hips.
Alcunas veguadas dolor es en le dos per tropas causas, cum per cazement o per percucio o per superflua evacuacio, e per causas ad aquelas semblantz, per infusio de materia frega e humida.	Sometimes pain occurs in the back due to several causes, such as by injury or blow or excessive evacuation, and for similar reasons due to the infusion of moist and hot matter.
E cauteri no catz sino en aquesta sola specia la qual es fayta per efusio de materia frega.	Cauterization is not appropriate except in this single case which is caused by an outpouring of hot matter.
Donc cove, aprop evacuacio del malaute am pillulas fitidas e am semblant a lor, que sian faytas sobre·l dos en le qual es la dolor tres linhas segon la latitut de lu, pus que senhas am tentha en quascuna linha v cauteris o mays, segon la quantitat que ve de la tolleransa del malaute e de la vertut de lu.	Therefore, first perform evacuation of the illness with pills made from figs and similar drugs, placed on the back where the pain is felt, three lines across according to its width. Then make cauteries or more, depending on the amount of tolerance for the illness and the strength of the drugs used.
E sia fayta cauterizacio am cauteri de punt.	And cauterization should be done with a point cautery.
E si vols, cauteriza am tres cauteris o am quatre am cauteri clavilh medial segon aquesta forma:	"If you wish, cauterize with three cauteries or with four using the middle pronged cautery according to this form:"
Capitol .xliii.	"Chapter XLIII."
De cauterizacio al comensament de gilbositat.	"About cauterization at the beginning of jaundice."
Motas veguadas endeve aquesta malautia als petitz enfantz; e senhal del comensament de lu en les enfantz es que accideys sobre lor estrectura en le ale eves la elevacio e·l movement.	Many times this illness happens to little children; the sign of its beginning in children is that they suddenly fall ill and their structure rises up and moves.
E atrobas en le derier espondil del dos e dels notz de lu que ja comensa a sobremontar sobre les autres spondils.	Moreover, you can see this disease begin in the lower back and in the nape of the neck where it starts to rise above the other vertebrae.
E donc quan tu vezes aquo e voles prohibir, lahoras cauterisa aquel am cauteri que sia cercle segon aquesta forma:	And so when you find that, and wish to prevent its progress, cauterize there with a circular cautery according to this form:
que prengua le cauteri sobre tota partida del spondilh engualment.	...that the cautery should cover the entire joint of the vertebra evenly.
E si vols, cauteriza en le circuit del spondilh am le cauteri de punt dos linhas o tres.	"And if you wish, cauterize around the vertebra with a pronged cautery having two or three points."
E sian les puntz propdas entre lor.	"Let the points be close together."
E aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat am aquo que havem dit.	And then cure the wound, which should be healed by what we have said.
Mays guarda que cauteri no sia administrat en gelbositat que sia fayta per spasme de nervi.	"Beware that cautery should not be administered in swelling caused by nerve spasm."
Capitol .xliv.	"Chapter XLIV."
De cauterizacio de podagra e de dolor de juncturas.	Of the cautery for gout and joint pain.
Quan dolor de juncturas son faytas per humors fregas les quals so enfundutz a quascun membre del cors, lahoras quan veno dolors en los pes, de costuma dels metges es que aquo apelen podragua propriament.	When joint pains are caused by humors rubbing together which have become congealed in every member of the body, then when pain comes into the feet, it is customary for doctors to call this gout proper.
E donc cum es curada podagra de causa frega am manieyra de cura e no so remaugudas las dolors, lahoras las remau cauteri.	And therefore, since gout caused by friction is cured by means of treatment and yet the pains are not removed, then cautery should be used.
E es que tu cauterizas aquel aprop evacuacio en le circuit de la junctura del pe am motz cauteris.	And you should cauterize that area appropriately for evacuation in the circuit of the ankle joint using hot irons.
E sia cauteri olivar del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And it is cauterized with olive oil, whose form is thus:
E si es necessitat que puntz sia fayt sobre la fassia del pe, lahoras fay am cauteri de punt.	And if points need to be made on the fascia of the foot, then do so with a cautery point.
E si las dolors pujan entro als denolhs o a las autras juncturas, e aquo motas vetz s’endeve, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre quascun donolh am tres cauteris o quatre de tota partida am aquest cauteri olivar.	And if the pains go into the innards or to other joints, and oftentimes it happens so, then cauterize that area with three cauteries or four all around with this olive oil cautery.
E si motz cauteris que aquestz cauteris sian a tu necessaris, lahoras cauteriza aquel e no premas trop la tua ma am le cauteri abans, sia tant solament enviro la specitut de la codena.	And if many cauteries are needed and these cauteries are necessary for you, then cauterize that area without pressing too much with your hand on the cautery before, it should be just around the circumference of the bone.
E si las dolors pugan entro al donolh e·l dos, lahoras aministra le cauteri le qual havem dit en le sieu capitol.	And if the pains go into the big toe, then administer the cautery which we have spoken about in its chapter.
E si las dolors so en las mas tant solament, e es apelada suagra, lahoras puncta en le circuit dels focils ayssi cum se revolvo, puncta en aquels dos linhas.	And if the pains are only on one side and it is called "sacra," then prick around the channels thus as they revolve, pricking two lines.
E si reman de las dolors en les ditz, lahoras puncta en le cercuit dels focils sobre quascun notz e sobre la pinche de la ma.	And if there remain pains in the said places, then prick around the channels over each knot and over the palm of the hand.
E si las dolors pugan aprop alscus jorns als coydes o als muscles, lahoras cauteriza les quascus de tota part dels ajutoris.	And if the pains go near to those joints or to the muscles, then cauterize each one on all sides of the helpers.
E no evacuas le malaute de bon regiment e de recepcio de medicinas, quar si es fayt bon regiment e flacma es evacuada am aquest cauteri sira sanat, Dieus ajudan.	And do not evacuate the illness with bad regimen and reception of medicines, for if it is done well and the inflammation is evacuated with this cautery alone, God helping, it will be healed.
Capitol .xlv.	Chapter XLIX
De cauterizacio de rompeduras.	About the cauterization of broken bones.
Quan endeve rompedura en les angonars e diysendo les budels denant l’atela al genetiu, e aquo es comensan de aprop, lahoras cove que tu mandas al malaute layssar la sua comestio en le sieu dia e que use de causas leniens per so que la fenda deyssenda del sieu ventre.	When there happens a broken bone in the limbs and intestines sending forth blood before the horse's genitalia, and this is how it begins to approach, then you should command the patient to let his food rest on that day and use gentle remedies so that the wound opens from his belly.
E aprop segua le malaute entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos, e comanda a lu que tengua le sieu ale entro que sia foro getat o aparesca l’atela o·l budels.	And then follow the patient between your hands over his big toe and command him to hold his breath so that it is forced out or appears the anus or the intestines.
E aprop retorna aquel am les tieus ditz e senha am tenta la ruptura sobre le os del pentenilh am senhal la extremitat del qual sia semblant a la maytat de cercle a las subiranas partidas del cors.	And then return that with your hands and search for the rupture over the bone of the knee joint, signaling the end of it which should be like the majority of the circle in the upper parts of the body.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And then ignite the cautery of which this is the form:
entro que sia mot rog e gete cintilhas.	"When there is much heat and it throws off sparks."
E aprop reduzeys le budel o l’atela a la sua conquavitat, e aprop pause la sua ma sobre le loc per so que le budel no yesqua.	"And then gently reduce the hernia or return it to its cavity, and place your hand over the area to prevent the hernia from coming out again."
E tu ja has ubert entre las coyssas del malaute e dejos lu as pausat un coyssi, et autre servent sia sus las cambas de lu, e autre sus le pietz de lu, le qual tengua las suas mas.	"And you have already opened the space between the patient's thighs and placed a cushion under them, while another servant stands on one side of the patient, another on their chest, holding their hands."
E aprop pausa le cauteri sobre aquel senhal am la tua ma am cauteri stan dreyt, e te aquel entro que am lu consieguas le os del pentenilh entro al mieg del duiduni; e itera am aquel autra veguada si a tu aquel no has conseguit en la primieyra veguada entro al os.	"And then place the cautery on that sign with your right hand, and when you have done so, gently introduce the tip of the penis into the middle of the anus; repeat this again if necessary until you succeed in the second attempt."
E observa saviament del ysiment del budel en la hora de la tua cauterizacio, que no comburas aquel budel per so que sobre le malaute no vengua in mort o autre gran malicia.	"And carefully observe the feeling of the hernia during your cautery operation, taking care not to burn the hernia so that it does not cause harm or great injury to the patient."
E sapias que quan tu am le cauteri no atenhas le os, no confereys la tua operacio.	"And know this: if you do not catch the tip of the penis with the cautery, your operation is invalid."
E cove que·l cauteri dels enfants sia subtil segon le gran e la mesura de lor.	"And it is necessary that the cautery used on children be small according to their size and measurement."
E aprop cura le loc del cauteri per tres dias am boder entro que sia remauguda la scara del foc.	"And then take care of the cauterized area for three days, washing it gently with warm water to remove any scabs from the fire scar."
E aprop cura aquel am les autres enguentz entro que sia sanat.	"And then dress it with other ointments so that it may heal."
E le malaute sia jasent sobre le sieu dos per xl dias entro que sia sigillat le loc e la plagua.	"Let the patient lie on their back for forty days until the wound and the scab are sealed."
E cove que pauses le nutriment de lu segon la longitut del temps de la curacio de lu le qual le linesca le ventre de lu, e que le budel no yesca fora deves le esforsament de guerir.	"And it is necessary that the patient's diet be restricted according to the length of time for their treatment, so that the intestines do not prolapse due to the effort of healing."
E aprop quan se vol levar aprop xl dias, lahoras aministra liament decentment fayt, e tengua aquel per autres xl jorns.	"And then when it is about forty days since the cautery, administer appropriate food gradually and keep them for another forty days."
E sia mermat de trebalh e de replecio de vianda e de beure, e de votz vehementz, quar quan usa de aquest regiment de sanacio entiera sira sanat.	"And they should be restricted from physical labor, overeating and drinking, and loud voices, because if they follow this regimen of healing entirely they will heal completely."
E yeu diyre la curacio de las rupturas en las autras partidas del ventre, e so al comensament, e vols que no treguan, lahoras cauterisa la ruptura d’aquel am cauteri redon segon la quantitat de lu, e sia aquo que es exhurit de la codena ayssi cum la tersa partida de lu; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit, e no es ajustat.	"And I will now speak about the treatment of ruptures in other parts of the abdomen. First, if it is necessary to cauterize the rupture, do so with a round cautery according to its size and extent, from the navel downwards like the third part of the belly. And then dress it as we have said before."
E ja diyssero alcus primiers que ruptura sia cauterizada am cauteri triangular segon aquesta forma, pus que es senhada am tenta:	"And some earlier authors have said that a rupture should be cauterized with a triangular cautery, because it is shaped like this: \[...\]"
e es pausada linha que eys per la latitut en le latz pus sobira de la ruptura, e autra linha al desus; e depausa la tua ma am un cauteri clavilh, mays le primier cauteri es pus leugier e milhor.	"and it is divided by a line that runs across its width on either side of the rupture, and another line above it. Then place your hand with a small pointed cautery on it, but use the first cautery more gently and carefully."
Capitol .xlvi.	"And he should avoid coitus for forty days after the cautery."
De cauterizacio de torcio.	"On the cautery of a hernia."
Quan endeve en alscus membres per cazement o per percussio dolor e persevera aquela dolor per lonc temps e no comfereys al u curacio am medicinas, lahoras cove que cauterizes am cauteri de punt.	When pain occurs in some limbs due to bruising or injury and persists for a long time without alleviating with medications, then it is necessary to cauterize with a pointed cautery.
E sia le cauteri de tot membre segon la magnitut e la parvitat de lu, e vertut e develitat de lu, e locacio de torcio e dolor de lu.	And the cautery should be applied according to the size and smallness of the limb, its strength and weakness, location of the torsion and severity of the pain.
Donc si·s sanat per le primier cauteri, bo es; e sino, lahoras itera sobre lu le cauteri; quar de costuma de aquelas dolors es que sian punctatz de membre ad aquel membre le qual apropinque al u, per que cove que consieguas aquels am cauteri entro que·l malaute sia sanat.	If it is healed by the first cautery, that is good. But if not, then apply the cautery again; for such pains are often punctures of a limb near to the one in which it hurts, so it is necessary to continue with cauteries until the illness is cured.
Capitol .xlvii.	Chapter XLVI.
De cauterizacio de lepra.	Of the cautery for leprosy.
Les lebros alcunas veguadas am cauteri per mot gran juvament, e magerment si la specia de lepra que es fayta per putrefaccio de flacma e de melencolia.	Some lepers are occasionally treated with cautery but with little benefit, and it is harmful if the species of leprosy is caused by putrefaction of phlegm and melancholy.
E donc cum tu vols cauterizar aquel, considera si la lepra es comussan e as aquela curada am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no deysen, ni esta, e temes sobre le malaute que la corrupcio comprehenda tot le cors de lu e tota la compleccio de lu, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre le cap am v cauteris: am un en le mieg loc del cap, e am le segon pus dejos de lu, eves le front a la fi dels cabels; e amdos sobre dos corns; e am un detras, sobre la nuca o servitz.	And therefore when you want to cauterize that one, consider if the leprosy is as described and treat it with what has been said in the division, and do not give it, nor this, and beware of the illness so that corruption does not spread throughout the whole body and entire complexion. Then cauterize it on the head with five cauteries: one in the middle of the head, and the second a little below it, even to the end of the hair; and both on the two horns; and one behind, on the nape or neck.
E ultima la tua ma am le cauteri un pauc entro que emprema en le os una petita empressio, e de lu sian deslocadas las scorsas, per so que la expiracio de grossas vapors sia alleujada de lu; e cauteriza sobre la melsa segon que es precesit.	And lastly press your hand on the cauteries a little until it impresses on the bone and causes some blisters to appear, so that the expiration of thick vapors may be alleviated from it. And cauterize the breast according to what is necessary.
E si la lepra es ja expanduda sobre le malaute e apar manifestament, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas aquel am aquels cauteris les quals havem ditz en le cap; e am cauteri sobre la extremitat del nas, e am dos cauteris sobre las doas maysselas, e am dos cauteris sobre dos spondils del col, e am vi cauteris sobre les spondils del dos, e am un gran sobre les spondils prop de la coeta, e un sobre la cotea , e am dos sobre las anquas, e am un sobre quascuna anqua, e am dos sobre les donols e un sobre quascun donolh, e am dos sobre les coydes, e am dos sobre les muscles, e am dos las teneretutz del sieu pietz; e cauteriza aquel sobre totas las juncturas dels ditz de las mas e dels pes, e sobre quascun talon dels sieus pes, e sobre les foscils de las suas mas.	And if the leprosy has already spread over the illness and appears manifestly, then it is necessary for you to cauterize that one with those cauteries which we have spoken of in the head; and with cauteries on the tip of the nose, and two cauteries on each cheekbone, and two cauteries on each shoulder blade, and six cauteries on the lumbar vertebrae, and one large one on the vertebrae near the buttocks, and one on the buttock itself, and two on the ankles, and one on each ankle, and two on the knees and one on each knee, and two on the elbows, and two on the wrist joints; and cauterize it over all the joints of the said members and feet, and on each heel of the feet, and on the hollows of the hands.
E guarda te dels nervis les quals so sobre le talo que no comburas aquels.	And beware of burning the nerves which are situated above the sole that you do not burn those.
E alcunas veguadas es cauterizat am un cauteri sobre le os del pentenilh e am autre sobre la boca del stomac, e autre sobre le fietge.	And sometimes it is cauterized with one cautery on the bone of the sternum, and another on the mouth of the stomach, and another on the liver.
E sapias que quant mays ajustas cauteris, tant es mays juvatiu e mays conferent; e sapias que le malaute no ha en le cauteri dolor, ayssi cum han les sas, per so quar le cors de lu ja es stupefayt.	And know that the more closely you apply cauteries, the greater is the benefit and efficacy; and know that the illness does not feel pain from the cautery, as people do, because its body is already stunned.
E cove que les cauteris sian grans o paucs segon les membres e las juncturas segon que es precedit de las specias dels ferramentz.	And it is necessary for the cauteries to be large or small according to the members and joints as has been described in the species of instruments.
E aprop cura le cauteri am farina de errs coyta am mel e am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And afterwards, cure the cautery with finely powdered barley meal mixed with honey, and with the other remedy until it is healed.
Capitol .xlviii.	"Chapter 48."
De cauterizacio de stupor.	"Regarding cautery of a boil."
Quan alcun membre es stabozit o adormit e es curat am medicinas, olis e emplastres, e no es sanat, lahoras tu cauteriza aquel membre stabozit am cauteris segon que merita la grandesa del membre o la parvitat de lu.	If a limb is paralyzed or numb and treated with medicines, oils, and plasters, but not healed, then cauterize that paralyzed limb with a cautery according to the size of the limb or its smallness.
E sia lo tieu cauteri intrant la ispicitut de la codena un pauc.	And insert your cautery into the incision of the spine slightly.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia sanat.	Then dress it with ointment until it heals.
E alscunas veguadas es cauterizada alcuna stupor le qual endeve a las mas e als pes, e als spondils del dos e ves le eysiment dels nervis les quals mavon aquel membre, e es remauguda la stupor.	And sometimes certain numbness is cauterized which affects the arms and legs, and the vertebrae of the back and those that move that limb, and the numbness is removed.
Mays no prusuma sobre aquo sino aquel que es savi en la anotomia dels membre e de la egressio dels nervis tot le cors moventz.	But do not presume to do this except one who is knowledgeable in the anatomy of limbs and the exit of nerves throughout the body moving them.
Capitol .xlix.	Chapter XLIX
De cauterizacio de albaras que es morfea.	On cauterizing warts that are mole-like.
Quan albaras es antiqua e no comfereys a lu alcu dels enguentz de medicina, lahoras tu cauteriza sobre aquela am cauteri preon un pauc segon la quantitat de la specitut de la codena entro que sia remauguda la blancor e la color de lu, e la color de lu sia mudada.	When a wart is old and does not disappear with any of the ointments of medicine, then cauterize it with a preheated cautery slightly according to the quantity of the thickness of the skin so that its whiteness and color are removed, and its color is changed.
E aprop cura aquel am farina de errs e de lentilhas am oli rozat e am folhas de arnagrosa, e am sanc de colomba o am sanc de yronda, da cascuna sia una partida e totas sian mescladas, e aprop sia linit un drap e sus le loc sia pausat entro que sia sanat.	And then dress it with flour of earth and lentils with rose oil and leaves of greater plantain, and with pigeon's blood or hen's blood, giving each one a part and mixing all together, and then apply a cloth and place it there until it heals.
Capitol .l.	Chapter L
De cauterizacio de cranc.	"On cauterizing a boil."
Quan canser es comensan e vols aquel ostar, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteri de cercle en le circuit de lu ayssi cum es revolgut.	When cancer begins and you wish to burn that tumor, then cauterize it using a circular cautery around the edge of it just as it is turning.
E diysero les savis que sia cauterizat am lo derier cauteri en le mieg loc; mays a mi no es vist aquo, quar temi que sia ulcerat, e yeu ja e vist aquo alcunas veguadas.	And the wise men say that it should be cauterized with the last cautery in the middle of the tumor. But I have not seen this, because I fear that it might ulcerate, and I have already seen it done several times this way.
E es pus dreyturier que sia cauterizat en le circuit de lu am cercle ayssi cum avem dit, o am motz cauteris.	And it is more correct to cauterize around its edge with a circular cautery as we said before, or with several cauteries.
Capitol .li.	Chapter .li
De cauterizacio de adubilati.	"On the cauterization of warts."
Quan alcun adubilati es tardat en maturacio, e aysso es per la superfluitat fazen aquela, o per etat del malaute, quar es vielh en decrepitat, de pauc sanc, o per le temps, e tu vols festinar en la maturacio de adubilati; lahoras cauteriza en le circuit de lu am motz cauteris petitz punctan; e aprop leyssa aquela quar ela fastinara en maturacio.	When a wart is delayed in its maturation, whether due to the superfluity causing it or because of the state of illness, either from being old and decrepit with little blood or simply due to time passing, and you wish to hasten the maturation of the wart; then cauterize around its edge using small puncturing cauteries and leave that alone until it has matured.
Mays si tu vols la perforacio de lu am cauteri, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu: e depausa aquel en le mieg loc de adubilati entro que penetre la codena.	But if you wish to burn it with a cautery, then heat the cautery of which this is the shape: and afterwards place that in the middle of the wart until it penetrates the chain.
E si le cauteri en aquel loc que es pus dejos, per so que le cors del brac sia alleujat; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if the cautery is placed too deep, such that the flesh of the arm is relieved, then dress it until it heals.
Capitol .lii.	De cauterizacion de carnacuras.
De cauterizacio de corrodent.	Cauterization of decaying flesh.
Corrodent es corrupcio ambulant en le membre, la qual corrodeys aquel ayssi cum a foc comedent lenha secca.	Corrodent is wandering corruption in the limb, which corrupts it just as dry wood consumes fire.
Donc si vezes aquel corrodent en loc le qual sufferte cauteri am foc, lahoras tu igneys cauteris clavils motz paucs, e grans segon que es convenent en aquel loc en le qual es corrodent.	Therefore if you wish to cauterize that corrosion with fire, first ignite several small and large cautery irons according to what is suitable for the location of the corruption.
E aprop cauteriza aquel de tota partida entro que erradiques tota la corrosio e no romangua alcuna causa de lu.	And also cauterize it completely throughout until you eradicate all the corrosion and leave no cause of it remaining.
E aprop leyssa aquel per tres dias, e pausa sobre les locs cauterizats solpre trissat am oli mesclat entro que las scaras sian totas eradicadas e tota la corrupcio.	And then let him rest for three days, and dress the cauterized locations simply with oil mixed in until all scars are eradicated and all corruption is gone.
E aprop cura aquel am enguentz carn engendrantz.	And then treat it with fresh flesh-generating ointment.
Mays si aprop tres dias vezes que la carn nasca sana en la qual no es corrupcio, bo es; mays sino, lahoras itera le cauteri sobre aquo que es romas en les locs corrumputz.	But if after three days the flesh does not grow healthy and free from corruption, then you should repeat the cauterization on what remains in the corrupted locations.
E corrodent es medicat alcunas vetz am medicina aguda, quar aquela es meza en loc de cauteri.	And corrosion is sometimes treated with an acute medicine, because that is half as severe as cautery.
Mays empero cauteri am foc es de pus leugier juvament.	But cautery with fire is the lighter remedy to use.
E yeu ja e dit la curacio de lu am medicina aguda en la divisio, e donc pren aquela quan de lu auras endegencia.	And I have already discussed the treatment of it with acute medicine in the division on that topic, so take that when you begin [the treatment].
Capitol .liii.	Chapter LIII.
De cauterizacio de claus e dels autres semblants.	Of Cautery of Ulcers and Similar Conditions.
Motas veguadas endeve a las partidas dejos del pe malautia que s’apela clau, e es causa grossa, fentrada, la qual ladeys le pe; e cauteri en aquels es segon dos manieyras, so es cauteri am foc e cauteri am aygua cauda.	Many times in the parts of the body there appears an ulcer called a "claw," which is a thick, deep wound that causes pain. It is treated with two kinds of cautery: cautery with fire and cautery with hot water.
Mays cauteri am foc es que igniscas le cauteri concau semblant a pena de voltor, le qual sia feyt de ferr segon la quantitat la qual contengua le clau de tota partida, e sia de subtils marguas.	"A hot cautery is one that ignites like a bird's feather, made of iron according to the size that contains the keyhole of the whole part, and is of fine edges."
E aprop pausa aquel ignit sobre le clau, e aprop revolveys la tua ma am le cauteri en le circuit del clau entro que·l cauteri pervengua a la profunditat del clau.	"And then pause that ignition on the keyhole, and immediately rotate your hand with the cautery in the circuit of the keyhole until the cautery reaches the depth of the keyhole."
E leyssa aquel per tres dias entro que comense getar brac.	"Leave it for three days until it begins to grow skin."
E aprop emplastre aquel am malvas salvatges trissadas am sal, e leyssa le emplastre sobre aquel per una nuoyt, quar aquel sira eradicat de las suas razitz.	"And then apply that with wild mallows crushed with salt, and leave the plaster on it for one night, because it will eradicate its roots."
E aprop cura le loc am enguent de carn generatiu entro que sia sanat.	"Then treat the place with a genital ointment until it is healed."
E si so no-convertitz, e motas veguadas accideysso en la superficia del cors, majorment en las mas e les pes, lahoras cove que tu aministres en aquels cauteri am aygua, e es que prenguas una quannula de eram o de ferr o de pena de voltor, e pausa aquela sobre le clau; e aprop geta en la quanula de aygua cauda pauca cantitat, e rete la tua ma, e tu revolveys aquela am compressio de la tua ma de tot, e sia enpremut le marge de la canula en la razit del clau, e atrobara la aygua cauda via al preon de la razit del cau; e espera le malaute un pauc la mordicacio de l’aygua cauda per una hora, e aprop remau aquela, quar le clau am las suas razitz sira erredicat.	"If it is not converted [to flesh], and sometimes it happens on the surface of the body, more often on the thighs and legs, then you should administer cauteries with water, taking a spoonful of wax or iron or bird's feather and pausing it over the keyhole; then pour in the spoon some cold water, raise your hand, and rotate that with pressure from your whole hand, so that the edge of the spoon presses into the root of the keyhole, allowing the cold water to flow onto the front of the keyhole's root; wait for a little while until the pain caused by the cold water passes for about an hour, then remove it, because the key with its roots will be eradicated."
E ayssi fe am aquels la i aprop l’autre entro que venguas sobre totz les quals de lor so en le cors.	"And thus do to those until all of them in their place in the body come together."
E aprop cura aquels pus que las razitz dels claus so erradicadas am aquo dels enguentz les quals la carn ve engenran.	"And then treat those with ointments that make flesh grow, because the roots of the keys have been eradicated."
Capitol .liiii.	"Chapter 49."
De cauterizacio de tremor.	"On Cauterization for Tremor."
Quan endeve ad alcu tremor per freg en le nervi o per febre de causa frega, o per autra causa semblant, lahoras cove que tu cauterises aquel am quatre cauteris o am v sobre les spondils del dos, entre quascun spondilh am un cauteri; e am cauteri en le pietz de lu, e sobre l‘estomac de lu, am cauteri olivar.	When trembling occurs due to coldness in the nerves or fever caused by coldness, or similar cause, then you must cauterize them with four cauteries or five on the vertebrae of the back, between each vertebra; and one cautery on the foot, and on the stomach.
E la tremor de lu se repausa e festina la sanetat de la malautia frega.	If the trembling subsides, it will hasten the recovery from the cold illness.
Capitol .lv.	Chapter 50
De cauterizacio de albati accidentz al cors.	On cauterization of certain accidental conditions in the body
Quan en le cors so espellitz albati, e so pustulas fendas las quals so feytas de materias grossas corruptas; donc cove al comensament cum apareyso, que sia cauterizat sobre tot cap de la fistola am cauteri subtil am fustz de mirt, la extremitat del qual es estenduda am foc; o am razitz de erestologia longua; o am cauteri lentecular.	When there are boils on the body, and pustules with openings that are filled with thick, corrupted matter, then at the beginning when they appear, they should be cauterized on top of each fistulous head with a thin cautery made from myrtle wood, the end of which is heated over fire; or with a long probe of erestology; or with a lenticular cautery.
E alscunas veguadas es cauteri ademamil al comensament de la sua expulcio segon aquesta manieyra; e no so cregudas, e es disrumpuda la superfluitat fazens aquels, et sana de aquels.	And when such boils are seen again, they should be cauterized at the beginning of their eruption in this manner; and they are not believed, and the superfluity is dissolved by doing so, and they heal from it.
Mays empero cove que aquo sia fayt aprop evacuacio am fleubotomia.	But nevertheless, it is necessary that this be done after evacuation with phlebotomy.
Capitol lvi.	Chapter 51
De cauterizacio de fluex de sanc accident per incisio de arceria.	On cauterization of accidental flows of blood by incision with an artery knife
Tropas veguadas endeve fluex de arceria que es inciza deves la plagua la qual endeve deforo, o deves la incizio de apostemas o cauteri del membre, e alor semblantz, e es dificil remaura aquel.	Many times there are accidental flows of blood that gush out through the skin which is torn open, or through an incision of an aposteme or cautery of a member; and then they seem difficult to heal.
Donc cum accideys ad alcu aquo, lahoras tu·t coyta am la tua ma a l’orrifici de la arceria, e pausa sobre aquel le tieu dit endic estrenh aquel motas veguadas entro que sia ostat le fluex del sanc dejos le tieu dit, e que non yesqua.	Therefore, whenever such an occurrence happens, then you should quickly take your knife for cutting arteries and press it upon that place with your finger stretched out so as to stop the flow of blood from there beneath your finger and prevent it from gushing out.
E aprop pausa en le foc les cauteris olivars paucs e grantz, per nombre motz, e exsuffla sobre aquels entro que sian mot ignitz.	And immediately place on the fire olive oil cauteries, both small and large ones, by number several, and blow upon them until they are hot enough to use.
E aprop pren de aquels un petit o un gran segon le loc e la plagua en la qual es rompuda la arteria, sobre aquela vena festinantment pus que auras remaugut le tieu dit, e te le cauteri entro que sia abcindit e restreyt aquel sanc.	And then quickly take one of those cauteries, small or large according to the place and size where the artery has broken open, and apply it upon that vein with haste once you have removed your finger, and hold it there until it becomes adherent and stops the flow of blood.
E si le sanc es expellit de l’orrifici de la arteria quan tu remaues le tieu dit e extringeys le cauteri, lahoras pren la un autre cauteri coytadament dels cauteris les quals en le foc son preparatz, e donc no cesses fer aquo un aprop autre entro que le sanc sia restrengit.	And if blood is expelled from the opening of the artery when you remove your finger and press on the cautery, then quickly take another cautery carefully from those which are being prepared on the fire, and do not cease doing this until the flow of blood is stopped.
E guarda te que no comburas le nervi que aqui es, e que vengua sobre le malaute autra malicia.	And be careful that you do not burn the nerves that are nearby, lest some other harm or mischief ensue.
E sapias que quan de l’arteria flueys sanc, lahoras no es possible en aquels restrenge la sanc, e majorment quan l’arteria es gran, si no am una de quatre manieyras: o am cauteri ayssi quo dit havem, o am extraccio quan no es extrayta, quar quan es extrayta las extremitatz de lu miels son comburidas e es restreyt le sanc, o que sia liat am fiel o am liament per fort strectura, o que sian pausadas sobre lu medicinas de las quals la vertut es restringir la sanc; e sian strengudas am pulvinar am costriccio decent.	And know that when blood flows from an artery, it is not possible to stop the flow in those cases unless by one of four ways: either with cautery as we have said, or with extraction if it cannot be extracted, because when it is extracted, the ends of the muscle are burned and the blood is stopped; or it should be tied with a thread or with linen by strong binding, or some medicines whose virtue is to stop bleeding should be applied upon it, and they should be pressed with a bandage with proper compression.
Mays aquel que aministra restriccio decent de lu am liament e am strictura am draps o per posicio de causas comburentz e de semblantz, no comfereys sino tart.	But he who administers binding properly with linen and with bandages or by position of cauteries and the like does not deserve anything but praise.
Mays si aquo endeve ad alcu e no sia le metge present ni medicina, lahoras obre am pausament del dit indic sobre le orrifici de aquela vena ayssi cum havem dit, e entenda a la gran costreccio de lu entro que le sanc sia ostat de la sobirana partida de la plagua, e sobre la arceria le dit no sia remaugut; e de sobre la arceria sia aspergit am aygua frega de mot gran fregiditat entro que·l sanc sia congilat e engrossat; e mays cossire en que ha de cauteri o de medicina necessitat.	But if such a thing happens to someone and there is no physician present nor any medicine, then one should press with the tip of the finger upon the opening of that vein as we have said, and hold it tightly so that the blood is stopped from flowing out from the highest point of the skin where the artery has broken open; and once the finger is removed from the artery, cold water should be sprinkled upon it until the blood is coagulated and thickened; and afterwards one should see whether cautery or some medicine is necessary.
Comensa la segonda partida.	Here begins the second part.
De incisio e perforacio e ventozas e de fleubotomia e de plaguas e de lor semblants.	Of Incision, Perforation, Punctures and Venesection, and of Veins and Their Kindred
Aquestas son paraulas de Albucazis.	These are words from Albucasis.
Ja havem dit en le primier capitol tota malautia en la qual cauteri am foc es convenient e am medicina comburent, e las occasios e las causas de lu, e les instrumentz en aquels necessaris am las formas dels cauteris; e he ordenatz les capitols de la subiranetat del cap entro als pes.	We have already said in the first chapter all the illnesses in which cautery with fire is appropriate and with medicine that burns, and the occasions and causes of them, and the instruments necessary for those things with the forms of the cauteries; and we have arranged the chapters concerning the superiority of the head down to the feet.
E yeu procesire en aquest capitol per aquela meteysa guisa, per que sia alliujat lo querent aquo, lahoras sobre aquo que aura demandat.	And we will proceed in this chapter with that same method, so that whoever wishes may be helped thereby; therefore concerning that which shall be asked.
E denant que yeu comense aquo, cove, fils, que aprenguatz que en aquest capitol es per terror aquo que es en le capitol primier de cauterizacio.	Before we begin this, son and pupil, know that in this chapter is included that which is in the first chapter concerning cautery.
E per aquo que cove que sia en lu gran cautela, quar en la operacio la qual es en aquest capitol motas veguadas catz evacuacio la qual es am sanc am le qual esta la vida deves la aspersio de la vena o incisio sobre l’apostema o apercio de exsitura o puracio de la plagua o extraccio de sageta o incizio de peyra e a lor semblantz.	And because caution is necessary in the operation which is described in this chapter, for often there occurs evacuation with blood, with which life is devoured, such as aspiration of the vein or incision upon an abscess or opening of an ulcer or curettage of a wound or extraction of an arrow or incision of a stone and their like.
E de totz aquels so acompanhatz temor e tremor e en le mas de lor catz la mort.	And all these are accompanied by fear and trembling, and in most cases death ensues.
E yeu amonesti vos que sobre vos no caia aquo en le qual es esitacio, quar alcunas veguadas cazo deves vos manieyras de homes am manieyras motas de malautias.	And we warn you that upon yourself does not fall that which involves doubt, for sometimes you will have to employ the ways of men with many ways of illnesses.
E de lor es alcu que s’irays am la sua malautia e es leugiera deves lu la mort, e aysso per la vehemensia de aquo que troba de sa malautia, e per longuesa de la malautia de lu, e am la malautia es paor la qual significa mort.	And among them are some who will become angry with their illness and it is easy for them to bring about death upon themselves, because of the vehemence of that which they find in their illness, and because of the length of time that the illness has lasted, and because of the fear which that illness brings, which means death.
E de aquels es le qual dona a tu son aver e ditta, tu esperant am aquel sanetat, e la sieua malautia es perniciosa.	And among them is he who gives you his wealth and promises you, while you are waiting with that one in health, but his illness is harmful.
E donc no cove que tu consentas en aquel que ve a vos del qual es aquesta manieyra; e la vostra cautela sia major que covesitat e la vostra rapacitat; e no presumatz alcuna causa sobre aquo sino aprop sciencia certa la qual virifica aquo deves vos, e al qual perve successio lausabla.	Therefore do not consent to that one who comes to you with this way of acting; and let your caution be greater than greed, and your rapacity less; and do not undertake any case unless you have certain science which can verify it for you, and upon whom success is likely.
E usatz en la curacio de totz vostres malautes de pronosticacio e indicacio de lu al qual es salut convertida, quar en aquel es a vos ajutori sobre adquisicio de fama e de memoria, de lausor e de gloria.	And use in the cure of all your illnesses prognosis and indication of him whose health has been restored to him, for in this way you will be helped toward the acquisition of fame and renown, of praise and glory.
O, filhs, Dieus en vos spire le sieu entendement e no oste a vos direccio e proteccio, quar aquo es en la sua ma.	Oh son, may God inspire his understanding in you and not take away direction and protection from you, for this is in his hand.
E yeu e ordenat aquest capitol distingent per capitols segon que precedit en le capitol de cauteris, de la cura del cap entro als pes, per que sia a vos alleujat aquo que demandatz de aquo e del qual havetz necessitat.	And we have arranged this chapter divided into chapters according to what preceded in the chapter concerning cautery, of the cure from head to foot, so that it may be easy for you to find whatever you ask about and of which you stand in need.
Capitol primier.	First Chapter
De la curacio de aygua la qual es contenguda en le cap dels enfantz.	Of the Cure of Water Which is Contained in the Head of Children
Sapias que aquesta malautia motas veguadas endeve als enfantz deves le enfantament e quan la noyrissa estrenh le cap del enfant ses livitat.	Know that this illness often happens to children during childbirth, when the midwife squeezes the head of the child without its softness.
E alcunas veguadas endeve per causa amaguada la qual no es saubuda.	And sometimes it happens because of some hidden cause which is not known.
Mays yeu no vi aquesta malautia sino en les enfantz; e a totz aquels les quals yeu vi se coytec la mort, e per ayssi es a mi vist layssada obra en aquels.	But we have only seen this illness in children; and of all those whom we saw, the death was hastened, and therefore it seems to us that this work is useless for them.
E yeu e vist que un enfant le cap del qual era d’aygua omplit, e·l cap de lu era totjorn ayssi magnificat entro que ceser no podia sobre si meteys per la grandesa del sieu cap, e mays que la humiditat fe aucmentada entro que foc mort.	And we have seen that the head of one child was filled with water, and his head was continually swollen to such an extent that he could not lift it up because of the greatness of his head, and more water came forth until death occurred.
E aquesta humiditat o es agreguada entre la codena e l’os, o es agreguada dejos le os sobre le ciphac.	And this humidity either collects between the nape of the neck and the bone, or collects above the bone upon the crown of the head.
Quar la operacio en aquel si la humiditat es entre la codena e l’os e le apostema es pauc, lahoras cove que tu fendas en le mieg loc del cap am una fissura en la latitut, e sia la longitut de la fissura cays dos notz entro que corra la humiditat, e aquesta es la forma del spatum:	For the operation in that case if the humidity is between the nape of the neck and the bone and the swelling is small, it is necessary for you to make an incision in the middle of the head with a cut in the width, and let the length of the cut be two fingerbreadths so that the humidity can run out, and this is the form of the spatula:
E donc si la humiditat es mays augmentada e l’apostema es major, lahoras son aqui dos fissuras segon aquesta manieyra:	"And if then moisture has increased more and the abscess is greater, then there are here two incisions made in this manner:"
E si la humiditat es dejos le os, senhal de lu es que tu vezes la comissuras del cap ubertas de tota partida e l’aygua es spremuda quan tu compremes aquela am la tieua ma a las partidas dedintz e no es aquo a tu amaguat.	"And if the moisture is gone, the sign of this is that you see the commissures of the head opened completely and water is squeezed out when you compress it with your thumb on the inside, and this is not hidden from you."
Cove que tu fendas en le mieg loc del cap am tres fissuras segon aquesta manieyra:	"Therefore you should make three incisions in the middle of the head in this manner:"
e aprop la inscizio extratz ne tota la humiditat; e aprop strenh las fissuras am draps e plumassols; e aprop enbroca aquo de sobre am vi e oli entro al quint dia, e aprop deslia le liament e cura la plagua am tentas e enguentz, e strenh le cap am equalitat; e mange le malaute am vianda secca de pauca humiditat entro que·l membre sia confortat e sanat.	"and soon all the moisture will be extracted from the incision; and soon afterwards stitch up the incisions with bandages and cotton wool; and then on the fifth day sprinkle wine and oil on it from above, and then remove the bandage and cure the wound with warm fomentations and dressings, and cover the head evenly; and let the sick person eat dry food with little moisture until the member is strengthened and healed."
E es autra manieyra de incisio, que consideras hon apar la magnitut del apostema e la colleccio de l’aygua, quar alcunas veguadas es mays en le occipicii, o en la partida denant, o en la destra, o en la sinistra; e donc aten am la incizio on appar le apostema e la replecio de l’aygua, e fen aquo segon que a tu es miels possible.	"And there is another manner of incision to consider when the abscess appears large and filled with water, for sometimes it is larger in the occiput or in front or on the right or on the left; therefore make the incision where the abscess appears and the collection of water, and do this according to what seems best to you."
Et observa que no inscindas la arteria e endevengua flueys de sanc e mora le malaute per aquel flux de sanc am evacuacio de humiditat.	"And observe that you should not cut the artery, nor cause bleeding of blood, and thus harm the sick person through that flow of blood with evacuation of moisture."
Capitol .ii.	"Chapter 2."
De inscisio de las arterias las quals so aprop las aurelhas, apeladas hilasseysse.	"Concerning the incision of the arteries that are near the ears, called hilasseysse."
Capitol segon.	"The chapter on the second".
Quan endeveno ad alcu catars o raumas als huelhs o al pietz, e es antiquat aquo, e no confereys en aquo la curacio de las medicinas, lahoras la deriera curacio en aquest es incizio de aquelas dos arterias.	"When all else fails - cataplasms or poultices on the eyes or chest, and it is not improved by this, then the last resort in this case is the incision of those two arteries."
E donc cove quan tu vols inscidir aquelas que le malaute raza lo sieu cap, e aprop fregua le loc am drap aspre per so que aparan las arcerias, e aprop sia strengut le col del malaute am alcu drap; e aprop considera on polsa la vena; e les locs de quascuna sobre les locs les quals so aprop las aurelhas depremutz, e tant se occultan sino en alcus homes.	"And therefore when you want to cut those [arteries] that cause the patient's head to swell, and close by rub with rough cloth so that the arteries appear, and close by strengthen the patient's neck with some cloth; and consider where the vein pulses; and the locations of each one above the locations which are near the ears below, and so they do not appear unless in certain men."
E aprop senha sobre la arceria am tenta, e aprop inscideys quascuna am le spatum de quascuna partida agut am inscizio pervenient entro al os, e sia aquo per la latitut del cap.	"And therefore search for the artery with your finger, and therefore cut each one with the sharp point of each bone saw with a cut entering into the bone, and let this be done through the width of the head."
E si vols, entromet le spatum dejos la arteria e trenqua aquala a las inciden a las partidas desus.	"And if you wish, insert the saw from above the artery and cut it off at the incision points."
E sia la longitut de la inscizio cays dos ditz ajustatz, quar quan alcuna vena es inscizida le sanc es eyssit am egressio pulsatil, le qual saut deforo per saut frequent.	"And let the length of the cut be about two fingers wide, for when any vein is cut, blood issues forth with a pulsating exit, which jumps forth by frequent jumping."
Mays si la arceria no apareys al cintiment, lahoras cove que tu mesures de la aurelha la quantitat del spazi de tres ditz, e aprop senha am tenta, e fen entro al os.	"But if the artery does not appear to your senses, then measure from the ear the quantity of space of three fingers' width, and therefore search with your finger and feel inside the bone."
E aquo que cove getar del sanc es quantitat de vi unc., e fort leu ne geta de lu mays o mens, e tot aquo es segon la quantitat la qual appareys de la vertut del malaute e de la replecio de la arceria de lu.	"And therefore what quantity of blood to remove is one vessel's worth, and more or less depending on the strength of the person, and all this depends on the quantity that appears from the virtue of the patient and the fullness of the artery of him."
E aprop considera la plagua, e donc si reman sobre le os alcuna causa del ciphac, lahoras inscindys aquo per so que no endevengua apostema caut.	"And therefore consider the wound, and if there remains on the bone any cause for a cyst, then cut that off so that it does not turn into a cauterizing ulcer."
E aprop strenh la plagua am plumassols e am liamentz de drap de li, e aprop cura aquela am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	"And therefore strengthen the wound with cotton wool and bandages of linen cloth, and therefore cure it with ointment within until it is healed."
Capitol .iii.	Chapter III.
De extraccio de las arcerias las quals so en las templas.	Of the extraction of arteries that are in the temples.
Quan ad alcu accideys emigranea antiqua o catertz agutz, per humiditatz agrimonials e per qualiditat en les lacertz des templas, o sodo antiqua vehement e semblantz ad aquels, e es medicat am las manieyras de curacio de medicina e aquo no comfereys, lahoras nos hem sproatz en aquestas malautias extraccio de las arcerias en les templas, o cauterizacio de aquelas ayssi cum havem mostrat.	When ancient migraine or sharp pain occurs due to humid and cold conditions in the temples, it is treated with medicinal remedies but this does not help. Therefore, we resort to extracting blood from the temples' arteries or cauterizing those vessels as shown previously.
E la manieyra de la operacio e extracio de aquelas es que·l malaute raza les pels les quals son en les templas; e entenda a la arceria apparent en le templar quar ela es a tu mostrada per le sieu pols, e·s occultada sino en paucs homes per vehemencia de freg.	The method of operation and extraction is as follows: shave the hair on the temples where the artery to be operated on is located. Understand which artery appears in the temple according to its pulse, as it may not be visible in some people due to excess hair growth.
E si a tu es occultada, lahoras le col del malaute sia strengut am alcun drap; e aprop fregua le loc am un drap aspre o evapora le loc am aygua cauda entro que aparesca a tu la arceria manifestament.	If the artery is not visible, then apply pressure to the patient's neck with some cloth and vigorously rub the area with a rough cloth or pour boiling water on it until the artery becomes clearly visible.
E lahoras tu pren le spatum del qual aquesta es la forma:	Then, take the scalpel which has this shape:
E aprop tu scorja la codena am aquel am facilitat entro que pervenguas a la arceria; e aprop geta en lu onti e extratz aquela a las partidas sobiranas entro que extraguas aquela de la codena e descobras aquela de las tunicas las quals so dejos aquela, de tota partida.	Next, carefully cut through the skin with the scalpel until you reach the artery. Then, gently lift it up and extract the blood from its upper branches until you have extracted enough blood to reveal the underlying tunica adventitia of the artery, making sure not to cut too deeply into any other tissues.
Mays si la arteria es subtil, lahoras envolveys aquela am la extremitat del oncii, e aprop inscindeys de aquela una partida segon la quantitat per la qual sian alonguadas las extremitatz de lu e sian contraytas, e no endevindra flux de sanc, quar si no so inscididas no pujara le sanc de tot.	But if the artery is too small to grasp with forceps, then carefully incise a section of it according to its size and length, making sure not to cut all the way through. This will allow blood flow to be controlled and prevent excessive bleeding.
E aprop evacua del sanc de vi unc. entro a tres.	Then, using a sponge or cloth, remove as much blood as possible from around the area within three minutes.
E si la arceria es gran, lahoras cove que tu lies aquela en dos locs am fiel dopble fort de ceda o am cordas a lonc, e no coyte a lu putrefaccio denant la consolidacio de la plagua e endevengua flux de sanc.	If the artery is large, you should ligate it in two places using strong sutures or catgut ties to prevent leakage of blood and promote healing. Be sure not to tie too tightly initially, as this may cause tissue necrosis before the wound can heal.
E aprop incideys la superfluitat la qual es entre dos liamentz; e fay aquo en aquela hora o aprop autra ora.	Then, trim away any excess skin and fatty tissue between the two ligatures, and do this promptly to prevent blood loss and promote healing.
E si vols, cauteriza aquela am cauteri entro al os am cauteri cutellar entro que sian incididas las extramitatz de lu, e stara en loc de aquela meteyssa obra.	If desired, you can cauterize the exposed artery using a hot iron or caustic agent to seal off any remaining branches and prevent bleeding. This can be done instead of tying the artery if it is too small or difficult to ligate.
E es milhor obra sino que·l malaute aia febre o es de escalfada compleccio; quar cauteri es de aquelas causas que ajudan a las humiditatz finidoras, e donc es milhor en juvament.	It is better not to use cautery if the patient has fever or is in a state of hot complexion, as cautery increases heat and moisture, which can exacerbate the condition. It is therefore preferable to avoid this method in such cases.
E cove aprop la extraccio de las arcerias que huomplas le loc de coto antic, e sian pausatz sobre lu polvils decentement fayt, e aprop sia curat am medicinas seccas fazen naysser la carn e am calguas entro que sia sanat.	After the removal of any exposed arteries, it is important to apply powder or other antiseptic agents to the wound area and dress it appropriately with dry dressings. This should be done immediately to prevent infection and promote healing. Keep the wound clean and use dry dressings until it has healed.
E si mentre obres autra veguada endeventa flux de sanc de la arceria, lahora tu te coyta a restrenger aquel sanc, o am cauteri, o que omplas le loc de coto, e strenh la tua ma entro que sia restreyt le sanc.	If during the procedure you encounter bleeding from the artery that cannot be controlled with ligatures or cautery, quickly apply pressure to the wound site using gauze or other materials. You can also use your fingers or other instruments to clamp off the bleeding vessel until it is secured and the bleeding stops.
E si deguna causa de aquelas no es a tu present, lahoras pausa le tieu dit sobre le loc entro que·l sanc sia congilat, e enbroca le loc am aygua de vehement fregiditat entro que la acuitat repausa, e sia strengut segon que cove.	If no cause of bleeding can be identified or controlled by the above methods, then apply pressure with your finger over the site until bleeding stops. Then, rinse the area thoroughly with cold water to help reduce inflammation and promote coagulation. Finally, dress the wound appropriately according to its severity.
E aquo que es pus leugier en extraccio de arceria es que tu cauterizes la vena am aquest cauteri haventz dos cotels, pus que tu has senhat les dos locs am tenta, e depausa quascus, mot ignitz, entro que pervenguan al os e inscindan la vena en dos locs, per so que sia elonguat aquo que es entre las extremitatz de lu, quar no son consolidadas de tot am aquest cauteri.	When extracting an artery, it is important to cauterize the vein alongside it using two hot irons or caustic agents after tying off both ends with sutures. This ensures that the intervening segment of the vessel is completely sealed off, as cautery alone may not be sufficient to seal off the entire length of the vein.
E aquesta es la forma del cauteri:	Here is how cautery is typically performed:
E sia la acuitat dels dos cotels esemps.	"Let sharpness of both knives be tested."
Mays empero si so mendres acuitat que dos cotels es milhor, quar si so agudas cum dos cotels propera a quascuna freg, e no enscideysso la carn am velocitat.	"But if the sharpness is less than that of two knives, it is better to use two knives, for if they are very sharp like two knives close together they will cut the flesh quickly without injury."
Donc cum en aquels es alcuna grossitut, es tenguda la calor del foc en aquels e la carn es abscindida leugierament.	Therefore, with those [knives] there is some thickness, the heat of the fire is held in them, and the flesh is gently severed.
E aquesta obra es milhor en tota obra e pus leugiera.	"And this work is better than all other works and much easier."
E sia le spazi le qual es entre dos cotels la quantitat de la grossesa del dit.	"Let the space between two knives be equal to the thickness of a finger."
Capitol quart.	Chapter Four
De la cura de cors de lagremas agudas e aciduas dels huels.	On the treatment of sudden and severe pain in the eyes.
Quan so lagremas aciduas, e es le cors de aquelas venas las quals so sobre le test del cap deforo, e no comfereys en aquo alcuna causa de la curacio de medicina, e vezes la cara del malaute ja enrogesir e sent en le sieu front deambulacio ayssi cum si era deambulacio de formiguas, e·ls huels de aquel so extenuatz, humitz enayssi que ja les pels de lor son conodutz, e las parpelas so scalfadas per la acuitat de las lacrimas, les antics agro mesties en la curacio de aquelas de aquesta operacio, e nompnero aquela curacio am spassa.	When the tears are acidic and it is a case of those veins above the forehead pulsating and causing discomfort in the face as if there were ants walking on it, and the eyes are reddened, exhausted, wet to the point that the eyelashes are stuck together and the corners are raw from the acidity of the tears, the ancient remedy for this condition is as follows:
E es que tu comandas al malaute rayre les pels les quals son en le sieu front, e aprop inscideys en le front tres fissuras engualment distans segon la longitut del front.	First, command the patient to raise their eyebrows. Then, make three equal incisions on the forehead parallel to its length.
E si’ la longitut de la fissura cays dos ditz: la una fissura sia engualment distant a la longitut del nas en le mieg loc del front, e la segonda segon la longitut un petit del movement dels lacertz les quals so en le lacrimal, e la tersa del autre part.	"The length of the slit should be such that one is equidistant from the length of the nose in the middle of the forehead, and the second follows the length slightly behind the movement of the eyelids which are in the lacrimal area, and the third from the other side."
E guarda te de la incizio de las arcerias las quals so en dos latz, e elongua la tua ma de la continuacio de amdos las mandibulas.	"Be careful of the arteries that lie on both sides and stretch your hand along the continuation of both jaws."
E si’ l’espazi de quascuna inscizio la quantitat de tres ditz ajustatz.	"And if the space of each incision is equal to three fingers wide."
E si’ a tu una pessa d’espongua apparelhada o draps seccatz motz am les quals exsiccas le sanc.	"And if you have a sponge wrapped in cloth or dry, crushed towels with which to absorb the blood."
E aprop entremet le spatum de dos agudas extremitatz, del qual aquesta es la forma de la inscisio de lu:	"And then insert the spit made of two pointed extremities between them, of which this is the shape of the incision:"
que es de la partida des templas entro a la segonda inscizio.	"This is for the partition of the temples into the second incision."
Exxcorja am aquel tota la codena la qual es entre dos incizios am le ciphac le qual es sobre le os, e aprop fay aquo de la inscizio migera entro a la segonda inscisio.	"Excavate with it all the chain that is between two incisions up to the bone that is on top of the skull, and then do this from the median incision into the second incision."
E aprop stratz ne aquest spatum e entromet en la primieyra inscizio autra vetz un autre instrument le qual es apelat cutellar, agut de una part e del autre no agut.	"And then insert this spade and again enter the first incision with another instrument called a scalpel, sharp on one side and blunt on the other."
E pausa le latz de aquel agut deves la carn annexa deves la codena, e le latz de lu leon dintz le os, e empelley aquel entro que pervengua a la fissura migera, e abscindeys am aquel totz les vaysels que descendo del cap als huels.	"And pass the sharp side of it down through the flesh attached to the chain and then enter the bone on one side of the median fissure and use it to cut all the vessels that descend from the head to the ears."
Mays que sia continuada la inscizio ad aquo appar de la codena, e aprop fay aquo en la fissura migana entro al autra fissura.	"But make sure that the incision is continued until you reach the chain and then do this in the median fissure into another fissure."
E pus que corr del sanc quantitat engual, exprem les locs de las pessas del sanc congilat.	"And since much blood flows from it, compress the places of the bleeding sponges together."
E aprop pausa en quascuna fissura calgua de coto vielh, e pausa sobre aquels polvils enbegutz en vi e oli e vi agre, e vegas que no endevengua apostema caut.	"And then put in each wound a piece of cotton wool soaked in vinegar and oil and vinegar, making sure that there is no burn resulting from cauterization."
E en le tertz dia deslia le liament e aministra gran enfusio de aygua cauda o tebeza, e aprop cura aquo am enguent bazilicon am oli rozat e autres entro que las plaguas sian sanadas.	"And on the third day untie the stitches and administer a large infusion of cold water or decoction of tormentilla, and then dress it with basil ointment with rose oil and other remedies until the wounds are healed."
Capitol .v.	"Chapter .v"
De la cura de lagramas per catartz e als huels descendentz de las partidas dedintz del cap.	"Of the treatment of lacerations by caustic substances and of the ears descending from the partitions inside the head."
Quan ad alcu veno catartz agutz e continuantz, e vezes les huels del malaute extenuatz petitz, e ja le reguardament de lor es debelitat, e las palpebras ulceradas e de lor cazo les pels, e en le preon del cap es dolor aguda ledent e extrenutacio consequent, lahoras sapias per aquestz accidentz que las materias e catartz no veno sino de motas venas de las partidas dedintz procedent.	"When someone comes with caustic substances that are sharp and continuous, and the ears of the sick person are thin and small, and their function is debilitated, and the eyelids are ulcerated and from them fall hairs, and there is acute painful sensation in the forehead with consequent swelling, you should know that these materials and caustic substances do not come from anywhere else but from small veins proceeding from inside the partitions."
E la milhor curacio en aquels es aquesta: que comandes al malaute que raza lo sieu front, e aprop inscideys en aquel una fissura al mieg loc del front, un petit per la latitut (e comensa am la fissura del templar senestre entro al dextre templar; e sia inscisio entro al os; e eslongua la tua ma dels lacertz del templas lesquals son maugutz deves la mastigacio), entro que sia le os descubert.	"And the best treatment for these is this: order the sick person to raise their forehead, and then make an incision in it in the middle of the forehead, a little one on the left (and begin with the incision on the left temple entering the right temple; and let the incision be within the bone; and lengthen your hand through the lacertians of the temples which are thickened by mastication), until the bone is uncovered."
Exsicca tot le sanc am espongua o am drap secc e aprop repleys entre las doas labias de la fissura am coto vielh o am draps de li.	"Dry up all the blood with sponge or dry cloth and then fill in between both lips of the wound with cotton wool or linen."
E aprop estrenh desus am polvils enbegutz en vi e oli per so que no endevengua apostema caut.	"And then sprinkle on top with powders soaked in vinegar and oil so that there is no burn resulting from cauterization."
E quan deslias aquo e veses que l’apostema ja es diminuit, lahoras cove que fregua le os entro que comensa en lu nayser carn, e aprop cura aquel am regiment exsiccatiu le qual fassa neysser la carn, ayssi cum si tu prenes de farina de froment dos partidas e de colofania quatre partidas e mescla o, e de lor sia fayt emplastre e sia aministrat en aquestas plaguas a de la carn nativitat.	"And when you remove that and see that the aposteme has decreased, then it is necessary to rub the bone where the flesh begins, and then dress it with a drying remedy which makes the flesh appear, for example if you take two parts of wheat flour and four parts of colophony and mix them together, and make an plaster from them and apply it to these wounds on newly born flesh."
Capitol .vi.	"Chapter .vi"
De la cura de aquo que catz en las aurelhas.	"Treatment for that which falls into the ears."
Tota causa que catz en las aurelhas es una de quatre specias, quar o es peyra mineral o causa semblant a peyra, ayssi cum ferr e veyre, o es de planta ayssi cum ceze o fava, o es causa fluxtibla ayssi cum aygua e vi agre e a lor semblantz, o alcuna bestia.	"Every cause that falls into the ears is of four kinds, for either it is a mineral stone or a similar cause such as iron and copper, or it is from a plant such as chickpeas or broad beans, or it is a fluid cause such as water and vinegar and their like, or some kind of creature."
E donc quan peyra catz en l’aurelha o autra causa semblant de aquelas causas que no ajustan ne creysso en l’aurelha, e pausa la aurelha al solelh, e si vezes la peyra, lahoras distilla en aquela alcuna causa de oli violat o sizami, e aprop aministra la extraccio de lu, e fay le stornudar am condizi, e oppila las nars deve le aveniment de stornutacio.	"And therefore when a stone falls into the ear or another cause similar to those causes that do not fit nor grow in the ear, and blocks the ear canal, and sometimes the stone is ground down, at times it distills into that some cause of olive oil or sesame. And then promptly administer its extraction, and make them sneeze under conditions, and plug their nose with the onset of sneezing."
E aprop pausa en le circuit de la aurelha alscunas pessas de drap o lana, e dextendas la aurelha a las partidas desus, quar motas veguadas es foro-getada am aquestas causas.	"And promptly plug the ear canal with some pieces of cloth or wool, and extend the ear outward from these parts, for many times it is forgotten with such causes."
E si no n’es getada, lahoras aministra extraccio de lu am le instrument apelat gesti epicicarios subtil del qual aquesta es la forma:	"And if it is not removed, then promptly administer its extraction using the instrument called the subtile epicicarian gesture, of which this is the form:"
E si es foro-getada am gesti, bo es; e sino, lahoras aministra la extraccio de lu am onci subtil de pauca duplicacio.	"And if it is forgotten with gestures, it is better so. And if not, then promptly administer its extraction using a thin hook of doubled thread."
E donc si no es foro-getada per aquo, lahoras fay una canula de aram e entromet la extremitat de la canula en le trauc de la aurelha e claus a l’enviro de la canula am cera e am oli mollificada per so que no sia ubert sino la canula.	"And therefore if it is not removed by this, then make a cannula of lead and insert the extremity of the cannula into the passage of the ear, closing around the cannula with wax and softened oil so that only the cannula may be inserted."
E aprop extratz am le tieu vent am fort atraccio, quar tropas veguadas cum aquo que havem recontat.	"And promptly extract it using a small wind with strong attraction, for often this is how it has been related to us."
Mays si no es foro-getada en aquesta manieyra, lahoras pren de halka alumbat o de vecz aparelhat am le qual son preses les ausels una patita quantitat, e pausa aquel en la extremitat de ray, e aprop envolopa sobre aquel coto decentment pausat.	"But if it is not removed in this manner, then take a heated halaka or sometimes prepared with which birds are taken by the foot in small quantities, and place that on the extremity of the ray, promptly wrapping it around that well-placed spot."
E aprop entromet aquel en le trauc de la aurelha am facilitat, e aprop excicca la aurelha de la humiditat.	"And promptly insert that into the passage of the ear with ease, and promptly remove the ear from moisture."
E donc si no es foro-getada am totas las causas las quals havem recontadas, lahoras tu coyta a talhar aquela denant que endevengua apostema caut o espasme.	"And therefore if it is not removed with all the causes which we have related, then you should cut that before it becomes an aposteme caut or spasm."
E la manieyra de talhar aquela es que tu al comensament sancnes le malaute de la vena sephasica e extratz del sanc segon la mannieyra de la vertut de lu, e aprop fay aquel cezer entre las tuas mas e converteys l’aurelha a las partidas desus, e fen am petita fissura en la razit de la aurelha deves lo greys de lu en le loc be premegut de lu.	"And the manner of cutting that is: first sanctify the vein sephasica and extract the blood according to its virtue, then make that cut between your thumb and index finger, converting the ear outward from these parts, and finish with a small fissure in the root of the ear, placing the greys of it in the well-pressed place of it."
E sia la fissura de figura lunar entro que pervengua a la peyra, e, la peyra atrobada, osta aquela si podes am instrumentz apropriatz; e aprop cos la fissura en aquela hora am velocitat, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	"And let the fissure be made in the shape of a crescent moon that reaches to the pear, and once the pear is attained, remove it if possible with appropriate instruments; and promptly close the fissure at that hour with speed, and care for it until it is healed."
E si la causa cazent en la aurelha es un dels gras que creysso e so inflatz, lahoras aministra la curacio e la extraccio de lu; mays si no obezeys a tu ad eyssiment, lahoras tu pren spatum teune subtil segon aquesta forma:	"And if the cause of pain in the ear is one of those greases that has increased and swollen, then promptly administer its cure and extraction. But if it does not obey your examination, then you should take a thin subtle spatula according to this form:"
e aministra am aquel la abscizio de aquel gra lo qual es cazut en l’aurelha.	"and use that for the excision of that grease which has fallen into the ear."
E no fassas aquo quan cogitas que aquel ja es humectat per la vapor del aurelha, e pausa aquel en motas pessas, e prop extratz ne aquelas am les oncis o am gesti subtil, o ab inscizio ayssi co dit havem, quar es alleujada la extraccio de lu.	"And do not do this when you think that it has already been moistened by the vapor of the ear, and pause until it is dry in several pieces, then promptly extract it with tweezers or subtle gestures, or with excision as mentioned above, for its extraction will be relieved."
Mays en l’aygua la qual es intrada en l’aurelha cove que·l malaute use de sternutacio am condizi al comensament, e omple la sieua aurelha am alcu coto vielh, e jagua sobre aquela aurelha en la qual es l’aygua, e si per aquo es foro-getada, bo es; e sino, lahoras pren tropas peyras teunas e leons segon la longitut del dit, e calfa aquelas en le foc un pauc, e le pacient entrometa una de aquelas en le trauc de la sua aurelha e saute sobre la un pe sieu de aquela partida e percussia am una autra peyra sobre la peyra la qual es dintz la aurelha.	"But in the water that enters into the ear, it is necessary to use sternutation with caution at the beginning, and fill one's ear with a little wax, and place it over that ear in which the water is located. And if it does not remove it, then promptly take thin pearls of lionstone according to the length of your finger, heat them in the fire slightly, and have the patient insert one of those into the passage of his ear and press on one side of that part with his little finger while striking another pearl over the pearl that is inside the ear."
Donc no cesse aquo am peyra entro que tota l’aygua sia foro-getada.	"So continue doing this until all the water has been removed."
E ja l’aygua sira foro-getada enayssi que tu prenguas de papier o de gonc i, e met la una extremetat de lu en l’aurelha e estendas l’autre extremitat am foc entro que sia comburit le may de lu.	"And if the water cannot be removed in this way, then take some paper or cotton, insert one end of it into the ear and extend the other end with fire until most of it is burned."
E prop met i autre gonc e fay aquo tantas veguadas entro que tota l’aygua sia foro-getada, e stratz aquel am canula ayssi co desus es dit de la peyra extrasadora.	"And promptly take another cotton and do this several times until all the water has been removed, then extract that with a cannula as mentioned above regarding the extracting pear."
Mays en la extraccio de bestia intrant en aquela aurelha, si es a petit cos, ayssi piussa e a lu semblant, cura aquel ayssi cum havem dit en la divisio; mays si es de gran cos la qual causa apar al sen del vezement, lahoras aministra la extraccio de lu am gesti e oncis, e la causa de lu es pus leugiera de totas las autras causas que cazo en l’aurelha.	"But in the extraction of a beast that enters into that ear, if it is a small creature, do thus and treat it in the same way as mentioned in the division. But if it is a large creature that causes fear at its sight, then promptly extract it with gestures and tweezers, for this cause is lighter than all other causes that occur in the ear."
Mays en la extraccio de verm engendrat en la aurelha, quan tu curas aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e en le tractat de distillacios e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu reguardes la aurelha al solelh.	"But in the extraction of a worm generated in the ear, when you treat it with what has been said in the division and in the treatise on distillations and your cure does not succeed, then it is necessary that you examine the ear towards the sun."
E donc si apar aqui alcuna causa dels verms, lahoras extratz aquel am gesti o am onci subtils, mays si no apar deguna causa, lahoras pren una canula dejos streyta e desus ampla de la qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	"And then if any cause of worms appears here, promptly extract it with gestures or subtle tweezers. But if no cause appears, then take a cannula of the form below:"
E entromet la extremitat subtil en la aurelha segon la quantitat la qual suffertar puesca le malaute; e aprop sucgeys am aquela per succio fort, e fay aquo motas veguadas, entro que totz les verms sian foro-gitatz.	"I insert the tip of a thin instrument into the ear according to what the patient can tolerate; then I suck strongly with it, and repeat this many times until all the worms are removed."
Mays si no obezeysso a tu al ayssiment, lahoras tu opila e claus en le circuit de la canula am cera ayssi cum havem dit; lahoras aministre distillacios las quals han ja esproadas les antics en la curacio dels verms, e atrobaras aquo en le tractat de distillacios.	"If you do not follow the aforementioned instructions, then seal and close the opening of the tube with wax as mentioned earlier. Then administer distilled drugs that have been proven effective in previous treatments for worms, and you will find this information in the treatise on distillation."
E sia la tua efusio am la qual efundas les olis medicinas en la aurelha am aquest strument del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	"And here is your procedure to pour medicinal oils into the ear using the instrument, whose shape is as follows:"
E fay aquela de argent o de eram, dejos streyt, en le qual sia un petit trauc, e am pla desus.	"And make it of silver or brass, narrow and straight, with a small hole at one end and flat on top."
E donc sia cum empellent a que es en la conquavitat de la canula de continent aqui on sira necessari.	"So that it may fit into the concavity of the cannula used here when necessary."
E si vols, pren le ray e envolveys en la extremitat de lu decentment coto, e aprop gieta oli en la concavitat del auziment, o suc de alcuna herba, o aquo que vols de aquestas medicinas en la canula — e aquela es en la aurelha —, e aprop entromet le ray am coto desus e exprem am la tua ma aquel am compressio temprada de lu entro que l’oli sia expellit en la concavitat del auziment e le malaute senta le oli dedintz.	"And if you wish, take the reed and wrap it around the tip of the instrument decently, and then pour oil into the concavity of the funnel, or juice from some herb, or any other medicine that you want onto the cannula — which is in the ear — and then insert the reed with its tip downwards and squeeze gently with your hand until the oil is expelled into the concavity of the funnel and the disease feels the oil inside."
E aquo que sia enfundut en la aurelha sia ja scalfat am foc un petit.	"And whatever is poured into the ear should be heated gently over fire."
E guarda te que la causa la qual distillaras en l’aurelha no sia trop frega, quar las medicinas de aurelha no suffertan aquo.	"And be sure that the cause you are treating in the ear is not too hot, as ear medicines do not tolerate heat excessively."
Capitol .vii.	"Chapter VII."
De curacio de opilacio de aurelhas.	"On the treatment of ear infections."
Alcunas veguadas alcus enfantz yeysso dels ventres de lors mayres no-perforatz, e aquo ja accideys en alcus homes, opilacio en le meat de la aurelha per plagua o per carn nada en aquela; e aquesta opilacio alcunas veguadas es fayta en le preon del trau de la aurelha la qual no consiec le vezement, e alcunas veguadas es en las partidas defora.	"Sometimes children are born from mothers' wombs not fully pierced, and this has happened to some men, deafness in the ear for plague or birthmark present there; and this deafness sometimes occurs on the front of the ear canal which does not affect hearing, and sometimes it is outside the ear parts."
E aquela que accideys en le preon de lu, la qual no comprehen le vezement, es en las majors disposicios de dificil sanacio.	"The one that happens in its front, which does not comprehend hearing, is among the most difficult dispositions to cure."
E en aquela en qual consegueys le vezement, cove que tu pauses la aurelha del malaute al solelh e reguarda en aquela.	"And in that where it succeeds in comprehending, you should place the patient's ear to the sunlight and look inside it."
E donc si vezes oppulacio apparent, obre aquela am espatum subtil del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	"Therefore if deafness appears, open with a thin spatula of which this is its shape:"
Si’ la extremitat de lu en la qual sia petita la latitut, del qual la una partida sia aguda e l’autra no; e le spatum sia de dos latz leon per so que no fassa lizio al aurelha.	"If the tip of it where it should be small in width, one part sharp and the other not; and the spatula is of two lion sides for that it does not make injury to the ear."
E donc si la opilacio es per carn nascuda en la aurelha o en le meat de lu, lahoras te aquela am oncis subtils e incidiys aquela vehement facilitat entro que sia ostada tota la carn.	"And therefore if the deafness is due to skin born in the ear or in its canal, then you should use thin scissors and cut it out with great ease until all the skin is removed."
E si opilacio es en le preon de la aurelha, lahoras pren ray subtil leon e escalfa aquel am foc un pauc, e aprop met aquel en le meat de l’aurelha.	"And if deafness is in front of the ear, then take a thin lion iron and heat it a little on fire, and quickly place that into the canal of the ear."
E donc si as scentit oppulacio am aquo que le malaute atroba am facilitat, per gravetat de ausir, esforsa la oppressio de lu am facilitat; e guarda te que no plagues les nervis del aurelha.	"And therefore if you perceive deafness with what the patient finds easily, due to gravity of hearing, ease its oppression with care; and make sure that you do not injure the nerves of the ear."
E aprop pausa en l’aurelha drap de li segon la quantitat del ample del trauc lo qual tu as envolvutz en l’enguent egipciac; e fay aquo per alcus jorns entro que sias segur de la consolidacio de la plagua; o que prenguas qualgua e enfon aquela en ayguaros e pulveriza sobre lu segi trissat e usa de lu; e si vezes la aurelha ja esser apostemada, lahoras cove que tu estraguas la qualgua e permutes aquela am autra qualgua la qual tu envoloparas en cerot que sia fayt am oli rozat, entro que sia le apostema caut cedat; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	"And immediately place a dressing on the ear according to the amount of width of the canal that you have involved in the Egyptian ointment; and do this for several days until you are sure of the consolidation of the wound; or else take wax, heat it, and pulverize it over it three times and use it; and if the ear becomes inflamed then it is necessary to cleanse the wax and replace it with another wax which you will envelop in cerot made with sweet oil until the inflammation has been cauterized; and immediately cure it until it is healed."
Mays si accideys flux de sanc, lahoras submergeys esponga o drap en aygua frega e pausa sobre la aurelha, e usa del autra curacio la qual restrengeys le flux del sanc, la qual es dita en le tractat de distillacio.	"But if it happens that there is a flow of blood, then immerse a sponge or cloth in warm water and place it on the ear, and use the other cure which restrains the flow of blood, which is described in the treatise on distillation."
Capitol .viii.	"Chapter VIII"
De cura de athezil le qual endeveno a las palpebras.	"Of the cure for atrophy that occurs on the eyelids."
Athezil les quals endeveno a las paupebras dels huels alcuna veguada so humitz, alscunas veguadas son secs.	"Some people's eyelids have been moistened occasionally, sometimes they are dry."
Donc cove que tu tenguas aquels am tenhalhas o am onci, e inscindas aquels am espatum de las suas razitz, e aprop pausa sobre les locs segi trissat.	"Therefore you should have those hands ready to handle the intestines or the hernia, and carefully spread out their edges with your fingers as explained."
Mays si dolor am flux de sanc veno, lahoras tu cauteriza aquels am cauteri lanticular subtil.	"But if there is pain from a blood flow, then cauterize it immediately with an anticlinal cautery."
E la milhor cauterizacio es aprop las inscizios e tropas veguadas retornam quan reman alcuna causa de sas razitz; e quan so cauterizadas am foc, aquelas razitz son comburidas e no retornan.	"And the best cauterization is to burn and close up wounds that return several times due to some cause of their edges; but when they are burned with fire, those edges get burned off and do not return."
Capitol .ix.	"Chapter IX."
Cura de grandeyssa que veno a las palpebras dels huels.	"Treatment of swelling that comes to the eyelids."
Motas veguadas endeve en las palpebras dels huels alcuna causa la qual es asemblada a grandissa en sa fortalicia e duricia, e per so grandissia es apelada.	"Many times there appears in the eyelids some cause that resembles hardness and toughness, which is called swelling due to its hardness."
E es agreguacio de humiditat grossa en la palpebra dejos e desus.	"And it is an aggregation of thick humidity in the left eyelid above."
Donc la opperacio en lor es que consideras lahoras si la grandissia es procedent en lu en aquo que apar de la palpebra e es mauguda a tota partida; e la causa de lu es leugiera.	"Therefore, if the swelling appears on the outside of the eyelid and is swollen all around, its cause is light."
Donc fen sobre aquela am fissura per la latitut, e aprop escorga aquela de tota partida am facilitat entro que evasesca, e aprop suspen aquela am onci e abscindeys aquela.	"Therefore make an incision over it along its width, carefully excise all around with ease, and suspend and cut off that cause."
Mays si a tu no es apparelhada la incizio de lu si no pus que penetras la palpebra am inscizio pauc a pauc, lahoras aquo no notz en deguna causa.	"But if the incision is not apparent at first but you penetrate the eyelid little by little with an incision, it does not matter for any cause."
E si la figura es gran, lahoras tu l’ajusta am sutura; e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	"And if its size is large, then adjust it with a suture; and dress it until it heals."
E si es pauca, a tu no sobrevindra mal per aquela quar l’anguent de lu restaura aquela e encarna.	"But if it is small, you will not suffer any harm from it since the ointment for it restores that and makes it grow again."
E si la grandissia es declinant a las partidas dedintz de la palpebra deves la superficia dedintz, lahoras evesa la palpebra e suspen la grandissia am onci, otra que tu indigescas de incizio, e prem aquela de tota part, e si la palpebra per inscizio es alonguada, aquo no notz en deguna causa.	"And if the swelling is declining towards the inner parts of the eyelid, then open the eyelid and suspend that swelling with a needle, except where you need to make an incision. Then press it all around, and if the eyelid is lengthened by the incision, it does not matter."
E aprop la incizio, lava le huel am aygua salada; e cura le loc am aquo que encarna entro que sia sanat.	"And after the incision, wash the eye with salt water; and dress that place with whatever makes it grow until it heals."
Capitol .x.	Chapter X
De la cura axcirnah en la palpebra desus del huel.	On the treatment of swelling above the eyelid.
Axcirnath es grays le qual es engendrat en las tunicas de la palpebra desus, e majorment endeve als enfantz, agrava les huels de aquels et accideyso a lor catartz le mayti; e no podon reguardar la claror del solelh per aquo quar lagremas se coytan ad aquels.	Axcirnath is a growth that occurs in the tissues of the eyelid above, and it happens more often in children. It aggravates their eyes and affects their sight so much that they cannot tolerate the brightness of sunlight because tears flow from them.
E per so tu vezes aquels jaser sobre les lors caras tot temps, e sobre les lors caras dormen; e so a las palpebras de lor dejos les sobrecils humidas, las quals ja ha cuberta imflacio, e iminencia de accernac apparent es en l’uelh; e que quant tu premes le loc am les tieus ditz, tu centes accernac entro aquels.	And therefore they make them wear patches on their faces all the time and while sleeping. And there are tears flowing from the eyelids of their left eyes which have already become inflamed and swelling is imminent in the eye; and you can feel the swelling when you press that place with your fingers.
E alcuna manieyra de opperacio es en aquel que le malaute pausa le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop pausa drap de li e de lu fay calgua, e fay de lu cercle segon la quantitat la qual contena arthernach de tota partida, e aprop pausa aquel sobre aquela e prem am les tieus ditz de tota per que sia agreguat arcernac en le mieg del cercle, e aprop fen en le mieg de aquela humiditat am spatum inscident am fissura per la latitut, e la fissura no sia major que la fissura que es fayta en flaubotomia.	And one way of operating is for the person to hold his head upright with his chin down and place a cloth on it and over the eye. Then make a circle according to how much swelling there is all around, and place that over it and press all around with your fingers so that swelling collects in the middle of the circle. Then make an incision in the middle of that humidity with a sharp instrument along its width, but the incision should not be bigger than the one made in phlebotomy.
Mays en le preon cove que tu fendas la codena tota entro que pervenguas ad arcernach, quar en las mays desposicios proceseys arcernach per fissura segon la forma de grayseza blanca.	But when you cut through the skin completely until you reach the swelling, for in most cases it comes out through the incision like white cheese.
Donc extratz aquela am draps los quals tu as envolopatz entre les tieus ditz a las partidas deforo e revolv entre la ma dextra e sinistre entro que sia dispargut.	Then take that out with cloths which you have wrapped between your fingers and roll them between your right and left hands until it has all come out.
E guarda te que no ajustes en la fissura per so que am le spatum no pervenguas al huel e ladescas aquel.	And be careful not to sew the incision too tightly, lest with the instrument you reach the eye and damage it.
Mays si no apar a tu arternach en le comensament de la fissura, mays que tu ajustes en la fissura un petit am fecilitat entro que procesisca arternach; e aprop extratz aquela ayssi quo havem dit; e aprop submargeys draps de li en aygua e vi agre e pausa les sobre le loc e estrenh aquels am polvils.	If it does not appear to you at the beginning of the fissure, then insert a small wedge with ease within that processes arternach; and then extract as we have said; and then overlay cloths with water and vinegar on the area and press them there and strain those with powders.
E so alcus que trissan sal e pausan aquel en la conquavitat de la fissura per so que aquo que es remas de aquela humiditat.	Some people crush salt and place it in the concavity of the fissure so that any remaining moisture is absorbed.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And then dress that wound once it has healed
Mays si accideys en le loc apostema caut, lahoras cura aquel am emplastres cedatils entro que sia sanat.	But if an abscess occurs in the cauterized area, then cure it with cedatil plasters until it is healed.
Capitol .xi.	Chapter XI
De manieyras de tactimi del huel.	Of methods for handling the sick.
Quan en las palpebras dels huels so natz pels ajustatz dejos les pels naturals e so antiquatz, lahoras aquels noso al huel e fan endevenir manieras de malautias ayssi cum lacrimas assiduas e mollificacio de palpebras e tela entro que aquo sia causa de destruccio del huel que s’apela tactinir del huel, e cura se en quatre manieyras: o per cauteri am foc; o am medicina acuta segon que denant es dit en le capitol de cauteri; o es fayt atactini per inscizio e sutura; o per cannas segon que yeu diyre.	When the eyelids of the sick are swollen due to excess discharge and become inflamed, then they cause unpleasant conditions such as persistent tears and softening of the eyelids and tissue that may lead to destruction of the eye, which is called inflammation of the eye, and it is cured in four ways: either by cauterization with fire; or with sharp medicine as mentioned earlier in the chapter on cauterization; or it is treated by incision and suturing; or with ointments as I will explain.
E donc cove que tu pauses le cap del malaute en le tieu se; aprop converteys la palpebra del uelh am la tua ma sinistra, e si es convertida, bo es; e sino, entromet agulha en aquela en la qual sia fiel de la partida pus dejos de la palpebra, e fay penetrar la agulha am fiel desus, e aquo sia — prop del marge de la palpebra en le qual naysso les pels — prop dels pels, e tira le fiel a las partidas desus am la palpebra, e converteys aquela am le ray.	And therefore, you should first examine the head of the sick person in its entirety; then turn the eyelid of the eye with your left hand, and if it is turned, that's good; but if not, insert a needle into that part where there is an excess discharge below the eyelid, and make the needle penetrate with thread above, and when you have — close to the edge of the eyelid where the hairs grow — close to the hairs, then pull the thread upwards with the eyelid turned towards you.
E aprop fen en la partida dedintz de la palpebra dejos les pels ajustatz am spatum inscidentz del lacrimal major entro al lacrimal mendre; e aprop extratz le fiel e pausa dejos la palpebra polvilhs petitz de coto o de drap, e aprop senha sobre la palpebra am tenta, e sia ayssi cum figura de fuelha de mirt.	Then cut into the part underneath the eyelid where the excess discharge is with a sharp probe inserted from the large lacrimal duct into the small one; then extract the thread and compress it beneath the eyelid using small pieces of cotton or cloth, and then press down on the eyelid with your fingertip in the shape of a myrtle leaf.
Mays empero cove que sia la figura segon la quantitat de helevacio de la palpebra, quar aquo ja es diversificat en les homes, quar de aquels es le quals indigeys que sia inscidit de la palpebra gran quantitat segon la quantitat per la qual la palpebra es mollificada.	But however the shape should be determined according to the amount of swelling of the eyelid, for that varies among individuals, and those who require a large incision of the eyelid according to the amount by which it is softened.
E aprop fen am le spatum sobre las doas linhas las quals has senhadas, e comensa del lacrimal major entro al lacrimal menor.	And then cut with the probe along the two lines that you have marked out, beginning from the large lacrimal duct into the small one.
E si’ la tua fissura prop dels pels naturals ayssi cum es la grossetut del rey.	And if your incision is close to the natural hairs, then it should be as wide as the thickness of a hair.
E aprop met le onci en un dels dos angles de la codena, e aprop excoria aquela tota, e aprop ajusta am la scitura las doas labias am gula o fiel de lana subtil, e abstergeys le sanc, e fay adherir aquo que superflueys dels fiels sobre dos sobrecils am alcunas causas enviscans, si voles far aquo, e sino, non cures.	And then place a clamp on one of the two ends of the thread, and then cut off all of it, and then sew up the two lips with wax or fine wool thread, and wipe away the blood, and make what is superfluous of the threads adhere to both eyebrows with some sticky substances, if you wish to do so; otherwise, do not worry about it.
E aprop leyssa la sutura dels fiels entro a tres dias o quatre, e aprop cura aquo.	And then leave the stitches in for three or four days, and then take them out and cure it.
E si vols, layssa la plagua ses sutura, e cura aquela am aquo que exsicca e constrenh, quar la palpebra es alevada deves la sigillacio de la plagua e la agreguacio de lu; mays sutura es milor E donc aysso diysso les antics de taxanir.	"And if you wish, leave the wound without stitching, and heal it with something that dries and constricts."
Mays empero en lu sia sollicitut sobre le malaute, e es de bona operacio, e no es en lu temor.	"But he was solicitous about the patient, acted well, and did not act out of fear."
E es autra manieyra en taxmir, e es que senhes sobre la palpebra figura ayssi cum fuelha de mirt, e aprop eleva la palpebra am tres uncis segreguatz e congreguatz segon aquesta forma:	"And another method of stitching is to cut the eyelid like a myrtle leaf and raise it with three separated and gathered needles thus:"
Mays si no es possible aquo, tener les uncis, e aquo no es engualhat, lahoras pren una agula en la qual haia fil e met aquela en le mieg de la figura, e entromet le autre fiel prop le lacrimal major, e·l fiel segon prop le lacrimal mendre, e ajusta entre les tieus ditz les fiels am equalitat, e aprop am aquels eleva la tua ma am elevacio engual, eleva tota la codena sobre la qual es senhat ayssi cum havem recomtat.	"But if that is not possible, then hold the needles, and this does not matter. Then take a needle with thread and put it in the middle of the figure, and put the other thread near the larger lacrimal, and the second thread near the smaller lacrimal, and adjust between these said threads with equality, and raise your hand with an equal elevation, raising all the chain on which it is cut as we have recommended."
E aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	"And then join the two lips of the wound with stitching, and heal that part which has been stitched up."
Mays si accideys apostema deves la tua inscizio o la tua fissura, seda aquel apostema am cerot e a lu semblantz, e am enguentz.	"But if an abscess forms after your incision or wound, cauterize that abscess with pitch and its like, and with fire."
E alcunas veguadas endeve a la palpebra que·ls sieus pels sian convertitz, adonc cove que tu uses en aquela de aquo que havem dit de inscizio; mays sutura en quascus es mays artificial.	"And sometimes it happens that the hairs of the eyelashes are turned inwards, so then you should use what we have said about incision, but stitching is more artificial."
Ataxinir am cannas es segon aquesta forma:	"The method with a needle is as follows:"
e es que tu convertas la palpebra e scindas la figura qu’es dedintz segon que he recontat; e aprop per art fay doas cannas o doas astelas subtils de las quals longitut sia segon la longitut de la palpebra e la latitut de lor sia mendra de la latitut del spatum.	"And it is that you turn the eyelid and cut the figure which is beneath as I have described; and then make two needles or two thin astels, of which the length should be according to the length of the eyelid and the width less than the width of the spatula."
E tu ja has inscidit en las extremitatz de quascunas partidas, la on tenes les fils.	"And you have already incised at both ends of each parted part, where you hold the threads."
Aprop agregua quascuna am subtilitat subre aquo que superflueys de la palpebra del huel, e constres las cannas de quascunas partidas am fort strictura, e layssa aquela per alcus jorns, quar la codena per la strictura morira e sira denegada e se poyrira entro que per si meteyssa cayra.	"Then bring each one together with subtlety over what is superfluous of the eyelid of the hole, and tighten the needles of both parted parts with strong pressure, and leave it like that for a few days, because the chain will die from the tightening and fall away and fall inside where you put it."
Mays si es tardat, lahoras trenca la am las toroyras, e aprop cura la plagua entro que sia sanat.	"But if it is delayed, then cut it with scissors, and then heal the wound where it has been healed."
Donc cum es solidada, la palpebra es elevada e les pels no pungo.	"So when it is healed, the eyelid is elevated and the hairs do not irritate."
E aquesta es la forma de doas cannas las quals faras segon aquesta forma:	"And this is how you make two needles according to this method:"
e haia la quantitat de la longitut e de la latitut ni mays ni mens.	"And have the quantity of length and width neither more nor less."
Capitol .xii.	"Chapter XII."
De elevacio de pels pungentz en le huel am agula quan le pel es dur.	"About raising irritating hairs in the eye with tweezers when the hair is hard."
Quan son pels no-naturals, durs e aspres e pungentz les huels, lahoras la operacio en lu es que tu prenguas agula subtil e pauses en aquela fiel de ceda subtil e leon, e aprop que tu ajustes las extremitatz de lu e nozes quascu en manieyra mot subtil.	"When hairs are not natural, hard and rough and irritating to the eyes, then the operation in it is that you take a fine tweezers and grasp with it that single hair of cedar or lion, and then adjust its ends very subtly without touching them."
E sia la longitut dels fiels de quantitat de una palma.	"And let the length of the hairs be about a palm."
E aprop tu compon2 autre fiel subtil dejos lu en breu, e nuza las extremitatz de aquel si tu·t vols.	"And then you make another fine hair from it in brief, and use its ends if you wish."
E aprop pause le malaute le sieu cap en le tieu se, e sia prop del solelh per que la tua obra sia declarada, quar es operacio subtil e menuda.	"And then grasp the sick person's head with your left hand, and let it be near the sun so that your work is clear, because this operation is delicate and fine."
E aprop intromet la agulha en la razit del pel ajustat la qual ha necessitat de engen, e fay aquela penetrar en la palpebra festinantment entro que extraguas aquela desus le pel natural.	"And then insert the tweezers into the root of the grasped hair which has needed to be removed, and make it penetrate into the eyelid quickly until you remove that from above the natural hair."
E aprop tire le pel entro desus e intromet aquel en alixati, e sian les pels un o dos o tres e no mays.	"And then pull out the hair from above and insert that one in its place, and let there be one or two or three hairs and not more."
E aprop tira la tua ma am aquel entro que·l pel sia fora-gitat am alixolati en la palpebra am le pel natural.	"And then pull your hand with it until the hair is completely removed from the eyelid with the hair in its place on the eyelid with the natural hair."
Mays si es atirat alixalati e non es gitat le pel, atiraras alixati a las partidas dejos am le fiel le qual tu has compost am aquela, entro qu’en sia gitat alixalati del trau sobira.	"But if it is pulled out and the hair is not removed, then you pull it out from both sides with the hair that you have made with it until it is completely removed from below."
E vegas aquela am la visio del huel, quar lahoras tu gitaras alixati e lo fiel, e grotan quascu e clautz le huel, e laysse le claus per dos dias o tres, entro que·l pel adheresca al sieu loc e nasque sobre aquel bona carn.	"And then examine it with the vision of the eye because then you will remove the tweezers and the hair, rinse both well, close them and leave the eyelid for two or three days until the hair adheres to its place and grows over it good flesh."
E si es mays breu le pel, lahoras tu ajusta un pel lonc dels pels naturals, e es elevat am aquel, o que·l leysses entro que sia alonguat aprop alcu spazi, e lehoras tu eleva aquel.	"And if the hair is too short, then you adjust a long one of the natural hairs and elevate it with that, or let it grow until it is lengthened appropriately some space, and then elevate it."
Capitol .xiii.	"Chapter XIII."
De la cura de ehacratir la qual ve en la palpebra desus.	"About treating the swelling that occurs on the eyelid above."
Quan ve en le huel ehacratir, e es contraccio de la palpebra quan es contrayta en sus, o a dextra o a sinistra partida, per mala consolidacio de plagua o de seccio o de cauteri, e es apelada leporina, e aquesta ahercrati o es natural o accidental, e es fayta per consolidacio de plagua o de seccios o de cauteri, o per semblantz a lor malcuratz.	"When swelling occurs in the eye, and is contraction of the eyelid when it contracts above on the right or left side due to poor healing of wound or section or burn, and it is called leporina, and this swelling is either natural or accidental, and is done by healing a wound or section or burn, or by resembling their ills."
May la manieyra de la operacio en lu es que tu fendas aquela consolidacio e que separes las labias de lu, e pauses en lu en aquo que es entre aquelas una meca de drap de li, e ligues aquelas entro que sian sanadas.	"The manner of operation in it is that you cut through that consolidation and separate its lips and apply to it a wick of linen soaked in water and tie those until they are healed."
E no cove que tu uses de curacio de lu de las causas las quals exsiccan, constrenho; quar si tu fas aquo retorna alixacratir pus mal que nulh temps no foc habantz.	"And do not use remedies that dry and constrict it because if you do it returns to swelling worse than ever before."
Usa en aquela de causas que mollifico ayssi cum es fenugrec, e embroca am la aygua en la qual son coytz altea e semensa de li, o enguent dyaquilon, le qual sia liquefayt am alcu dels olis, e submergeys en aquel la meca, e cura am aquel.	"Use on it causes that soften it like fenugreek, and steeped in the water in which it is cooked and washed or diacynthon, which should be melted with some oil, and immerse the wick in it and cure with it."
E lo tesaur de la tua curacio es que tu perforsses am tot engen que no sia consolidat segon la forma que foc al comensament.	"And the treasure of your remedy is that you perforate all that has not healed according to the form that was at the beginning."
E aquesta operacio la qual havem dita, no es sino alcuna rectificacio de ehalixacrati que no retorna la forma del loc segon que foc denant.	"And this operation which we have said is nothing but a certain correction of swelling that does not return to its original form."
Capitol .xiiii.	"Chapter XIV."
De la cura de ehacrati le qual es fayt en la palpebra dejos.	"About treating the swelling that occurs in the eyelid below."
Aquesta alxacrati la qual es fayta en la palpebra dejos, la qual es nompnada vertadierament alxacrati; e es de lu alcuna natural, autra accidental.	"This swelling that occurs in the lower eyelid is truly called swelling; and it is either natural or accidental."
Mays accidental es fayta per plagua o per scissura o per cauteri o per autres semblantz.	"But accidental is caused by wound or cut or burn or other similar causes."
E la via de la operacio de lu es que tu prenguas una agula en la qual haga fil doble, e fiques aquela en la carn, e que la fassas passar del lacrimal de senestre entro al lacrimal dextre, entro que·l fil pervengua en las doas extremitatz de la carn.	"And the way of operating on it is that you take a needle with a double thread and insert it into the flesh and make it pass from the left tear duct to the right tear duct until the thread reaches both ends of the flesh."
E aprop exten la carn a las partidas desus am la agula e cus aquela am la agula, e inscideys am spatum ample.	"And then extend the flesh above with the needle and close it with the needle and cut it open with a broad spatula."
E donc si retorne la figura de la palpebre segon que cove, bo es; e sino, pren le ray e pausa aquel en la figura fenduda, e am aquel converteys la palpebra, e fen las doas fissuras en le latz de la palpebra dejos.	"And then if the shape of the eyelid returns as it should be good. And if not, take the ray and place it in the cut figure and with that turn over the eyelid and make both incisions on the side of the lower eyelid."
E sian las extremitatz de las doas fissuras de dos angles de la inscizio, la qual has fayta entro que concurren, e sia de lor fayt angle entro que quan se congreguan sia fayta figura de lor.	"And let both ends of the two incisions be at two angles of the incision you have made so that they meet and form an angle between them when they come together to make a figure."
E aquesta figura es letra greca: la landa.	"And this figure is the Greek letter lambda (Λ)."
E aprop osta la carn aquela per la quantitat que es le latz de lu agut dejos de lu, aquo que siec la palpebra.	"And then remove that flesh by the amount that is on the sharp edge of it below where the eyelid meets."
E aprop ajusta las partz seperadas e cos aquelas am le fil de lana; e aprop cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit de las medicinas mollificativas e de las calguas entro que sia sanat.	"And then adjust the separated parts and close them with a wool thread, and then cure those with what we have said about softening medicines and compresses until it is healed."
E si alxacrati endeve per fissura o sutura o cauteri, lahoras cove que tu fendas am fissura plana sobre les pels de la palpebra segon que es precedit.	"And if swelling occurs again due to fissure or suture or burn, then you should make a flat incision on the skin of the eyelid as previously mentioned."
E aprop separa am la calgua entre doas labias segon que havem dit.	"And then separate with compresses between two lips according to what we have said."
En la suma del sermo de la cura de alxacrati quan es desus o dejos, que corra en lu operacio, segon que es preparat de la forma de alxacrati, e aquela es en forma de motas diversitatz.	"When it comes to the final words of the treatment speech for a patient who is above or below, let the operation run according to what has been prepared in the form of Alcathrat's method, which is in the form of many variations."
E le artifexs savi totz temps prepara engen en quascuna manieyra la qual es possibla a lu entro que fassa retornar la figura a la forma natural, o prop de aquela, e aquel malaute segon que a lu conveneys de la operacio e dels strumentz en las majors disposicios.	"And the wise artisan prepares in every possible manner to make the patient's figure return to its natural form or near it, according to what is convenient for the operation and tools in their most suitable positions."
Capitol .xv.	"Chapter XV."
De la adherencia de la palpebra am la conjunctiva o am la cornea.	"Of adhesion of the eyelid to the conjunctiva or cornea."
Quan accideys aquesta consolidacio a motz homes enayssi que sia solidada la palpebra pus desus am le album del huel, e sia prohibida de la facilitat del movement e de las suas obras naturals, donc cove que tu entrometas la extramitat del ray dejos la palpebra, e eleva en sus aquela, o exten aquela am le unci.	"When this adhesion occurs in many people, such that the eyelid is solidified upwards with the skin of the eye, and its movement and natural functions are hindered, then you should insert the tip of a needle under the eyelid and raise it up, or extend it using tweezers."
E aprop tu inscideys la adherencia am spatum subtil, le qual no sia am acuitat de las inscisios, habantz obtus un petit per so que·l malaute no sia inquietat deves la operacio, e remau le spatum que no ledesca le huel am la sua acuitat.	"And then you should cut the adhesion with a fine spatula that is not too sharp, having made it slightly obtuse so that the patient is not disturbed by the operation. Be careful not to let the spatula slip and harm the eye with its sharpness."
E sia la tua inscizio quays excorjan aquela adherencia am facilitat entro que sia retornada la palpebra segon la sua forma natural e que sia sanada tota la adherencia.	"And may your incision be such that it easily cuts through the adhesion, so that the eyelid returns to its natural shape and all of the adhesion is healed."
E aprop tu met en le huel aygua salada am la qual tu laves; o distilla en lu de zunia dissolvut en l’aygua.	"And then you should put salt water in the eye, with which you rinse it out; or dissolve honey in water and use that to wash it instead."
E aprop separa entre la palpebra e l’huel am calgua de li, e pausa sobre le huel lana infuza en album de huou, e aprop le tertz jorn usa de causas consolidativas entro que sia sanat.	"And then separate the eyelid from the eye with gauze and press on the eye with wool infused in egg white. And on the third day use consolidating remedies so that it may heal."
Capitol .xvi.	"Chapter XVI."
De inscizio de ungla e de eminencia de carn dels lacrimals.	"Of Incision of Nail and of Protrusion of Flesh from the Lacrimal Ducts."
Sapias que ungla es segon dos manieyras, quar o es nervosa, e es semblant a ciphac dur subtil; o es no-nervosa, semblant a humiditat blanca congilada, la qual quan ferr la toca, o es forsat aquela prendre am onci, es abscindida e le onci no es ficat en lu.	"Know that there are two kinds of nails: one is nervous and resembles hard cartilage; the other is not nervous and resembles congealed white moisture. When you touch this kind with a knife, it can be easily grasped with tweezers and cut off without the tweezers becoming stuck in it."
E amdos las specias no comensan sino del lacrimal major entro que va petit a petit que cobre la vista e prohibeys le lum e·l movement de huel.	"And both of these species begin from the larger lacrimal duct, which gradually extends until it covers the eye and prevents light and movement."
Mays la manieyra del obrar en la inscizio de lu es que·l malaute pause le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop obre les huels de lu, e eleva la palpebra am la tua ma, e aprop colligeys la ungla am onci de pauca duplicacio e exten aquela a las partidas desus.	"But the method of operating for this incision is that the patient holds his head steady by placing it against the table, and then you open his eyes and lift up the eyelid with your hand. Then you grasp the nail with tweezers using few duplicates and extend it upwards."
E aprop pren una agula e entromet en aquela un pel de cavalh o de buou o de vaqua, o de semblantz, o de fiel fort, o duplica la extremitat de la agulha petit a petit e fica aquela en le mieg de la ungla, e penetra aquela am la agulha, e lia am fiel la ungla; e exten aquela a las partidas desus, e excorja am le pel le latz de la ungla lo qual siec la pupilla.	"And then take a needle and insert it under the nail a little bit using a horsehair or cowhair or pig hair or similar thread, or strong string. Then duplicate the tip of the needle little by little and insert it into the middle of the nail, pierce it with the needle, tie the nail with string, extend it upwards, and cut off the side of the nail that covers the pupil using the thread."
E ayssi tu sieguas aquela am le pel entro al derier de lu.	"And then follow this method behind it as well."
E aprop tu inscideys le romanent en la razitz del lacrimal am spatum subtil o am petitas forfexs, e leysa la carn del lacrimal natural per so que per inscizio de aquela no endevengua fluxs de lagremas continuabla.	"And then cut off the remaining part of the nail in its root with a subtle spatula or small forceps and lift up the flesh of the natural lacrimal duct so that there is no continuous flow of tears from the incision."
E alscunas vetz la ungla am le sol onci estenduda o am fiel, ayssi co havem dit, e aprop sia excurjat am spatum leon del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	"And sometimes you can also grasp and extend the nail with only one pair of tweezers or string as we have said earlier. And then cut off the remaining part of it using a lion-shaped spatula whose shape is like this:"
E guarda te que am le spatum no toques la tunica cornea e que avengua en lu ruptura, e que la pupilla sia perforada.	"And be careful that with the spatula you do not touch the corneal tunic and cause a rupture in it, or pierce the pupil."
Aprop la inscizio geta en le huel un pauc de sal trissa o di cief fayt de siniar, e leyssa aquel entro al autre dia; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove entro que sia sanat.	"Then place a little bit of salted water or thin dough made from flour and sinapis into the eye and leave it overnight. Then rinse it with clean water until it is healed."
E si la ungla no es nervoza e no podes metre la agulha, ni es ficada en aquela le onci, lahoras motas veguadas aquesta specia de ungla es curada am medicinas, e es sanada ayssi cum yeu e recomtat en la divisio.	"And if the nail is not nervous and you cannot insert the needle into it or grasp it with tweezers, then sometimes this type of nail can be treated with medicines and healed as described in the division."
E si tu vols inscindir aquela, lahoras tu obre le huel del malaute e pren spatum subtil leon de freul acuitat segon aquesta forma:	"But if you want to incise it, then open the eye of the patient and take a subtle lion-shaped spatula with acute edges like this:"
am subtilitat.	"with subtlety."
E si vezes que aquela es rarificada e es confugida e empren en aquela razit, lahoras distilla de la tua ora en le huel de cief fayt de siniar o am cief rog o am sal trissat, e opila le huel entro a l’autre dia.	"And if sometimes it becomes rarefied and congested and stuck in its root, then distill from your mouth into the eye some thin dough made from flour and sinapis or egg white or salted water, and close the eye overnight."
E aprop itera sobre aquela la operacio entro que sia remaugut tot aquo que es de lu, sino que·l contrari apostema caut sia en le huel, quar lahoras tu leyssa aquela, e cura al comensament la apostema entro que sia sanat.	"And then repeat the operation until all of it is removed. But if a contrary aposteme appears in the eye, then leave it alone and cure it at the beginning so that it heals."
E aprop itera la tua operacio sobre aquela am razo entro que sia sanat.	"And then continue your operation on it with reason until it is healed."
La emenencia de la carn lacrimal, si notz en le huel per gran nocument, sia suspendut am onci; e inscideys aquela de aquela una partida, e no ultimes la inscizio per so que no inscidesqua fluxs de lagremas.	"The prominence of the lacrimal caruncle, if it causes great discomfort in the eye, should be suspended with tweezers. Then cut off one part of it and do not extend the incision too much to avoid cutting the tear ducts."
E aprop distilla en le lacrimal cief rog e fayt de siniar entro que sia sanat.	"And then distill some egg white and flour made from sinapis into the lacrimal duct until it is healed."
Capitol .xvii.	"Chapter XVII"
De inscizio de alguazardenic e de aquo que es nascut de carn ajustada en le huel.	Of Incision of an Abscess and of What is Born from Adherent Tissue in the Eye.
Alcunas veguadas en les huels de alcus es nascuda carn roga, e es sobre-pausada entro que cobre la pupilla, o apropinqua o estrenh sobre las palpebras e fort leu comprem las palpebras a las partidas deforo e es assemblada a roza de balaustra.	Sometimes in the eyes of some people rough flesh is born, which covers the pupil or approaches and adheres to the eyelids and presses them together at their edges like a column.
Mays la operacio en lu es que·l malaute pausa le sieu cap en le tieu se; e aprop obre les huels de aquel e colligeys tota aquela carn am oncis convenientz ad aquo, e te aquo am una forcep o am cesti; e aprop inscindiys la carn el comensament entro que tot sia finit am le encisori, e guarda te del huel que no ledescas aquel deves la tua operacio.	But the operation for this is that the patient holds his head steady on the table, and then opens his eyes and grasps all of that flesh with appropriate tweezers or forceps or cesterne, and incises it at the beginning until everything is finished with the scalpel. But be careful not to hurt the eye during your operation.
E sia la tua inscizio am la qual inscides aquelas o am espatum le qual nos havem recomtat en la inscizio de la ungla, o am petitas forfexs am las quals es colligit ascebel segon que vindra la forma de lu aprop aquest capitol.	And your incision should be done with the scalpel with which you cut those nails or with the lion-shaped spatula mentioned in the chapter on cutting the nail, or with small forceps using a scalpel according to what is appropriate for this chapter.
Donc cum es complida la tua inscizio e es remauguda tota aquela carn, lahoras omple le huel de sal trissa, o destilla en lu polvera roga e semblantz a lu de las medicinas corrossivas, e pausa sobre le huel deforo coto am album de huou entro que sia asegurat de apostema caut.	Therefore, when your incision is finished and all of that flesh has been removed, then fill the eye with salted water or distill into it rough powder similar to corrosive medicines, and compress it externally with a bandage made from wool until it is certain that there is no cauterization.
E si roman alcuna causa de alguardenici e es senhoragat sanc caut, e temes apostema caut, lahoras leyssa le huel e cura aquela apostema am aquo que ceda aquela apostema, e aprop itera sobre aquel am operacio entro que sia sanat, e semblantment fay en la carn ajustada la qual accideys en le huel de aquesta especia.	And if there remains some cause of abscess and it is swollen but not cauterized, and you fear cauterization, then leave the eye alone and cure that abscess with what will help it heal. Then repeat your operation on it until it is healed, and do similarly for adherent flesh that occurs in this type of eye.
Mays empero tu cove que alienes tota curacio del huel freul per via natural o per via accidental, obran am ferr, e no metas la tua ma en alcuna de aquestas operacios entro que veges que aquel membre sia suffertant aquela operacio.	But you should avoid all cure of the eye by natural means or accidently done with iron instruments. Do not put your hand in any of these operations until you see that that member can withstand such an operation.
Capitol .xviii.	Chapter XVIII
De colleccio de sabel en le huel.	Of Extraction of a Foreign Body from the Eye.
Sabel so venas rogas las quals son testudas sobre le huel e prohibeysso al vesement la sua operacio, e develican le huel am longitut de dias.	Rough foreign bodies that are stuck in the eye and hinder its vision require an operation to remove them, which can take many days.
Donc necessari es al comensament que tu consideres si le huel en le qual es sabel es fort e en lu no es autra malautia que sabel, lahoras tu colligeys aquel sabel.	Therefore, at the beginning you must consider whether the eye in which there is a foreign body is healthy and not affected by any other disease. Then grasp that foreign body with suitable forceps or tweezers.
E es que tu comandes al malaute que pause le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop suspen aquelas venas am un onci o am dos segon la tua prudencia; e sia aquel onci de subtil duplicacio segon aquesta forma:	And tell the patient to hold his head steady on a table, and then suspend those veins with one or two tweezers according to your judgment. And that tweezer should be of fine double-ended form like this:
o so dos oncis gradantment en un cos segon aquesta forma:	or two tweezers graduated in one body like this:
E aprop sian colligidas aquelas venas am forses subtils, am subtilitat, e abstergeys le sanc hora aprop hora, entro que vegas aquelas venas esser remaugudas del huel e sian revolgudas.	"Then carefully tie those veins with subtle threads, with subtlety, and remove the blood promptly, before you see those veins being freed from the bone and turned over."
E guarda te que tu no ledes le huel am las extremitatz del spatum; e si’ la tua operacio en le miegjorn denant le solelh, e sias mot ferm en la tua operacio que no inscidas sino aquelas venas.	"And be careful not to cut the bone with the scalpel's tip; and if your operation is done in the middle of the day before the sun, make sure you are steady during the operation so that you only cut those veins."
E quan tu auras complitz, lahoras tu distilla en le huel cief vert o rog per que am sa acuitat corrodesca aquo que es remaugut del sabel.	"Once you have completed this, then distill in the hollow skull vertex or rose water so that with its sharpness it might corrode what has been cut off by the scalpel."
Mays si aquo no es a tu possible colligeys tot en aquela hora, e lahoras tu emplastra tot am aquo que cede la dolor de lu, e leyssa lu per alcus dias entro que sia sedada la dolor de lu e que sia asegurat de apostema caut.	"But if this is not possible for you, then collect all in that hour and afterwards plaster it with what relieves the pain of it, and let it rest for a few days until the pain is calmed and an abscess has healed."
E aprop itera sobre lu segon que la mateyssa manieyra entro que sia sanat.	"And repeat this process again in the most gentle manner until it is healed."
E aquesta es la forma de las forfexs:	"Here is how you perform a caesarean section:"
Capitol .xix.	"Chapter XIX."
De reduccio de arizati al nas.	"On reducing fractures of the nose."
Quan tu curas arisati am cauteri o am medicina aguda comburent segon que es precedida la narracio de lu e no es sanat, lahoras no es engen en lu sino que fendas sobre le apostema deves la maturitat de lu, e que extraguas tota la humiditat la qual es en lu e·l poyre entro que sia descubert le os.	When you treat burns with cautery or sharp medicine according to the preceding description and they do not heal, then do not attempt to enter until the abscess ripens. Open it there and extract all the moisture that is within it, ensuring the bone is exposed.
E donc cum es descubert le os e vezes en lu corrupcio o negror, lahoras tu ratz lu am un sturment del qual aquesta es la forma:	And thus when the bone is exposed and you see corruption or blackness in it, then cut it with an instrument that has this shape:
E es nompnat de aspre cap, e sia feyt de fer indi, e sia le cap redon ayssi cum asir le qual sia fayt punctat per punctacio de lima o aliskalfati per punctacio subtil (ayssi cum es en la forma seguent).	And it is called the "sharp-pointed head," made of iron, and its head should be round like this ∘ but punched with lime or fine chalk points through subtle piercing.
E pausa aquel sobre le loc corrumput del os, e aprop revolveys aquel entre les tieus ditz, e prem la tua ma petit a petit entro que sapias que aquela corropcio es rasa.	Place that upon the decayed part of the bone and then turn it between your fingers, pressing it little by little until you know that corruption is scraped away.
E aquo sia fayt alcunas veguadas, e aprop restaura le loc am causas exsiccativas e stipticas.	And after doing this several times, then restore the place with drying and astringent causes.
Donc si·l loc es consolidat e es en lu nascuda bona carn e es abscindit le cors de la sania e roman per xl dias, e no es renovat e no es apostemat e no accideys en lu accident, lahoras tu sapias que es sanat.	Therefore if the location is consolidated and new flesh has grown there, and the body is separated from sickness and remains thus for forty days, and it does not renew nor suppurate nor suffer any accident, then you would know that it is healed.
E sino, lahoras no es en lu engen sino reduzir la fissura a la forma del nas, e segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu descuebras de segon os am ferr o am medicina acuta, e cum sira descubert le os, lahoras tu pren tribo segon aquesta forma:	And if not, then it is necessary to reduce the fracture back into place according to this manner. First, uncover it using a hammer or sharp medicine, and when uncovered, you take a splint thus formed:
Sia la extramitat de lu ferr triangulada, e·l fust de lu sia prim extenuat entro a la extremitat ayssi cum vezes assi.	The end of the iron should be triangular, and its shaft should be thinly tapered towards that end like this.
E aprop pausa aquel sobre le os, e sia aquel prop del lacrimal; e alongua la tua ma un pauc del huel, e aprop revol la tua ma am le tribo entro que penetre tot le os, e aquel sente le malaute per asso que atroba vent yssir per so quan te la sua ma.	And then place that splint on the bone, near the lacrimal; and with your hand a little above it, press the splint down while it enters until all of the bone is covered. Then you will feel the discomfort as air escapes from there when your hand presses down.
Donc lahoras restaura le loc am medicinas stipticas exsiccantz ayssi cum t’e eyssenhat.	Then restore the location using drying astringent medicines, like this.
Donc cum nays la carn e·l loc es endurazit, lahoras la materia la qual effundia a las partidas deforo retorna al nas, donc aquo es pus leugier sobre le malaute.	"Therefore when flesh and the place are hardened, then the matter that flowed into the parts returns to its source, therefore this is easier upon the patient."
Capitol .xx.	"The chapter twenty."
De reduccio de la eminencia del huel.	"On the reduction of the swelling on the wound."
Quan le huel emineys am la sua totalitat e no accideys en le vezement nocument ni diminuacio, lahoras cove que laxas le malaute, e aprop que·l segues, e aprop que pausas ventozas en le cervitz ses scarificacio e succa per bona succaccio; e aprop pausa sobre le huel liniment le qual sia fayt de acatra e aloe e enses e sarcocolla, e aprop strenh le emplaustre sobre le huel am motz polvils.	"When the swelling of the wound is complete and no document or diminution occurs in the appearance, then it is necessary that you leave the patient, follow him closely, and pause windy fomentations on his neck without scarification and suck with good suction; also apply ointment made from acacia, aloe, wax, and tragacanth on the wound, and strengthen the plaster with many powders."
E la manieyra dels polvils es que prenguas draps de li leons motz, e quascun drap sia duplicat en quatre plecs; e fay de aquels motz.	"And the manner of making the powders is that you take linen rags many folds, and each rag folded into four pleats; make them of these folds."
E aprop pausa aquels la un sobre le autre segon la quantitat de la qual ha le huel necessitat.	"And also place those on top of one another according to the quantity which the wound requires."
E aprop strenh sobre aquels am drap dur am fort strictura; e itera las ventosas am succio ses scarificacio; e aprop osta las ventosas e leyssa le huel streyt le dia e la nueyt.	"Then apply a hard cloth tightly with strong pressure; and apply cupping glasses with suction without scarification; then remove the cups and let the wound remain tight day and night."
Mays si entretant le liguament es mollificat, lahoras cove que sia mot streyt.	"If during this time the ligament becomes softened, it is necessary to tie it tightly."
E aprop osta le liament aprop le dia e la nueyt ayssi cum havem dit.	"And remove the bandage day and night as we have said."
E si vezes le huel ja esser redusit, bo es, e sino, lahoras itera le emplastre am les polvils e la strictura e las ventosas entro que sia sanat.	"If the wound has already been reduced, that is good; if not, then apply the plaster with powders and pressure and cupping glasses until it heals."
Capitol .xxi.	"Chapter XXII"
De la inscizio de la eminencia de la tunica uvea.	"Of the incision of the prominence of the tunic of the eyeball."
Quan endeve disrupcio en la tunica uvea, e aprop es eminent e procezeys fora las palpebras ayssi cum un gra de rasim, e es orrazada la forma de home per aquo, e vols aquo inscidir, lahoras la operacio en lu es ayssi cum havem recomtat, que tu entrometas la agula en la razitz de la uvea de la partida dejos en la partida desus, e aprop met la agula autra en la qual sia fil doble de la part del lacrimal, e fay aquela penetrar e leyssa la primieyra agula segon la sua disposicio; e aprop inscideys le loc del fiel doble e leva am aquel la partida de la uvea en le circuit de la agula, e strenh aquela mot.	"When there is a rupture in the tunic of the eye and it becomes prominent and protrudes through the eyelids like a grain of millet, and you wish to incise it, then perform the operation in this manner: insert the needle into the groove of the eye at its lower end and bring it up towards the upper end. Then insert another needle on the side of the lachrymal gland and let it penetrate and follow the first needle in its path. Then cut the looped suture and lift out the prolapsed portion of the tunic with that, pulling it firmly."
E aprop extratz la agula e pausa sobre le huel lana infusa en album de huou e leyssa entro que cayha le fil am la uva.	"And then remove the needle and press the wound with lanum infused in egg-white and leave it there until the thread adheres to the wound."
E aprop cura le huel am aquo que conforte aquel entro que la plagua sia sanada.	"And then dress the wound with that which will comfort it until the prolapse is healed."
E alcunas veguadas aduna de tota partida am cercle de drap entro le huel ajuste eminencia gran, e aprop sia perforat am le spatum subtil que vengua al preon del huel, e corra la humiditat albuginea, e descen le huel e intra tantost.	"And sometimes it happens that the entire prolapse is enclosed within a circle of cloth applied over the wound with great prominence, and then it should be perforated with a fine spatula which comes to the front of the wound, allowing the humor albuminous to escape, and the eye will descend and become quiet immediately."
E aprop strenh entro que sia sanat.	"And then wait until it is healed."
Capitol .xxii.	"Chapter XXII"
De curacio de alconati.	Treatment for eye strain
Aquesta malautia que es apelada alconati no es sino sania la qual es ajustada en le huel semblant a aygua dessendent e no es aquela.	This condition known as eyestrain is nothing but excess heat that settles in the area around the eye, resembling water flowing downwards.
Mays la manieyra del obrar en ela es que fasses le malaute sezer sobre la sela aparelada e dreyta, e aprop pren le cap sieu en las tuas mas de doas partz e mau aquel entro que veias la sania pervenir a las partidas dejos, e aprop sia siccada e no descenda, e sia ostat le lum, e·l malaute veia las causas ayssi cum vezia.	The method of treating this condition is to make the patient sit on the prepared stool with their back straight, and then take hold of their head with both hands, moving it in such a way that you see the excess heat beginning to descend from the affected area. Then, dry it off so that it does not flow downwards, and cover them with clothing, so that they feel better as if they have seen light again.
E si no descendra en jos, sapias que es aygua.	And if it does not flow downwards, know that it is water.
Mays si no es preparat le descendement a la sania am aquo que havem dit, lahoras fay le malaute sezer entre las tuas mas e aprop pren spatum subtil e fen am aquel sobre le pannicol cernent un petit deves la continuacio de la conjunctiva am la tunica cornea en la corona (entro al loc vuet), entro que sia fora-getada la sania.	But if the excess heat is not properly prepared to flow downwards as we have said, then make the patient sit between your hands and take a small, fine spatula. Wipe with it on the inner corner of the eye, close to the continuation of the conjunctiva onto the cornea, until the excess heat has been dispersed.
Donc cum es fora-getada, lahoras tu distilla en le huel aygua cauda en la qual has mesclat mel o aygua en la qual ja has bulit fenugrec e mel.	Once it has been dispersed, then distill onto the eye a few drops of water in which you have mixed honey or water in which you have boiled fenugreek and honey.
E aprop sia curat am las autras causas entro que sia sanat.	And then treat them with other causes until they are healed.
Capitol .xxii.	"The chapter twenty-two."
De la curacio de la aygua descendent del huel.	"Regarding the treatment of descending hydrocele."
Ja havem dit las specias de la aygua en la divisio e qual conveneys a perforar am sermo declarant, lahoras aquel segon la sanetat.	"We have already spoken about the kinds of water in the division and which is appropriate to perforate with clear speech, therefore following health guidelines."
Lahoras cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute entre las tuas mas sobre un cayrat e lia le sieu huel sa, lu mot stringent.	"Therefore you should make the patient sit between your thighs on a chair and hold their testicle with your hand, squeezing gently."
E aprop pausa prop de la palpebra del sieu huel la tua ma senestra, si le huel en le qual es l’aygua es le huel senestra; o am la tua ma dreyta, si le huel es le dextre.	"And appropriately place your left hand close to the scrotum of their left testicle if it is the one containing water; or your right hand if it is the right one."
E aprop am la tua ma dextra pren almagda, si le huel es senestre; o am la tua ma senestra, si le huel es de dreyt.	"And with your right hand take a bandage if the testicle is left; or with your left hand if it is right."
E aprop pausa la extremitat de almagda prop de la corona per la grossesa del ray en le album del huel de part del mendre lacrimal, e aprop enpelleys almagda am vertut e revol la tua ma am aquel.	"And then place the end of the bandage close to the ring-like structure near the thickness of the vein on the testicle towards the lesser lachrymal gland. Then wind the bandage tightly around it with your hand."
E aprop penetre en le album del huel e sentas que almagda ja es pervenguda a causa vueda.	"And then enter into the vein of the testicle and feel that the bandage has reached its proper position."
E cove que sia la masura del cami de almagda al preon la mesura del spazi le qual es de la pupilla entro a la fi de la negror, e es la corona del huel; quar tu veyras am aquel pupilla am la visio de l’huel per la clartat de la tunica cornea.	"And the length of the bandage should be equal to the measurement of space from the pupil to the end of the blackness, which is the ring of the testicle. Because you will see with that pupil through the clarity of the tunica cornea."
E aprop pausa almagda entro al loc en le qual es l’aygua, e aprop tu la atira en jos una veguada aprop autra, e donc si la aygua descen tantost, lahoras vetz le malaute aquo sobre le qual huebre la sua vista tantost, e almagda en le sieu huel.	"And then place the bandage into the space where the water is located. Then pull it down suddenly once or twice more. And if the water descends quickly, immediately the patient will see better and the bandage will be in its proper position."
E aprop repausa se un pauc; donc si la aygua es descenduda, lahoras tu depausa aquela autre veguada abantz que almagda ne sia getada.	"And then pause for a moment. And if the water has descended, then pull that other bandage again making sure that it is not dislodged."
E donc quan es sicada e no descen, lahoras tu extrat almagda am facilitat, e revol am aquel la tua ma pauc a pauc, e aprop dissolveys en l’aygua un petit de sal clara de gemma e am aquela lava le huel dedintz; e aprop pausa fora le huel coto o stopa o lana infusa en oli rozat e album de huou e ligua am aquo le huel sa.	"And then when it is full and no more water descends, carefully remove the bandage. Then slowly unwind it with your hand, a little at a time. And then dissolve a small amount of gemstone clear salt in the water and use that to wash the inside of the testicle. And then pause outside the testicle and stop or plug it with cotton soaked in rose oil and almond oil and tie it around the testicle."
Mays nos e aquels que so de nostre temps pause sobre aquel comi trissat am album de huou.	"But those of our time pause over that command twisted with almond oil."
E si no obezeys a tu almagda al intrament de l’huel per la sua duricia — quar es alcu dels homes del qual le huel es dur mot —, lahoras cove que prenguas le spatum le qual es nompnat alberid del qual aquesta es la forma:	"And if you cannot insert the bandage into the testicle due to its hardness - for it is one of those men whose testicle is very hard - then you should take the spatula called 'alberid' which has this shape:"
E donc perfora am aquel aquela conjunctura, e no ultimes la tua ma en le trauc, e no es si no que fassas via ad almagda loc subtil.	"And then pierce with that the conjunction between the testicle and the scrotum. And do not go too deep with your hand. And if you cannot make a way for the bandage, use a subtle instrument."
E aprop entromet almagda segon que havem dit.	"And then insert the bandage as we have said."
E deves le compliment de la tua obra, sia preparat al malaute dormitori descentment fayt en le qual dorma sobre le sieu dos en mayson tenebrosa, e sia prohibit de totz movementz .	"And you must prepare the patient for sleep by ensuring that they are lying down comfortably in a room where it is dark and quiet. They should remain still and avoid any movements."
E pausa en la natura de lu aquo per que sia linida la sua natura, e no maugua le sieu cap a la partida dreyta ni senestra de tot.	"And pause the nature of water so that its nature is clear and do not move your head to the left or right at all."
E sia le liament segon la sua disposicio entro al tertz dia.	"And let the bandage be according to its arrangement on the third day."
E aprop deslia aquel en aquela maysso tenebrosa e exproha la freol vista, e fay li vezer alcunas causas, e aprop retorna le liament entro al dia .vii.	"And then untie it in that dark room and uncover the eye, and let him see some lights. And then return the bandage to its place on the seventh day."
E no cove que fassas aquo en la hora de las curacios o tantost aprop la infusio.	"And you should not do this during the hours of treatment or immediately after infusion."
Habantz cove que tu alienes aquo per so quar la aygua puega leugierament per gran e vehement de reguardament.	"For it is necessary that you avoid doing this because water plays lightly upon great and powerful regard."
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras cove que deslias le huel denant le vii dia, e rectifica aquel am aquo que ceda apostema.	"But if an abscess forms, then you must untie the testicle on the seventh day and correct it with something that will cause the abscess to drain."
Lahoras tu absol la vista de lu e pausa sobre la cara de lu oral per le qual sia regit le vezement de lu dejos lu per alcus dias, lu existent en la mayszo tenebrosa.	"Then uncover his eye and pause over the face of it so that it will direct its gaze towards the ceiling. Let him lie thus in a dark room for several days."
E aprop sia gitat de aquela mayzo gradantment e conversa8 en las suas causas.	"And then gradually lead him out of that darkness and accustom him to his usual surroundings."
E sapias que in alchatea no es excusat le discipol de visio alcunas veguadas, e lahoras tu sias ardit sobre la operacio.	"And know that sometimes the apprentice is not exempt from vision. Therefore you should be careful about the operation."
E ja es pervengut a nos de alcu de aquels les quals so al Artach , e alcu disse que fayt foc en al Ayrac magdaam perforat am le qual es succada la aygua.	"And it has come to our knowledge that among those who practice this art, some say that fire should be made in the River Magdalen, pierced with a reed through which water is sucked."
Mays empero yeu non e vist degu en la nostra terra le qual haia perfeyt aquo, ni e aquo legit en alcu dels libres dels antics; e es possible que aquo sia novel.	"But nevertheless we have not seen this done in our land, nor is it written in any of the ancient books. Therefore it seems that this method may be new."
E aquestas so las formas de las specias de magdaan per que sia sobre aquelas aquel le qual ignora aquelas:	"And these are the forms of the bandages for those who do not know them:"
E sian faytas de eram o de ferr propriament, e sian las extramitatz de lor am aquesta subtilitat triangulada, la extremitat aguda ayssi cum aquela es la forma.	"And they should be made of iron or steel properly forged and their extremities should be cut with this triangular subtlety, the sharp point being like this:"
Capitol .xxiv.	"Chapter XXIV."
De la curacio de carn nada en le nas.	"On the treatment of flesh torn in the nose."
Quan en le nas so nascudas carns diversas ajustadas de las quals es alcuna causa la qual es assemblada a scorpio de motz pes, o a polip peys; e aquesta malautia es apelada polipus quar es a semblansa de aquel peys representat.	When flesh of diverse colors emerges from the nose, which is sometimes caused by a condition similar to a scorpion with heavy weights or polyps in the face; this illness is called polypus because it resembles that fish.
E de lu es carn cancrosa, lapadea, de fusca color; e de lu es que es carn leon no de color fusca.	And its flesh is cancerous and pale, dark-colored; and its lion-like flesh is not dark-colored.
Donc en aquela que es en aquestas carns leon no fraudulenta ni cancroza, cove que fassas le malaute sezer entre las tuas mas e posat al solelh, e huebre las nars de lu, e picoys le tieu onci en aquelas carns.	Therefore, in that case where the flesh is not deceitful or cancerous, you should make the illness disappear between your hands and place it in the sun, open its nostrils, and pick up the lion's hair from those areas.
E aprop extrat aquela a las partidas deforo, e aprop inscindeys aquo que has comprehendut de aquelas am spatum agut subtil de la una partida entro que sapias que tota la carn ja es ostada; que si roman de lu deguna causa de la qual la abscisio es possibla, lahoras tu ratz aquo am la un dels estrumentz subtils am facilitat entro que de lu romangua denguna causa.	And immediately remove that from the parts deforo, and carefully cut away what you have grasped of those with sharp and subtle spatula from one part until you know that all the flesh is removed; so that if any cause remains for which amputation is possible, then quickly remove it with one of the delicate instruments with ease.
Mays si senhoreja am sanc o accida apostema caut, lahoras tu pausa a lu aquo que cove; o es dels apostemas malignes, lahoras tu coyta e cauteriza aquel entro que sia abscindit sanc e sian ostadas las cavas totas.	But if there is an abscess with blood or pus, then you should wait until it opens up; but if it is of the malignant kind, then cut it open and cauterize it immediately after amputation so that blood may be stopped and all cavities may be cleaned out.
E aprop sia getatz en le nas aprop la inscizio vi agre e aygua o vi.	And also pour into the wound wine mixed with honey or water to make the incision clean.
Mays si le nas es ubert e de lu procezeys humiditat entro al palat, lahoras sapias que ja es sanat.	But if the wound is open and moistures flow out towards the palate, then you know that it has already healed.
Mays si la humiditat no penetra segon que cove, lahoras tu sapias que dedintz lu es carn nada en los pus sobiras osses de las nars als quals non es pervengut abscizio.	But if moisture does not penetrate as it should, then you know that beneath the wound there is dead flesh and pus above the bones of the nostrils where amputation was not performed.
Donc lahoras cove que entromitas fiel de li al qual sia alcuna grosseza, e nuza en lu motz nuzes, e pausa entre quascun nutz la quantitat del dit o mens, e engene le malaute e entromet una extremitat del fiel en le nars am lo ray o am autra causa la qual es a lu possibla.	Therefore you should then insert a probe into it if there is any thickness, and make knots at the mouth of the wound, leaving the quantity between each knot equal to the length of the finger or less. Then extract the disease by inserting one extremity of the probe into the nostril with a hook or other means available.
E pus que aquo aura fayt, que atire le sieu odorament entro que pervengua a las canals de las nars, e sia eyssit sobre le sieu golayro, quar tropas veguadas le semblant ad aquesta accio fan les enfantz a las scolas, e es leugiera causa ad aquel que ho vol far.	And after doing this, let him breathe strongly through his nostrils until the odor reaches the canals of the nostrils and let it escape over his gullet, as many people who have done this action before can see that children do at school. It is an easy thing for anyone who wishes to do it.
E aprop pausa las dos extramitatz del fiel, una extremitat que iesca sobre le nas et l’autra que romangua en le nas, e aprop aministra serratura de carn am les nuzes que so en le fiel, e fay aquo entro que sapias que las carn ja so am les nuzes del fiel.	And also pause both extremities of the probe, one extremity which comes out over the nostril and the other which remains in the nostril. Then apply a suture of flesh around the knots that are on the probe until you know that the flesh is well attached to the knots on the probe.
E aprop extratz le fiel, e pausa en le nas aprop la abstraccio del sanc una calgua , e fay aquo per tres dias o mays entro que l’enguent corrodo tot aquo que es romas de las carns.	Then extract the probe and pause in the nostril until bleeding has stopped completely. Then apply a plaster made of honey and salt for three days or more until the wound is healed from the flesh.
E aprop en la fi de la causa, pausa en le nas una canula de plom per alscus jorns entro que sia sanat.	And finally, at the end of the treatment, insert into the nostril a lead cannula for several days until it has healed completely.
Mays si endigeys de curacio que exsique, usa de aquela.	But if you have to perform an operation that requires drying, use that one accordingly.
E aquesta es la forma del instrument a capipurge fazedor am le qual son distillatz olis e medicinas en le nars:	"And this is the form of the device for purging the head with which oils and medicines are distilled into the nose:"
E fay aquo de argent o de eram, la qual sia semblant a una petita lampesa uberta, ayssi cum petita conqua, e le meat semblantment.	"And make this of silver or brass, it should resemble a small open lantern, like a small basin, with the mouth likewise."
E si vols, fay una canula clausa ayssi cum cana, e la cancula del estrument a capipurge fazedor e sia plana, descuberta; a la qual sia manubre en lo derier de lu, am le qual tenguas aquela quan escaufas en lu oli o aquo que tu vols dels sucs e de las causas suctiblas.	"If you wish, make a closed cannula like this: and the opening of the instrument for purging the head should be flat and uncovered; at which you should hold it when you pour in oil or water that you want from the juices and causes of suction."
E aquestz capipurgi es precios: recipe de enforbi de castor, de balayra blanc, de giengiebre, e piletre de safra, de pebre lonc, de escafragia, de epetum de spic ana unc. vi cumfizeys am suc de bleda e de caul, e sian faytas pillulas, e sia destemprada una pillula am aygua tebeza, e sia gitat en las nars del malaute jasent envers.	"And this is the recipe for purging the head: take of castor oil, white bay leaf, ginger, saffron flower, long pepper, scammony, and gum acacia one ounce each. Combine them with the juice of beetroot and cabbage, and make pills. Take one pill dissolved in hot water and administer it to the sick person lying down."
Capitol .xxv.	"Chapter XXV."
De theyls natz en las extramitatz del nas.	"Of knots (polyps) found in the nasal passages."
Motas veguadas es nat theyl en las extramitatz del nas, e es magnificat e omentat en alscus dias entro en que mot es leg le reguardament de lu.	"Very often, a polyp is found in the nostrils, and it is magnified and inflamed during those days when much mucus flows from it."
E per aquo cove que tu inscidas aquel en le comensament de la apparissio de lu, e erediques tot aquel.	"And for that reason, you should insert this (remedy) at the beginning of the appearance of the polyp and remove all of it."
E aprop pausa sobre le loc o cauteri o medicina comburent la qual estia en loc de lu.	"Then place a cautery or medicine that burns on the spot."
Mays si es tardada la sua inscizio entro que sia magnificat, lahoras considera si es lapificat, dur, de fusca color e de pauc sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel am ferr quar es apostema crancos; quar motas veguadas ad aquel que inscideys aquesta apostema endeve per lu granda malicia sobre aquel le qual aquel havia.	"However, if the incision is delayed until it becomes magnificent, then consider whether it has become hard, dark in color and insensitive. If so, do not touch that part with iron because it is a malignant cancer; many times those who cut this cancer end up dying because of great wickedness towards him who had it."
E si le apostema es de leon tocament e no es de fosca color, e vezes que inscizio es possibla en tot aquel, lahoras evacua le malaute e inscideys aquel senes temor, e cura le loc am aquo que exsique e costrenh entro que sia sanat.	"And if the aposteme is of lion's touch and not dark in color, and sometimes incision is possible throughout it, then evacuate the sickness and incise without fear, and cure the spot with astringent water that constricts until it heals."
Capitol .xxvi.	Chapter XXVI
De sutura del nas e de las labias e de la aurelha quan la continuitat es dissolvuda per plagua o per semblantz.	"Of the suture of the nose and lips, and of the ear when continuity is dissolved by plague or by injury."
Sapias que quan accideys solucio de continuitat en una de aquestas cartillages, pauc confereys en aquela operacio sino en alcus homes.	Know that when a solution of continuity occurs in one of these cartilages, it is advisable to perform this operation on few men.
Donc cove, quan endeve ad alcu alcuna causa de aquelas, que consideres si es plagua fresca am le sieu sanc, e lahoras tu ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	Then, when you find such a cause in someone, that you should consider whether it is fresh plague with its own blood, and then join the two lips of the wound with suture, and afterwards cure it until it heals.
E si las labias de solucio de continuitat so ja separadas, e quascuna es fayta sana, lahoras cove que tu excorjes quascuna partida de la sua codena apparent entro que n’iesca sanc.	"And if the lips of a solution of continuity are already separated, and each one is healthy by itself, then you should cut each edge along its apparent course until there comes out blood."
E aprop ajusta las doas labias am sutura e strenh aquelas, e sobre aquelas pulveriza sanc de drago e enses trissat, e pausa sobre la polvera una pessa de emplaustra diafinicon, o de alcu autre dels emplastres consolidatius, e leyssa aquel liat per dos jorns o per tres, e aprop deslia aquel e permuta aquel emplaustre e leyssa aquel entro que·ls fiels per si sian abscinditz, e aprop cura am enguent entro que sia sanat.	"And then join the two lips with suture and strengthen them, and over them sprinkle dragon's blood powder and a little bit of tragacanth gum, and place on top of it a piece of diafinicon plaster or some other consolidative plaster, and leave that bandage for two days or three, and then remove it and replace the plaster, leaving it to heal by itself until the wound is closed. Then cure with ointment until it heals."
Mays la manieyra de la sutura es que tu agregues la solucio de continuitat o am agulhas ayssi cum havem recomtat en la sutura del ventre, o agregua la solucio de continuitat am fiel ayssi cum a tu e fayt saber.	But the manner of suture is that you join the solution of continuity with needles as we have explained in the suture of the belly, or join it with thread as you and others do.
Capitol .xxvii.	Chapter XXVII
De extraccio de aquela causas que veno en las doas labias en las partidas dedintz.	"Of the extraction of those causes that appear between the two lips in wounds."
Motas veguadas endeve a motz homes en las partidas dedintz de las suas labias alcus apostemas durs semblantz a gras de errs, e alscunas de lors son mendres e alcunas son majors.	Very often it happens to many men that in wounds between their lips there appear hard abscesses like fat of hares, some small and others large.
Donc cove que tu convertas las labias e fendas quascuna de aquelas duricias de tota part, e aprop la abscizio umpliscas le loc de sagi trissat entro que·l sanc sia restrengut, e aprop sia lavat am vi agre e sia curat le loc am aquo que es stipticitat, entro que sia sanat.	Therefore you should cut the lips and split each of those hardnesses on all sides, then make an incision in that place with tragacanth gum until the blood is stanched, and then wash it with vinegar and cure it with something astringent until it heals.
Capitol .xxviii.	Chapter XXVIII
De inscizio de la carn ajustada en las gengivas.	"Of the incision of attached skin in the gums."
Granre de veguadas nays sobre la gengiva carn ajustada la qual les antics apelero albulus, adonc cove que tu suspendas aquela am onci o que tenguas aquela am las forfecs e inscidas aquela deves la sua razit, e leyssas la sania correr o le sanc.	"It is often necessary to place a clamp on the attached gum tissue around the alveolus before incising it, so that you can retain its position and maintain traction during the incision, allowing blood to flow without clotting."
E aprop pausa sobre le loc sagi trissat o autra polveras stipticas o excicativas.	"And then place a pause (packing) on the wound with other powders, either stypitic or excitative."
E si aquela carn retorna, lahoras inscideys aquela segundariament, e cauterisa aquela, quar aprop le cauteri no retornara.	"If that tissue returns, incise it again and cauterize it, because proper cautery will prevent its return."
Capitol .xxix.	"Chapter XXIX."
De razo de dentz am ferr.	"Regarding teeth with iron (fillings)."
Quan en la superficia de las dentz de las partidas dedintz e de las de foro e entre las gingivas so ajustadas escorsas aspras, legas, e alcunas veguadas son de nigradas e son faytas citrinas o vertz entro que a la gingiva ve per aquo corrupcio e son faytas las dentz legas.	"When on the surface of the teeth there are rough, hard, and sometimes black spots between the gums, which often cause corruption, allowing pus to escape between the gum and tooth, causing them to appear loose."
E donc cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute entre las tuas mas e pausar le cap de lu en le tieu se, e ratz las dents en las quals apareysso aquelas escorsas e causas semblantz arena entro que de lor no romangua deguna causa, e aquo fay de la negror e de la citrinitat e de las autras entro que sian mondificadas.	"And therefore you should cut through the cause of this between your hands and push it down into its place, and scrape off the hard spots on those teeth where such appearances are seen that they do not appear loose for any other reason. This is due to blackness and yellowness, and other discolorations."
Donc si es ostat aquo que es en aquelas del comensament de la razio, bo es; e sino, lahoras tu itera la razio sobre aquelas al autra dia e al segon e al tertz entro que vengua al derier stament en aquo que tu vols.	"So if that is what you want at the beginning of this reason, well and good. Otherwise, you should repeat this reason over those again on another day and the second and third times until it comes to the last statement that you want."
E sapias que las dentz han necessitat de motz rezoris de diversas formas e de motas figuras segon que es preparat a la tua operacio.	"And know that teeth require different types of drills with various shapes and forms according to what is prepared for your operation."
E per so quar le razori am le qual la dent es raza de la partida dedintz es autre del razori am le qual es ras entre las dentz segon autras formas, e aquestas formas de razoris sian deves tu preparadas las quals veyras tantost:	"And therefore the drill with which a tooth is scraped at its outer surface is different from the drill used to scrape between teeth according to other forms. These forms of drills should be prepared by you, as you will see shortly:"
Capitol .xxx.	"Chapter XXX."
D’eradicacio de dentz.	"On the extraction of teeth."
Cove que tu cures la dent de la sua dolor am tot engen e tardes en tota eradicacio de lu, quar no es denguna causa que suplisqua la veguada de lu quan es eradicada, quar es sustancia sublima entro que es excusacio en la eradicacio de lu.	"Though you treat the tooth for its pain with all art and diligence in its extraction, there is no reason why the sight should suffer when it is extracted, for it is a subtle substance that is freed from constraint by its extraction."
Mays cove quan le malaute es forsat aquela dent eradicar, que fermament deves tu sia certificat quala es la dent dolent, quar motas veguadas la dolor descep le malaute e cuga que sia en dent sana, e tu eradicas aquela e aprop la dolor no cessa entro que la dent malauta e dolent sia eradicada, quar nos ja havem vist aquo per operacio dels barbies.	"When the patient is about to have that tooth extracted, you must be firmly certain which is the painful tooth; for often the pain seems to come from a healthy tooth and you extract one while the real source of pain remains until the truly diseased tooth is removed. We have seen this happen many times in dental operations."
Donc cum deves tu es sertificat qual es la dent dolent, e que o sabes be, lahoras cove que tu scarifiques en le circuit de la dent am spatum en le qual sia alcuna vertut, entro que sia dissolvut de la dent de la gingiva de tota partida, e aprop mau aquel am les tieus ditz, o am forfexs subtils al comensament petit a petit entro que aquela concucesquas.	"Therefore when you are certain which is the painful tooth and know it well, then you must carefully scrape around the tooth with a probe having some medicinal virtue until the gum is dissolved from the tooth completely parted; and then gently remove it with your fingers or delicate forceps little by little until that occurs."
E aprop alogua en lu fortz tenalhas grans per bona loquacio o estuptura fort, e pausa le cap del malaute entre les tieus denolhs que be le tengues que no·s maugua, e aprop tratz la dent segon rectitut en manieyra que no trenques aquela, ni al malaute major dolor no dones.	"And then use strong tenaculum forceps for good grasp or extraction; carefully hold the head of the patient between your thumbs so that it does not move and thus extract the tooth straightly without breaking it, nor causing greater pain to the patient."
E donc si no es foro-getat, lahoras pren un de aquels instrumentz, e met aquel dejos lu de tota part am facilitat e esforsa la remocio de lu ayssi que es feyt al comensament.	"And then, if it is not forgotten, take one of those instruments and insert it gently from both sides with ease and effort to move the tooth as it was done at first."
Mays si la dent es trauquada o corrosa, lahoras cove que tu comples de drap aquel trauc e estrenguas aquel am la extremitat de ray subtil per so que no sia trinquada en la hora de la tua constriccio sobre aquela am tenalas.	"But if the tooth is broken or decayed, then you must first fill that crack with wax and strengthen it at its end with a subtle thread so that it may not be injured during your constriction upon it with forceps."
E cove que tu obres exquesitament am scarificacio en le circuit de tota part de la gingiva e guarda mot la tua fortaleza que no trenques aquela e romangua partida de lu, e retorne sobre le malaute per la malicia que sia majo que la primieyra dolor de lu.	"And you must work carefully with scraping around all sides of the gum and guard your strength so that you do not break it and injure the patient, returning upon him for more pain than the first pain of his."
E guarda te que no fassas aquo que fan alscus ignorantz barbiers en lor fistinacio e audacia sobre la eradicacio de lor, ses que no aministran aquo que nos havem recomtat; quar motas veguadas fan venir sobre les homes malautias grans las quals son pus dificils que sian trinquadas, e las razitz de lor remaugudas totas, o alcunas de aquelas, o que extrayguas aquela am alcus osses de la mandigula ayssi cum motas veguadas havem testificat.	"And beware that you do not do what many ignorant barbers commonly do in their haste and boldness regarding extraction, without administering anything we have recommended; for often they cause great illnesses upon people which are harder to treat than the tooth itself was to extract, and sometimes leave behind roots all broken off or some of those, or even remove teeth with pieces of jawbone as we have witnessed many times."
E aprop la eradicacio de lu sia lavada la boca am vi caut o vi agre am sal.	"And then for the extraction of it, let the mouth be washed with hot water containing salt or vinegar."
E si endeve fluxs de sanc per aysso, ayssi cum motas veguadas endeve, lahoras trissa alcuna quantitat de zegi e aspergeys sobre la plagua, e si no confereys aquel zegi, cauteriza.	"And if there should be flows of blood thereby, as often happens, then take some quantity of sage and sprinkle it upon the wound; and if that sage does not suffice, then cauterize."
La forma de las forceps e tenalas subtils am las quals es mauguda la dent al comensament sia de longua extramitat, de breu manubre e gros, per so que no sian doblatz quan am aquels deves obrar.	"The form of the forceps and delicate tenaculum with which the tooth is held at first should have a long extremity, short handle, and thick, so that they may not be bent when you use them."
E sian ayssi cum vezes de gros manubre entro que quan estrenhas am aquelas no sian dobladas, sian breus extramitatz.	"And they should be such that their inside is of sufficient thickness that when you grasp with them the tooth is not bent or broken at its end."
E sian faytas de ferr de India descentment faytas de dreytas extramitatz, e en las extramitatz de aquelas sian dentz de las quals las unas intron en las autras e estrenhan per constriccio descent fort, e alscunas veguadas las extramitatz de aquelas sian la forma del bec d’un auzel le qual ha nom ciconia, so es guanta, e son de fort constriccio.	"And they should be made of wrought iron, with straight extremities, and on the extremities there should be teeth which fit into each other and grasp firmly for constriction; sometimes the extremities are shaped like the bill of a bird called the ciconia, that is, hook-shaped, and have strong grasping power."
Capitol .xxxi.	"Chapter XXIX."
De erradicacio de dentz e d‘estraccio dels osses de las mandibulas trincadas.	"On the extraction of teeth and removal of broken jawbone pieces."
Quan deves la eradicacio de dent le qual es trinquat roman alcuna causa, lahoras cove que tu pauses sobre le loc coto am boder per un jorn o per dos entro que·l loc sia mollificat; e aprop entromet algesti o tenalhas las extramitatz de las quals so asembladas al bec de un auzel apelat ciconia o guanta, la forma de las forceps:	When extraction of a tooth that is firmly embedded requires some cause,
Las extramitatz de lor sian faytas dedintz ayssi cum lima o alfagi.	"Their extremities are made smooth like lime or whetstone."
E si no obediys a tu a eyssiment am aquestas forceps o tenalas, lahoras cove que tu caves sobre la razit e descrobas tota la carn e entrometas le instrument le qual ha nom atali, so es palanca petita del qual la forma es aquesta:	"And if you do not obey the examination with these forceps or tongs, then you must cut through the flesh and insert this tool called 'atali', which is a small lever whose shape is as follows:"
E sia de breu extremitat grossa un petit, e no sia enbegut per so que no sia trinquat.	"And it should have a short, thick end that is not inserted to prevent pinching."
Donc si per aquo la razit es foro-getada, bo es; e sino, ajuda te am aquestz autres instrument dels quals aquestas son las formas: la forma del primier instrument es de triangulada extramitat en la qual sia alcuna grossesa:	"Therefore, if the incision is forgotten, it will be good; otherwise, help yourself with these other tools, of which this is the shape of the first one: a triangular-pointed instrument with some thickness:"
La forma del segon instrument es que sia de triangulada e de pus subtil extremitat.	"The shape of the second tool is that it should have a triangular point but be more delicate."
E ja so ajudatz am aquest instrument havent dos ramps del qual aquesta es la forma aprop la seguent:	"And then you are helped with this tool which has two branches whose shape is approximately as follows:"
e am autres instrumentz les quals precidero en rasura de dentz; quar juvament es fayt am aquest instrument le qual es asemblat a onci gran, e aquesta es la forma:	"And also help yourself with these tools that resemble large pins; for the sake of clarity, this tool is shaped like so:"
de la triangulada extremitat torta o curta, la qual sia alcuna grossesa, e no sia enbegut per so que no sia trinquat.	"with a triangular, bent or short tip, which has some thickness but should not be inserted to prevent pinching."
E otra sapias que·ls instrumentz de las dentz motz so e semblantment les autres instruments.	"And you should know that the tools for removing teeth are similar in shape to the other instruments mentioned before."
Mays le artifexs savi e subtil en l’art, atroba per si mateys segon aquo que a lu significa la operacio e las malautias diversas; quar son de las malautias a las quals les antics no diysero ni pausero propri instrument, per las formas de diversas specias.	"But the skilled and subtle artist will find for himself according to what he understands about the operation and various diseases. For there are some diseases for which the ancients did not provide any specific instruments due to their varied forms."
Mays si es trinquat l’os de la mandibula o dels autres osses de la boca, o si poyreys, lahoras sia pes curat sobre aquel en son loc am aquo que es a lu convenient dels instrumentz e de las forceps las quals havem dit en la extraccio de las razitz de las dentz, e ajuda te am gesti del qual aquesta es la forma:	"But if the bone of the mandible or other bones in the mouth are crushed or broken, then it should be carefully treated on that spot with whatever is convenient from the instruments and forceps mentioned earlier for the extraction of dental roots. Help yourself with this gesture whose shape is as follows:"
E sia en lu alcuna grosseza petit a petit, e sia instringida o tenguda am la boca per que no evasesca o fuga entro que l’os de tot sia foro-getat; e aprop restaura le loc am medicinas convenientz ad aquo.	"And gently press it with some thickness little by little, and hold it tightly with the mouth so that it does not escape or flee until all the bone is removed. Then approximately restore the area with appropriate medications."
Mays si en l’os es petita poyredura, lahoras ratz aquel de aquela poyredura e de la sua negror, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	"But if there is a small fracture in the bone, then remove that piece of the fracture and its darkness, and treat it until it heals."
Capitol .xxxii.	"Chapter XXXII."
De la cura de las dentz eminentz sobre las autras.	"Of the care of prominent teeth above the others."
Quan las dentz so eminentz no segon lor cors natural per aquelas la forma es laga, e majorment quan endeve a las femnas, e majorment a las piuselas venerablas; donc cove que tu consideras: si dent es nada aprop autra dent, e no es possibla sarradura ni linament de lu, lahoras radica aquela; mays que no sia annexa am autra dent, lahoras tu inscideys aquela am aquest instrument del qual aquesta es la forma; e es semblant a morr de porc, e sia feyt de ferr de India de extramitat mot aguda.	When teeth protrude unnaturally beyond their natural course and form, especially in women, and more so in venerable elderly women; therefore you should consider: if the tooth is not adjacent to another tooth, and it is impossible to straighten or align it with thread, then that tooth should be extracted. But if it is attached to another tooth, then cut that one with this instrument whose shape resembles a pig's bristle, made of Indian iron with an extremely sharp tip.
E sia la tua inscizio am la qual inscideyses aquela en trops dias per la duricia de la dent, e que no sia comauguda autra de las dentz.	And if your incision is not deep enough that you can cut that tooth out in three days due to its hardness, and do not touch any other teeth.
E si es dent eminent expausat a limadura, lahoras lima aquel am lima de ferr de India del qual aquesta es la forma:	And if it's an erupted tooth that needs filing down, then file it with this Indian iron file whose shape is like this:
E sia tot de ferr de India e·l margua eysament; e sia de motz menutz puntz ayssi cum lima am la qual son faytas agulhas, am la qual la dent sia limada pauc a pauc en motz dias am fecilitat, per so que no sia autra dent comauguda e caga.	And all of it is made of fine Indian iron; and it has many short sharp points like this file with which teeth are slowly filed little by little over several days with ease, without touching or harming any other teeth.
E aprop lineys aquela en la fi, e ratz aquela am alscus razoris.	And finally, smooth out the tooth at its end with these little scissors.
E si es dent del qual una partida es trinquada e lideys la lengua, lahoras cove que tu limescas aquel entro que l’aspretat de aquela fraccio sia ostada e engualhada, e sia aplenada per so que la lengua no ledesca ni la paraula no corrumpa.	And if it's a tooth with one corner broken off that cuts the tongue, then you must grind down that edge until its sharpness is smoothed and blunted, so that the tongue does not get cut and speech is not impaired.
Capitol .xxxiii.	Chapter XXXIII
De restauracio de dentz maugudas am fiel de aur o de argent.	Concerning the restoration of broken teeth with gold or silver foil.
Quan accideys a las dentz devant concussio e remossio per percussio o per cazament, e le malaute no pot strenher sobre aquo que manga, e tu has curat aquel am medicinas stipticas, e no ha valgut la tua curacio, lahoras per so que no cagan es engen en aquelas que sian strengudas am fiel de aur e no de argent, quar argent se fa vert e aprop se poyreys aprop alscus dias, mays aur nul temps no es mudat.	When toothache occurs due to concussion and dislocation from a blow or fall, and the patient cannot swallow food, and you have treated them with medicinal astringents, but your treatment has not been effective, then those who are strangled by gold thread and not silver may be strengthened, for silver becomes green and soon purtefies within these few days, but gold is never changed.
E sia le fiel en tal subtilitat e grocesa segon la quantitat que puesca entrar entre las dentz; e la forma de la reccio es que prenguas le fiel e pren lo doble de lu entre doas dentz sanas, e aprop que cresques am doas tortuositatz del fiel entre doas maugudas, o si’ una o motas, entro que pervengua la tela a la dent sana del autra partida.	And let the thread be of such fineness and thickness according to the amount that can fit between the teeth; and the manner of tying is as follows: take the thread, and take twice its length between two healthy teeth, and precisely when you have made two twistings of the thread between two molars, or one or more if necessary, until the thread reaches a healthy tooth on the other side.
E aprop itera le teyssiment entro a la partida de la qual comenciest, e strenh la tua ma am facilitat e savieza entro que no sia mauguda.	And repeat the tying within the same partition where you began, and strengthen your hand with facility and skill until it is not loose.
E sia la tua striccio am la qual strenhas le fiel deves las razitz de las dentz que no evasesca.	And let your tying be such that when you tighten the thread, you do not displace the roots of the teeth.
E aprop inscindeys las extramitatz del fiel superfluens am las forceps o tosoyras, e agregua aquelas en quascun loc am gesti, e converteys aquelas e las occulta entre la dent sana e la dent mauguda, per so que no fassa lesio a la lengua.	And then cut off the excess ends of the thread with forceps or scissors, and gather them up in each place with gestures, and turn them back and hide them between the healthy tooth and the loose tooth, so that they do not cause injury to the tongue.
E aprop leyssa aquela ayssi streyta cum roman.	And then leave it like this for three days.
Mays si es desliada o rumpuda, strenh aquela o aquelas am autra fiel en tal manieyra en tot son temps.	But if it becomes loose or breaks, strengthen that one or those with another thread in the same manner at all times.
E aquesta es la forma de las dentz e la figura de la rectacio de doas dentz sanas e de doas maugudas, ayssi cum vezes aquestas liadas:	And this is the form of the teeth and the figure of the rectification of two healthy teeth and two loose teeth, as seen in these tied ones:
E quan se fa que retorno una dent o doas aprop le cazement de quascuna en lors locs, e sian recrescutz ayssi cum havem recomtat, e que remauguan.	And when it happens that a tooth or two return to their proper places, and are repositioned as we have described, and remain stable.
E no fa aquo sino bo artifexs e savi.	And this is not done by anyone except skilled and wise artisans.
E alcunas veguadas es aptat alcuna causa dels osses de vaca, e es fayt de lor ayssi cum forma de dent, e es pausada en loc en le qual defayl la dent, e es strengit ayssi cum havem dit, e reman e serveys am aquel per lonc temps.	And sometimes it is appropriate to use bones from cattle for this purpose, and they are made in the shape of teeth, and placed in the location where the tooth has failed, and tightened as we have said, and remain and serve for a long time.
Capitol .xxxiv.	Chapter XXXIV
De inscizio del liament le qual ve en la lengua e prohibeys loquela.	Of cutting the thread which comes into the tongue and obstructs speech.
Aquest liguament le qual ve dejos la lengua alcunas veguadas o es natural am le qual hom nays, o accidental e accideys per plagua la qual ja es consolidada.	This ligament which comes from near the tongue sometimes is natural with which people are born, or it occurs accidentally due to plaque that has already become consolidated.
E la operacio en lu es que huobres la boca del malaute, le sieu cap existent en le tieu se; e eleva la sieua lengua, e aprop inscideys aquel liament nervos segon la latitut entro que sia solvuda la lengua de la sua recencio.	And the operation in this case is that someone lifts the patient's mouth open with their head held in place, and elevates their tongue, and then cuts that nerve ligament along its length until the tongue is released from its restraint.
Mays si en aquela es alcuna duricia o denodacio, e aquo es stat per consolidacio de plagua, lahoras tu gieta unci e scindeys aquel per la latitut entro que aias inscindit le liament e sia dissolvuda la nodacio.	But if there is hardness or resistance in that place, and this is due to the consolidation of plaque, then you should use forceps and cut through it along its length until you have incised the ligament and dissolved the resistance.
E guarda te que no sia fayta fissura en le preon de la carn e que scindas aqui arceria e vengua flux de sanc.	And be careful that there is not made a fissure in the front of the flesh, and do not cut carelessly so that blood flows excessively.
E aprop sia lavat le vestigi de la inscisio am ayguaros o am vi agre o am aygua frega; e aprop pausa dejos la lengua licini; so es meca la qual tengua le malaute dejos la lengua en quascuna nuoyt per so que no sia consolidat autra veguada.	And then wash the wound of the incision with warm water or strong vinegar or hot water and oil, and then place a lint bandage near the tongue; this is the method that the patient should follow every night so that it does not become consolidated again.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc, pausa sobre le loc vetriol trissat; mays si le sanc ventz, lahoras cauteriza le loc am cauteri lantiginos le qual conveneys ad aquo.	But if bleeding occurs, apply powdered vitriol over the place; but if the bleeding continues, then cauterize the place with a silver caustic which is suitable for this purpose.
E aprop aquel cura am las autras causas entro que sia sanat.	And then treat it with other causes until it is healed.
Capitol .xxxv.	"Chapter XXXV."
De extraccio de ranula dejos la lengua.	Removal of a mucocele from the tongue
Alcunas veguadas accideys dejos la lengua apostema asemblant a nomla petita prohibent la lengua de la sua operacio natural; e fort leu es magnificada entro que huempla la boca.	Sometimes, an accumulation of fluid resembling a small tumor forms on the tongue, preventing it from functioning naturally, and causing difficulty in speaking.
E la operacio en lu es que huebras la boca del malaute sesent devant le solel e considera le apostema.	And the operation is as follows: have the patient sit facing the sunlight and examine the tumor.
E si tu le vezes de fusca color o de negra, dur, al qual le malaute no atroba sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel quar es cranc.	If you find that it is of dark or black color, hard, and the patient feels no pain, then do not touch it for it is cancerous.
E si es declinat a blancor, en le qual es humiditat, lahoras tu met le onci en lu, e inscideys aquel am spatum subtil, e inscindeys le de tota partida; e si sanc te ventz en la hora de la tua operacio, lahoras tu pausa desus zegi trissat, so es vetriol, entro que sia restreyt le sanc.	But if it is white or translucent, indicating that it contains fluid, then insert the curette into it, incise the mucous membrane around it, and excise it completely. If bleeding occurs during the procedure, pause briefly to allow for coagulation, using vinegar if necessary to facilitate hemostasis.
E aprop retorna a la obra tua entro que lo haias trayt am compliment de lu, entro que sia lavat am vi agre e sal; e cura aquel am l’autra curacio ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	Then return to your work until it is completely healed with a smooth surface. It should be washed with vinegar and salt water daily, and dressed with the usual cure until healed.
Capitol .xxxvi.	Chapter XXXVI
De extraccio de apostema de doas aurelhas e de aquel que es nada en le golayro e de las autras apostemas.	On the extraction of tumors from the ears, those found in the throat, and other kinds of tumors.
Quan endeveno en le golayro godat, so son glandulas las quals son asembladas algodat, las quals accideysso deforas e son nompnadas doas aurelhas, las quals quan tu las curas am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no es sanat, lahoras tu considera si le apostema es dur, de fusca color, de pauc sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel am ferr.	When a tumor appears in the throat, it is called a gland, which may be formed from adipose tissue. If it grows externally and is named "double ear," if this tumor does not heal after being treated with water as previously described, and if it is hard, dark-colored, and causes little pain, then do not touch it with an iron instrument.
E si es de roga color e la razic es grossa, lahoras no toques aquela am ferr per le flux del sanc; abantz layssa aquel entro sia madurat, e lahoras o tu trauqueras aquel, o sira romput per si.	If it is of rough color and the root is thick, then do not touch that with iron for the flow of blood; rather wait until it has matured, and then you will either draw it out or it will break on its own.
E si es de blanqua color, radon, e la razit de lu es subtil, lahoras aquel es que cove esser inscidit.	If it is of white color, round, and the root of it is subtle, then that is what ought to be incised.
E la operacio en lu es que consideras, denant la tua operacio, si ja ha repausat le apostema de lu caut am repaus complit o si es deminuit am alcuna deminucio; e lahoras fay sezer le malaute denant le soleyl, e·l cap de lu sia en le tieu se, e huebre la boca de lu, e le servidor prenent entre las suas mas prema la lengua de lu dejos am instrument mot noble del qual aquesta es la forma:	And in operating on it, before your operation, consider whether the aposteme has already rested and completed its growth or if it has diminished somewhat; and then have the patient lie down facing the sun, with their head towards the east, open their mouth wide, and the servant holding between their hands press the tongue of the patient away with a noble instrument of which this is the form:
E sia fayt de argent o de aram, e sia subtil cum cotel.	And it should be made of silver or of bronze, subtle and sharp like a knife.
Donc cum tu premes am aquel la lengua e es mostrat a tu la apostema, e catz sobre aquel le tieu vezement, lahoras pren onci e fica aquel en l’amenla, e tira aquel a las partidas defora tant quant podes.	Therefore, when you press with that the tongue and it is revealed to you, then cut upon it quickly with the tincture of the east, and then take fire and place that in the middle of it, and draw it out at its partitions outside as much as you can.
Otra aquo que tiras alcuna causa de las tunicas, e aprop incideys aquela am instrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	And afterwards, when you have drawn out some of the tunics, then promptly incise that with the instrument of which this is the form:
e es asemblat a forceps, empero las extramitatz de lu son corvadas, ayssi que l’orrifici de quascuna de aquelas es en le endreyt del autra, mot agudas, le qual sia de ferr indi enbegut.	And it resembles forceps, but its extremities are curved so that the sharpness of each is turned towards the other, very sharp, made of iron inserted within.
Mays si aquest instrument no es a tu present, lahoras inscideys aquel am spatum del qual aquesta es la forma de lu: E sia agut de la una part, no agut del autra part.	But if this instrument is not available to you, then incise it with a scalpel of which this is the form: And it should be sharp on one side and not sharp on the other.
E pus que has inscidit una mella, inscideys l’autra segon aquesta meteyssa manieyra de inscizio, e aprop la inscizio le malaute guarguarise de aygua frega	And after you have incised one vein, then incise the other in the same manner of incision, and promptly wash the wound with water squeezed through a cloth
Mays si endeve flux de sanc, guarguarise aygua de decoccio de scorsa de milgrana o de fuelha de mirtra e semblantz ad aquel de las causas stiptiquas entro que·l flux del sanc sia restreyt, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	But if blood flows out, then wash it with water from a decoction of figwort or myrrh leaves, and similar to those of the styptics, so that the flow of blood is stopped, and then dress it until it is healed.
E alcunas veguadas naysso en le guolayro autras apostemas otra aquelas doas aurelhas, e inscideys aquelas segon que yeu e dit en la inscizio de doas mellas engualment.	And sometimes it happens that other apostemes appear around those two ears, and incise them in the manner which I have told you regarding the incision of two veins equally.
E yeu ja fu medicat una femna de apostema le qual era nat en le golayro de lu, le qual apostema tendia a color fusca, de pauc sentiment, le qual ja havia claus le golayro de lu, e la femna respirava am meat streyt, e ja havia prohibit a lu comestio e beure de aygua, e ja era pervenguda a la mort si mays agues stat per un dia o per dos.	And I once treated a woman with an aposteme that had appeared in her throat, which was dark in color and insensitive, and had closed up her throat, so that she breathed with difficulty, and food and drink had been prohibited to her, and she had come near to death if more time had passed for one or two days.
E l’apostema ja tant havia pugat que havia mezes dos ramps entro que eyssiro per dos traucs.	And the aposteme had already grown so much that it had formed two lumps, each of which issued forth through two ducts.
Donc yeu me cuytegui fisturalment e fiquegui en un de lor onci, e tiregui aquel, e atirada es de lu gran porcio, e aprop yeu incidigui aquela de on comprendegui del autre trau, e aprop yeu obrigui la boca de lu, e compremegui la sua lengua, e aprop yeu fiquegui le onci en aquela apostema.	"You extracted it with a tweezer and placed it in one of their sores, pulling out quite a large portion. Then you cut off the part where it was connected to the other tumor, and then you tied its mouth shut and pressed its tongue down. Then you left the sore in that abscess."
E aprop yeu abscizi gran partida de lu, e no corria de lu sino un pauc de sanc.	"And you removed a large part of it, from which only a little blood flowed."
Donc absolut es le guolayro de aquela femna, e comensec tantost beure aygua, e aprop presec vianda, donc yeu no cessegui inscidir de aquela apostema motas vetz per lonc temps, e succesia apostema en loc de aquel, le qual inscizia entro que es prolonguat aquel.	"So the ulcer of that woman was healed soon after she began drinking water and eating. Then I often cut into that abscess for a long time without it healing, but instead it grew bigger."
Donc yeu engen agui e cauterizegui le guolayro de lu, donc astec de addicio; e aprop yeu perambulegui e no saubi que fec Dieus de aquela aprop mi.	"So you took a needle and cauterized the ulcer. Then you added more medicine to it. But you wandered around and did not know what God had done for me."
Capitol .xxxvii.	Chapter XXXVII
De inscizio de huvela quan es apostemada.	**Of Incising a Swelling When It Becomes Abscessed.**
Quan catarr deysen a la huvula, e es apostemada e es longa, lahoras ela es nompnada perpendicular; e si es en la partida dejos grossa e redonda, e lahoras ela es apelada buba.	When phlegm descends to the humors and is thick and long, then it is called perpendicular; and if it is at the beginning thick and round, then it is called bubo.
Mays quan es curada am aquo que havem dit en la divisio, e no comfereys la tua curacio, e eyssament ja vezes que apostema caut ja es ostat de lu e es subtil, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquela que es agreguadas redonda; e si es ad aquela longitut, e es sanguina, de fusca color o de negre, e no es a lu centiment, lahoras cove que tu temtes la inscizio de lu, quar en aquela es temor sobre le malaute.	But when it is cured with what we have said in the division, and your treatment does not confirm it, and also sometimes even when an abscess has been cauterized and it is already open and subtil, then you should insert that which is aggregated roundly; and if it is to that length, and it is sanguineous, of dark color or black, and there is no feeling in it, then you should examine the incision of it, for in that case there is fear about the patient's condition.
E quan tu vezes aquela segon la manieyra que yeu he dita de la sua blancor e longuesa, que tu fassas sezer le malaute e premas la lengua de lu am instrument del qual procesic la sua forma e aprop fica le onci en la nuva, e tira aquela en jos e inscideys aquela am un de dos instrumentz les quals e ditz en la inscizio de dos mellas.	And when you find that according to the manner which I have described of its whiteness and length, then you should make the patient lie down and press the tongue of it with an instrument whose shape is appropriate for it, and place your finger on the new opening, and draw that downwards and incise it with one of two instruments which are mentioned in the incision of two melons.
E cove que no inscidas aquela sino aquo que es ajustat sobre le terme natural ses addicio, quar si tu inscides de lu mays, lediyras le sieu parlar.	And you should not incise it unless that is adapted to its natural term without addition, for if you incise too much of it, you will impair its speech.
E aprop la inscizio, usa de aquo le qual havem recomtat en la inscizio de dos mellas, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	And at the incision, use that which we have recommended in the incision of two melons, and cure it within so that it may be healed.
Mays si era le malaute espaventat per la inscizio de lu, cove que use de engen en la cauterizacio de lu ses temor, e la manieyra del cauteri en lu no es sino am aygua aguda, e es que tu pauses le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop prem la lengua de lu am le instrument le qual havem dit, e aprop pren de l’aygua la qual havem dita en le capitol de cauterizacio, e comfeys am aquela caus viva, e pausa aquela no spessa ni subtil, e de aquela omple la concavitat de l’estrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	But if the patient is frightened by the incision of it, then you should use a cautery in its cauterization without fear, and the manner of cauterizing it is not but with hot water, and this is what you should do: pause the head of the patient on his chest, and press the tongue of it with the instrument which we have mentioned, and take some of that water which we have said in the chapter of cauterization, and apply it with that fire, and place it neither thick nor subtil, and with that fill the concavity of the instrument whose shape is this:
Sia la extramitat de lu conquavitat en la qual sia pausada la medicina ayssi cum la conquavitat de culher de ray, e pausa le strument am la medicina sobre la vula, e·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu latz per so que corro saliva o musellage de la boca de aquel per la intrinscequa medicina, per so que no deyssenda de aquela deguna causa sobre le golayro de lu e que ledesca aquel.	Let the extremity of that concavity in which the medicine is placed be thus as the concavity of a spoon of ray, and place the instrument with the medicine over the wound, and let the patient lie upon his side so that saliva or mucus from the mouth of it may not fall into the interior through the intrusive medicine, lest it should descend into its throat.
E aprop te la tua ma am la medicina, e exprem aquela sobre la uvula per l’espazi de miega hora entro que vegas aquela esser denegrada e sedada per la mordicacio de la medicina.	And then place your hand on the medicine, and press it upon the uvula for the space of half an hour until you see that it is blackened and sedated by the biting of the medicine.
E si vols, prengues coto e envolopes aquel sobre la extremitat del ray, e submergeys le coto en la medicina, e entrometas le ray am le coto en una canula de sobre entro que·l coto adheresca en aquela canula, e fay aquo tantas vetz entro que consiegues aquo que vols de la cauterizacio de la uva, e aprop leyssa aquela quar ela se seccara e cayra aprop tres dias o quatre.	And if you wish, take cotton and wrap it around the extremity of the ray, and immerse the cotton in the medicine, and insert the ray with the cotton into a cannula above until the cotton adheres to that cannula, and do this many times until you achieve what you want from the cauterization of the uvula, and then leave it alone for three or four days until it dries up and falls off.
E si indigeysses que iteras la medicina, itera aquela, e aprop la cauterizacio abstergeys en le circuit de la uva am coto enbegut en boder, e mondifica am aquel aquo que es en le circuit de lu de la medicina, e sia lavat am aygua frega, e sia curat deforo am embrocacio, e dedintz am guarguarismes entro que sia sanat.	And if you should need to repeat the medicine, then repeat it, and afterward cauterize around the uvula with cotton dipped in borax, and cleanse it with that of what is around it from the medicine, and wash it with warm water, and afterwards cure it abroad with embrocation, and then keep it at rest until it is healed.
E aquesta especia de curacio es pus salva que inscizio e pus long de temor.	And this kind of cure is more safe than incision, and also longer lasting without fear.
Alcunas veguadas es curada la uvuola am aquo que es pus subtil que cauteri e inscizio, quar es curat am subfumigacio en aquesta manieyra: recipe calament, ysop, origua, ruda, scicados arabic, camamilla, broyda e semblant ad aquels de las erbas, e ajusta totas aquelas causas, o alcunas de lor, en una ola, e sian submergidas am vi agre, e bulhan; e la ola sia be lutada am lut decentment, e sia en le mieg loc de la ola un trauc, sobre le qual sia pausat un instrument conquau de aram segon aquesta manieyra; sia fayt de argent o de aram.	Sometimes the uvula is cured with something more subtle than cautery and incision, for it is cured by sublimation in this manner: take calamint, hyssop, origanum, rue, saffron arabic, chamomile, betony, and similar herbs of those kinds, and adjust all those causes, or some of them, in a mortar, and let them be moistened with sour wine, and boil them; and let the mortar be well beaten with good lime, and let there be in the middle of the mortar a tube, upon which is placed a concave instrument of silver or brass thus made:
E sia entromesa la extremitat en la boca del malaute entro que la vapor poge a la uvula sobre la quanula, entro que la uvula sia mot ofuscada.	And let the extremity be inserted into the mouth of the patient so that the vapor may reach the uvula upon the uvula until the uvula is much obscured.
E aprop itera sobre aquela motas veguadas entro qu’es secca, e guarda te que no fassas aquesta curacio al comesament de l’aveniment de apostemas, quar trop ajustaria en le apostema, e no cove que tu fassas aquo, sino deves la declaracio de apostema de lu caut.	Guessed translation:
Mays si no es a tu present aquest instrument, lahoras pren una cana e compon en la extramitat de lu un clos de huou, per so que la boca del malaute sia comborida, quar le closc del huou prohibeys la vapor comburir la boca.	"However, if you do not have this instrument present, then take a reed and attach at its end a piece of hot coal, so that the patient's mouth is warmed, for the heat of the coal prevents the mouth from burning."
E aquesta curacio es bona am salut.	"And this cure is good for health."
Capitol .xxxviii.	"Chapter XXXVI."
De extraccio d’espinas e de aquo que adhereys en le golayro e de las autras causas.	"Of the removal of splinters and other things adhering in the eye, and of other causes."
Motas veguadas adhereys en le guolayro o spina de peys o alcuna autra causa.	"Many times a fly or thorn or some other thing adheres to the eye."
Adonc cove que tu extraguas aquo que de aquels es apparent, sobre le qual catz la vista, pus que tu premes la lengua am instrument denant solelh, per so que a tu sia declarat aquo que es en la guola.	"Therefore you should remove that which is visible among those [things], on which the gaze falls, because as you press your tongue against the instrument before the sun, it will be declared to you what is in the eye."
E aquo que no apar e es a tu occultat en le guolayro, cove que tu fassas vomir le malaute denant que la vianda sia degerida en l’estomac, quar fort leu la causa annexsa le golayro sira foro-getada per vomit; o que deglusia le malaute una pessa de nap o de razit de laytuga o un boci de pa sec; o prengua una pessa de sponga marina sequa leon, e lia aquela fortment am fiel, e aprop le malaute transglussia aquela, quar cum perve al loc en le qual so spinas e es extrahuda, lahoras so foro-getatz.	"And that which is not apparent and is hidden in the eye, you should make the patient vomit before food has been digested in the stomach, because very often the cause annexed to the eye will be forgotten through vomiting; or the patient could swallow a piece of dough or of fig leaf or a mouthful of dry bread; or he could take a piece of dried sea sponge and tie it strongly with flax, and appropriate it to the patient's forehead, for as soon as it arrives at the place in which the thorns are extracted, they will be forgotten."
E mays pren una anguila e be am fiel liada, e sia dedintz mesa e soptament sia extrayta; o pren un porr e soptament le metas e soptament l’en tratz.	"And more, take an eel and tie it with flax, and put it inside the bed, and suddenly extract it; or take a pot and suddenly put it on [the eye], and suddenly remove it."
Mays si no so foro-getatz am aquelas causas las quals havem ditas, lahoras husa de un instrument de plom segon aquesta forma:	"And more if they are not forgotten through those causes which we have said, then use an instrument of lead in this way:"
E sia pus gros que ray un petit, e en la extramitat de lu sia conquavitat la qual tu entrometas en la sua guola am facilitat.	"And it should be thicker than a little finger, and at the end of it there should be concavity which you will insert into his eye with ease."
E el aga le sieu cap elevat en sus, e guarda te que·l tocament del sieu os de la gola, per so que endevengua a lu cos e am aquela que enpellesca le os o la spina, o que aquel le metge am la sua ma.	"And hold his head raised up, and make sure that the contact of his forehead with his throat does not happen, so that it could go into him and with that which causes the bone or the spine, or that which the physician puts in with his hand."
Mays empero que·l malaute aquel entrometa es miels, per la sua sciencia del loc de la causa annexa e enpellisca en jos, e tira la sua ma am le instrument en sus, tot aquo segon la quantitat la qual es a lu preparada entro que sia foro-getada.	"But however that the patient himself inserts it better, by his knowledge of the place of the annexed cause and pushes it downwards, and pulls his hand with the instrument upwards, all this according to the quantity which is prepared inside him until it is forgotten."
Capitol .xxxix.	"Chapter XXXIX."
De extraccio de sancguisugua annexsa al golayro.	"Regarding the extraction of blood from the groin area."
Quan es medicada sanguisugua am aquo que havem dit en la divisio de la curacio am medicinas e no comfereys, considera lahoras en le guolayro del malaute al solelh, pus que tu aias compremuda la lengua de lu am instrument le qual a tu havem recomtat.	"When applying the leech as mentioned in the division of cure with medicines and it does not improve, consider the time when it is applied to the patient's groin area, for you have prepared the tongue of the leech using the instrument that was recommended."
Donc si tu vezes la sancguisugua, extratz aquela am onci petit o am gesti subtils decentment.	"If you wish to use the bloodletting leech, extract it gently or with subtle movements accordingly."
E si no es a tu possible estrayre am aquel, lahoras pren una canula concava e entromet aquela en lo guolayro del malaute, e aprop pausa en la concavitat de la canula un ferr ignit, e fay aquo tantas vetz (entro que la sancguisugua sia morta e se osta del guolayro) e abstengua se le malaute tot lo jorn de aygua.	"And if it is not possible to extract with that, then take a concave cannula and insert it into the patient's groin area, and properly place within the concavity of the cannula an ignited iron, and do this several times (until the leech is dead and removed from the groin area), abstain from giving the patient water all day."
E aprop prengua una veyria plena de aygua frega, e obra la boca de lu en aquela, e lava la boca am aquela; e no trasglucia de aquela alcuna causa e maugua l’aygua una hora aprop autra am la sua ma, quar la sancguisugua tantost cum sent l’aygua catz.	"Then take a vial full of water that has been warmed, and place its mouth over there, wash the mouth with it; do not let any leak from that and keep changing the water an hour at a time in your hand, for the leech immediately feels the water."
Mays si no es foro-getada am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras subfumigua le malaute am cimetz o am assafetida per le instrument le qual havem recomtat en la sufumiguacio de uvula.	"But if it is not forgotten as mentioned earlier, then fumigate the patient with cummin or asafetida using the instrument that was recommended in the fumigation of the uvula."
Fay aquo, so en quar cayra.	"Do this, so that it may be effective."
E es un’autra manieyra de operacio en sufumiguacio de aquela, es que tu prenguas una ola en la qual sian carbos ignitz e la ola sia cuberta am una cobertora en le mieg de la qual sia un trauc, e sia compausat en aquel trauc la extremitat del instrument; e aprop dega desus la subfumigacio; e pause le malaute la sua boca en la extremitat de la canula, e claugua la sua boca per que la subfumiguacio no sia foro-getada entro que sapias que la subfumigacio es pervenguda a la sancguisugua, quar la sancguisugua tantost cayra.	"And this is another method of operation in fumigation of that area: you should take an earthenware vessel containing burning coals and cover the vessel with a lid having a hole in the middle, and place the end of the instrument through that hole; then perform the fumigation from above; and have the patient place their mouth over the end of the cannula, closing their mouth so that the fumigation is not lost until you know that the fumigation has reached the leech, for the leech will immediately fall."
E si no catz, lahoras tu itera la subfumiguacio motas vetz, e abstengua le malaute de beure, e mange causas saladas e alhs, e no begua aygua, e ayssi necessari es que am aquest regiment sia fora-getada.	"And if it does not fall, then you should repeat the fumigation many times, and prevent the patient from drinking water, and let them eat salted foods and almonds, and do not let them drink water; and thus it is necessary that with this regimen one should be forgetful."
E aquesta es la forma del instrument am le qual es trayta sancguisugua del guolayro quan es vista; e es semblant a forceps ayssi cum vezes, sino quar es en lu alcuna curvitat:	"And this is the shape of the instrument with which one draws out a leech from the groin area when it can be seen: and it resembles forceps like these, except that it has some curvature:"
le qual sia mesa al guolayro, e la extremitat de lu es semblant a bec de ciconia, que es guanta, en la qual es aspretat de lima, per so quar, quan comprem alcuna causa, aquela no leyssa.	"which is placed on the groin area, and its end resembles the beak of an ibis bird, which is broad, in which a file has been sharpened, for when it seizes something it does not let go."
Capitol .xl.	"Chapter XL."
En le qual es la suma del sermo en apercio de apostemas e en seccio de lor.	"In this chapter is the summary of the sermon on the treatment of apostemes and their incision."
Les apostemas so motas specias, de motas manieyras, segon que ve rememoracio de lor, de quascuna en aquest libre.	"Apostumes are many species with many methods, according to what is remembered about them in this book, each one being described here:"
E so diversas en perforacio e seccio de lor per doas manieyras, de las quals la una es per la specia de apostemas en si meteys; e per aquo que comprem de las humiditatz.	"And they are different in their puncture and incision methods due to two ways: one is for the species of deep apostemes; and by what is gained from humidity."
E la segonda manieyra es prop les locs en les quals accideys del cos, quar le apostema accident en le cap es autra de la apostema accident en le cul; e le apostema en le loc carnos accident es autra del apostema accident en junctura; e a quascun de lor es son juguament per operacio.	"And the second way is according to the places where accidents occur in the body, for the aposteme that occurs on the head is different from the one that occurs on the buttocks; and the aposteme that occurs on a fatty location is different from the one that occurs at a joint; and each of them has its own treatment through operation."
E mays de apostemas so alcunas las quals cove que no sian perforadas sino aprop maturacio de la sania en aquels o compliment de lor.	"And more about apostemes: some should not be punctured but rather waited until maturity or completion of them in those areas:"
So autras apostemas les quals cove que sian traucatz quan son cruzes, e no son maturatz segon lor compliment, ayssi cum apostemas que son propdas a las juncturas, quar apostema quan ve prop junctura, lo esser de lu es prolonguat entro que·s poyreys aquo que es en le circuit de lu, e fort leu son corromputz les liamentz o les nervis de aquela junctura, per que es fayta causa de contraccio de aquel membre; o es apostema prop de membre principal, e si tu tardas la perforacio de lu entro sia madurat nosira al membre principal; o es prop le cul, donc perfora aque no-madurat; e no cove que·l perforas cru, de no-complida degestio, sino aquel que es prop del cul, per so que no poyresca le preon de lu e sia elonguat a las partidas dedintz del cul, e sia fayta fistula, o que sia fayt en le terme de lu que no sia sanat.	"There are other apostemes which should be drawn out when they are hard and not mature according to their completion, such as apostemes near joints, for when an aposteme is near a joint its essence extends into what is around it, and often the ligaments or nerves of that joint are corrupted by it, causing contraction of that limb; or if it is near a main limb, if you delay its puncture until it is fully matured it may harm the main limb; or if it is near the buttocks, then pierce it immaturely; and do not pierce one that is hard due to undigested matter unless it is near the buttocks, for fear of tearing the skin of it and extending it towards the inside of the buttocks, causing a fistula."
Mays cove que tu sapias la hora de la perforacio de la apostema, e aysso es quan es maturat.	"But you should know the time of puncturing an aposteme, which is when it has matured:"
E sapias que es madurat quan es la cedacio de la dolor e la cessacio de la febre, e aprop la diminucio de la rogor e de la pulsacio, e la acuitat del cap del apostema, e les autres senhals.	"And it is matured when there is cessation of pain and fever, and around the decrease in redness and pulsation, and the sharpness of the head of the aposteme, and other signs."
E quar cove que sapias la perforacio cazer en le loc pus dejos del apostema e de pus venient de curacio de la eminencia.	"And because you should know that puncturing should be done where there is least pus: far from the aposteme and coming from its peak."
E perforacio tostemps sia per le lonc de la carn o del cors, si las apostemas son en las partidas de las mas o dels pes, e en loc dels lacertz, de las cordas dels nervis, de las arcerias; e, al derier, en totz locs enguals en les quals no es reflecio; quar en aquels que so reflectitz, usa de perforacio segon aquel membre.	"And puncturing should always be done along the length of flesh or skin if apostemes are in areas such as those around the breast or feet, and at locations of muscles, nerves, arteries; and, finally, in all places except where there is reflection; for those that are reflected use puncture according to that limb."
Mays quan le apostema es en loc carnos, lahoras miels es que leysses la perforacio de lu entro que sia confermada la digestio de lu segon compliment, ayssi quo havem dit; quar si tu perforas aquel denant aquo, es prolonguat le cors del poyre de lu e de mota sordicia, e fort leu las labias de lu so enduradas e la profunditat de lu.	"But when an aposteme is in a fatty location, it is better to leave its puncture until digestion of it has been confirmed according to its completion, as we have said; for if you pierce it before that time the skin of the hole will be extended and much matter will accumulate, and often the lips of the hole will become hardened and its depth increased."
Mays alcus apostemas so perforatz segon la latitut de la carn o del cos deves la necessitat, o segon aquo del qual lo membre indigeys.	"But some apostemes are punctured across the width of flesh or skin due to necessity, or according to what is necessary for that limb."
E cove que administres petita perforacio , e·n les apostemas grans gran perforacio e ampla o motas seccios segon la diversitat de la grandesa dels apostemas.	"And you should administer a small puncture, and in large apostemes make a large puncture and wide or many incisions according to the diversity of their size."
E autras so dels apostemas en les quals cove que la codena sia conquavada e sia encidida, quan es fayta ayssi quo pan e fayta es en terme que ja stigua, ayssi cum aquel que accideys en trops de dubelec e de bubos.	"And others are apostemes in which it is necessary to make the chain concave and cut it when it has been completed as if it were bread, and done so that it may already stick, such as those that occur in tubercle and buboes."
E de aquels so que so insciditz am seccio havent tres angles; e de aquels es en le qual es inscidit ayssi cum figura de fuelha de mirtra, ayssi cum las apostemas dels angonars.	"And of those that are incised with three angles in section; and of those in which it is cut like the figure of a mitre leaf, such as those of hermits."
E de lor so en les quals es administrada seccio redonda e seccio lunar, e semblantz ad aquels.	"And among them are those to which round incision and crescent incision are administered, similar to those."
Mays aquel al qual no es cap ayssi cum son apostemas leons superficials, cove que tu perforas aquel am perforacio superficial, o plana tant solament.	"But that one to which it is not applicable as with their superficial apostemes, you should pierce it with superficial or flat puncture alone."
E cove quant le apostema es gros e ya ha colligit mota sania, que perfores aquel e no te coytes que extraguas tot le poyre en aquela hora; habantz extratz de aquel una partida, e aprop opila le apostema entro al autre dia, e aprop extratz una partida major, e aprop fa aquo motas veguadas segon graduacio entro que sia foro-getat.	"And when an aposteme is large and has already collected much matter, you should pierce it but not remove all the pus at that time; having removed some of it, bandage the aposteme overnight, and then on the following day remove a larger portion, and continue doing so gradually until it has healed."
E majorment si·l malaute es de freol vertut, o femna prens, o enfant petit, o viel en decrepitut, quar l’esperit animal motas vetz es resolvut am la egressio de la sania, e fort leu mor le malaute, e tu operte les.	"And especially if the patient is an infant or pregnant woman or child or elderly person in decline, for the animal spirit is often resolved with the exit of matter, and sometimes the patient dies, and you operate on them."
Don guarda aquest capitol am gran cautela, e aprop la tua perforacio en la qual perforas aquestz apostemas, cove que abstergescas las plagues e consideras donc si la plagua del apostema es pauca, o es una seccio plana, lahoras tu aministra las qualguas de li o de coto antic; e si le apostema es gran, e las fissuras de la perforacio son motas, lahoras cove que tu pauses meca en quascun trauc entro que pervenguan ensemps.	"Therefore guard this chapter with great care, and especially the puncture you make in these apostemes, for you should cleanse the wound and consider whether the wound of the aposteme is small or is a flat section; then you should administer the cautery to it or ancient caustic. And if the aposteme is large and the incisions of the puncture are many, then you should pause between each pull until they converge together."
E si en le apostema es abscindit una partida de la codena o has concavada aquela en le circuit, lahoras cove que tu la complescas de coto viel o de fil fayt de drap de li, ayssi cum quan has traytz pans o razizos, ses humiditat; e strenh aquel entro al tertz dia; e aprop proceseys aquel e cura le am aquo que cove dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	"And if in the aposteme a portion of the chain is cut off or has been made concave around its circumference, then you should fill it with old cotton or thread made from linen cloth, like when you bake bread or cakes without moisture; and strengthen it on the third day; and then proceed with it and cure it with what is needed for the dressings until it heals."
Mays si accideys flux de sanc en la hora de la operacio tua, lahoras tu aministra aygua frega e vi agre en les quals mules un drap de li, e pausa aquel sobre le loc del fluxs del sanc motas veguadas.	If blood flow occurs during your operation, then you should administer warm water and vinegar mixed in a cloth, and place that over the area of blood flow many times.
Mays si persevera le fluxs del sanc, lahoras cove que tu aministres regiment e curacio e polveras las quals he recomtadas en motz locs de aquest nostre libre e de divisio.	If bleeding persists, then you should administer remedies and care as recommended in various places of this book and its division.
Mays si es en temps de hivern, e·l loc de la apostema es loc de motz nervis, lahoras cove que tu enfundas pulvils en vi e oli caut, e pauses aquels sobre les locs.	If it is wintertime and the location of the abscess has many nerves nearby, then you should mix powder in warm vinegar and oil, and place that on those locations.
E si es en estiu, e les locs son carnoses, lahoras cove que tu pauses pulvils enbeguts am aygua e oli o am vi e oli, e tot aquo sia freg entro que sia le ters dia, ayssi cum havem dit, e lahoras cove que tu deslies le apostema e abstergescas aquel e aministres en la curacio de lu aquo que a lu conveneys entro que sia sanat.	And if it is summertime and the locations are fleshy, then you should mix powder with water and oil or vinegar and oil, and keep that warm until the third day, as we have said, and then you should drain the abscess and cleanse it, administering to it whatever is appropriate for its healing.
E aysso es aquo que es necessari de la cognicio de la curacio de apostemas universalment, mays segon la via de distinccio ja he dit de tot apostema en qual manieyra es via de la cura de lu per capitols singularment.	And this is what is necessary for the general knowledge of the treatment of abscesses, but according to the method of distinction, I have already mentioned in detail how each type of abscess should be treated in its own chapter.
Capitol .xli.	Chapter XL.
De seccio de apostemas les quals veno en la codena del cap.	Of the Incision of Abscesses Which Appear on the Neck
En la codena del cap petitz apostemas, e so de specias de nodes les quals conteno tunicas que so a lor factz ; e las specias de lor so motas.	In the neck of young children, small abscesses form, which are like glands containing sacs that are made in this way; and their varieties are many.
E de lor son pingas, e de aquelas so que conteno humiditat semblant a lima.	And among them there are pimples, and those contain a moisture similar to slime.
E de aquelas so las quals conteno humiditat semblant a pols, et asemblantz a lor; e de aquelas so que son lapideas, durs.	And those which contain moisture resembling dust also resemble them in this way; and those which are like stones, hard.
E en la seccio de totz, e en la extraccio de aquels no es temor, cum deves la exteccio de aquels no fa contrariat arceria.	"I fear not the sectioning of all things, nor the extraction thereof; for I must do that which is neither harsh nor cruel."
E la operacio en seccio de aquels es que tu esproes aquels am instrument la forma del qual ve aprop aysso, le qual es apelat entromes, entro que sapias que contengua.	"You must use an instrument shaped like this, called a 'tomes', so that you know what it contains."
Quar si aquo que conte es humiditat, lahoras scindeys aquel am seccio segon la longitut per seccio superficial segon aquesta forma:	For if what it contains is humidity, then cut it lengthwise along the surface according to this form.
E comensa en la seccio de la linha de .B. entro a la linha de .G. Donc cum la humiditat es evacuada, lahoras tu excoria aquela pel que conte aquela humiditat, e no leysses de aquela alcuna causa de tot, quar tropas veguadas retorna, si roman de aquela alcuna causa.	"And begin the section at line B, extending to line G. When the moisture has been evacuated, then peel away that which contains this moisture, leaving no cause for any recurrence of trouble."
E aprop submergeys coto en enguent egipciach, si es present, e sino, en aygua e sal; e umpleys am aquel la plagua e layssa aquel entro ad autra dia, quar am aquo corrodeys tot so que es romas de aquela pellicula.	"And immerse it in Egyptian pitch, if available, otherwise in water and salt. Fill that with the mixture and leave it for another day, as with this it will corrode all that remains of its surface."
E aprop itera sobre aquel coto am enguent egipciach segondament e tersament si indigeyses de lu, entro que·t comfides que no y haia romas alcuna causa de aquela pellicula; lahoras cura la plagua am enguent entro que sia sanada.	"And again apply Egyptian pitch to that spot a second and third time if necessary, until you are confident that there is no remaining cause of its surface. Then heal the wound with ointment until it is healed."
E si apostema conte nodi gras, lahoras tu inscideys aquel segon aquesta forma:	"And if an abcess contains hard nodes, then cut it according to this form:"
am seccio havent forma de crotz, e geta oncis entre doas labias de la seccio e scorsa aquel de tota partida, e esforsa la tua vertut en extraccio de la tunica la qual conte aquel.	"A section having the shape of a cross, and cut once between its two lips and scrape it clean from all sides, and exert your strength in removing the tunic which contains this."
Mays si a tu arceria fa contrarieta, lahoras fay aquo que yeu t’e recontat primieyrament.	"But if you encounter resistance with your scalpel, then do what I told you first."
E semblantment fay en le apostema lapificat de seccio e de curacio segon que a tu havem dit; e seccio sobre apostema lapificat es pus leugiera, quar es de pauc sanc e de pauca humiditat.	"And similarly treat the carbuncle section and cure it according to what I have told you. The section of a carbuncle is easier because it has little blood and humidity."
E alcunas vetz so alcus de aquestz apostemas les quals so en le cap en alcus homes am los quals de tot no es humiditat; la qual causa es quar yeu inscindigui sobre un apostema en le cap de una femna vielha e atrobegui le apostema ayssi cum peyra sorda, aspra, blanqua, la qual no podia esser trinquada, e si a alcu fos am aquela percussit, plaguera aquel.	"And sometimes some of these abscesses that are on the head in some men have no humidity at all. The cause is that once someone cut an abscess on the head of an old woman like a deaf stone, rough and white, which could not be opened, and if anyone were to hit it with something, it would injure him."
Mays en les autres apostemas accidentz en le cap otra aquest no es aquest capitol, ayssi cum les apostemas que veno als caps dels enfantz e deves las razitz de las aurelhas, mays la seccio de aquestz totz sia seccio superficial.	"But in other accidental abscesses on the head that are not like this one, such as those that occur on the heads of children and behind the ears, the section should be a surface section."
E pausa la perforacio de aquels de la partida pus bassa de lor per so que sia alleujat le cos de la sania a las partidas pus bassas.	"And make the incision of these as low down on them as possible, so that it alleviates the body from the lower parts of the abscess."
E aprop cura aquelas am aquo que conveneys ad aquel de curacio.	"And apply the appropriate treatment to those according to what you consider suitable for cure."
Capitol .xlii.	"Chapter XLII."
De seccio de scrophulas las quals accideyso en le col.	"On sectioning scrofulas that occur on the neck."
Motas veguadas endeveno aquestas apostemas en le colh e en las aysselhas e en les angonars; e alcunas veguadas accideyso en las autras partidas del cos.	Many times these abscesses occur in the neck, in the armpits and in the groins; sometimes they also happen in other parts of the body.
E so aquelas que accideysso en le colh, e so motas que so engendradas entre lor, e tota scrofula de aquelas es dintz la sua tunica propria, e ayssi cum en les nodis e apostema del cap, ayssi cum havem recomtat.	And those that occur in the neck are many and are generated between them, and all scrofula of these is within its own tunic, as also in the nodes and abscesses of the head, as we have said.
E las specias de aquestas scrophulas son motas, quar de aquelas so alcunas lapideas, e de aquelas so que conteno humiditatz, e de aquelas so malignas las quals no obeseysso a curacio.	And the types of these scrofula are many; for some are hard (lapideas), and others contain moisture, and some are malignant and do not respond to treatment.
Donc en aquela la qual tu vezes de bona disposicio en le Tocament, de la qual la color de aquo que es manifest es propda a la color de la codena, e es mauguda a tota partida, e no es annexsa am le nervi del colh, ni am las venas, ni am la arceria, e no es preonda, cove que tu inscidiscas aquela am siccio superficial de la partida desus a la partida dejos del cos de la linha de .G. entro la linha de .B., e scorja aquela de tota partida, e exten dos labias de la codena am onci, o am motz oncis si has necessitat de aquels, ayssi cum havem dit en las apostemas del cap, e extratz aquela petit a petit.	Therefore in that one which you feel to have good disposition upon touch, of which the color of that which is manifest is like the color of the skin (codena), and is smooth throughout, and is not annexed with the nerve of the neck, nor with the veins, nor with the artery, it is necessary that you incise it with a dry superficial cut from above to below on the line from G. to the line B., and remove all its skin, and extend the lips of the wound with forceps, or with several forceps if you have need of them, as we have said in the abscesses of the head, and extract it little by little.
E es mays cautela que no sia inscidida la vena o nervi.	And it is more cautious that neither vein nor nerve be incised.
E sia le spatum no mot agut, que no ajuste a tu la tua ma am inscizio, o que enquiete le malaute, e que inscidas aquo que no es necessari inscidir; quar si inscideysses vena o arceria e prohibeys tu de la tua operacio, lahoras pausa en la plagua vetriol trissat o autras polveras las quals ostan fluxs de sanc, e estrenh la plagua, e layssa aquel entro que·s repausa la acuitat de la apostema e sia mollificada la plagua e comense esser poyrida.	"And if the wound is not moving, do not insert your hand into it lest you injure the patient and unnecessarily incise; for if you incise a vein or artery and hinder your operation, then apply powdered vitriol or other powders that stop bleeding, cleanse the wound, and allow that which causes inflammation to rest so that the pain may be mollified and begin to suppurate."
Quan le sanc es abscindit.	"When blood is absorbed."
Donc retorna a la tua operacio entro que l’aias complida.	"And then return to your operation until it is completed."
E aprop inquireys am le tieu dit indic si es romas alcuna causa de las autras petitas scrophulas, donc inscideys aquelas e munda aquelas.	"Then inquire if there are any causes of the other small scrofulae, and if so, incise them and cleanse them."
E si es en la razit de la scrophula gran vena, cove lahoras que no inscidas aquela scrophula de la sua razitz.	"And if it is near a large vein, do not incise that scrofula at its root."
Abantz cove que lies aquela am fiel doblat fort e que leysses aquela entro que caia per si ses nocument.	"Avoid cutting it with a doubled folded blade, and allow it to fall on its own without injury."
E aprop omple la plagua de coto vielh le qual tu has ja submirgit en enguent egipciac, e aprop cura aquel.	"And then fill the wound with softened cotton which you have already immersed in Egyptian ointment, and also treat it."
E si inscides aquela scrophula tota, lahoras cove que tu ajustes las doas labias de la plagua e cuzas2 tantost pus que no y ha romasa deguna superfluitat.	"And if you incise the whole scrofula, then it is necessary that you approximate the two lips of the wound and dress it immediately so that there remains no superfuility."
Mays si tu vezes que haia romasa superfluitat per la grandeza de la scrofula, cove que tu entendas a inscidir la razit de aquela, e astrayra aquela e aministra sutura e aquo que es dit.	"But if there remains superfuility due to the size of the scrofula, then it is necessary that you incise the root of it, extract it, and administer suturing and whatever else is said."
E aquela de las scrophulas que conteno humiditatz, perfora aquela am perforacio superficial aqui la on appar a tu le loc de maturacio de lu, e pausa perforacio de aquo que siec le pus bas del cos, ayssi cum havem dit.	"And those scrofulae that contain fluid, pierce them with a superficial perforation where it appears to you the location of maturity of it, and pause the perforation until it emits purulent matter from below the skin, as we have said."
E aprop aministra perforacio, calguas am enguent e semblantz ad aquels, per so que corroda aquo que es romas de la corropcio.	"And then administer a dressing with ointment and similar substances, so that it may burn away what remains of the corruption."
E aprop quan tu vezes la plagua ja esser mundada, lahoras tu cura aquela am enguent de carn generatiu entro que sia sanada.	"And when you see that the wound is already cleansed, then treat it with a ointment for generating flesh until it heals."
Capitol .xliii.	Chapter XLIII
De seccio del pilhot del apostema accident dintz le guolayro.	Of the Incision of the Point of the Abscess Accidentally in the Groin
Diyssero les antics aquesta seccio en le epilhot, e no vist alcu hom en nostra terra que aquela aia fayta.	The ancients called this type of incision "epilhot," and there is no man known in our land who has performed it.
E aquesta es la inscriptura del sermo de aquels.	And this is the inscription of the speech of those people.
Mays en les homes haventz esquinencia, cove que sia esquivada la extraccio del epilhot, cum per aquo no sia fayt juvament per so quar totas las venas e las majors del malaute so aqui.	But in men with hip pain, it is necessary to avoid the extraction of the epilhot, because by doing so, all the veins and major vessels of the disease are opened.
Mays en aquels que han apostemas cautz en la boca o guolayro o dos aurelhas, quan la malautia no es en la cana, cove husar de la seccio de epilhot a fugir la perdicio la qual es fayta per perfocacio.	But in those who have hard abscesses in the mouth or groin or ears, when the disease is not in the canal, it is necessary to perform an incision of the epilhot to avoid the damage that is caused by perforation.
Donc cove quan volem aquo, que inscidam le epilhot dejos tres cercles dels cercles del epilhot, o quatre am petita seccio per la latitut en aquel que es entre dos cercles per quantitat, que la seccio sia en ciphac, no en la cartillage, e aquest loc es convenent a seccio, quar es privat de carn e les vayselhs de sanc de lu son luhen.	Therefore, when we want this, we should incise the epilhot around three or four circles of the epilhot's rings, or make a small incision across its width in that which is between two circles in quantity, so that the incision is made in bone, not cartilage. This location is convenient for an incision because it is devoid of flesh and the vessels of blood are distant from it.
E si le metge es pauruc, cove lahoras que extenda la codena del golayro am onci, e aprop fenda la codena entro que pervengua a la canal, mays evite les vaysels de sanc si vetz de aquelas alcuna causa.	And if the physician is fearful, then he should first extend the cord of the groin with a loop and then cut it so that it reaches the canal, but avoid the vessels of blood if one sees any cause for doing so.
E aprop inscida li ciplach segon que havem recomtat; e es significat sobre la seccio de la canal per le flacma le qual es de aquela eyssit am aquo que es de lu disromput e per la abscizio de la votz.	And then incise the hip bone as we have recommended, and it is indicated above the incision of the canal by the flap that has issued from there with what is of its disruption and by the absence of sound.
E layssa la plagua uberta per alcun temps.	Leave the wound open for some time.
Donc cum la hora es remauguda en la qual perforacio es temuda, agregua doas labias de la codena de la plagua, e cus aquela sola ses la cartillage.	Therefore, once the hour has passed in which perforation is feared, join two lips of the cord of the wound, and sew it alone without cartilage.
E aprop administra medicinas que fan naysser la carn entro que sia sanat.	And then administer medicines that promote the growth of flesh until it heals.
E diyssec Albucasis que la summa del sermo le qual havem recomtat, exposicio no es sino que veias que alcus de aquetz apostemas ja han opilat lo guolayro del malaute, e le malaute es vengut entro a mort, e le ale de lu es entresecat, e alcus van a inscidir le epiglos per so que respire le malaute sobre le loc de la plagua per alcuna respiracio, e sia salvat de mort.	And Albucasis says that the sum of the speech which we have recommended is this: that some of these abscesses have already closed off the groin of the disease, and the disease has come inside to cause death, and the breath of it is cut off, and some go to incise the epiglottis so that the diseased may breathe over the location of the wound for some breaths, and thus be saved from death.
E per aquo comandero layssar la plagua uberta entro que sia consumida la malicia de la malautia; e es la malicia de lu per tres dias; e donc lahoras comandero cosi la plagua, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	And therefore I command that the wound be left open until the mischief of the disease is consumed; and the mischief lasts for three days. And then I command that the wound be sewn up, and cared for until it heals.
E aquo que yeu he vist per mi meteys, es que una sirventa pres un cotel e mesec le en le sieu golayro e inscidic am aquel una partida de la cana del pulmo, e yeu fu apelat a la curacio de lu, e atrobegui la mugen ayssi cum es mugit del moridos, e descubrigui la plagua e atrobegui le sanc le qual era yssit de la plagua petit.	And this is what I have seen myself: that a servant took a knife and stuck it in his groin and made an incision with it into a part of the canal of the lung, and I was called to care for him, and I heard him moan like one dying, and I uncovered the wound and removed the blood that had issued from it in small amounts.
Donc yeu fo confessat que aquela no havia inscidit vena ni guidegi, e le vent yssia de la plagua, e curegui aquela entro que foc sanada.	Therefore, I was convinced that he had not cut any vein or artery, and the wind issued from the wound. And I cared for it until it healed.
E no accidic a la sirventa si no rauquiera en la votz, e aprop alcus dias retornec ad miloracio de las suas dispozicios.	And nothing happened to the servant except that he lost his voice temporarily, and a few days later he returned to his usual state of health.
E ara dic yeu que en la seccio del epilhot no ha temor.	And now I say that in the section of the epiglottis there is no fear.
Capitol .xliv.	Chapter XLIV.
De seccio sobre apostema le qual accideys en le golayro defora, e es apelat hernia del golayro.	On incision over an abscess that occurs externally in the groin, and is called a groin hernia.
Aquest apostema nompnat hernia del golayro es apostema gran segon la color del cors, e es mot en las femnas.	This abscess called a groin hernia is a large abscess according to the color of the skin, and it is common in women.
E es segon dos manieyras, quar o es natural o accidental.	And it occurs in two ways: either naturally or accidentally.
E en le natural no es engen de curar.	"In nature, it does not arise to cure."
E l’accidental es segon dos manieyras del qual la un es semblant a nodes grasses, e l’autra manieyra es semblant apostema le qual es fayt per nodacio de arteria, e en aquel es temor.	"And the accidental is according to two methods: one is similar to fatty tumors, and the other method is similar to an abscess which occurs due to the clogging of an artery, and in this case there is fear."
E no cove que·s fassa presumpcio a lu cum ferr sino en aquel que es petit.	"And it should not be presumed upon him with iron unless it is requested."
E tu proha aquel e investigua aquel am le dit, e si atrobas lu semblant a nodi gras, e no es suspendut am alcuna de las venas, lahoras tu inscideys aquel ayssi cum les nodes, e extratz aquel am aquo que conte lu de la pel e bursiclam; e sino, lahoras es perscrutat tot le sieu esser, e aprop cura le loc am aquo que cove de curacio entro que sia sanat.	"And then you should press it and investigate it with the said iron, and if you find that it is similar to fatty tumors and there are no veins suspended in it, then you should cut into it like nodes, and extract what contains it from its skin and bursa; but if not, then you should carefully examine all of its being, and apply cure to the place according to what cure requires until it is healed."
Capitol .xlv.	"Chapter .xlv."
De seccio de las specias de nodes.	"Of the sectioning of kinds of tumors."
Dels nodes so motas specias e yeu ja he dit totas las specias de lor en la divisio.	"There are many species of tumors, and I have already mentioned all the kinds of them in the division."
E cove que yeu recomte assi la diferencia entre node e exitura cum fassa dubitacio.	"And it is necessary that I explain thus the difference between a tumor and an ulcer so that there may be no doubt."
Donc yeu dic que am exitura es caliditat e febre e dolors vehementz entro que es sedada la ebullicio de la superfluitat; e es complida putrefaccio que lahora cessa la febre, la dolor e la calor.	"So I say that in an ulcer there is heat and fever and violent pain until the boiling away of the superfeta is stopped; but it is completed putrefaction which then stops the fever, pain, and heat."
Mays am node no es caliditat ni febre ni dolor, e conte aquel ciphac leon le qual es al u sac propri.	"But a tumor has neither heat nor fever nor pain, and contains that which produces phlegm in the lymph vessels or the proper sac."
E es segon la color del cors, e le comensament de lu es cum un ceze e es fayt ayssi cum vace, sia major o minor, e son segon dos specias, quar o so grassas e conteno humiditat, e las colors de la humiditat son motas, segon que yeu diyssi en la divisio.	"And according to the color of the body and the beginning of it is like a boil, and becomes like an empty sack, whether larger or smaller, and they are divided into two species: those that are fatty contain moisture; and the colors of the moisture are many, as I have said in the division."
Donc cove, quan pervenas a la curacio de node, que exprohes aquel e inquiras aquel al comensament am sturment le qual es apelat intromes, segon que vindra la sua forma en le capitol le qual es aprop aquest.	"Therefore, when you come to the treatment of tumors, it is necessary that you investigate it at its beginning with an instrument called the trocar, according to what will be said about its shape in the following chapter."
E es manieyra de inquisicio de apostemas e de totz nodes, e es que tu prenguas aquest sturment e entromet aquel en le loc pus humit le qual atrobas en le apostema, e tu revolveras les tieus ditz am aquel petit a petit entro que sapias que·l sturment ja ha penetrat la codena.	"And the manner of investigating abscesses and all tumors is this: you should take this instrument and insert it into the moist place which you find in the abscess, and turn your said instrument around little by little until you know that it has penetrated the channel."
E aprop ultima la tua ma segon la mesura de la grandeza del apostema, e aprop extratz le entromes e considera aquo que es yssit en le vestigi de lu.	"And at last withdraw your hand according to the measure of the greatness of the abscess, and then remove the trocar and consider what has issued from it in its trace."
E si es fora-getada la humiditat corrent, de qualque color sia, lahoras tu le inscideys am seccio superficial segon que he dit en les autres apostemas.	"And if there is a flow of moisture of whatever color, then you should cut into it with a superficial section according to what has been said about other abscesses."
E si del vestigi de l’intromes no hieys humiditat, lahoras sapias que es gras.	"But if there is no moisture issuing from the trocar's trace, then know that it is fatty."
E secca sobre lu am seccio havent forma de crotz segon aquesta forma:	"And then cut across it with a cross-section having this form:"
ayssi cum t’e ensenhat, e suspen aquel am oncis, e excorja la codena de tota part am facilitat, e guarda la pel o sac, si podes, sobre aquel e extraguas aquela sania am le node.	"So as you have been shown, and suspend it with forceps, and carefully excise the channel from all parts, keeping the skin or sac if possible, and remove that tumor."
Mays si es romput en la operacio, no es possible extrayre aquela sana, e motas veguadas endeve aquo, e lahoras tu la extratz a pessas entro que de lu no romangua denguna causa.	"But if it breaks during the operation, it is not possible to remove that tumor whole, and sometimes something remains there; therefore, you should remove what you can without leaving anything behind."
Quar si de lu roman denguna causa, pauc o trop, le node retorne segon le mays.	"For if anything remains there, little or much, the tumor will return again according to its nature."
E si tu vezes que de lu roman alcuna part petita, lahoras comple la plagua de alcunas polveras corrosivas agudas e strenh la plagua, e pausa sobre aquela que sede apostema caut, e cura aquel del autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	"And if you find that some small part remains there, then fill the cavity with some sharp corrosive powders and sew up the wound, leaving a cauterizing plaster over that which sits upon the abscess; and cure it by the other method until it is healed."
E si es node gran, lahoras tu cus las doas labias de lu e cura aquel am aquo que encarna.	"But if it is a large tumor, then cut both lips of it and cure it with what oozes out."
Mays si vena pulsatil es a lu contraria, o no-pulsatil, lahoras tu coyta e huemple le loc de zegi trissat que es vetriol e leyssa aquel streyt per dos dias o per tres entro que·s poyresca la plagua e que repause la ebullicio del sanc; e aprop retorna a inscindir aquo que es romas del node.	"But if there is pulsation, contrary or not, then tie and compress the place of the wound with threefold bandages which are moistened with treacle and leave it thus for two or three days until the wound closes and the ebullition of blood ceases; and then return to cutting into what remains of the tumor."
Capitol .xlvi.	"Chapter XLVI."
De las formas del sturmentz necessaris en seccio e perforacio.	"Of the shapes of the instruments necessary for sectioning and perforation."
De aquels so las formas dels intromesas, e so de tres specias, que de aquels es alcu gran, e de lor es migier, e de lor es petit.	"Of these are the shapes of the entrails, and they are of three species, namely large, medium, and small."
La forma de intromes gran es aquesta:	"The form of the large intestine is this:"
La forma de intromes migier es aquesta:	"The shape of the medium intestine is like this:"
La forma de intromes petit es aquesta:	"The form of the small intestine is thus:"
Sian faytz de ferr, de alfulud, de extremitatz cayradas decentment, per so que festino le intrament en les apostemas.	"They have iron feet, well-rounded extremities skillfully made, so that they may quickly enter into the wounds."
E aquestas so las formas dels experientz, e son nompnatz albered, e un de aquels es apelat berid.	"And these are the shapes of the experiences, and they are named Albered, and one of them is called Berith."
E so de tres especias, quar de lor es gran, migier e pauc.	"And they are of three species: namely large, medium, and small."
La forma de experient gran, forma de lu:	"The shape of the large experience is thus:"
La forma de experient migier, forma de lu:	"The shape of the medium experience, form of lu:"
La forma de experient pauc, forma de lu:	"The shape of the small experience, form of lu:"
Conveneysso que sian per aquels apostemas e exituras e fistulas e bubos per so que entre aquelas so dels osses e de autras causas.	"That they may serve for such wounds and exits and fistulas and boils; so that among those are the bones, and other causes."
E so faytz redontz, grosses, leons, ayssi cum grans agulhas am las quals son cosidas las selhas, e son faytas de eram citri, o de eram o de ferr, o de argent, E las milhors so quan so faytas de eram citri.	"And they are made redoundant, large, lion-like, such as great needles with which the skins are sewn together, and they are made of ivory, or of brass, or of iron, or of silver. And the best are those which are made of ivory."
E son faytz les experient de plum negre, les quals se acordan que per aquels sian ubertas las fistulas en la conquavitat de las quals so reflexios, que sian reflectidas am la sua levitat am aquelas refleccios.	"And they are made of black lead, which are used to open the fistulas in the concavity of which there are reflections that may be reflected with its levity by those reflections."
E so de tres specias, quar alcus de lor so loncs, e dels autres migiers, e dels autres breus, segon la quantitat del ample de la fistula e de la strictura de lu.	"And they are of three species: some of them are long, others medium, and others short, according to the quantity of the width of the fistula and the stricture thereof."
Forma del experient gran de plom:	"Form of the large lead experience:"
Forma del experient migier de plom:	"Form of the medium lead experience:"
Forma del experient petit de plom:	"Form of the small lead experience:"
Las formas dels oncis so de motas specias, quar de aquels so alcus simples, als quals es una curvitat solament, e so de tres specias: grans, paucs e migiers.	"The forms of the hooks are of many species, for some are simple ones, having only one curvature, and they are of three species: large, small, and medium."
E de lor so uncis orps, e so de tres specias.	"And among them there are hook-shaped ones, which are of three species:"
E de aquels so uncis haventz doas curvaturas, e so de tres specias.	"And among those hooks having two curvatures, they are of three species."
E de lor so haventz tres curvaturas, e so de tres specias.	"And among them there are ones having three curvatures, and they are of three species."
E totz aquetz so necessaris en lor loc.	"And all these are necessary in their place."
Forma de unci simple gran, forma de lu:	"Form of large simple hook, form of lu:"
Forma de unci simple migier:	"Form of medium simple hook:"
Forma de unci simple pauc, forma de lu:	Shape of a little hook, shape of it:
Forma de unci orp gran:	Shape of a large hook
Forma de unci orp migier, forma de lu:	Shape of an average-sized hook
Forma de unci orp pauc, forma de lu:	Shape of a small hook
Forma de unci gran havent dos curvaturas:	Shape of a large hook having two curves
Forma de unci migier havent dos curvatas:	Shape of an average hook having two curves
Forma de unci pauc havent dos curvaturas:	Shape of a small hook with two curves
Forma de unci gran havent tres curvaturas:	Shape of a large hook with three curves
Forma de unci migier havent tres curvaturas:	Shape of an average hook with three curves
Forma de unci pauc havent tres curvaturas:	Shape of a small hook having three curves
E aquestas so las formas dels scalpels am les quals son seccatz e scorjatz les nodes e le apostemas, e so de tres specias, quar de aquels es gran, migier, e pauc.	And these are the shapes of the scalpels with which the nodes and boils are cut and scraped, and they are of three kinds: large, medium, and small.
Forma de scapel gran:	Shape of a large scalpel
Forma del scapel migier:	Shape of the medium scalpel
Forma de scapel pauc:	Shape of a small scalpel
Las extramitatz de aquels am les quals es fayta seccio so agudas e las autres extramitatz so no-agudas, e no so pausadas en tal manieyra, sino per que sia fayt juvament en la excorjacio dels nodes la temor de inscizio de vena o de nervi, e per aquels sia sanat le malaute e atrobe tranquilitat un petit per la adustio la qual atroba deves la excoriacio del apostema.	The outer edges of those with which the section is made are sharp and the others are not sharp, but they are not blunt in this manner, but so that it can be done carefully in scraping nodes to avoid the fear of cutting a vein or nerve, and for those who want healing from illness and tranquility of mind through the removal of boils by scraping.
E aquestas son las formas de almagidas, e so de tres specias: gran, migier e pauc, ayssi cum veyras.	And these are the shapes of spatulas, and they come in three kinds: large, medium, and small, as you can see.
La forma de magda gran:	The shape of a large spoon
Forma de magda migier:	Shape of a medium-sized spoon
Forma de magda pauc:	Shape of a small spoon
Sian faytas de eram e so semblantz de ray am le qual e fayt alcofol.	They are made of bronze and resemble rays with which alcohol is distilled.
E es en la extramitat lada punctada am spatum occultada e en aquela corr a las partidas dedintz e defora, quan tu vols, ayssi cum veses.	And at the side edge there is a hole hidden by a small plate, through which you can insert and remove the parts both inside and outside, as you wish.
Las formas de spatimis, les quals so amaguatz entre los ditz deves la perforacio dels apostemas e no les percebo les malautes, e so de tres specias: gran, migier e pauc.	The shapes of spatulas, which are hidden among the aforementioned tools for removing boils and are not perceived by the sick, come in three kinds: large, medium, and small.
E aquestas so las formas de aquels:	And these are the forms of them:
Las formas de ventozas am las quals es abscindit le flux del sanc, e so de tres specias; gran, migiera e pauca; las formas de lu:	The shapes of tweezers with which blood flow is cut off, and they come in three kinds: large, medium, and small. The forms of them are like this:
Sian faytas de eram citri, redondas am alcuna longitut , e sian subtils.	There are made of wax, round with some length, and they are subtle.
E cove que sian aquestas specias de ventosas deves tu grans, migieras e paucas, per so que per aquelas abscindas flux de sanc am velocitat en necessitat, e lahoras quan a tu primieyrament no es medicina.	And you should choose these types of cups to be large, medium, and few in number, so that through those incisions blood flows quickly as needed, and later on when it is not medicine at first.
Enpero no uses de aquelas ad abscidir sanc en tot loc del cors, e non uses sino en locs carnoses, ayssi cum en les lacertis de las cambas e de las coyssas, e en les lacertz dels brasses, e de las mamillas e del ventre e dels engonars, e semblantz a lor dels lacertz carnoses humitz.	Wait, do not use those to incise blood everywhere on the body, and only use them in fleshy locations, such as on the thighs and buttocks, arms, breasts, abdomen, and groin, and similar moist fleshy areas.
E alcunas veguadas son faytz de aquels strumentz autres petitz semblantz scorsas de fisacs segon aquesta forma; per les quals lo sanc es abscindit quan es fayt per fleubotomia, o deves inscizio de vena o de arceria.	And sometimes they are made of those other small instruments like lances in this shape: for which blood is incised when it is done by phlebotomy, or incision of a vein or artery.
E alcunas veguadas son faytas redondas segon aquesta forma:	And sometimes they are made round in this shape:
Capitol .xlvii.	Chapter XLVI
De la cura de las mamillas dels homes las quals so asembladas de femnas.	Of the care of the breasts of men which are like those of women.
Alcunas veguadas so infladas las mamillas de alcus homes deves le compliment del dormir cum comensan esser pellutz, e aprop so infladas las mamillas, e so asembladas las mamillas de las femnas, e romano apostemosas, lejas.	Sometimes the breasts of some men become enlarged and puffy with sleep, and they are inflamed, and their breasts resemble those of women, and we should bind them tightly.
E ad aquel que avoreys aquo, cove que inscidisca aquelas am seccio lunar segon aquesta forma, de la linha de .B. entro a la linha de .G., e aprop excorja la groceza tota, e aprop uempla la plagua de medicament encarnatiu, e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am cosidura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And regarding that which is said above, it should be cut with a lunar section according to this shape from line B. to line G., and then remove all the thickness, and then fill in the wound with an ointment that encourages healing, and then sew together the two lips of the wound, and care for it until it heals.
Mays si la mamilla declina a las partidas dejos e es mollificada per la sua magnitut ayssi cum endeve a las femnas, lahoras sia fendut en dos latz sieus pus sobiras, am dos seccios semblantz a figura lunar, de las quals quascuna sia contenguda en l’autra deves la fi de quascuna, entro que sia que la linha major contengua la menor segon aquesta forma de la linha de .B. e la linha de .G. E aprop excorja la codena la qual es entre dos labias de la plagua, e osta la pingueza, e aministra aquo que havem dit de la sutura e de las polveras aquo que es necessari en la curacio entro que sia sanat.	But if the breast leans towards the sides and becomes softened by its size like that of women, then it should be cut in two on both sides upwards with two lunar sections, each containing the other at their ends so that the larger line contains the smaller according to this shape from line B. to line G. And then remove the cord which is between the two lips of the wound, and remove the excess flesh, and administer what has been said about suturing and powders as necessary for healing until it heals.
E si tu non conpleysses la inscizio de aquo que cove inscidir per la inquietut del malaute, e per flux de sanc, lahoras cove que huemplas la plagua de coto submergit en enguent corrosiu e layssa aquel entro que aquo corroda que es romas de la grayssa, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if you do not complete the incision of that which ought to be cut due to restlessness of illness and bleeding, then you should fill in the wound with cotton soaked in corrosive oil and leave it until it has corroded what is removable from the thickness, and then care for it until it heals.
Capitol .xlviii.	Chapter XLVIII
De perforacio de apostemas que veno dejos le titillic.	Of the perforation of boils that come from the armpits
Aquetz apostemas que veno dejos le titillic so de las specias de scrophulas, durs, las quals conte una pel que es sac.	These boils that come from the armpits are of the kind called scrofula, hard ones, which contain a core that is removed.
E de aquelas so alcunas que conteno humiditatz; e aquelas que conteno humiditatz cove que sian inscididas am seccio lunar segon aquesta figura: de la linha de .G. a la linha de .B. E cum es tot evacuat aquo que es en le apostema de la sania, lahoras tu le comple de coto viel e leysa le entro al autra dia.	And those that contain moisture; and those that contain moisture should be cut with a lunar section according to this shape: from line G. to line B. And when all the healthy matter has been evacuated from the boil, then fill it with black wool and leave it for another day.
E aprop le coto sia ostat e sia curat am enguent convenient ad aquo, entro que sia sanat.	"And then the wound should be covered and treated with an appropriate salve until it heals."
E si le apostema de las specias dels nodes es, e de las scrophulas, lahoras tu scindeys sobre aquel ayssi cum havem dit en la seccio sobre las scrophulas engualment.	"And if the abscess is of the kind found in joints or on the skin, then you should incise it as we have said in the section about scrofula."
May si la plagua es extenduda en aysso que yesca poyredura, lahoras administra en lu cauteri segon que en aquo havem denant dit.	"And if the plague has spread to the point of causing putrid flesh, then you should apply cautery as we have said earlier."
Capitol .xlix.	Chapter XLIX.
De seccio de apostemas que accideysso per arceria o per vena.	About incising abscesses that occur from injury or by venesection
Quan arceria es rompuda, e la codena es consolidada la qual es sobre aquela, lahoras motas veguadas accideys apostema E les senhals per les quals es conoguda que imflamacio e apostema sian per la arteria o per vena: quar quan apostema es per arceria es lonc agreguat en le preon del cors; e que quan inpelleysses le apostema am les tieus ditz, sentes en lu quays sia stridor.	When an artery has burst and the vein that is above it becomes consolidated, then often an abscess occurs. And the signs by which it is known whether inflammation and abscess are due to the artery or the vein: for when an abscess is due to an artery it is elongated towards the front of the body; and when you press on the abscess with your fingers you feel a cracking noise.
E aquel que es per vena es redon al manifest del cors.	"And one that is due to a vein is round, near the surface of the body."
E seccio sobre aquest apostema es error, e majorment en aquel que es dejos las aysselhas, e en les angonars, e en le col, e en motz locs del cors; e es mot gran, donc cove que la sua curacio am ferr sia esquivada, e aquel que es en las extramitatz, o al cap, cove que sia evitat.	"And it is an error to make an incision regarding this abscess, especially those that are located on the hips, thighs, armpits, neck, and many other parts of the body; therefore its treatment with iron should be avoided. And those that are in the extremities or on the head should also be avoided."
Mays sobre aquel que es de lor per imflacio de l’orrifici de la arceria, scindeys en la codena seccio en le lonc; e aprop huebre la seccio am uncis e aprop la arceria, e deliura de las tunicas entro que sia descuberta.	But concerning that which is due to inflammation of the sheath of the artery, make an incision in the vein along its length; then widen the incision with hooks and expose the artery itself, delivering it from its surrounding sheaths.
E aprop met sobre aquel agulha e fay aquela penetrar entro al autre latz, e estrenh la arceria am fiel doble en dos locs, — la qual causa yeu a tu eyssenhegui en extraccio de doas arcerias les quals so en les templars.	And then take that needle and pierce it through to the other side; and twist the artery with a double thread in two places, — which will provide you an example of how to extract two arteries which are found on the temples.
E aprop punh le loc le qual es entre dos liamentz am spatum entro que yesca le sanc tot que es en lu, e sia dissolvut le apostema.	"And then make a puncture with a spatula in the location between the two ligatures where blood has accumulated; this will cause the abscess to dissolve."
E aprop administra curacio en la qual es engendrat poyre entro que caian les liamentz; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz convenientz ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	"And then apply treatment in which pus is generated between the ligatures so that they fall away; and also treat him with appropriate medicines until he is healed."
E si es apostema per seccio de vena, lahoras cove que tu tenguas am la tua ma aquo que es a tu possible del apostema am la codena, e aprop intromet la agulha dejos le loc le qual tu has tengut dejos la tua ma, e fay aquela penetrar; e sia en aquela fil doble entro que tu extraguas aquel del autre latz, e aprop ligua le apostema am bo liament segon que yeu he dit a tu en le liament de uva4 de doas partz am doas extremitatz del fil.	"And if the abscess is due to an incision of a vein, then you should take hold of it with your hand as much as possible; and then insert the needle on the side where you have held the abscess, and pierce it through. Then tie the thread in such a way that you extract it from the other side; and then ligate the abscess with good ligatures according to what I have taught you regarding the ligation of grapes of two parts with two ends of the thread."
Mays si temes que extraguam le fil, lahoras entromet le fiel am aquela agula dejos tot le apostema deves la inscizio de la agulha primieyra, e strenh les tieus fiels en quatre locs.	But if you fear that the thread may come out, then insert the needle along with it on both sides of the abscess through the original incision of the needle; and twist your threads in four places.
Aprop secca le apostema en le mieg loc de lu entro que quan es yssit aquo que es en lu, lahoras tu inscideys la superfluitat de la codena, e layssa aquo que de lu es liat.	"And then close the abscess in its middle part so that when it has healed, you can then incise the superfluity of the vein, and leave what is tied."
E aprop pausa sobre lu pulvil le qual has submergit en vi e oli, e aprop administra la curacio la qual es fayta am calguas e enguentz entro que sia sanat.	"And then plaster it with powder that you have immersed in wine and oil, and apply hot fomentations and appropriate medicines until it is healed."
Capitol l del apostema le qual accideys per torcio de nervis.	Chapter 1 of the abscess which occurs from twisting of nerves
Ayssi cum accideys apostema en arceria e en vena, e semblantment accideys apostema en les nervis quan accideys en lor percussio o accideys per trebal superfluable, e per semblantz.	Just as an abscess occurs in the artery and vein, so too does an abscess occur in the nerves when they are subjected to percussion or excessive movement, and for similar reasons.
E es fayt le mays de lu en les locs dels adjutoris o del talo, o en tot loc en le qual so maugudas las juncturas.	And such abscesses most often occur in the locations of the elbows or ankles, or in any place where joints are moved with violence.
E es apostema greu, e es asemblat a la color del autre cors, e es en las majors de lu disposicios ses de lor e quan es streyt am vehementia, sent en lu le malaute semblant stupor.	And if the abscess is large, it resembles the color of the rest of the body; it is hard and tense, without its usual flexibility, and when pressed with violence, there is a sensation like stupor.
E no es apostema agreguat en le preon del cors, e per so es dejos la codena, e el es maugut a tota partida e no va a las partidas denant ni detras.	And if the abscess is not situated on the chest, it is near the vein; it is moved at any part and does not move toward its front or back.
Donc aquo de aquels que es en las juncturas no cove que sia envasit am ferr, quar fort leu endevenguera contracio.	Therefore, those that are located in the joints should not be bandaged with iron, lest it cause contraction.
Mays aquel que es en le cap o en le front fen la codena am spatum.	But one that is on the head or forehead may be opened with a spatula.
Mays si es apostema pauc, lahoras te aquel am les forfecs e abscindeys aquel de razitz.	But if it is a small abscess, then treat it with cold compresses and incise it with razors.
E si es gran, lahoras tu le suspen am unci, e excorja aquel, e aprop osta aquel; e ajusta la plagua am sutura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	But if it is large, then suspend it with a bandage, scrape it off, and remove it; then sew it up with stitches, and treat it until it is healed.
Capitol .li.	Chapter 2
De seccio de apostema le qual accideys de cheil que accideys al ventre.	Of the incision of an abscess that occurs from a cut on the belly
Endeveno ad alcus homes motas veguadas en les ventres de aquels e en las autras partidas del cors de aquels theils les quals son apelatz funguals per similitut de aquels am funges, dels quals la razitz es subtil e·l cap de aquel es gros; e ja las labias de aquels so conversas, e es de aquels que es petit, e es de aquels que es mot magnificat.	There are certain people who see in the bellies of others and other parts of their bodies things that resemble those with fungi, which have a subtle root and a large head; they also have lips that are inverted, and these are small or greatly enlarged.
E yeu ja e vist un, e en le ventre de lu eran dos theils les quals eran mays a funges semblantz, e no era diferencia entre aquels blancs, de menuda razitz.	And I myself have seen one such case in which there were two growths resembling fungi on his belly, and they had no difference between them; both were white with small roots.
E ja las labias de aquels eran enversadas e se fendian, e humiditat corria de aquel tot temps.	And the lips of those were inverted and split open, from which moisture flowed constantly.
Donc yeu inscidegui aquels e atrobegui en la un en pes quays xviii unc. e l’autre quays vi unc.	Therefore, I incised them and removed one weighing eighteen ounces and the other weighing six ounces.
E la operacio en la inscizio de lor es que consideres lahoras si·l malaute es humit, e la color de atheil es blanca, humit, de subtil razitz; lahoras tu le inscideys am spatum lat, e sian en la presencia tua cauteris en le foc, quar motas veguadas deves la seccio de lu es expellit mot sanc; e si te ventz le sanc, cauteriza aquel.	Therefore, when performing the incision of such abscesses, consider first whether the inflammation is moist. If the color of the skin is white and moist with a subtle root, then incise it with a wide spatula that has been heated in fire, for much blood may flow during the sectioning; cauterize if any blood flows.
E si vezes le malaute pauruc e temeros, guarda te de inscizio am ferr; mays lahoras pren fiel de plom recent fayt, e strenh am aquel atheil, la manieyra del qual es aquela que havem dita; e leyssa aquel per dos dias.	But if the inflammation is painful and fearful, beware of incising with iron. Instead, take a fresh lead thread made from the kind we have described, twist it around the abscess, and leave it for two days.
E aprop ajusta en la strictura del fil de plom; donc, no cesses strenher le plom granre devetz en theil, entro que sia abscindit e cayha per se ses trebalh.	Then adjust the lead thread at its tightest point; continue twisting the lead around it until it has been separated and fallen off by itself without any manipulation.
Mays si theil es de grossa razitz, lahoras en la inscizio de lu es alcuna causa de temor e de paor, e majorment en aquel que es en le ventre.	But if the root is thick, there may be some cause for fear and anxiety during its incision, especially one that is in the belly.
Mays possibla es que tu inscindas la maytat de lu , e aprop cauteriza aquel per que no retorne.	But it is possible to incise most of it, and then cauterize it so that it does not return.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanada la plagua.	And then treat it until the wound has healed.
E guarda te que tu no presumas inscidir theil le qual es de fusca color, de pauc sentiment, de leg reguardament, quar aquel es absi cancros.	Beware that you do not attempt to incise a growth that is dark in color, insensitive to touch, and regularly recurring, for it is cancerous.
E yeu vindre am rememoracio de cranc aprop aysso.	And I remember this regarding cancer.
Capitol .lii.	Chapter 52
De curacio de eminencia del umbilic.	Of the treatment of umbilical hernia
Eminencia del umbilic es fayta per motas causas; o per fissuras del ciphac le qual es sobre le ventre, e yeys de lu la tela o budel segon que endeve en las autras rupturas; o per sanc le qual flueys de vena o de arceria segon que es denant dit, o per ventositat coarctada en lu.	An umbilical hernia is caused by various factors: fissures of the skin over the belly, or a prolapse of the intestine or bowel through other ruptures; blood flowing from a vein or artery as mentioned earlier; or constricted flatulence in it.
Mays si es per fissura del ciphac e per yssiment de la tela, lahoras la color del apostema es semblant a la color del cors; e es leon ses dolor, e aprop appar de divers situament.	But if it is due to a skin fissure and prolapse of the intestine, then the color of the abscess will resemble that of the body; there will be no pain, and it will appear in various positions.
E si es per egressio del budel, lahoras le situament de aquel am lu de aquo que havem recontat, de mays vehement diversitat, e cum tu premes aquel am les tieus ditz es occultat, e aprop retorna; e fort leu es am lu so, e es magnificat mot deves le introt de banh e vehement trebalh.	But if it is due to prolapse of the bowel, then its position will be as we have described earlier with great variation. When you press it with your fingers, it will disappear and then return; there will be a loud noise, and it will become greatly enlarged during bathing and vigorous exercise.
Mays si per humiditat, lahoras es leon e no es occultat quan premes am la tua ma, ni es constrengut, ni es cregut.	But if it is due to moisture, then there will be no noise and it will not disappear or become hidden when you press it with your hand; nor will it be constricted or enlarged.
E si es per sanc, lahoras am aquestz senhals apareys le apostema a negror declinant.	If it is due to blood, then appear these signs: the abscess turns black.
Mays si es per carn nada, lahoras es apostema greu, gros e dur, e es ficat segon una quantitat.	However, if it is due to flesh without blood, then it becomes a hard, large and tough abscess, which grows in size.
Mays si es per ventositat, lahoras le tocament de lu es leon.	But if it's due to windiness, then its touch is light.
E la operacio en lu es que consideras lahoras si la eminencia de l’umbilic es per sanc de arceria, o de vena, o per ventositat; lahoras cove que sias prohibit de la curacio de lu, quar en aquela es temor e paor ayssi cum t’e ensenhat en le capitol en le qual he dit les apostemas per arceria e per vena.	And the operation in this case is to consider whether the prominence of the navel is due to arterial blood, venous blood, or windiness; therefore you should be prohibited from treating it, because there is fear and awe as I have taught you in the chapter where I spoke about arterial and venous abscesses.
E si la eminencia del umbilic es per le budel o per la tela, lahoras cove que comandes al malaute que tengua le ale sieu, e sia stant extendut; e aprop senha am tenta en le circuit de tot le umbilic, e aprop comanda a lu que stia envers entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos, e aprop circunda am spatum lat en le circuit del umbilic sobre le loc le qual has senhat am la tenta; e aprop exten la maytat del apostema a las partidas desus am unci gran; e aprop lia en le circuit am fiel fort o am ceda e la manieyra del liar decent.	And if the prominence of the navel is due to bowel or tissue, then you should command the patient to keep their elbows by their sides and stand extended. Then, sign with a tent around the entire navel, and then command them to lean back between your thighs but above your two knees, and then encircle around the navel with a wide spatula on the area where you have indicated with the tent. Then extend the mass of the abscess upwards with a large unguent; and finally, ligature around it with strong flax or cotton, using an appropriate tying manner.
E aprop huebre le mieg del apostema extendut sobre le liament e intromet le dit tieu en aquel indic e quereys le budel; e si tu l’as atrobat ni guardat per le liament, lahoras tu extratz alxorati e impelleys le budel a las partidas dedintz del ventre.	And then carefully press the middle of the extended abscess towards the cord and insert your finger into that opening, seeking the bowel. And if you have found it and grasped it with the cord, then gently pull it outwards and push it back inside the abdomen.
E si has atrobada la tela, lahoras pren aquel am unci; e inscideys las superfluitatz de lu.	"And if you've exposed the tissue, then take that with oil; and incise its excesses."
Mays si es contraria a tu arceria o vena, lahoras circunda aquel mot, e aprop retorna a la tua operacio; e pren dos agulhas e met en aquelas dos fiels fortz e entromet dos agulhas en le circuit le qual has feyt entorn le apostema en manieyra de crotz, las quals fassas penetrar; e aprop strenh le apostema en quatre partidas sobre las agulhas.	"But if it's opposed to your artery or vein, then encircle that spot and return to your operation; take two needles and place them in those strong threads, inserting the needles into the circle you've made around the abscess in a cross-like manner, penetrate them; and then stretch the abscess in four directions over the needles."
E si tu vols, osta las agulhas e leyssa le loc entro que poyresca la carn extenduda e caia per si; o inscideys aquel quan es subtiliat e se poyreys, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	"And if you wish, remove the needles and let the wound close up on its own; or cut it open once it has healed and become subtle, then dress it with oil as necessary until it is fully healed."
E si la eminencia del ombilic es de carn nada en lu o per humiditat, lahoras cove que tu conquaves le apostema ayssi cum havem dit e estraguas le sanc o la humiditat, la qual atrobas en lu, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove e que consolide le loc.	"And if the prominence of the navel is made of raw flesh or due to dampness, then you must remove the abscess as we have said and drain out the blood or dampness that you find there, and then dress it with oil until it is consolidated."
Capitol .liii.	Chapter LIII
De curacio de cranc.	Of the treatment of cancer.
Ja havem dit, en la divisio, de specia de cranc e en qual manieyra es via a la curacio de lu am medicinas, e que es squivador en lu la curacio am ferr per so que no sia ulcerat; e havem dit cranc engendrat en la mayra e cautela de la curacio de lu.	We have already spoken in the division of kinds of cancer and how it can be treated with medicines, and that surgery with iron is avoided because it could cause an ulcer; we have also said that cancer generated in the larger vein or artery is difficult to cure.
E diyssero les antics que alcunas veguadas cranc es en loc on es possibla la eradicacio de lu, ayssi cum de cran le qual es en las mamillas o en la coyssa e a lor semblantz dels membres allocat a estrayre tot aquel, e majorment quan es comensant petit.	And the ancient authorities said that sometimes cancer can be found in places where its removal is possible, such as cancer of the breast or scrotum and similar locations on the limbs, especially when it begins small.
Mays quan es antiquat e es gra, no cove que te propries a lu, quar yeu non pogui sanar de aquel alcu ni no he vist autre, ni que sia pervengut ad aquo.	But when cancer is advanced and deep-seated, it is not advisable to approach it, because I have never seen anyone healed of that kind nor heard of another case.
E la operacio en lu es quan es allocat ayssi cum havem dit, es que tu precedescas e laysses le malaute e purgues de colera negra alcunas veguadas, e aprop sagna aquel, si es atrobada replecio manifesta.	And the operation for this kind of cancer is as follows: first excise the malignant tissue and purge with black collyrium several times, then cauterize it if there is a manifest tumor.
E aprop prepara le malaute am preparacio en le qual sia locat am operacio, e aprop prohiceys en le trauc uncis les quals cove ad aquel; e aprop concava de tota part am la codena sego bona perexcrutacio entro que no romangua alcuna causa de las razitz de lu.	And then prepare the patient for surgery in that location, and afterwards sew up the wound with stitches as necessary. Also cut out everything around it with a good excision so that there is no remaining cause of recurrence.
E layssa correr le sanc, e no abscidas aquel leugierament, e exprem les locs, e abstergeys le sanc gros tot am la tua ma o am instrument am le qual es a tu possible dels instruments.	And let the blood flow out, and do not bind it lightly, squeeze the parts, and wipe away all thick blood with your hand or an instrument that is available to you among the instruments.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat de sanc gros inscizio de vena o de arceria, lahoras cauterisa aquela entro que·l flux del sanc sia cessat, e aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	But if you encounter a lot of thick blood during the incision of a vein or artery, then cauterize it immediately until the flow of blood stops, and then treat it with the other treatment until it is healed.
Capitol .liv.	Chapter LIV
De curacio de ydropici.	Of the treatment of dropsy.
Nos ja havem recomtat, en la divisio, de las specias de ydropici de l’aygua, e les senhals de quascuna especia, de la curacio de lu am medicinas.	We have already discussed in the division the kinds of dropsy and their symptoms, as well as how to treat it with medicines.
E aquela la qual es curada am ferr no es sino la specia de althitas sola, e no es aproximat am ferr a la specia de timpanistres ni a la especia de yposarcha, quar aquo es mortal.	And that which is treated by surgery is only the condition of ascites alone, and it should not be approached surgically in cases of tympanites or hydrothorax because these are fatal.
E quan tu ja has medicat aquesta especia de ydropici timpanistre am medicinas e no comfereys la tua medicacio, lahoras considera, quar si al malaute ja es conseguida debelitat, o es am aquel autra malautia otra ydropici, ayssi cum si es en lu tos o cos de ventre e semblant ad aquels, lahoras guarda te que no le mediques am ferr, quar temor es sobre aquo.	And when you have treated tympanites with medicines but do not see any improvement, then consider whether the patient has become weak from another illness or has another kind of dropsy, such as in cases of coughing or abdominal pain, and do not treat it surgically because there is great danger involved.
Mays si tu vezes le malaute de vertut exuberant, e am lu no es autra malautia sino ydropici tant solament, e no enfant ni vielh, lahoras la manieyra de la operacio de lu es que tu eleves le malaute entre las tuas mas, e le ministre aprop lu exprema le ventre de lu am la sua ma, enpellen la aygua a la partida dejos del pentenilh, e aprop pren spatum spinos segon aquesta forma:	But if the patient is strong and healthy, and the only illness present is tympanites alone, not in infancy or old age, then the method of surgery for it is as follows: raise the patient between your hands, and have an assistant press the abdomen with their hand below the ribs on the left side, expelling the water through the opening in the peritoneum, and then take a spine-covered spatula in this manner:
sia de dos partz agudas lonc, de aguda extremitat ayssi cum spatum; mays empero sia en lu alcuna brevitat petit a petit, per so que en la operacio am aquel no passes entro al budel, e que ledas aquel.	"Let it be of double-edged sharpness, long at its pointed end like a spade; yet let it have some slight shortening here and there, so that in the operation with it one does not enter too deeply into the intestine."
E aprop considera si la generacio de ydropici es de part dels budels, quar lahoras cove que tu am la seccio te alonhes del ombelic per la quantitat de tres ditz a las partidas dejos, en le dreyt de lu sobre le pentenilh.	"And consider whether the generation of dropsy comes from the bowels, because now you should extend the section through the navel for about three fingerbreadths on the right side over the bladder."
Mays si la generacio de hydropici es per malautia del fietge, lahoras la tua seccio sia sinistra del ombilic per tres ditz.	"But if the generation of dropsy is due to illness of the liver, then your section should be on the left side of the navel for three fingerbreadths."
E si la generacio de lu es per la melsa, lahoras la tua seccio sia en le las dreyt.	"And if the generation of it is because of the womb, then your section should be on the right side."
E no cove que la tua seccio sia sobre le costat sobre le qual vol jaser le malaute per que no corron las superfluitatz ad aquel loc freul.	"And do not let your section be over the side where you want to make the opening, lest the superfluities run to that place."
E aprop perfora am le instrument tota la codena, e aprop entromet en aquela seccio, e eleva la tua ma am le spatum entre la codena e·l siphac, e tu excorja aquel; e si’ la quantitat de una ungla o enviro.	"And then carefully perforate the entire cord with the instrument and enter that section, elevating your hand with the spade between the cord and the bladder, and you shall cut through it; if the amount is like a fingernail or less."
E aprop perforo le ciphac entro que pervengua le spatum al loc vuoyt, e es loc de l’aygua.	"And then carefully perforate the bladder so that the spade reaches the desired place, which is the location of the water."
E aprop extratz aquel e entromet un instrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	"And then extract it and insert an instrument whose shape is as follows:"
e es semblant a canula de argent subtil; es fayt de argent o de eram o de lato leon, al qual en la partida pus bassa de lu es un petit trauc, e en les costatz de lu so tres traucs: dos de una partida e un del autra partida; e fayta es la extremitat de lu insciza segon la manieyra de pluma, ayssi cum vezes:	"And it is like a thin silver cannula; it is made of silver or iron or laton lion, at the lower end of which there is a small hole, and on its sides there are three holes: two on one side and one on the other side; and its tip is cut obliquely in the manner of a feather, like this:"
E en la extramitat de lu pus sobirana es armilla, quar quan le instrument perve al aygua, lahoras aquela tantost deysen sobre le instrument, donc evacua de l’aygua en la ora miega quantitat, quar si tu evacuas de aquela mes que no cove en la hora, fort leu mor le malaute per resolucio del sieu spirit animal, o accideys a lu cincopi que es appropinquada la mort.	"And at the upper end of it there is an armilla, for when the instrument reaches the water, then immediately let that fall onto the instrument, so that you evacuate from it as much water in half an hour as is necessary, for if you evacuate more than is necessary in that hour, it causes sudden death due to resolution of its animal spirit, or five days before death approaches."
Mays evacua de aquela segon la quantitat de la vertut de lu e segon que significan a tu las disposicios del malaute de la vertut del pols de lu e de la bontat de lu.	"But evacuate from it according to the quantity of its virtue, and according to what you understand about the conditions of the illness and the strength of the pulse and its goodness."
E aprop extrats le instrument, e rete l’aygua la qual causa es quar tantost es retenguda per la codena la qual rete le trauc que es sobre le ciphac del qual e recomtat a tu que perfores aquel segon aquela manieyra.	"And then extract the instrument and retain the water that is held by the cord which retains the hole that you have made on the bladder according to what I have taught you."
E aprop itera le instrument al autra dia si vezes le malaute tollerant aquo, e extratz de la aygua petita quantitat, e fay aquo per alcus jorns sobre temor, e guarda te de error entro que no romangua de l’aygua sino pauc.	"And then repeat the procedure on another day if the illness is tolerating it, and extract a small quantity of water each time, doing so for several days with caution, and make sure that not too much water remains."
Mays si tu temes sobre le malaute, e leyssas de l’aygua gran quantitat, lahoras cura aquel am sepultura en arena cauda, e mota suzor en banh, e al solelh espere per lonc temps; e cura aquel am medicinas dessicativas entro que sia sanat.	"But if you fear for the illness and allow too much water to escape, then cure it with a burial in hot ashes, and apply a lot of dry suet in a bath, and expose it to the sun for a long time; and cure it with drying medications until it is healed."
E cauteriza sobre le stomac, e la melsa e·l fitge aprop la extraccio de l’aygua, segon que yeu he recontat en aquo que es precedit.	"And cauterize the stomach and the mesentery around the location of water extraction, according to what I have previously described."
Capitol .lv.	Chapter LIV
De la curacio dels enfants les quals so natz les locs de la urina no-perforatz.	"Concerning the cure for children born with unperforated openings of urine."
Alcunas veguadas alcun dels enfantz es eyssi del ventre de la sua mayre e·l cap de la sua mixtio no es perforat (o es trauc streyt o no es en son loc).	Sometimes, some children are born from their mother's womb with the head of their mixture not pierced (or too tight or not in its place).
Donc cove coytar am perforacio de lu tantost que es nascut am spatum mot subtil segon aquesta forma:	Therefore, carefully cut into it immediately after birth with a sharp knife according to this form:
E aprop pausa en le trauc un clavil subtil de plom e ligua aquel, e te per tres jorns o per .iiii.tre.	And then pause in the tight spot with a thin lead awl and tie it up, and leave it for three days or four.
E quant vol urinar sia remaugut e hurine; e aprop retorne aquel.	And when they want to urinate, move them away and let them relieve themselves; then return that one (to its position).
E si tu no pauses le plom, ja es possible que la urina la qual va sobre le loc, no leysa aquest claure.	And if you do not use lead, it is possible that the urine which falls on this place will not close it.
Mays aquel del qual le trauc es streyt sia medicat am clavil de Plom, ayssi cum havem dit, per trops dias entro que sia amplificat.	But that one whose opening is too tight should be treated with lead awl as we have said for several days until it becomes wider.
Mays aquels en les quals es le trauc no en son loc, so leditz, la qual causa es quar de aquels, aquel que es nat e·l trau es deves la fi del cap de la vergua per que no pot urinar a las partidas dedintz, entro que eleva la vergua am la sua ma a las partidas desus; e no es a lu generacio, per so quar le sperma no pot pervenir a la mayre segon rectitut, e es malautia mot laga.	But those in which the opening is not in its proper place should be led away, because some of them are born with the head of the penis at the end for which they cannot urinate except by lifting the penis with their hand above; and this is not due to their generation, because the sperm cannot reach the mother according to nature, and it is a serious illness.
E la manieyra de la operacio en lu es que·l malaute sia envessat sobre le sieu dos, e aprop exten le cap de la vergua de lu am la tua ma sinistra am vehement extraccio, e inscideys le cap del cap de la vergua del loc del perpucii am spatum agut, ayssi cum es inscizio de pluma, o que tu ne razas alcuna partida, per so que·l mieg de lu vengua semblant al cap de la vergua e que le trauc caia en le mieg loc segon que cove.	And the manner of operation in this case is that the sick one should be placed on his back, and then extend the head of the penis with your left hand with great force, and cut off the tip of the glans penis at the opening of the urethra with a sharp knife, as if cutting through paper, taking care not to cut any other part, so that the middle of the penis resembles the head of the penis and the opening falls into its proper place according to what is appropriate.
E guarda te que en la tua operacio de flux de sanc, quar motas vetz accideys aquo; e pausa te a lu am aquo que abscindeys le sanc, e cura la plagua entro que si’ sanada.	And beware in your operation of a flow of blood, because many times this happens; and stop the bleeding with whatever you cut off the blood, and cure the wound until it is healed.
Capitol .lvi.	Chapter LVI
De albater le qual accideys en le prepucii en le cap de la vergua e de corropcio e negror e adherencia del prepucii del cap de la vergua.	Of whiteness which occurs in the foreskin on the head of the penis, and of roughness, blackness, and adherence of the foreskin to the head of the penis.
Motas veguadas accideys aquest albater en la vergua e es eminencia de carn laga.	This whiteness often occurs on the penis and is a raised flesh growth.
E de aquela una es maligna e autra es no-maligna.	And among them one is malignant and another is not malignant.
No-maligna, cove que suspendas am unci subtil e abscindas aquela entro que aquela mondes tota; e aprop pausa sobre aquela coto submirgit en enguent egipciac; e aprop aquel, cura le am enguent diafinicon entro que sia sanat.	Then take a subtle hook and suspense it carefully, cutting the diseased part completely. Immediately afterwards, apply pressure on that area with your fingers in the Egyptian manner. Then cure the wound with clean linen until healed.
E si albater es maligna, de lega color, lahoras cove que tu aministres cauteri aprop la inscizio de lu e la razio de lu.	And if it is malignant and of a black color, then you must apply cauterization immediately to the incision and its root.
Mays si albater es en le prepuci del cap de la vergua no-circumcis, e la una partida de albater es dedintz le prepucii e l’autra partida es defora, lahoras cove que tu ostes albater le qual es dedintz al comensament entro que es consolidat; e lahora tu cura aquel deforo, quar quan tu curas aquel ensemps le prepuci, no es asegurat que no sia trinquat.	But if the swelling is on the foreskin of an uncircumcised penis and one part of the swelling is inside the foreskin and another part is outside, then you must remove the swelling that is inside at the beginning so that it becomes consolidated. Afterwards, cure that which is outside, for when you cure it together with the foreskin, it may become inflamed again.
E ja eysamen accideys en les genetius e en le prepuci negror e corruccio, adonc cove que tu conquavas tot aquo que ja es denigrat e que ja se vol corrompre o que ja es corrumput; e aprop lineys sobre aquel aprop aquo am mel, le qual es contusit am farina de scorsa de milgrana e de errs trissatz e crivellatz.	And if such a condition occurs in the groin or foreskin with blackness and corruption, then you must cut away all that is already discolored and about to become corrupt or already corrupted. Then apply linseed over it mixed with honey, which has been ground together with fine flour of millet, three parts sifted and sieved.
E aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sana.	And afterwards treat it with the other remedies until it is completely healed.
Mays si endeve flux de sanc, lahoras aministra cauteri lunar segon aquesta forma:	But if there is a flow of blood, then perform a lunar causterization in this way:
quar cauteri juvatiu es a dos disposicios ensemps, so es a flux de sanc e a la plagua quan es corrumpuda.	"When cautery is beneficial for two conditions together, it is helpful for bleeding and plague when corrupted."
E si le cap de la vergua es corrodut e es destruit tot en la hora, lahoras cove que tu intrometas en lo meat del prepucii una canula de plom per so que le malaute urina per aquela.	"If the tip of the glans is corrupted and destroyed all at once, then you should insert a lead cannula into the flesh of the foreskin so that the patient may urinate through it."
En la adherencia del prepucii am le cap de la vergua (et aquesta adherencia no accideys sino en aquel del qual le prepucii es sa, e sobre lu no es exhigida circumcizio; e quan accideys adherencia per plagua o per apostema) cove que excorjas am spatum obtus entro que sia dissolvut le liament e sia deliurat le cap de la vergua de tota partida.	"In the adhesion of the foreskin to the glans (and this adhesion does not happen except in that which has a redundant foreskin, and over it circumcision is not required; and when adhesion occurs due to plague or aposteme) you should excise with a blunt spatula until the bond is dissolved and the glans of the penis is freed from all adhesion."
E si es dificil desirnir aquelas exquisidament, lahoras cove que tu excorjes am spatum alcuna causa del cap de la vergua e del prepucii, e aysso es quar le prepucii, quan es subtil, fort leu es perforat per la sua subtilitat leugierament.	"And if it is difficult to distinguish them carefully, then you should excise with a spatula some cause of the glans and foreskin, for the foreskin, when thin, can easily be pierced by its thinness."
E aprop separa entre·l prepucii e·l cap de la vergua am dra7 de li subtil, le qual ja es mulhat en l’aygua frega per que no adherescan autra veguada.	"And afterwards separate between the foreskin and the glans with a thin thread of silk, which has already been moistened in warm water so that they do not adhere again."
E aprop sia curat am vi stiptic entro que sia consolidat.	"And afterwards it should be treated with astringent wine until it is consolidated."
Capitol .lvii.	"Chapter 57."
De mundificacio dels enfants e de la curacio de aquo que accideys ad aquels de circumcisio.	"The purification of children and the treatment for what happens to them after circumcision."
Circumcisio no es solucio de continuitat ayssi cum las autras plaguas: mays empero cum sia de la nostra operacio e de nostra voluntat, e lus de aquela sia propriament en les enfants, es necessari que asignem en aquela milhor operacio e via pus leugiera perdusent a salut.	Circumcision is not a continuous solution like other diseases; however, since it is an operation that we perform willingly and on children specifically, it is necessary to assign the best method and easiest path for them to recover their health as quickly as possible.
Donc dic que les antics no diyssero circumcisio en alcu dels lors libres, quar no n’usan en las suas leys, e no es sino quar havem aquisit per speriment, la qual causa es que yeu he atrobat la major partida dels artifexs e dels barbies usar circumcisir e mundificacio am novacula e am torores; e usan de liament am fiel e de inscizio am la ungla.	Therefore it is said that the ancients did not mention circumcision in all of their books because they did not use it in their laws. And this is because, from our experience, we have found that most artisans and barbers use circumcision and purification with a scalpel and clamps; and they use lime and incision with the nail.
E yeu ja he prohadas totas aquestas manieras e no atrobegui milhor mondificacio am forfexs, am liament am fiel que en mondificacio cum la ungla, quar motas vetz efugeys la codena pus desus, quar la codena del prepucii a dos tunicas, e roman la tonica pus dejos, e fort leu es forsat ad autra inscizio e dolor sicura.	And I have already tried all these methods and found that purification with forceps, lime, and nail is not better than purification with the nail alone. For many times it escapes the foreskin above because the foreskin has two tunics, and one remains on the outside, making another incision necessary and causing more pain.
E am mundificacio le qual es fayta per alphecati, e es digital, del qual usan les sabatiers, no es segurada la inscizio de la extremitat del membre viril, quar fort leu intra en le trau de lu.	And in the purification that is done with tweezers, which are used by barbers, it is not ensured that the incision at the end of the male member will be precise because they often go inside the foreskin.
Mays en la operacio am ungla, fort leu obazeys ferr e corromp la tua operacio.	But with the operation using a nail, you may slip and damage your work.
E la codena del enfant es breu per natura, e motas veguadas nays en tal manieyra que no ha necessitat de mondificacio, e yeu he vist aquel.	And the foreskin of an infant is short by nature, and often it can be performed in such a manner that there is no need for purification. And I have seen this myself.
Mays de la mondificacio que·s fa am forfexs e liamentz am fiel, la bontat, experiment descrobic a mi, quar las forfexs so de proporcional inscizio, per aquo quar la acuitat que es desus es ayssi cum la acuitat que es dejos; e donc cum tu premes la tua ma so proporcionadas dos acuitatz, e inscideysso segon una comperacio en un temps; e es fayta compressio del fiel am figura contenent la codena de la vergua de tota partida, am le qual no catz error de tot.	But regarding purification that is done with forceps and lime with salt, its advantage has been clearly demonstrated to me because the forceps are of proportional incision. That is to say, the sharpness above is equal to the sharpness below; and therefore, when you press your hand so proportionately between two sharp points, you cut in accordance with one comparison at once; and there is compression of the salt in a figure containing the foreskin of the entire part, with which there can be no error whatsoever.
E la manieyra de la operacio primeyra es que tu fassas estar le enfant majorment si es de aquels que entendo un petit, que no fassas sino que tu lies le fiel en la sua vergua tant solament, e que leysses aquel entro al autra dia.	And the first manner of operation is that you should hold the child more firmly if it is one of those who understands a little, so that you do not merely place the salt on its foreskin but allow it to remain there for another day.
E aprop fay aquel alegrar en tota aquela manieyra que es a tu possibla de aquo que recep la sua intelligencia.	And then have him rejoice in every possible manner that he understands.
E aprop fa aquel estar entre las tuas mas estatuir preparadament, e no sia ges cezent; e occulta las forfexs en la tua ma o dejos le tieu pe, que l’enfant no veia aquelas ni degun autre dels instruments.	And then have him sit between your knees in a well-prepared state and not afraid. Hide the forceps in your hand or behind your ear so that the child does not see them nor anyone else any of the instruments.
E aprop entremet la tua ma a la vergua de lu e suffla en la codena, e tira aquela entro que sia eyssit le cap de la vergua, e aprop mondifica aquel de aquo que es agregat en ela de sordicia.	And then place your hand on his foreskin and blow into the foreskin, draw it back until the head of the foreskin appears, and then purify that which has gathered there of dirt.
E aprop lia le loc signat am fiel dobla, e aprop ligua pus bas de aquel un petit le segon liament, e aprop te am le dit pous e endic tieu le loc del liament dejos am bona retencio, e inscideys entre dos liaments.	And then place a folded cloth marked with salt on the spot and tie it with another small linen below that. Then take your thumb and index finger of the other hand and press the spot of the linen underneath with good retention, and cut between two linens.
E aprop eleva la codena sus leugierament e estratz le cap de la vergua; e aprop leyssa le sanc corre petit e petit, quar es milhor ; e pausa polvera desus e sobre la polvera pausa drap en le qual es spandut mugol de huou coyt en ayguaros concosit am oli rozat recent bo; e layssa aquel sobre aquel entro al autra dia; e cura aquel am curacio entro que sia sanat.	And then raise the foreskin gently and remove the head of the foreskin. Then allow the blood to flow little by little, as it is better; place powder on top and over the powder place a cloth in which has been spread soft white wax melted with fresh sweet oil; leave that on overnight; and treat him with treatment until he is healed.
La forma de las forfexs a mondificacio, aquesta es la forma:	The shape of the forceps used for purification is as follows:
Sian las unas extramitatz no-talhantz e las autras sian talhant, que non sia yssit le ram del clau, e sia la longitut de las doas acuitatz ayssi cum la longitut de dos manubres engualment.	The outer edge of the forceps should not be cut and the inner edge should be cut so that the root of the claw does not appear. The length of the two points should be equal to the length of two flattened handles.
Mays la error en mundificacio es quar fort leu efugeys la codena intrinseca tota, o partida de lu deves la inscizio.	But the error in purification is when you pull too hard and remove the entire inner foreskin or cut it off during the incision.
Donc cove que tu extendas aquela de la tua hora am la tua ungla denant la apostemacio del loc e que inscidas aquela segon equalitat.	Therefore, you must extend that with your nail before the swelling of the spot and cut it evenly.
E si no la podes tenir am la tua ungla, lahoras extratz aquela am unci e inscideys aquela.	And if you cannot hold it with your nail, then pull it out with tweezers and cut it.
Mays si son passatz tres dias, e roman aquo que es imflat dejos la vergua apostemat, lahoras tu leyssa aquo entro que sia cedat le apostema caut, e excorja aquel am fecilitat, e inscidex aquel segon que a tu es preparat.	But if three days have passed and there is still swelling behind the foreskin, then leave it until the swelling has subsided and carefully cut away the dead skin, and cut it according to your preparation.
E guarda te del cap de la vergua, quar no nosera a lu aquo.	And be careful with the head of the foreskin, for do not cut off anything from it.
E donc cura aquel am aquo que la plagua consolida de las polveras las quals havem recomtadas en le tractat de las polveras.	And then treat him with what will consolidate the wound using the powders that have been recommended in the treatise on powders.
E si es inscidit de la codena sobre mesura, e obezeys a las partidas desus, aquo no notz a lu.	And if it has been cut correctly, obeying the divisions above, there will be nothing left behind.
E mays cura aquel am aquo que havem dit entro que sia sanat.	"Moreover, care should be taken with this condition as we have said within for it to be healed."
Capitol .lviii.	Capitolul .lviii
De curacio de urina retenguda en la vesiqua.	"Regarding the treatment of urine retention in the bladder."
Retencio de urina en la vesica es fayta per oppulacio fayta per peyra o per sanc congilat, o per poyre o per carnada, e semblantz ad aquels de aquo que havem dit de las manieyras de curacio en la divisio.	Retention of urine in the bladder occurs due to obstruction caused by a stone or concretion, or by poverty or paralysis, and is similar to those conditions that we have mentioned regarding the methods of treatment in this division."
E si no es dissolvuda la urina, e veses retencio de lu esser per peyra le qual ja es en le col de la vesica, lahoras cove que le malaute sia encorbat sobre les sieus denolhs.	"And if the urine is not dissolved and the retention of it occurs due to a stone that is already in the neck of the bladder, then the patient should be bent over on their elbows."
E aprop conponeys les pes de aquel sobre le sieu dos e extendas le sieu ventre de la partida pus desus del sieu dos, e le malaute estrengua le sieu ale tant quant es a lu possible.	"And then place weights on top of the patient's buttocks and extend their belly upwards from where it joins with their back, and the patient should strain as much as they are able."
Donc lahoras le col de la vesica es costreyt ha espulsio de la peyra a las partidas detras, per que la urina es absolta.	Therefore, at that time the neck of the bladder is constricted and expels the stone to the parts behind, allowing urine to be released."
E si no es dissolvuda am aquo que havem dit he vehement es fayta la causa sobre le malaute, lahoras cove que aministres extraccio de lu am instrument le qual es apelat siringua, del qual aquesta es la forma: Sia de argent e sia subtil leon conquau, ayssi cum canula de pena de ausel am subtilitat de ray lonc en similitut d’un palm e mig, al qual sia cana subtil en le cap de lu.	"And if it is not dissolved by that which we have said, then the cause of the illness is severe. In this case, extraction must be performed using an instrument called a siringue (syringe), which has the following form: It should be made of silver and well polished, similar to a feather quill with a subtlety like half a palm in length, at whose head there is a subtle canal."
E la manieyra del eyssiment de la urina per aquel es que prenguas le fiel doblat e lies en la extramitat de lu lana o coto per bona liadura; e entrometas las extramitatz del fiel en la partida dejos de la ciringua, e inscideys am las forfexs si superflueys alcuna causa de la lana, mays intromet la en la canula am vehemencia E aprop enongeys la ciringua am boder e am album de huou.	"And the method of extracting urine with this is: Take the doubled thread and tie it at the end of the wick or cotton for a good knot; then insert the ends of the thread into the opening of the syringe, and if there are any superfluous causes of wool, cut them off with scissors. Then insert the wool into the canal with force. And then press the syringe with a border and albumen of an egg."
E fay cezer le malaute sobre la selha, e embroca la vesiqua de lu e la vergua am olis umitz, e oli de oliva e ayguaros.	"And make the patient sit on a chair, and grasp their scrotum with olive oil and water."
E aprop entromet la ciringua am facilitat entro que pervengua a la razit de la vergua; e aprop dobla la vergua desus a la partida del embelic; e aprop empelleys la ciringua dintz aquela; e aprop empelleys aquela entro que pervengua a la vesica, e aquela centa le malaute esser pervenguda a la causa vuoda, e no es fayt asso segon aquest orde, sino le meat en le qual va a tortuositat.	"And then insert the syringe gently until it reaches the root of the scrotum; and then fold the scrotum upwards at the navel area; and then push the syringe inside that; and then push it further until it reaches the bladder. And when the patient feels that it has reached the empty cause, do not follow this order but place the instrument in the meatus which goes to the tortuousness."
E aprop exten le fiel am la lana petit a petit, quar la urina siec la lana.	"And then gradually pull out the thread with the wool, because urine sticks to the wool."
Aprop extratz aquela e fay per curacio urina, e usa ciringua, no cesses fer aquo e usa ciringua entro que sia evacuada la vesica e le malaute atrobe alleviacio.	"And then remove that and perform a curettage of urine, using the syringe until the bladder is emptied and the patient feels relief from the ailment."
Capitol .lix.	Chapter 59
De qualitat de clisterizacio de la vezica am clampcedra e am semblantz instrumentz les quals sian acordants ad aquo.	Of the quality of irrigation of the bladder with a catheter and similar instruments which are suitable for that purpose.
Quan accideys en la vesica ulceracio o apostema, o sanc congilat en aquela, o es coartat poyredura, e vols en aquela destillar ayguas e medicinas, lahoras sia fayt am instrument le qual es apelat clampcedra, e aquesta es la forma de lu:	When an ulceration or an abscess occurs in the bladder, or blood coagulates therein, or it is obstructed by a stone, and one wishes to drip water and medicines into it, then this should be done with an instrument called a catheter, which has the following form:
sino que en la extramitat de lu es sorda, so es clausa.	but its end is blunt, so it is closed.
Et en aquela so tres traucs: dos de la una partida , ayssi quo vezes.	And in that there are three holes: two on one side, and thus arranged.
En le comensament es loc concau, en le qual es aquo que es enpellit, e sia segon quantitat que oppile aquel, ses addicio, entro que quan alcuna causa es ab aquel tirada de las humiditatz, sia atirada, e quan es expellida, am aquo sia atirada, e quan es expellit lonc, segon que fa clampcedra am la qual es phicat naphta en las batalhas de mar.	"At the beginning is a place hollowed out, wherein this thing lies that is called by such a name, and its quantity may vary without addition, until when some cause draws moisture from it, let it be drawn thus, and when it is expelled, with it should also be drawn, just as pitch in battle is smeared with lampblack on ships."
Donc cum tu vols prohicir humiditatz en la vesica, entromet la extremitat de clapcedra en la humiditat, e atira am aquel aquo que es empellit a las partidas desus, quar la humiditat es atirada en la conquavitat de clapcedra.	"Therefore when you wish to prohibit moisture in the bladder, insert the tip of the lampblack into the moisture and draw with it that which is expelled upwards, because the moisture is drawn into the hollow of the lampblack."
E aprop entromet la extramitat de clapcedra en la vergua segon que havem recomtat en la ciringua; e aprop empelleys la humiditat am aquo que empelleys, quar aquela humiditat perve a la vesica tantost, e le malaute cent aquela.	"Indeed insert the tip of the lampblack into the penis as we have recommended in the circle; and likewise expel the moisture with that which you expel, because that moisture immediately reaches the bladder, and the illness is due to that."
Forma del cristeri subtil am le qual la vesica es cristerizada, e es aquela la forma:	"Form of the subtle crucible with which the bladder is crucified, and this is its form:"
E sia fayta de argent o de lato, de la qual le cap pus aut sia semblant a petita pluma, e dejos lu cana dedintz liament.	"And let it be made of silver or lead, from which the head has been removed so that it resembles a small feather, and the rest of the cannula may remain hollow inside."
E aprop pren vesica de moto, e pausa en aquela la humiditat que vols cristirizar en la vesica, e aprop lia aquela entre dos am fort liguatura am fiel doble, e escalfa aquela humiditat sobre le foc.	Approximately translates to: "Next, take a bladder from an animal, place the moisture you wish to crystallize in the bladder, then tie it tightly between two strong threads with doubled knot. Warm this moisture over the fire."
E aprop entromet la extremitat del cristeri en la vergua.	Approximately translates to: "Next, insert the tip of the crystal into the bellows."
E aprop estrenh la tua ma sobre la vesica am la humiditat am strectura descent entro que·l malaute centa que aquela humiditat ja es pervenguda a la vesica.	Approximately translates to: "Next, press your hand on the bladder containing the stretched-out moisture until you feel that that moisture has reached the bladder."
Mays si a tu no es present vesica, lahoras tu pren una pessa de parguames e fay de aquel cercle; e perfora aquel de tota la sua retonditat; e aprop entromet fiel fort en aquels traucs, ayssi quo so revolgut; e aprop agregua le cercle ayssi quo es agreguat alsofatur, pus que tu pausas en aquel aquo que tu vols de las humiditatz, e olis e ayguas.	Approximately translates to: "But if you do not have a bladder, then take a piece of parchment and make it into a circle; pierce that circle throughout its entire roundness; next insert a strong thread through those holes, so that it may turn; then attach the circle as is usually done; afterward you will pause in that which you wish of the moistures, oils and waters."
E aprop tu lia aquel en le instrument e fay am aquel ayssi cum has fayt am la vesica, e exprescio am la tua ma entro que la humiditat pervengua a la vesica.	Approximately translates to: "And next you will place that in the instrument and do it as you did with the bladder, expressing with your hand until the moisture reaches the bladder."
Capitol .lx.	Capítulo .lx.
De extraccio de peyra.	De Extracción de Piedra.
Nos ja havem dit en la divisio las specias de peyra e curacio de lu am medicinas, e la diferencia entre peyra engendrada en los ronhos e peyra engendrada en la vesica, e les senhals de aquela.	"We have already spoken in the division about the kinds of stone and their cure with medicines, and the difference between stones generated in the kidneys and those generated in the bladder, and their signs."
E havem dit la peyra en la qual catz operacio am ma, e seccio.	"And we have said that operation with knife and section is performed on this stone."
E la peyra engendrada en la vesica propriament es aquela que es ficada en la vesica.	"And the stone generated in the bladder itself is that which remains in the bladder."
E yeu so narrant aquel am exposicio manifesta e abreviacio.	"I will now explain this briefly and concisely."
Donc dic que peyra engendrada en la vesica majorment ve als enfantz; e dels senhals de lu es que la urina que es eyssida de la vesica es semblant a aygua en la sua subtilitat, e apar en aquela arena; e le malaute fregua la sua vergua, e motas veguadas pen, e aprop es dressada; e am aquo yeys foro le cul en motz de aquels.	"Therefore it is said that stone generated in the bladder mostly affects children; and its signs are that the urine which comes out of the bladder resembles water in its fineness, appears in that area; and the pain grips the penis, often happens at night, and especially when standing up; and with this there may be difficulty defecating."
E es laugiera la sanacio dels enfants de aquela entro que han conseguitz xiiii ans; e es dificil curacio en les viels.	"And it would be easier to cure children of that complaint who have not yet reached fourteen years, but difficult in old people."
Mays en les joves es migiera per aquo quar es entre aquels.	"But in young persons it is more suitable for this [treatment] because they are between those."
E de aquel del qual la peyra es major e la curacio es pus leugiera; E si es pauca, es contraria ad aquela.	"And of that one whose stone is large and its cure will be easier; but if it is small, it is contrary to that [treatment]."
Donc cum pervenem a la curacio de aquela, cove al comensament de aquela que mondifiquem le malaute am cristeri le qual extragua tota la fenda la qual es en les sieus budels; quar aquela fenda alcunas veguadas prohibeys la envencio de la peyra deves la inquisicio de lu.	"Therefore when we come to the cure of this [complaint], at the beginning of it we must relieve the pain with a poultice which draws out all the inflammation that is in its passages, because sometimes that passage prevents the expulsion of the stone during its search."
E aprop sia pres le malaute am les sieus pes e sia contosit e maugut enjos per so que la peyra descenda al preon de la vesica, o que saute de loc aut alcunas veguadas.	"And especially let the pain be taken with his feet and held down and moved in such a way that the stone descends to the neck of the bladder, or what is left over from it."
E aprop fay aquel cezer entre las tuas mas preparat, e las mas de lu sian dejos las coysas de lu, per so que la vesica tota sia fayta declinant a las partidas dejos.	"And also let that sitting be done between the thighs well prepared, and the most of it should be done with things of that kind, so that the whole bladder may be made to decline towards the parts below."
E aprop perquier aquela e tota aquela deforo.	"And again seek that [stone] and all of it defecated."
Donc si sentes la peyra en l’espazi, lahoras tu te coyta tantost am seccio sobre lu.	"Therefore if you feel the stone in its place, immediately lie down on your back with your legs raised up over it."
E si no catz de tot dejos le tieu tocament, lahoras cove que tu untes am oli le tieu dit indic de la ma sinistra, si malaute es enfant, o le dit miga si es jove complit, e entrometas aquel en le sieu cul.	"And if all of that does not come down from the said touch, then you must anoint your index finger of the left hand with oil, if the pain is a child's, or your middle finger if it is a youth's, and insert that into his anus."
E perquier de la peyra entro que stia dejos le tieu dit.	"And again seek the stone so that it may remain below your little finger."
E converteys aquela petit a petit entro al col de la vesica.	"And slowly turn that little by little until it enters into the neck of the bladder."
E aprop prem sobre aquel am lo tieu dit, e expelleys aquel a las partidas defora ves le loc del qual vos la seccio.	"And also press upon it with your finger and expel it outwards from its place where you cut."
E comanda al ministra que prema la vesica am la sua ma; e comanda a un autra ministra que am la sua ma dextra extenda les genetius a las partidas desus, e am la sua autra ma remaugua la codena la qual es dejos les genetius, en partida del loc en le qual se fa la seccio.	"And command the minister to press on the bladder with his hand; and command another minister with his right hand to stretch out the scrotum upwards, and with his other hand to pull downwards on the cord which is below the scrotum, in part of the place where the section is being made."
E aprop entromet espatum be inscident del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	"And also insert spatula as shown in this way:"
e scindeys en lu aquo que es entre·l cul e·ls genetius, no en le mieg loc, abantz al latz de la coyssa sinistra; e sia la seccio sobre aquela peyra e·l tieu dit sia en le cul, e sia fayta seccio transversa, per que la seccio defora sia ampla e dedintz streyta segon la quantitat que egrecio de la peyra sia a lu possibla, e no major, quar fort leu comprem le tieu dit le qual es en le cul la peyra deves la seccio, e es foro-getada ses defacultat.	"and cut into it with the knife that is between the anus and the scrotum, not in the middle place, on the side of the left-hand thing; and let the incision be made over that stone and your finger be inside the anus, and let the incision be transverse, so that the outside may be wide and the inside narrow according to what is possible for the size of the stone, and no more, because too much pressure on your finger which is in the anus causes the stone to slip away during the operation, and it remains forgotten without difficulty."
E sapias que de la peyra es alcuna a la qual so angle e margers, per que le eyssiment de lu es fayt deficil per aquo.	"And know that some stones have angles or margins which make their extraction difficult because of this."
E de aquela aquo es leon semblant a glan, e es redonda, e es fayt de lu leugier eyssiment.	"And of those things one seems like a glans and is round, and it is done with light extraction."
Donc si es aquela al qual so angles e marger, ajusta en la fissura.	"Therefore if that one has angles or margins, adjust it in the opening."
E si no es ayssi foro-getada, lahoras cove que tu engenes sobre aquel, o que strenguas sobre aquel am gesti decentment, la extremitat del qual sia ayssi cum lima am le qual strenguas sobre la peyra, e no evasesca de lu; o que entrometas dejos lu instrument subtil de curvada extremitat.	"And if it is not thus forgotten, then you must press down upon it with your hand or press it gently down with a gesture like this: the end of which should be like a file with which you press on the stone, and do not let it escape from there; or insert into it that thin curved instrument."
Mays si tu no podes sobre aquel, lahoras tu amplifica le trauc un petit, e si tu veus flux de sanc, abscindeys en strenh aquel am vitriol trissat.	"But if you cannot press upon it, then widen the opening a little, and if you see blood flowing, cut into it strongly with powdered vitriol."
Mays si la peyra es mays de una, lahoras al comensament tu impelleys la ma a la boca de la vesica, e aprop inscideys sobre lu; e aprop impelleys un petit aprop aquo; e semblantment fay si son motas mays de doas.	"But if there are more than one stone, then at the beginning you insert your hand into the mouth of the bladder and cut upon it; and immediately afterwards insert a little further into that place; and similarly do this if there are many more."
E si es peyra mot gran, lahoras ignorancia es que tu inscidas aquel am gran seccio, quar accideys al malaute una de doas causas: o que mora o que endevengua a lu destillacio de urina continuabla, per aquo quar le loc no es de tot consolidat.	"And if there is a very large stone, then it is not known that you should cut into it with a large incision, because one of two things happens to the patient: either he dies or he suffers from continuous distillation of urine afterwards, because the place is not completely consolidated."
Mays aministra expulcio de lu entro que sia fora-getada, o engenia en la fractura de lu am las forfexs entro que extragua aquela en pessas.	"But the minister performs the expulsion of it from there which has been forgotten, or presses down on its fracture with forceps until that one comes out in pieces."
Donc cum tu auras cumplit la tua opperacio, lahoras omple la plagua de enses de aloe e de sanc de drago, e strenh aquel.	"Therefore when you have completed your operation, then fill the wound with threads of aloe and dragon's blood and stitch it up."
E pausa sobre aquel drap enfus en oli e vi, o en oli rozat e aygua frega, per so que apostema caut sia cedat.	"And place on that a cloth dipped in olive oil and wine or in sweet olive oil rubbed with water, so that the wound may heal without inflammation."
E aprop resupina le malaute sobre le sieu col, e no deslias le liament entro al tertz dia.	"And then let the patient lie on his back for three days without removing the stitches."
E cum aquel auras desliat, embroca le loc am aygua e mot oli, e aprop cura aquel am enguent diafinicon e am enguent diabazilicon entro que sia sanat.	"And when that has been removed, wash the place with water and much olive oil, and then dress it with fine ointment and diabaic ointment until it is healed."
Mays si en la plagua accideys apostema caut, adhust e corrosiu, e de aquel semblantz ayssi cum si le sanc es en la vesica congelat, e per lu es la hurina prohibida (e aquo es conogut per la egressio del sanc am urina), a donc entromet lo tieu dit en la plagua e extratz aquel sanc, quar si roman provoca la vesica a corropcio de la vesica e de lu putrefaccio.	"But if inflammation and corrosion happen in the wound, which is hard and destructive, like that which seems as if blood were congealed in the bladder, and because of this urine is forbidden (and this is known by the exit of blood with urine), then insert your finger into the wound and remove that blood, for if it remains it provokes corrosion of the bladder and its decay."
E aprop lava la plagua am vi agre, aygua e sal, e am opposicio a tota specia, am aquo que conveneys a lu de la curacio entro que sia sanat.	"And then wash the wound with sour wine, water and salt, and apply anything that is suitable for healing wounds until it is healed."
E cove en las horas de tota la curacio que tu lies amdos las coyssas e ajustes las medicinas las quals so pausadas sobre le loc.	"And you must lie quietly during all of the healing time with both legs elevated and adjust the dressings which are placed on the place."
E si la peyra es petita e es en le meat de la vergua, e es ficat en lu, e eyssement de urina es prohibit, lahoras cura aquel am aquo que yeu recomti denant que pervenguas a seccio, quar tropas veguadas per aquesta curacio yest acusat de seccio; e ja yeu e esproat aquo, e es que tu prenguas un perforador de ferr alfelut, del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	"And if the stone is small and is in the middle of the urethra and has been inserted into it, and urine cannot be excreted, then treat it with what I have mentioned before that you should do to avoid sectioning, because many people are cured by this treatment without any section being made; and here it is how you should take a small awl-shaped probe of iron, the shape of which is like this:"
de triangulada extramitat, agut, ficat en fust.	"with a triangular end, sharp-pointed, fitted into wood."
E aprop pren fiel, e lia am aquel la vergua dejos la peyra per so que no retorne a la vesica.	"And then take some wax and apply it with that to the urethra from below the stone so that it does not return to the bladder."
E aprop entromet le ferr en la vergua, perforant am fecilitat entro que·l perforador vengua ad aquela peyra.	"And then insert the iron into the urethra, gently perforating until the probe reaches that stone."
E revolveys le perforador am la tua ma en aquela peyra petit a petit, e tu perforsa la perforacio de lu entro que fassas aquel del autra part penetrar; quar la urina tantost es absolta.	"And then slowly rotate the probe with your hand on that stone and push it through until you pierce it from the other side, because urine will be released immediately."
E aprop prem la tua ma sobre aquo que es romas de la peyra de la partida deforo de la vergua, quar aquela es trinquada, e es foro-getada am la urina, e le malaute es sanat.	"And then press your hand on that which remains of the stone from its exit from the urethra, because that is broken and forgotten with urine, and the patient is healed."
Mays si aquesta curacio no es a tu aparelhada per alcuna causa la qual prohibeys de aquela, lahoras lia un fiel dejos la peyra, e autra fiel desus la peyra.	"But if this treatment does not suit you for any reason that prevents it, then apply wax below the stone and also above it."
E aprop encideys sobre la peyra en aquela vergua entre doas liaduras.	"And then tie two ligatures around the urethra on either side of the stone:"
E aprop extratz aquela.	"And then remove that."
E aprop deslia le liament e mondifica le sanc congilat, le qual es fayt en la plagua.	"And then untie the ligature and wash away the congealed blood, which has formed in the wound."
E no es necessari liament de fiel dejos la peyra, sino per que no retorne a la vesica, e l’autre liament desus sino, quar quan es desliat le fiel aprop la egrecio de la peyra, la codena retorna a son loc e cobra la plagua.	"And there is no need for sutures on the kidney stone, unless it returns to the bladder. The other suture above it is needed because when the ligature around the ureteral opening is released, the ureter slips back into place and closes the wound."
E per aquo es a tu necessari quan lias le fiel desus, que tu eleves la codena a las partidas desus, o que retorne deves le tieu compliment, e cobra la plagua ayssi co havem dit.	"And therefore, when you tie the suture above, it is necessary that you elevate the ureter towards its opening above or else you must complete your task and close the wound as we have said."
Capitol .lxi.	Chapter .lxvi
De extraccio de peyra de las femnas.	Of the removal of kidney stones from women.
Peyra en las femnas pauc es engendrada.	Kidney stones in women are rarely formed.
Mays si ve peyra ad alcuna de aquelas, lahoras dificil es la curacio de lu, e es prohibida per tropas manieyras.	If a stone appears in one of these [parts], then its cure is difficult and forbidden by many methods.
La una de lor es quar la femna fort leu es verges.	Another one of them is when the woman strongly resists being opened.
E la segonda es quar tu no trobas femna be scient que descroba si meteyssa al metge quan es casta, o es de las femnas haventz maritz.	And the second one is that you may not find a woman who knows how to tell if she would willingly submit herself to the doctor when she is chaste, or is among married women.
La tersa es quar tu no hatrobas femna be sabent aquesta art, majorment la operacio am ma.	The third one is that you may not find a woman who knows this art well, especially the operation with the male organ.
E la quarta es que·l loc de la seccio sobre peyra en las femnas es longinc del loc de la peyra, per que indigeys de seccio preonda, e en aquela es temor.	And the fourth one is that the location of the section for removing a stone in women is far from the location of the stone itself, requiring a deeper section, and causing fear.
Mays si necessitat provoca a tu ad aquo, lahoras cove que tu prenguas una femna metga be scient, e pauc es atrobada.	But if necessity forces you to do this, then it is necessary that you take a woman who knows well how to perform a female circumcision and is little frightened.
Mays si tu es privat de aquela, lahoras cerca metga quast e subtil, o presenta una femna matrona be esenhada en le feyt de las femnas, o femna que en aquesta art ennueys partida del art.	But if you are deprived of such a woman, then seek out a male doctor who is skilled and subtle, or present a mature woman who is experienced in the affairs of women, or a woman who has some experience in this art.
Donc fay aquela present, e comanda a lu que fassa tot aquo que tu li mandaras, de la enquisicio sobre la peyra al comensament; la qual causa es que reguarde si la femna es verges, lahoras cove que meta lo sieu dit en le cul de lu e quiera la peyra.	Therefore have such a woman present, and command her to do everything that you order from the examination of the stone at the beginning; one reason for this is to determine whether the woman is a virgin, in which case she should insert her finger into the woman's vagina and try to find the stone.
Donc si atroba aquela, coarte aquela dejos le sieu dit, e lahoras comanda a lu que inscida sobre aquela.	Therefore if she finds it, then command her to withdraw her finger, and afterwards have her insert a speculum over that area.
Mays si no es verge, lahoras comanda a la matrona que entrometa lo sieu dit en le conh de la malauta e enquiera sobre la peyra, pus que pausa la sua ma sinistra sobre la vesica, e comprem aquela am bona comprecio.	But if she is not a virgin, then command the midwife to insert her finger into the woman's vagina and search for the stone, since she will place her left hand on the bladder, and compress it with good pressure.
Donc si atroba aquela, lahoras cove que gradantment maugua aquela de l’orrifici de la vesica a las partidas dejos am somman de la sua vertut entro que pervengua am aquel a la razit de la coyssa.	Therefore if she finds it, then gradually move the speculum from the opening of the bladder to the sides with the help of her strength until you reach the root of the matter.
E aprop inscida sobre aquela apposicio de la maytat del conh deves la razit de la coyssa de qualque part sia a lu parada e cent la peyra en aquela partida, e·l dit de lu no sia remaugut de la peyra coartan dejos lu.	And appropriately insert the speculum into that position of the mouth of the bladder where you found it and stopped, and keep her finger on the stone until it is removed from there.
E la seccio sia pauca al comensament; e aprop entrometa lo ray sobre aquela seccio, e si sent la peyra, lahoras ajuste en seccio segon la quantitat la qual sap que la peyra sira getada de aquela.	And let the incision be small at first. Then insert your knife into that section and if you feel the stone, adjust the size of the incision according to how much of the stone you know will be removed from there.
E sapias que las specias de peyra son motas: quar de aquelas es pauca e gran, e leon e aspra, e longua e redonda, e havent ramps.	And know that stones are varied in their shapes: some are small and round, some are large and sharp, others are long and round, and some have branches.
Donc tu sapias quantas specias so de lu per aquo que tu signifiques sobre aquo que vols.	Therefore you should know what kind of stone it is based on what you can feel through the incision about what you want to do.
E si tu veus flux de sanc, ajusta en le loc vetriol trissat e te aquela per una hora entro que sia abscindit le sanc, e aprop retorna a la tua operacio entro que la peyra sia fora-getada.	And if you see flow of blood, adjust the position to the side of the vessel and leave it for an hour until the blood is absorbed, then return to your operation until the stone is removed.
E fay que prepares am tu dels instrumentz les quals e ditz en la extraccio de peyra en les homes, per so que sias ajudat per aquels en la tua operacio.	And make sure you have ready all the instruments mentioned in this book regarding the extraction of stones in men, so that you may be assisted by them during your operation.
E si tu veus flux de sanc, e sabes que la expulcio del sanc es de la arceria que es insciza, lahoras tu pausa polvera sobre le loc e estrenh aquel am pulvils e strictura descent, e no iteras aquo; e layssa la peyra e no extraguas aquela, quar fort leu morira la malauta.	And if you see a flow of blood and know that the expulsion of blood is from the artery that has been incised, then apply powder over the area and strangulate it with lint and strict ligature, but do not repeat this; leave the stone there and do not try to remove it, for otherwise the woman will surely die.
E aprop cura la plagua.	And then dress the wound.
Donc cum es cedada la acuitat del sanc aprop alcus jorns, e·l loc se poyreys, lahoras tu retorna a la tua operacio entro que la peyra sia fora-getada.	Therefore when the sharpness of the bleeding has ceased after several days and the area is healed, then you may return to your operation until the stone is removed.
Capitol lxii.	Chapter LXII
De seccio sobre ernia acoza.	Concerning incision for incarcerated hernia.
Hernia ayguoza no es sino agregacio de humiditat en le ciphac blanc lo qual es dejos la codena dels genetius contenent le huou, e es nompnat ciphac.	Hernia occurs when there's excess moisture in the white coat that leaves the groin of the genitalia containing the eggs.
E alcunas veguadas es en le propri pannicol le qual a lu preparec natura en la partida del huou, entro que sia cuyat que ja es autre huou; e es la codena del genetiu entre le ciphac blanc le qual havem dit, e no es aquo sino tart.	Sometimes it occurs in the proper peritoneum that Nature has prepared at the time of childbirth between one egg and another, which is the groin between the white coat we've mentioned, and it's nothing but a mistake.
E la generacio de aquest hernia es per debelitat la qual accideys als genetius, per que ad aquels es efundunda aquesta materia, e alcunas vetz accideys per percuscio fayta sobre les genetius.	The cause of this hernia is weakness that occurs in the groins due to which this matter escapes from them, and sometimes it happens due to a sudden blow on the genitals.
E aquesta humiditat es havent motas colors, quar la color de lu o es declinant a citrina o a sanguinent, o rog, o es negra feculenta, o es ayguosa blanqua, e es aquo que es mays.	This moisture has various colors. Sometimes it tends towards citrine or sanguineous red, or dark brown, or is blackish-yellow, or watery-white; and this is what happens most often.
E les senhals per les quals es saubut on es aquesta agreguacio de aygua so aquestz: quar si es en le ciphac blanc le qual havem dit, lahoras le apostema es redon declinant un pauc a longitut ayssi cum figura de huou, e appar le genetiu, quar la humiditat conte aquel de tota part.	The signs by which one knows where this accumulation of water is located are these: if it's in the white coat we've mentioned, then the swelling appears leaning slightly towards length like an egg shape, and the groin is visible because the moisture contains that area entirely.
E si la humiditat es en le propri pannicol, lahoras le apostema es redon am partida del huou e per aysso hom estima que es autre huou.	If the moisture is in the proper peritoneum, then the swelling appears divided like an egg and for this reason people estimate that it's another egg.
E si la humiditat es entre la codena dels genetius e·l ciphac blanc, lahoras catz dejos le centiment.	And if the moisture is between the cord of the genitals and the white coat, then one should cut there.
E cum tu vols la cognicio de la color de la humiditat, lahoras tu esproa la color de la humiditat en le apostema am entromes cayrat del qual la forma es precedida; e segon aquo que es eyssit en le vestigi del entromes, jutga de aquo que es dedintz lu.	And if you want to know the color of the moisture, then press the color of the moisture in the swelling with an empty cupping glass whose shape is described here; and according to what appears in the mark of the emptiness, judge what is inside it.
Donc quan nos vinem a la curacio de lu am ferr, lahoras cove que comandem al malaute que sia fleubotomat si aquo es a tu possibla, e vezes le cos de lu ple.	Therefore, when we come to the treatment of this with iron, then it's necessary that we command the patient to cough if possible, and press the body of the swelling full.
E aprop sia resupinat sobre le sieu dos sobre alcuna causa un pauc auta, e pausa dejos lu motz draps.	And also let him lie on his back upon some slight elevation, and then cover the swollen parts with cloths.
E aprop setz tu sobre la part sinistra de lu, e comanda al ministra que segua a la dextra de lu, le qual extenda la sua vergua a hun de dos latz a la codena dels genetius e a la partida del mirac del ventre.	And then sit yourself on the left side of him and command the assistant to be on his right side. The latter shall extend his hand towards one or two fingers' breadth from the cord of the genitals and the boundary of the navel of the belly.
E aprop pren spatum lat e scindeys la codena dels genetius del mieg loc per la longitut entro prop le pentenilh.	And then take a broad knife and cut the cord of the genitals from its middle lengthwise, close to the penis.
E sia fayta la seccio segon rectetut engualment distant de la linha que deveseys la pel dels genetius, entro que pervengua al ciphac blanc comprehendent.	And let the section be made according to a straight line equidistant from the skin of the genitals, until it reaches the white coat containing.
E excorja aquel, e observa, e guarda te per aysso que tu no inscidas aquel; e la tua excoriacio am la qual aquel excorjas per partida jassia que sia suspenduda am le huou mays e subtilment escruta am la excoriacio segon la quantitat a tu possibla.	And strip that off, and observe, and take care that you do not incise it; and your stripping should be done in such a way that it hangs with the egg more subtly and carefully stripped according to the quantity possible for you.
E aprop perfora le ciphac ple de aygua am perforacio ampla, e extratz tota l’aygua.	And then pierce the full coat of water with a wide perforation and remove all the water.
E aprop separa entre doas labias de la seccio am uncis, e exten le ciphac a las partidas desus; e no toques la codena les genetius comprehendent, e inscideys le ciphac en aquela manieyra que es a tu possible.	And then separate between the two lips of the section with forceps and extend the coat at its upper parts. Do not touch the cord containing the genitals and cut the coat in this manner as is possible for you.
E inscideys aquel am la sua totalitat o en pessas, e majorment le sieu latz subtil, quar si tu no perscrutas exquisidament la inscizio de lu, no es fayta segurtat que la aygua no retorne.	Cut that completely or in pieces and especially its sides subtly, because if you do not examine the incision of it carefully, there is no guarantee that the water will not return.
Mays si le huou procezeys de aquela defora de la sua codena en la ora de la tua operacio, lahoras quan tu auras complida la seccio del ciphac, retorna dedintz aquel, e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la codena dels genetius am sutura, e aprop cura aquel ayssi cum las autras plagua, entro que sia sanat.	But if the egg proceeds from that outside its cord during the time of your operation, then when you have completed the section of the coat, return inside it and immediately join together the two lips of the cord of the genitals with suture, and also treat it like other wounds until it is healed.
E si atrobas le huou corromput per autra malautia, lahoras cove que tu lies les vayssels les quals so sore le suspensori, e extrat le huou, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit.	And if you find the egg corrupted by other disease, then it's necessary that you loosen the vessels which are near the suspenders and remove the egg. Then treat it with what we have said.
Mays si l’aygua es agreguada en doas partidas esemps, lahoras sapias que doas son las ernias; donc inscideys aquela partida segon que has feyt en l’autra engualment; e si es a tu vist que sia una opera, lahoras tu la fay.	But if water accumulates in two places separately, then know that there are two hernias. Therefore cut that section according to what you have done on the other side, and if it appears to be an operation, then do it.
E aprop tu abstergiys le sanc, e entramet en las seccios lana submersa en oli o en oli rozat; e pausa deforo autra lana la qual tu as submersa en vi e oli, e expandeys aquela sobre dos genetius e·l mirac del ventre; e pausa desobre draps doblatz e pulvils, e lia aquels desobre am liament le qual es segon aquesta forma:	And then you shall clean the blood and enter into the sections with wool submerged in oil or rose oil. And put outside other wool which you have submerged in wine and oil, and spread it over both genitals and the navel of the belly. Then place doubled cloths and powders on top, and bind those with a bandage according to this manner:
e aprop sian preses dos draps e sian humplitz de lana carmenada segon aquesta semblansa; e sian faytas las extremitatz am les quals es premut de coto o de lana humida, e sian agreguatz am strectura en le braguier de las braguas, e la una de las extremitatz prengua del cul entro al dos, e la segonda prengua a la partida del pantenilh, e dos extramitatz sobre dos coyssas dejos e dos extramitatz autras sobre dos angonars, e tota extrictura sia ajustada en le braguier de las braguas.	And then take two cloths and fill them with carded wool in this manner. And make the ends of those with which it is pressed from cotton or wet wool, and attach them together with a string in the breeches of the breeches. And one end should take the buttocks inside to outside, and the second should take at the navel, and two extremities over both thighs, and other two extremities over both hips, and all tightening should be adjusted in the breeches of the breeches.
E alcunas veguadas aquesta hernia es medicada artificialment am cauteri en loc de seccio am ferr; e es que tu prenguas cauteri cutellar subtil e que inscidas am aquel la codena dels ginitius, e es ignit segon que havem recomtat entro que sia descubert le ciphac blanc contenent la aygua, e lahoras tu pren cauteri segon aquesta forma:	And sometimes this hernia is treated artificially with cauterization instead of sectioning with iron. And you should take a cutting cautery and incise the cord of the genitals with it. And ignite it according to what we have recommended until the white coat containing the water is discovered. Then take cautery in this manner:
e es asemblat a letra greca.	And it resembles the Greek letter Pi.
E aprop perfora am aquel ciphac, e es ignit entro que tota la humiditat sia fora-gitada.	And then pierce with that cautery and heat it until all the moisture is driven out.
E aprop exten le ciphac am uncis, e excorja am uncis, e excorja am cauteri subtil ignit; e inscideys aquel segon que es a tu possible entro que eradiques tot lu; e guarda te del huou que·l foc no·l toque.	And then extend the coat with forceps and scrape it with forceps and scrape it with a subtly heated cautery. And cut that as much as is possible until you have removed all of it, and take care that the egg does not touch the fire.
E sapias que aquesta operacio es pus salva e pus longinqua de flux de sanc, e milhor que operacio am seccio.	And know that this operation is safer and farther from blood flow than an operation with sectioning.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat apostema caut en la hora de seccio o en hora de cauteri, o flux de sanc, lahoras cove que tu cures qual contrarietat fa a tu per aquo, am curacio la qual conveneys a lu segon que es dit.	But if you encounter an aposteme or cautery during the time of sectioning or cauterization, or bleeding, then know what hinders you for that and cure it with the treatment which is appropriate for it according to what has been said.
Mays si le malaute es pauruc, e no spera la segonda operacio per la sua horribilitat, lahoras administra perforacio segon que yeu recomti aquo; e es quan es certificat deves tu, per aquo que havem dit de las significacios, que aquela hernia es ayguosa.	But if the disease is painful and does not await a second operation because of its horror, then administer perforation according to what we recommend for that. And it is when you are certain, by what we have said about signs, that that hernia is hydrocele.
Lahoras cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute sobre alcuna cezelha elevada, aprop perfora le apostema en la partida pus bassa de lu am spatum lat, e pausa la perforacio segon la longitut del cos.	Then you should make a seat for the disease on some elevated cushion, and then pierce the apostume in its lowest part with a broad spatula, and continue the piercing according to the length of the body.
E sia la apercio ampla entro que corro tota l‘aygua.	And let the aperture be wide enough to drain all the water.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc coto e lia aquel e layssa aquel, per so que corro le romanent de l’aygua.	Then press with cotton on that spot and tie it and leave it there so that the remaining water can flow out.
E aprop cura aquel entro que la plagua sia sanada.	And then treat it until the wound is healed
Mays si contrarietat es a la egrecio de l’aygua en aquela hora tu perforas aquela: e aquo no es fayt sino per aquo quar le pannicol blanc en le orrifici de la plagua fa contrarietat e prohibeys le eyssiment de l’aygua, lahoras cove que tu metas en la plagua pena o instrument am la qual es extrayta l’aygua dels ydropitz, la forma del qual es precedida; o ajusta en la opprecio de la plagua un petit.	But if there is resistance to the exit of water at that time you pierce it, then that happens only because the white panniculus in the opening of the wound causes resistance and prevents the escape of water. Therefore, insert into the wound a probe or an instrument with which the water from hydroceles is removed, whose form is described above; or adjust a small catheter in the aperture of the wound
E sapias que l’aygua retorna, e es agueguada aprop vi meses o enaviro aquels; e cum es agreguada, lahoras sia perforat segon aquela meteyssa manieyra, quar le malaute ayssi passara les sieus dias.	And know that water will return and accumulate again around six months or less. And when it has accumulated, then pierce it in the same manner because this disease will thus pass its days.
Capitol .lxiii.	Chapter LXIII
De seccio sobre hernia carnosa e la curacio de lu.	Of sectioning on fatty hernia and its treatment.
Sapias que en la seccio sobre aquesta hernia es temor perdusent a pernicia en las majors disposicios; per que a mi es vista la dimissio de lu e esser salvat per aquela milhor.	Know this: in the section regarding this hernia, there is great danger of loss and peril in many cases; therefore, I have seen it fit to dismiss him and save him by that better means.
E yeu so rememorant la operacio en aquela e las specias dels apostemas.	And you are reminded about the operation on that one and the species of the abscesses.
Donc, dic que l‘apostemas natz en les cos dels quals les genetius so conponutz e es fayt aquo per motas causas: o per superfluitat aguda agra, la qual es efundida als genetius, o per percuscio.	Therefore, it is said that the abscesses are born in those bodies where the veins are composed and this happens for many causes: either by acute acid superfluity, which is poured into the veins, or by percussion.
E es la color de la apostema segon la color del cos, e no es atrobat en lu dolor, e es apostema greu.	And the colour of the abscess follows the colour of the body, and it is not found in the pain, and it is a serious abscess.
E fort leu es apostema lapificada, del qual la color es fosca, e no es centiment a lu.	A light boil is an apostemized ulcer, of which the colour is dark, and it is not painful to the touch.
E alcunas veguadas es fayt per nodacio de las arcerias, e per imflacio de aquelas ayssi quo ja es perceubut la rememoracio de lu, o per imflacio de venas.	And sometimes it happens through the coagulation of arteries and through inflammation of those vessels that have already been perceived to be remembered, or through inflammation of veins.
Mays aquo que es per imflacio de arcerias es conogut per la dispercio de la apostema quan compremas aquela am les tieus ditz; e no cove que aquel toques.	But that which happens through inflammation of arteries is known by the dispersion of the abscess when you press it with your fingers, and it does not need to be touched.
Mays aquel que es fayt per imflacio de vena no es dispergut de lu alcuna causa deves la compressio am les ditz.	But that which happens through inflammation of a vein is not dispersed by any cause due to the compression with your fingers.
E ja es possible que sobre aquesta specia sia fayta seccio e sobre les autres carns; e es que tu inscida la codena dels genetius, e aprop esten le huou a las partidas desus, e extratz aquel del ciphac blanc, e deliura le suspensori dels vaysels, e ligua les, e inscideys le suspensori pus que tu deliuras aquel de tota partida de las partidas del huou.	And it is possible that on this species there may be section made and on the other flesh; and it is if you cut the chain of veins, and close to where they emerge at their departure, extract from it the white matter, free the suspenders of the vessels, tie them up, and cut the suspender of pus after you have freed it from all parts of the hole.
Donc si l’huou ja es am aquelas carnadas consolida, lahoras cove que tu extraguas le huou e inscidas aquel.	Therefore, if the boil has already adhered to those flesh tissues, then you must extract the boil and cut it open.
E si es adherencia entro alcuna causa del ciphac, o entre aquo que es entre les bayssels, lahoras cove que tu deliures tota aquela adherencia e inscidas aquela per inscizio redonda.	And if there is adherence within some cause of the pus or between that which is between the vessels, then you must free all that adherence and cut it open with a round incision.
Mays si es nativitat de carn en le loc de la adherencia la qual es detras, lahoras cove que tu inscidas tot aquo que es de lu, e extraguas le huou ayssi cum havem dit.	But if there is native flesh in the place of the adherence which is behind it, then you must cut all that is of it and extract the boil as we have said.
Donc cum es complida la tua operacio, lahoras omple la plagua de lana imfuza en oli rozat e vi; e aprop cura aquela am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	Therefore, when your operation is complete, then fill the wound with wool soaked in rose oil and wine, and close it with the other dressing until it is healed.
Capitol .lxiv.	Capítulo LXIV
De la curacio de hernia que es de vitz.	Of the treatment of hernia that is caused by wind.
Vit es apostema envolut per alcuna envolucio semblant a broto am mollificacio dels testiculs, e es fayt dificil movement exercitiu e deambulacio sobre le malaute.	Wind hernia is an abscess wrapped in some wrapping similar to a bud with softening of the testes, and it makes difficult movements and walking over the illness.
E en la curacio de aquesta malautia es per temor per aquo del qual es precedida rememoracio.	And in the treatment of this ailment, it is by means of remedy that which preceded its memory.
Empero cove que diguam opperacio en aquela segon que fero les primiers.	"But how can we call this operation according to what was done first?"
E dic que cove que fassas sezer le malaute sobre una cezelha elevada; e aprop enpelleys le suspensori dels testiculs a las partidas dejos; e aprop te la codena dels genetius am les tieus ditz am les baysels que so probdas a la vergua; e tengua aquels autre ministre que tu, e extenda aquels am extencio vehement.	"And I say that you should first place the patient on an elevated couch; and then gently expose the spermatic cords at their origins; and then grasp the cord of the testicle with your fingers and tie it with a probe in the scrotum; and have another servant help you, extending his hands with great care."
E aprop inscideys am spatum lat agut per seccio traversa en le dreyt dels vaysels entro que sian les vayssels descubertz.	"And then make an incision with a sharp scalpel through the skin perpendicularly to the right side of the vessels where they are exposed."
E aprop excorja de tota partida ayssi quo a tu havem dit en extraccio de arceria las quals so en las templas.	"And then strip away all the fat from there, just as we have described for the extraction of an arrow from its head, which is located at the temples."
E aprop fica en aquelas un’agulha en la qual sia fiel doble, e lia aquel en le primier del locs en les quals accideys vit, e lia aquel autra veguada en le derier de lor.	"And then take a needle with double thread and insert it at the first point where you see blood flow, and bring it out again at the last of them."
E aprop inscideys aquels en le mieg loc per seccio dreyta segon la longuesa del cos, e extratz aquo que es agreguat de las humiditatz fetulentas e corruptas.	"And then incise at that midpoint with a perpendicular incision along the length of the body and remove what has accumulated there from corrupted and putrid humors."
E aprop cura la plagua am curacio de las autras plaguas en las quals vols sania esser engendrada per so que caian les vaysels les quals noyreysso un de dos genetius, quar no es mal per aquo.	"And then treat the wound with treatments for other wounds where you want healing to be generated, since the vessels that you have not ligated one of two will not cause harm."
Mays si accideys vit a totz les bayssels, lahoras cove que·ls testicols sian extragutz o que les testicols per aquo se cequo am les vayssels, per que sia privat de tot nutriment per la inscizio dels vayssels, e que sian estaborits, o que cequo per so que no sia juvament am aquels.	"But if it happens that all the vessels are cut off, then either the testicles must be removed or they should be tied off with the vessels so that there is no nourishment for them due to the incision of the vessels and they shrivel up, or else they will cause harm."
Capitol .lxv.	**Chapter LXV.**
De la cura de hernia entestinal.	**Of the Treatment of Intestinal Hernia.**
Le adveniment de aquesta hernia es per seccio que endeve en le ciphac extendut sobre le ventre de part dels angunars del mirac del ventre, per que deysendo les budels de aquela ruptura ad alcu dels budels.	Hernia occurs due to a rupture in the abdominal wall caused by straining during bowel movements, allowing intestines to protrude.
E aquesta ruptura es o del ciphac o de excencio de lu, e accideysso aquestas doas specias per motas causas: o percussio, o per sautz, o per clamor, o per elevacio de alcuna causa greu, o per semblantz.	And this rupture occurs either in the abdominal wall itself or due to an exit from it. This happens for many reasons such as: percussion, sneezing, coughing, heavy lifting, or similar causes.
E·l senhal de aquo, quan es per extencio del ciphac, es que accideys pauc a pauc en lonc temps, e no accideys soptament, e es apostema engual entro ves le preon per so quar le ciphac comprem le budel.	And the sign of this is that if it occurs due to an extension of the abdominal wall, it happens gradually over time and not suddenly. It appears as a swelling between the pubic area and the groin because the abdominal wall compresses the intestines.
E le senhal de lu es quan es per seccio del ciphac, quar al comensament fa accidir dolor vehement sobtament; e es apostema divers aparent dejos la codena propdana aparent, e aquo es per eyssiment del budel, e·l cos de lu a las partidas deforo del ciphac.	And the sign of it is that if it occurs due to a rupture of the abdominal wall, initially there is sudden severe pain. It appears as a different visible swelling near the groin area, which is due to protrusion of the intestines through the rent in the abdominal wall.
E alcunas veguadas es fora-getat am le budel la tela, e es apelada aquesta hernia entestinal zirbal.	Sometimes the intestinal tissue becomes trapped outside the abdominal cavity without being able to be pushed back inside. This type of hernia is called an incarcerated or strangulated hernia.
E alcunas veguadas es fayta am ventositat, e alcunas veguadas corr en le budel fenda, e aqui es retenguda, e es am aquo gran pernitia3 del malaute, e alcunas veguadas fa endevenir dolor malvada e majorment quan es premut.	Sometimes there is windiness (flatulence), sometimes the intestine slips out of the rent and gets trapped inside it. This can cause great danger to one's health. Sometimes it causes severe pain, especially when pressed upon.
E en la curacio de las especias de aquesta malautia am ferr es temor, per que cove que sia esquivat le cazament en aquela.	And in the treatment of these types of diseases with iron, caution is necessary to avoid causing a hemorrhage at that location.
E la manieyra de la operacio de aquela es que comandes al malaute que redugua le budel am la sua ma a las partidas dedintz de la sua conquavitat si obezeys al sieu retornament, e aprop sia envessat sobre le sieu col entre las tuas mas, e eleva las cambas de lu.	The procedure for this operation is as follows: tell the patient to push their abdomen inward with both hands from inside the navel if it returns there. Then quickly place your hands on their thighs and lift them up. This will help reduce the hernia by pushing the intestines back into the abdominal cavity.
E aprop sten la codena la qual siec la codena dels testicols a las partidas desus, e inscideys la codena dels testicols tota per le lonc; e aprop fiqua en doas labias de la seccio uncis segon que indigeysses a hubrir la seccio am aquels.	Then press the cord that connects the scrotum to the abdominal wall at its base, and incise it along its length. Then use two forceps on either side of the incision to widen the opening as much as necessary to expose the hernia.
E si’ la seccio segon la quantitat que a tu sia possible que de aquela le huou sia foro-getat.	And if the incision is made wide enough according to your ability, the protruding loop of intestine may be able to slip back into place on its own.
E aprop excorja aquela ciphaqueth les quals so dejos la codena dels testicols, entro que sia descubert le ciphac blanc dur de quascuna partida.	Then carefully remove the fluid-filled sac that is surrounding the loop of intestine (hernial sac) by pushing it back through the opening in the abdominal wall until only the white fibrous tissue of each side remains exposed.
Lahoras tu entromet le tieu dit en aquo que siec le testicol, en aquo que es entre ciphac blanc, le qual es dejos la codena del huou, e entre le ciphac segon, e absolve am aquel’adherencia que es en la partida detras del huou.	Then insert your finger into the opening around the testicle, between the white fibrous tissue (which is left attached to the loop of intestine) and the hernial sac. Then carefully separate any adhesions that may be present behind the hernia with your finger.
E aprop mau am la ma la codena dels testicols a las partidas deforo, e am aysso exten le ciphac blanc en sus am la ma sinestra, e eleva le huou am le ciphac a la partida de la seccio; e comanda al ministre que extenda le huou ensus e tu dissolveys la adherencia que es detras am solucio complida.	Then grasp the cord with your left hand at its base on the outside, and stretch the white fibrous tissue upwards with your right hand. Then lift the loop of intestine along with the hernial sac back into the abdomen through the incision. Tell your assistant to hold the loop of intestine in place from above while you use warm saline solution to dissolve any remaining adhesions behind it.
E cerqua am les tieus ditz que lay no sia alcuna causa del budel envelopat en le ciphac blanc dur.	Carefully check with your fingers that there is no bowel tissue still wrapped around the white fibrous cord (hernial sac) and that it has been completely reduced into the abdomen.
Mays si tu atrobas de lu alcuna causa, lahoras tu enpelleys aquel al ventre dejos.	But if you find any remaining cause (tissue), then carefully push it back into the abdominal cavity with your fingers.
E aprop tu pren una agulha en la qual sia fiel gros fayt de x fiels, e entromet aquel deves le derier del ciphac, le qual es jos la codena dels testicols, la qual siec seccio; e aprop inscideys las extremitatz las quals emineysso del fiel entro que sian quatre fiels, e aprop compausa alcus de lor sobre alcuna figura en manieyra de crotz; e lia am aquel le ciphac del qual havem dit que es dejos la codena dels testicols am fort liament de dos partz.	Then take a needle with thick thread (about four strands) and insert it through the posterior wall of the hernial sac, just below where the cord was incised. Then cut off the excess thread on both sides so that you have about four inches of thread on each side. Tie the two ends together in a figure-eight knot, and then tie this securely to the edge of the hernial sac that is left attached to the spermatic cord with a tight double knot.
E aprop envolveys las extremitatz dels fiels e lia aquelas am liament vehement entro que alcu dels vayssels que noyrrisso aquels no puscan trametre alcuna causa per so que de aqui no accida apostema caut.	Then tie off the ends of the thread and ligate them securely together with a tight knot, making sure that none of the blood vessels in the area are inadvertently tied off to prevent the formation of an abscess at this site.
E pausa autra veguada liament segon foro le primier liament, lonh de lu mens tres ditz; e aprop aquestz dos liaments layssa del ciphac le qual es dejos la codena dels testicols la quantitat de la grandeza del dit, e inscideys tot le romanent segon redondeza, e osta de lu le huou.	Then tie another ligature around the hernial sac about three fingers' breadth below the first ligature. Then grasp both ends of the hernial sac with forceps and cut away any remaining tissue that is attached to it along its rounded edge. Leave the loop of intestine in place.
E aprop inscideys en la partida dejos de la codena dels testicols per seccio de la qual corra sanc e sania ayssi cum havem recomtat en aquo que havem dit.	Then incise along the spermatic cord on its lateral side, as previously described, to allow blood and lymph fluid to drain freely.
E aprop aministra lana submersa en oli, e pausa en la plagua; e aministra le liament le qual havem recomtat (e alcunas veguadas le ciphac blanc es cauterizat, le qual havem dit aprop la inscizio de lu temen de flux de sanc, quar motas veguadas accideys aquels) e leyssa le liament entro que per si caia.	Then apply sterile gauze soaked in oil to the wound and place it over the incision. Then apply a ligature as previously described (and occasionally cauterize the white fibrous tissue with a hot iron near the blood vessel tie-off, especially if there is active bleeding), and leave the ligature in place until it falls off on its own.
Mays si le cazement de lu es tardat, lahoras de aygua cauda sia embrocat, e pausa sobre aquel entro que caia segon que havem dit.	But if the wound does not close spontaneously, then apply hot water compresses to promote healing and reduce inflammation as previously described.
E aprop cura la plagua am l’autra curacio de las plaguas entro que sia sanat.	Then dress the wound using appropriate wound care techniques until it is healed.
Capitol .lxvi.	Chapter LXVI
De hernia ventosa.	On Ventral Hernia
En aquesta hernia no e vist alcu que sia estat ardit sus la curacio de lu am ferr.	In this type of hernia, there is nothing that can be burned or cauterized during the operation.
E les primiers diyssero que es fayta ayssi cum havem recomtat en la hernia que es am vi; la qual es que tu lies les vayssels aprop la seccio sobre aquela am fecilitat de lu; e aprop secca en le mieg loc en enviro le apostema am aquo que obro aquel, entro que caian les vayssels.	The early authors said that it should be treated in the same way as a hernia with fluid (hydrocele), by ligating and tying off the blood vessels around the hernia and then cauterizing the wound with a hot iron to prevent infection.
E cura la plagua segon que havem dit entro que sia sanada.	And dress the wound according to what has been said until it is healed.
Capitol .lxvii.	Chapter LXVII
De la disropcio que es fayta en les anguonars.	On Dislocation of the Jaw
Alcunas veguadas endeve ruptura en les angonars ayssi cum havem dit, e emineys le loc.	Sometimes there occurs rupture in the joints as we have said, and swellings appear at that location.
E no deyssen als genetius alcuna causa dels budels al genetius; e si deyssen, aquo es pauc; e retorna s’en en totas horas.	And if the intestines do not cause any problem to the horse, then that is good, and it returns to its usual state at all times.
Mays si es prolonguat le temps am aquo, es ajustada fissura en le ciphac entro que deysenda le budel en le ciphac; e accideys aquo per la extencio del ciphac le qual es en le angonars ayssi cum havem dit, la qual causa es quar le ciphac es estendut, e aprop es mollificat e·l loc es apostemat e emineys.	But if the time is prolonged thus, there occurs an adjustable fissure in the hip joint through which the intestine enters into the hip joint; and this happens because of the extension of the hip joint which is located in the joints as we have said, whose cause is that the hip joint has been stretched out and the place becomes softened, with the resulting apostema (an abscess) and swelling.
E la cura de lu es am cauteri ayssi quo es precedida la narracio de lu.	And its cure is through cauterization as it has been preceded by its narration.
E alcunas veguadas es curada am ferr segon aquesta manieyra: e es que·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu dos entre las tuas mas, e aprop secca le loc de la ruptura dels apostemas emineys am seccio per la latitut segon la quantitat de tres ditz.	And sometimes it is cured with iron according to this manner: and it is that the sick person lays upon his back between two pillows, and then the place of rupture of the swellings is dried up by section through its width according to their quantity.
E aprop strenh le ciphac blanc que es jos la codena entro que sia descubert.	And then strengthen the white hip joint which is below the backbone so that it may be discovered (i.e., brought back into alignment).
E aprop pren le ray e pausa aquel sobre le loc eminent del ciphac, e prem aquel al preon del ventre.	And then take the ray and place it upon the prominent part of the hip joint, and press it against the front of the belly.
E aprop cus le dos locs eminentz sobre la extremitat del ray del ciphac, e ajusta am la sutura un de aquels am l’autre.	And then heat the two prominent places upon the end of the ray of the hip joint, and join them together with a suture.
E aprop extratz la extremitat del ray, e no inscidas del ciphac de tot, ni no extenda le huou, ni autra causa ayssi cum yeu te fi saber en la curacio de hernia entestinal.	And then extract the end of the ray, and do not squeeze the hip joint at all, nor extend the wound, nor cause any other harm as you know well in the cure of intestinal hernia.
E aprop cura aquela am la curacio de las plaguas, e cum inscideyses les fiels, mundifica aquela e restaura la plagua entro que sia consolidada; quar le ciphac es contrayt e no es ajustada la eminencia de ruptura.	And then cure it with the cure of ulcers, and when you have cut through the tissues, cleanse them and restore the ulcer so that it may be consolidated; because the hip joint is contracted and the prominence of rupture is not joined together.
E cauteri es milhor en aquest loc, quar es pus propda a salut.	And cauterization is better in this place, for it is closer to health.
Capitol .lxviii.	"Chapter 68."
De mollificacio de la codena dels testiculs.	"The softening of the chain of the testicles."
Motas veguadas la codena dels testiculs en alcus homes es mollificada per aysso quar las carns que so entre aquela son mollificadas, e es fedat le reguardament de lu.	"Many times the chain of the testicles in some men is softened because the flesh that is between them is softened. This is noticed."
Adonc necessari es ad aquel que es preguat en la curacio de lu que fassa jazer le malaute segon le sieu dos, e enscida tota la codena la qual es mollificada sobre la codena natural; e aprop que ajuste doas labias am la sutura.	"Therefore it is necessary that whoever examines the treatment of this [condition] makes the patient lie on their back, and cuts all the softened chain along its length above the natural chain; then he should approximate both lips with stitches."
E si vols, cus en le comensament la superfluitat de la codena mollificada am tres cozeduras o quatre e am ferma sutura.	"And if you wish, at the beginning, remove the excess of the softened chain with three or four cuts and sew it firmly."
E aprop inscideys entre las suturas; e aprop cura per curacio de las autras plaguas entro que sia sanat e caian les fiels.	"And then cut between the sutures; and then treat with treatment for other diseases until healed, and the threads fall out."
Capitol .lxix.	"Chapter 69."
De castracio.	"The Castration."
Sapias que castratio en nostre ley es excomengada, mays per causa es legut a mi que·m remembre de lu en aquest libre; e no es necessaria la rememoracio de lu sino per doas manieyras, de las quals es la una per so que aquo sia en la sciensa del metge quan es enterroguat de aquela, que sapia la curacio de lu al qual accideys; e l’autra manieyra es que nos motas vetz havem necessitat de castracio de autras bestias per les juvamentz nostres per aquelas, ayssi cum de motos, e de bocs, e de porcs, e de semblantz a las bestias.	"Know that castration is condemned in our law, but because it has been requested of me that I remember this in this book, and it is not necessary to remember it except for two ways: the first is so that it may be known by those who study medicine when they are asked about this, that they may know its treatment; and the second way is that we often have a need for castration of other beasts for our uses for those animals, such as mules, goats, pigs, and similar beasts."
E donc dic que castracio es fayta en dos manieyras: o per atrissio, o per fissura a seccio.	"And therefore I say that castration is done in two ways: either by crushing or by cutting through a section."
Mays en aquela que es fayta per atrissio, la via de la opera es que nos fassam cezer la bestia en aygua cauda entro que·ls genetius de lu sian mollificatz e sian linhitz e que pendan.	When an injury is caused by a blow, the method of treatment is to seize the beast in heated water until its genitals are softened and made limp, and then suspend it.
E aprop pren aquels am la tua ma entro que sian resols e no apparescan dejos le tocament.	And furthermore take those with your hand so that they are resolved and do not appear outside the touching point.
Mays en castracio fayta per fissura e seccio, cove que tu tenguas la bestia e premas la codena dels testicols de lu am la ma senestra.	Moreover, in castration performed through incision and sectioning, you should hold the beast and press the cord of its testicles with your left hand.
E aprop lia le suspensori, e inscideys sobre quascun huou am una seccio entro que dos huous proceseysso.	And moreover tie the suspensory ligament, and make an incision over each one with a section so that two halves proceed from it.
E aprop inscideys aquels pus que auras quascu excorjat.	And moreover cut those parts that will have extruded outwards.
E no leysses sobre aquels del ciphac alcuna causa, sino le ciphac subtil le qual es sobre les vazes.	Do not leave anything on the scrotum except for the thin skin which is above the testicles.
E aquesta manieyra de castracio es milhor la qual es fayta per atrissio, quar atrissio fort leu layssa alcuna causa dels testicols per que la bestia desira coyt.	And this method of castration is better than the one performed by crushing because crushing leaves no trace of the testicles and makes the beast desire copulation.
E aprop cura la plagua entro que sia sanada.	And furthermore treat the wound until it is healed.
Capitol .lxx.	"Chapter Seventy."
De la cura de hermafrodozia.	"On the Treatment of Hermaphroditism."
Hermafrodozia en les homes es segon dos manieyras: la una es quar o appar en aquo que siec l’espazi en la codena de testiculs, en aquel que es entre dos testiculs figura quar cunh de femna en la qual so pels.	"In men, hermaphroditism occurs in two ways: the first is when it appears in that space between the testicles where it resembles a vulva with menstrual blood."
E alcunas veguadas de aquel corr urina le qual es en la codena dels testiculs.	"And sometimes urine flows from that area between the testicles."
Mays en las femnas es una specia: e es que·l conh de la femna sobre le pentenilh es ayssi cum dos testiculs de home un pauc de tot yminiheys a la partida deforo ayssi cum le perpucii de home e dos testicols.	"In women, it is one species: and that is when the vulva on the pubis appears like two testicles of a man, a little bit smaller at their opening, like the penis of a man and two testicles."
E la curacio es de tres specias: de dos dels homes e de una specia de las femnas.	"And its treatment is of three kinds: two for men and one for women."
E es que cove que tu inscidas aquelas carns ajustadas entro que efuga la emprecio de aquela, e aprop que cures aquelas am curacio de las autras plaguas.	"And you should insert those joined flesh between the opening of that (vulva) and cure it with the cure for other sores."
E en la segonda specia dels homes de la qual yeys urina la qual es en la codena dels testiculs, no es curacio ni opperacio en lu.	"And in the second kind of men where urine flows from between the testicles, there is neither cure nor operation for it."
Capitol .xxi.	"Chapter XXI."
De lentinge e de carn eminent per causas de las femnas.	"Of lint and flesh protruding due to causes in women."
Lentige fort leu es ajustada sobre causas naturals entro que es etressat e es fayt leg le reguardament; e alcunas veguadas es magnificada en alcunas femnas en tant entro que es spandit ayssi cum en les homes e perve entro al coito.	"Freckles, being naturally formed between the skin's surface and its depth, are noticed due to observation. Sometimes, in some women they become prominent, spreading similarly as in men, even during intercourse."
Adonc cove que tu tenguas la superfluitat de lentinge am la tua ma o am unci e inscidas.	"Then you should remove the surplus of lint with your hand or tweezers and discard it."
E no ultimes en inscizio, majorment en le preon de la razit, per so que no endevengua flux de sanc.	"And finally, when cutting, especially around the wound's perimeter, to avoid bleeding."
E aprop cura aquela am curacio de las plaguas entro que sia sanada.	"And thus treat those with plague until they are healed."
Mays carn nascuda es carn que nays en le horrifici de la mayre entro que umple aquel, e fort leu es eyssit a las partidas deforo segon semblansa de coa (e per aquo alscus primiers appelero aquo “malautia caudada”); donc cove que nos inscidam ayssi cum inscidem lentinge, e curem aquela entro que sia sanada.	"Born flesh is flesh that appears during pregnancy within the uterus until it fills it entirely, and for this reason it is called "hairy disease". Therefore we should remove it as we remove lint and treat it until it heals."
Capitol .lxxii.	"This is chapter seventy-two."
De curacio de alratica.	"On the treatment of leprosy."
Alratica es que le conh de la femna no sia perforat, o sia le trauc petit.	"Leprosy is when a woman's vulva is not pierced or is barely torn."
E es o natural o accidental.	"And it can be either natural or accidental."
Accidental es per malautia la qual ha precedit, e aquela es fayta o per carn nada ajustada o per ciphac subtil o espes.	"Accidental occurs due to prior illness, and it is caused by lack of flesh, poorly attached skin, or thick, rough calluses."
E es fayt o en le preon de la mayre, o en les costatz de lu, o en le pus sobira de lu, o en le pus bas de lu, e prohibeys de cuoyt e de enprenguacio e de enfantament, e fort leu prohibeys las mestruas.	"And it happens either at the entrance of the womb, or on its sides, or on the pubic skin above it, or below it. It inhibits coitus, pregnancy and childbirth, and often inhibits menstruation as well."
E la cognicio de aquela es fayta per reguardament de la metrona, si la oppilacio es apparent, propdana; mays si no es apparent, lahoras tu cerqua aquela am les tieus ditz o am le ray.	"And its diagnosis is made by examining the vulva, if it appears open, it is considered prominent; but if it does not appear open, you should examine it closely with your fingers or a speculum."
Mays si oppilacio es per ciphac subtil, e es propda a las doas labias, lahoras tu coyta e disromp aquela.	"But if the opening is due to thick, rough calluses and appears between both lips, you should cut it open and remove it."
E es que pauses sobre las doas labias pulvils, e aprop pausa les tieus ditz indicz de amdoas las mas encemps.	"And when it pauses over both labia minora, its examination is indicated by inserting your fingers from both sides as far as they will go."
E la femna sia sobre le sieu dos, las sieuas coyssas extendudas, e aprop exten las doas labias am forsa entro que aquel ciphac subtil sia romput e la oppilacio sia uberta.	"And when the woman is lying on her back with her legs extended, she should extend both labia minora with force until that rough callus is broken and the opening is exposed."
E aprop pren lana e enbeu le4 en oli e pausa aquela sobre·l loc, e jagua am home le dia per so que·l loc inscis no sia consolidat.	"And then she should take some lint soaked in oil and place it on that location, and leave it there for a day so that the wound does not heal over."
Mays si le ciphac es gros e espes, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquel am spatum lat o am fuelha de mirta.	"But if the callus is thick and rough, you should incise it with a scalpel or a myrtle leaf."
Mays si la oppilacio es per carnada, lahoras suspen aquela am unci, e inscideys aquela.	"But if the opening is due to lack of flesh, you should suspend that area with a hook and then incise it."
E sian am tu las medicinas que fan cessar flux de sanc ses mordicacio, ayssi cum ahacatia, e sanc de drago, e enses, ajustat am album de huou.	"And use medicines that stop bleeding without biting, such as aloe, dragon's blood, and mastic mixed with egg white."
E aprop aministra una canulha de plom ampla per so que la plagua no sia consolidada leugierament.	"And then insert a wide lead cannula so that the wound does not heal too quickly."
E tengua aquela per alcus jorns e aministra calgua de li sec.	"And keep it like that for several days and apply hot compresses of flaxseed water."
E aprop sia curada am l’autra curacio de consolidacio entro que sia sanada.	"And then treat it with the other consolidation treatment until it is healed."
E alcunas vetz accideys en la mayre nativitat de autres carns, e lahoras cove que inscidas segon aquesta manieyra.	"And sometimes it occurs in the natural opening of other flesh, and in that case you should incise according to this method."
Mays si aysso es per apostema crancos, a l’apostema crancos le qual es en la mayre no sia fayta contrarietat am ferr en deguna manieyra.	"But if this is due to a hard abscess in the womb, you should not use any iron instrument against it."
Capitol .lxxiii.	Chapter .73
De la cura de emorroydas e de tayl e de botor roja que accideysso en le conh de las femnas.	Chapter .73
Emorroydas so apprecio dels orificis de motas venas entro que de aquelas corro mot sanc continuadament; e cum so antiquadas emorroydas e son fayts theyls.	"Hemorrhoids are recognized as orifices of many veins where blood flows continuously; and when these hemorrhoids become ancient, they are made thick."
E ja yeu he dit en la divisio las specias de aquelas e les senhals de aquelas, e diyre ayssi aquelas que recebo curacio e aquelas que no recebo curacio.	"And you have already spoken about the division of species and signs of those, saying which ones receive treatment and which ones do not."
Donc dic que emorroydas e theyls quan so en le preon de la mayre e no apparo al sentiment, lahoras en aquelas no sia fayta curacio am ferr.	"Therefore I say that hemorrhoids and piles, when they are in the front of the anus and do not appear to the touch, at that time they should not be treated with iron."
Mays aquelas las quals so en le orrifici de la mayre sobre las quals catz sentiment, so aquelas que so curadas.	"But those which are in the orifice of the anus where one can feel them, are those which are cured."
E cove que tu metas la femna en mayso frega e aprop exten atheyl am les forfexs, o am drap aspre, e inscideys aquelas am las razitz.	"And you should put the woman in a warm bath and then extend her buttocks with forceps, or with rough cloth, and incise those with scissors."
E aprop pulveriza sobre aquelas deves le fluxs del sanc de una de las polveras insciscivas ses mordicacio, ayssi cum acassia e semblant ad aquels.	"And then sprinkle upon them, against the flow of blood from one of the powder boxes without biting, thus with acacia and similar to those."
E aprop enpellesca les sieus pes per una hora, e aprop pausa aquela en aygua freja.	"And then let her sit on her heels for an hour, and then let her pause in warm water."
E si persevera le fluxs del sanc, lahoras fay aquela sezer en decoccio de sumat e de scorsas de milgranas e de gualas e de semblantz.	"And if the bleeding persists, then let her drink a decoction of sumac and the bark of thorns from the blackthorn tree and oak trees and similar ones."
E aprop pren farina de ordi e comfiys aquela am miel e vi agre e fay emplastre am aquo sobre le dos de lu.	"And then take barley flour, mix it with honey and vinegar and make a plaster with that on her back."
E si le sanc es abscindit, bo es; e sino, fay adherir am dos ventozas, e a las mamilhas ses escarificatio.	"And if the blood has been cut off, it is good; but otherwise let it adhere with two bandages, and on the breasts without scarification."
E aprop pren lana e submergeys aquela am suc de coliandre o am suc de arnagloza o am suc de guarravier am vi pentit e fay adherir al loc; e aprop cura le loc am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	"And then take wool and immerse it in the juice of coriander or in the juice of hyssop or in the juice of greater plantain with white wine and adhere it to the place, and also treat the place with a poultice until it is healed."
Mays athyl rog le qual es de aspre reguardament, cove que tu inscidas aquo que a tu appar de aquel segon que he dit en theyl engualment.	"But if there are rough and harsh rules, you should incise that which appears of those according to what I have said in their treatment."
E cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	"And cure it until it is healed."
Capitol .lxxiv.	"Chapter LXXIV."
De perforacio de eyssedura accident en la mayre.	"Of the Perforation of an Abscess Accidentally in the Belly."
Motas specias de apostemas accideysso en la mayre, ayssi cum cranc e apostema lapident e ulceracios e adhubelat e erpetromens e fistulas emorroyas e raguarrias e thyl e autres apostemas.	Many kinds of ulcers occur on the thigh, such as hard and fleshy tumors, ulcers, inflamed sores, scabs, serpiginous fistulas, blood-filled cavities, and others.
E yeu ja he dit aquestas malautias e las specias de aquelas e les senhals de aquelas, e las curacios de lor en la divisio.	I have already spoken about these illnesses, their types, symptoms, and treatments in the chapter on ulcers.
E cove que yeu digua en aquest tractat de apostema caut le qual ve en la mayre quan es dels apostemas que collegeysso sania, e si vols saber en qual manieyra se fa la opperacio de lu am ferr.	And now I will explain in this treatise how to cauterize the ulcer that appears on the thigh when it comes from ulcers that do not heal, and if you wish to know how the operation is performed with iron.
Adonc cove que tu consideres si la dolor de la apostema en le sieu comensament es aguda am percussio e flecma e febre, e vezes aquel enrogezir e si catz sobre aquel le sentiment, lahoras no·t coytes am perforacio de lu, e cura aquel am aquo que ajuda sobre la maturacio entro que cesse la acuitat dels accidentz.	Therefore, you should consider whether the pain of the ulcer at its beginning is acute with percussion and swelling and fever, if it becomes reddened and tender to the touch. Then, do not cut into it with a cautery until it begins to mature, and treat it with water that helps with maturation until the sharpness of the symptoms ceases.
E lahoras cove que tu fassas cezer la femna sobre una cezelha que aia doas cezelhas; e recline sobre le sieu dos e ajusta les sieus pes a la partida pus dejos del ventre, e las sieus coyssas sian expandudas, e pausa les sieus brasses dejos les sieus denols, e lia quascus am liament ad aquo convenient.	"Now you must place the woman on an elevated surface that has two pillows; she should recline on her back and adjust her feet close to the opening of her womb, with her thighs spread wide. Then position her arms beside her breasts, binding each one appropriately."
E aprop la matrona segua del latz dreyt e aministre le instrument am le qual es ubert le orrifici de la mayre, la forma del qual vindra en aquelas causas que·s faran aprop.	"And then the midwife takes her place on the right side and administers the instrument with which she opens the vagina, whose form will come up in these cases that they will discuss next."
E cove quan vols ministrar aquest instrument que tu fiques am lo ray le preon de la mayre de la femna, e aquo que del instrument es intrat en la mayre no sia mays que·l preon de la mayre e leda le malaute.	"And when you wish to administer this instrument, place it at the entrance of the woman's vagina; ensure that only the tip of the instrument enters the vagina and does not cause discomfort."
Mays si l’estrument es major que·l preon de la mayre, lahoras cove que tu pauses pulvils sobre la textura del preon de la mayre per sso que sia prohibit l’intrament de tot instrument en le preon de la mayre.	"But if the instrument is larger than the opening of the vagina, then you should apply powder on the surface of the opening of the vagina so that no instrument can enter it."
E cove que tu pauses le vertitge que corr en le strument del latz pus desus e que le ministre tengua le strument e revolva le vertitge entro que sia ubert le orrifici de la mayre.	"And you should hold the thread that runs through the instrument on the left side and above, so that when administering it, they must keep the instrument steady while turning the thread clockwise to open the vagina."
E cum appar la excitura, e es tocada am la ma e es leon e molh, lahoras cove que tu secces aquela deves le cap de lu am spatum lat.	"And when the head appears and is touched with the hand, it must be gently lifted and dried with a linen cloth; then you should cleanse the child's face with a sponge."
E cum la sania es evacuada, lahoras cove que tu pauses en la plagua una meca submersa en oli rozat o oli vert en le qual sia alcuna stiptisitat; e pausa la calca7 en la seccio en le preon de la mayre.	"And when the child is born, then you should place a cloth soaked in rose oil or olive oil with some astringent properties on the umbilical cord; and place it on the section at the opening of the vagina."
E pause deforo la mayre e sobre le pentenilh lana munda submersa en aygua en la qual sian bulidas malvas.	"And then cleanse the woman and over the child, place a clean cloth soaked in water with boiled mallow leaves."
E aprop sia curada aprop dos dias am enguent le qual conveneys ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	"And afterwards it should be cared for properly two days after birth with ointment that is suitable until it is healed."
E alcunas veguadas es lavada la mayre e la plagua enayssi que es cristerisat am aygua e mel, e aprop am aygua en la qual es bulhida razit de liri o de aristologia longua, e aprop retorna al enguent.	"And sometimes the woman and the placenta are washed in this way: they are crystallized with water and honey, and then returned to the ointment. And sometimes it is washed with water in which rose hips or long pepper have been boiled."
E si la plagua es dedintz en la mayre ameguada, lahoras cove que tu sias prohibit de la curacio de lu am ferr, habantz cura aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio.	"And if the placenta remains inside the womb after birth, then it is prohibited to perform any surgery on it with an iron instrument; they should have care of it with water as we have said in this division."
Capitol .lxxv.	Chapter LXXV.
A ensenhar las matronas en qual manieyre les enbrios bius sian medicatz quan yeysso segon figura no-natural.	"To teach midwives how to treat women whose births are difficult and do not proceed according to nature."
Necessaria causa es que la matrona conogua en le comensament la figura del enfantament natural per senhals de lu, e es que quan tu vezas la femna expremar a las partidas dejos e desira odorar le ayre, e sobre aquo es enleujada per aquo que sobre ela es del part, e festina le eyssiment del enbrio, lahoras sapias que aquest part es segon figura natural, e es l’eyssiment de lu sobre le sieu cap, e la segondina am aquel o suspensa o pendent del ombelic.	"It is necessary that the midwife recognizes at the beginning the figure of a natural birth by its signs, and this happens when she sees the woman pressing her thighs together and desiring to smell the air, and afterwards she feels relieved by what comes out over her, and hastens the birth of the child; then you know that this birth is according to nature. And this is the emergence of the head first, followed by the shoulders hanging from it or suspended from the umbilical cord."
Donc cum tu vezes aquels senhals, lahoras cove que·l ventre de lu sia compremut per so que l’embrio deysenda leugerament quar quan deyssen sobre le sieu cap, deysen a lu la segondina, e es mondada de aquelas superfluitatz am bona mondificacio.	"Therefore, when you see those signs, it is necessary that the woman's belly is pressed so that the child comes out gently as it emerges over its head; then the shoulders follow, and they are cleaned of those excesses with good cleansing."
Mays aquel que es otra aquest part es no-natural e no-lausable, quar quan le enbrio es eyssit sobre sos pes e·l cos de lu es eyssit devant le cap de lu e·ls pes de lu, e la ma de lu una, o al pe de lu i, o es eyssit le cap de lu e la ma de lu, o al ventre de lu, e fort leu es convertit sobre le sieu col, e semblant de las figuras de lu no-lausablas.	"But if the birth is not according to nature and is not desirable, then it occurs when the child emerges feet first, with its body emerging before its head and feet; or one of its hands emerges first, or its foot, or its head emerges together with its hand or belly. And thus it turns upside down on its neck, resembling those figures that are not desirable."
Don necessaria causa es a la matrona que sia savia e subtil en totas aquelas causas, e que·s guarde de error e de decepcio.	"Therefore, it is necessary for the midwife to be wise and subtle in all of these causes and to guard against error and deception."
E yeu so mostrant tota figura de aquelas, e qual engen es en aquelas per so que sia significat per aquo e sia stat sobre aquo.	"And here we are showing you all the figures of those that are not according to nature, and what is their cause, so that it may be understood by this and established on this."
Quan le feyt es eyssit sobre le sieu cap per egrecio natural, e aquel es vehement sobre la femna e es fayt a lu part dificil, e vezes la vertut de lu ja debelitada, lahoras fay aquela sezer , o que las femnas tenguan lu, e evapora le conh de lu am fenugrec coyt e am olis humitz.	"When the feet emerge first due to an error of nature, and it is violent over the woman and difficult for her to give birth, and she sees that her strength has weakened, then they should seize it by its feet or what the women hold onto, and evaporate its head with fenugreek cooked in oil and humid earth."
E aprop entrometa la metrona entre les sieus ditz espatum petit e fenda am aquel la segondina, o secce aquela am la sua ungla entro que corro aquo que es en ela de humiditat.	"And also the midwife should insert herself between its legs and tear open the second with her finger or cut it open with her fingernail until what is inside it of humidity flows out."
E preme le ventre de la femna entro que deyssenda le fet.	"And press the woman's belly until the child comes out."
Mays si no deyssen, lahoras cove que la femna sia cristirizada de mucellage de ptilli e mucellage de fenugrec am cizami.	"But if it does not come out, then the woman should be crystallized with dough of barley and dough of fenugreek with sesame."
E aprop comanda a lu, aprop le cristeri, que sia compremuda e fay aquela stornudar am condisi; e te la boca de lu e·l nas de lu per huna hora, quar le fet sira foro-getat tantost.	"And then command her to be pressed, and also she should sneeze with conditions; and put your mouth over hers and your nose over hers for one hour, because the child will soon forget."
E si las doas mas del fet so foro-getadas al comensament, lahoras cove que tu redusiscas aquelas am fecilitat petit a petit.	"And if both arms of the child are forgotten at the beginning, then you should reduce them gently little by little."
Mays si no obezeys al intrament, lahoras pausa la femna sobre una cezelha e leva les pes de lu sus, e aprop concuceys la cezelha sobre la terra; e la femna sia tenguda que no caia deves la concussio.	"But if it does not obey the manipulation, then place the woman on a pillow and lift her feet up, and also strike the pillow against the ground so that the woman is held that she does not fall due to the blow."
E si las mas no son dedintz tornadas e morr le fet, lahoras inscideys aquelas e extratz le romament del fet o lia le cors a la ma de lu am drap e extratz aquel am equalitat, quar aquel sira foro-getat.	"And if the arms are not properly returned and the child dies, then incise those veins and extract the flesh of the child or tie its body to your hand with cloth and extract it equally, because that will soon forget."
De eyssiment del embrio sobre les sieus pes.	"On the birth of the child feet first."
Quan le fet yeys sobre les sieus pes, lahoras cove que tu impelliscas aquels en sus, e aprop convertas le fet petit, e aprop que engualhes aquel, e aprop que prenguas un pe de lu e extendas aquels petit a petit.	"When the child emerges feet first, then you should push those up and also turn the child gently around, and grasp its heel with your finger, and take one of its feet and stretch it out little by little."
Mays cum son eyssit entro a las coyssas, lahoras tu comanda a lu que se exprema, e fay aquela extornudar am condizi, quar sira foro-getat si Deus lo vol.	"But when it is inside the hips, then you should command it to press itself out and make it sneeze with conditions, because it will soon forget if God wishes."
E si no es foro-getat am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras tu retorna le fet petit a petit entro que pauses aquel segon figura natural, quar aquel sira lahoras foro-getat am leugier eyssiment.	"And if it is not forgotten with what we have recommended, then return the child gently little by little until you place it according to natural figure, because that will soon forget at that moment with gentle birth."
E si es prohibit am tot aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras pren de musellage de altea e de goma dissolvuda, e percuteys tot en le mortier per bona percussio, e aprop linieys am aquo le conh de la femna, el pus bas del ventre de lu.	"And if it is prohibited with all that we have recommended, then take dough of mallow and dissolved gum, and grind everything well in the mortar, and also line the woman's head, especially the lower part of her belly."
E aprop fay aquela cezer en aygua tebeza, entro que consegua les ypocondias.	"And also make her drink hot water decoction until she achieves contractions."
E cum vezes que las partidas dejos de lu so lenificadas, lahoras fay a lu subfumiguacio de mirta e sub-pausa aquela a lu.	"When the passages of the child are softened, then make it steam with myrtle and keep it warm."
E quan te la sub-fumiguacio per una hora, lahoras tu la fay sezer sobre una cezelha, e aprop fay aquela stornudar e extrenh la boca de lu, e levas de aquela, e prem la partida pus bassa del ventre de lu am leugiera compressio, quar le fet sira tantost foro-getat.	"And when it has had steam for one hour, then make her lie down on a pillow and make her sneeze and draw out her mouth, take that out from there, and press the lower part of the birth passage gently because the child will soon forget."
Eyssiment del fet sobre les sieus denols e las suas mas.	"Birth of the child with its back first and arms."
Quan le fet eyssira segon aquesta forma, lahoras tu engenies en entrometen las suas mas petit a petit; e aprop la femna stia evessada sobre le sieu col, e les pes de lu pengo en jos, e aquelas sia jasent sobre le lieyt, e complegua las suas mas.	"When the child emerges in this form, then insert its arms little by little; and also the woman should be lying on her back with her feet hanging down and those arms resting on the bed, and she should complete its arms."
E aprop prem sobre le ventre de lu petit a petit, e aprop extratz aquo que es dejos les pes de lu de las aurelhas entro que sia preparada en la partida pus dejos.	"And also press gently on her belly little by little, and also extract what is behind its feet from the ears until it is prepared for the passage of birth."
E si le fet no es fora-getat, lahoras pren les pes de lu e mau aquels am movement vehement, e aprop prem aquo que es sobre les ypocondres petit a petit entro que le fet puege a las partidas desus.	"If the child is not forgotten, then take its feet and shake them vigorously, and also press what is on the hips little by little until the child reaches the passages above."
E aprop entrometa las suas mas e engualhe le fet petit a petit, e comanda a la femna que se exprema entro que le fet sia foro-getat.	"And also insert its arms and turn the child gently little by little, and command the woman to press herself out until the child is forgotten."
Eyssiment del fet latutidinalment pendent una de las suas mas.	Guessed Translation: Examination of the latitudinally hanging one of its hands.
Sia engeniat en reduccio de la ma de lu, mays si no podes aquela reduzir, lahoras eleva la femna e fe aquela anar.	Translation: If it cannot be reduced by that hand, then lift the female and make her go there.
E si anar no pot, lahoras fay la jazer sobre le lieyt, e concuteys las coyssas de lu am concussio vehement, e aprop aministra liamentz les quals yeu e recomtatz de mucillages.	If she cannot go there, then make her lie down on the bed, and strike the parts of her with violent concussion, and promptly administer remedies composed of mucilages.
E si es vengut le enfantament, lahoras fay aquela sezer sobre cezelha, e aprop studia sobre la reduccio de la ma, e enguala le fet segon figura natural, e fay stornudar la femna e comanda a lu que comprema a si entro que sia foro-getat.	If childbirth has come, then make her sit on the birthing chair, and immediately study the reduction of the hand, guide the fetus according to its natural shape, make the woman sneeze, and command her to push hard until it is expelled.
Eyssiment del fet sobre·l col expandudas las suas mas e la fassia de lu es al dos de la sua mayre.	Examination of the fetus on the collar with expanded hands and its fascia behind that of its mother
Cove que la matrona tengua la ma del fet e aprop revolva aquel petit a petit, e eque aquel am facilitat.	That the midwife should hold the hand of the fetus and gradually turn it around, and ease it out.
E cum es e quant so es engualhat, e lahoras pausa sobre le conh de lu aquo que havem recomtat de oli e de mucellages.	And when it has come and as much as possible is expelled, then pause on the neck of it until what we have recommended of oil and mucilages has been absorbed.
E aprop comandas a lu que·s maugua petit a petit, e quan auras feyt aquo, lahoras fay aquela cezer sobre una cezelha e comanda li que sia inclinada sobre le latz dreyt, e aprop comanda a lu que sia compremuda; e fay aquela stornudar am condizi.	Then command her to push little by little, and when she has done this, then make her sit on a birthing chair with the condition that she leans over the right side, and promptly command her to push; and make her sneeze.
Exitus foetus praeparati super latus.	The exit of the fetus prepared on the left side
Quan deyssen a horrifici de la mayre segon aquesta manieyra, considera, e lahoras tu inscideys la segondina am la tua ungla entro que sia evacuada de la humiditat.	When it has been expelled from the mother in this manner, consider, and then you should incise the secondine with your nail until it is evacuated of moisture.
E si le fet es suspendut sobre la cara e·l col de lu, lahoras tu inscideys aquela del embelic, per so que no sia retengut e mora.	And if the fetus is suspended on its face and neck, then you should incise that of the amniotic sac, so that it is not retained and dies.
E aprop empelleys le fet a las partidas dedintz entro que pauses aquel segon que cove, e manda a la femna que comprema a si alcunas veguadas, e el sira fora-getat am eyssiment leugier, si Dieus o vol.	Then push the fetus out towards its exit until that which is necessary passes, and command the woman to push herself several times, and it will be expelled with ease if God wills.
Exitus geminorum aut foetuum multorum.	Exit of twins or multiple fetuses
Sapias que gemels motas veguadas so natz, e alcunas vetz naysso tres o quatre , mays aquo es estranh e tart s’endeve; mays v so causas foro natura, e no vivo.	Know that many times twins are born, and sometimes three or four, but this is rare and strange and not to be expected; but two causes are natural, namely:
E conte aquelas, ja sia que sian montiplicatz, una segondina, e son seperatz per ciphac, distingen aquels enter le liguament en l’ombilic de cascun de aquels E alcunas veguadas so foro-getatz ayssi cum es un fet per eyssiment natural leugier, e so eysitz alcunas veguadas per eyssiment no-lausabla ayssi cum havem recomtat.	And count those that are multiplied, whether they be one or more secundine, and they are separate by caul, distinguished among each other within the ligament in the navel of each of them. And sometimes they are expelled thus as if it were one fetus through natural easy exit, and sometimes they are expelled through difficult exit as we have recommended.
E si son dificils alcus de lor deves le enfantament e perveno ad aquo que havem dit de las figuras no-naturals, lahoras tu cura aquels ayssi cum havem recontat.	And if some of them are difficult to bring forth and come thus as we have said about the unnatural figures, then care for them as we have mentioned.
E si’ la matrona subtil e fassa aquo que fa am facilitat e subtilitat, e am tarditat, e sia ingeniat segon tota figura segon que es a lu preparat de l’engen amenant a salut.	And if the midwife is skilled and does what she does with ease and skillfulness, and with patience, and if she is knowledgeable according to every figure as it has been prepared for her by the engineer bringing about health.
Rememoratio eius quod formatur in matrice ex embrionibus et Abortiuntur.	Remembrance of that which is formed in the matrix from embryos and miscarriages
Alcunas veguadas son formatz en la mayre un, e dos, e tres, e quatre, e v, e vi, e vii, e mays x, e ja es deves mi verificat que una femna abortem ne getet vi, e una autra x totz formatz, la qual causa fo fayta per mensuracio dels glorios savis.	Sometimes one, two, three, four, five, six, seven, and more than ten are formed in the womb, and it has been verified that a woman miscarried seven, and another one expelled all ten that were formed, which cause was made by measurement by the glorious wise.
E tot aysso cove que sia en la sciencia de la matrona quar fort leu ad aquela parve semblant de aquo, e donc opause se ad aquo am so que cove.	And all this should be known by the midwife for she must know well that small figure which is similar to it, and thus she may act according to what is necessary.
Capitol .lxxvi.	Chapter LXXVI
De extraccio del fet quan es mort.	Of the extraction of the dead fetus
Quan tu curas le fet mort am aquo que havem dit en la divisio de la medicacio e no es defora eyssit, e tu yest forsat usar de opperacio am ma, lahoras cove que consideras si la femna es de sana vertut e no es am alcu dels accidentz per les quals sobre ela es temuda perdicio.	When you care for the dead fetus as we have said in the division of midwifery and it has not yet been expelled, and you are forced to use an operation with your hand, then you must consider if the woman is of good health and does not have any of the accidents by which loss may be feared over her.
Lahoras cove que la femna sia envessada sobre le lieyt sobre le sieu dos, e sia le cap de lu enclinat enjos e las coyssas de lu sian elevadas.	Then the woman must be placed on her left side on the bed, and her head should be inclined downwards and her hips raised.
E·l ministre tengua aquela de doas partz o sia liada en le lieyt per so que·l cos de lu no se extenda deves la extraccio del fet.	And the attendant must hold her from both parts or else she must lie on the bed so that her body does not extend during the extraction of the fetus.
E aprop tu humecta la boca de la mayre de lu am olis humitz e am mucellage de altea e de fenugrec e de semensa de li.	And then you must moisten the mouth of the womb with olive oil and with mucilage of marsh mallow, fenugreek, and linseed.
E aprop unte la matrona la sua ma am aquels olis e mucellages, e aprop entrometa la sua ma am fecilitat en la mayre, e aprop cerque am la ma loc en le qual fique les uncis en le fet.	And then the midwife should anoint her hand with those oils and mucilages, and then she should insert her hand gently into the womb, and then she should search with her hand for where the hook is located in the fetus.
E locs convenient en aquo: adonc tu considera si le fet es preparat que deysenda sobre le sieu cap, e lahoras tu fique les uncis en les huels de lu, o en le col, o en la boca, o en le palat, o dejos la barba, o en la furcula de lu, o en les locs propdas de las costas, o dejos les ypocondres.	And the convenient place for this is: then consider if the fetus is ready to be expelled on its head, and then you should place the hook in the fetus' ears or neck or mouth or palate or beard or furcula or near the ribs or below the hypochondria.
Mays si le deysendiment es sobre les pes de lu, lahoras en le pentenilh, o en le mieg de las costas.	But if the expulsion is on its feet, then in the perineum or middle of the buttocks.
E cove que tengua le unci am la ma dreyta, e pausa la curvitat de lu en aquel loc le qual es entre les ditz de la ma senestra, e entrometa la ma am facilitat e fique le unci en alcu de aquels locs les quals havem ditz, entro que pervengua a la causa boyda.	And it is necessary to hold the hook with the right hand, and place its curve in that location which is between the fingers of the left hand, and insert the hand gently until you reach the desired cause of the child's body.
E aprop pause e fique en la apposicio de lu un autre unci, o le tertz si es necessitat, per so que sia atraccio engual, e no sia extencio segon la sua rectetut tant solament.	And then hold and place another hook or the third one if necessary, in order to have equal traction and not just lengthwise extension according to its correctness.
Ans sia maugut a tota partida, per so que l’eyssiment de lu sia alleujat ayssi cum es fayt en dent deves la eradicacio de lu.	And may it be useful for all deliveries, so that the expulsion of the fetus is alleviated just as it happens in tooth extraction during its eradication.
E cove en lu aquo que es entre lor que la extencio sia mollificada; e si alcuna partida de lu es retenguda, lahoras cove que la matrona unte alcus sieus ditz am oli e entrometa aquels espertament e revolva am aquels aquo que es retengut.	And it is necessary that during this the extension should be softened; and if any part of the fetus is retained, then the midwife must anoint some of her fingers with oil and insert them gently and turn them around in what is retained.
Donc si la partida del fet es fora-getada, lahoras les uncis sian permudatz entra loc le qual sia pus aut; e fay aysso entro que tot le fet sia fora-getat.	Therefore if the expulsion of the fetus has not happened yet, then the hooks should be changed to another place where they may push more effectively; and do this until the entire fetus has been expelled.
Mays si la ma es eyssida denant l’autra, e no es possible reduzir aquela per la coartacio de lu, lahoras cove que drap sia envolopat sobre aquela; e aprop extratz aquela entro que tota sia fora-getada, e inscideys aquela o en la junctura de la ma o en le coyde.	But if the hand has come out before the other, and it is not possible to reduce it by its contraction, then cloth should be wrapped around it; and then extract it until all of it has been expelled, and cut it off either at the junction of the hand or in the elbow.
E ayssi cove que fassas en l’autra ma e en les dos pes.	And do the same with the other hand and both feet.
Mays si le cap del fet es gran, o accideys a lu coartacio en le eyssiment, o es en le cap de lu aygua ajustada, lahoras cove que entrometa entre les ditz espatum spinos e fenda le cap e extragua la aygua, o que discroba aquel am un instrument le qual es nompnat “alundat”, la forma del qual vindra am las formas dels autres instruments en le capitol le qual es aprop aquest.	But if the head of the fetus is large, or it occurs contraction in its expulsion, or there is water in the head of the child, then you must insert between the spinous processes of the pubic bones and split open the head and extract the water, or remove it with an instrument called "alundat", the form of which will come with the forms of other instruments in the chapter that follows this one.
E semblantment fassa si·l fet es de gran cap per natura: e lahoras cove que inscida aquel am algematu, o que prengua aquel am alunda ayssi cum havem dit; e aprop extra les osses am les forceps.	And do the same if the fetus has a large head by nature: and then it is necessary to cut off that with an instrument called "gematu", or take it out with the alundat as we have said, and then extract the bones with forceps.
E si le cap es eyssit e es coartat deves la furcula, lahoras sia fendut entro que la humiditat la qual es en le pietz sia efunduda.	And if the head has been expelled but is contracted by the pubic arch, then it should be split open until the fluid in the fontanelle has flowed out.
Mays si no es complicat, ni obezeys a eyssiment, lahoras tu inscideys le cap tantost segon que a tu sira possible.	But if it is not complicated and does not obey expulsion, then cut open the head immediately as much as you can manage on your own.
E si le dejos del ventre es apostemat o es en lu ydropici, lahoras cove que tu perfores aquel entro que corro la humiditat que es en lu.	And if there is an aposteme or hydrops in the lower abdomen, then you must perforate it until the fluid in it runs out.
Mays si le fet es sobre les sieus pes, lahoras la atraccio de lu es leugiera e la direccio de lu a la boca de la mayre es leugiera.	But if the fetus is lying on its back, then its attraction will be lighter and its direction to the mouth of the mother will be easier.
Mays si es coartat deves le ventre e·l pietz, lahoras cove que tu extraguas aquel am drap le qual auras envolopat sobre la tua ma, e que fendes le ventre e·l pietz entro que corra aquo que es en aquels.	"If the belly and chest are tightly bound, then you must remove that cloth which you have wrapped around your hand, and cut into the belly and chest so that whatever is inside may flow out."
Mays si les autres membres so ostatz e torna le cap, lahoras la metrona entrometa la ma senestra; mays si la boca de la mayre es huberta, lahoras intrometa la ma en le preon de layre, e cerque am aquela le cap, e atira aquel am les ditz entro a la boca de la mayre, e aprop entrometa en lu un unci, o dos uncis, e atire lu am aquels.	"If the other limbs are stretched out and the head is turned, then insert your left hand; but if the mouth of the mother is closed, then insert your hand into her throat, encircle the head with it, pull that towards those things [the limbs], and immediately put one or two fingers inside [the mouth] and push them in there."
E si la boca de la mayre es coartada per apostema caut le qual accideys a l’u, lahoras cove que no sia trebelhat sobre lu; abantz cove lahoras aministrar efusio de causas humidas grassas.	"And if the mouth of the mother is obstructed by an aposteme [thick swelling] that has happened to her, then it should not be troubled; rather, it is necessary at that time to administer effusion of thick humid causes."
E aministre emplastres; e segua le pacient en ayguas que mollifican e humectan.	"And apply poultices; and follow the patient with waters that soften and moisten."
E si le fet es sobre le sieu costat, lahoras si possible es, sia agulat: e sia aministrat aquo que havem dit en le fet viu.	"If the patient is on their side, if possible, turn them over; and administer what we have said in the case of a living person."
E si aquo no es possible, lahoras sia inscidit en pessas, e sia extrayt.	"And if this is not possible, then incision should be made through the peritoneum, and it should be opened."
E cove que non layssas alcuna causa dedintz de la segondina.	"Take care to leave no cause behind inside."
E cum tu auras complida tota la tua opperacio, lahoras aministra aquo que havem dit de la curacio en les apostemas cautz les quals accideysso de la mayre.	"And after you have completed your entire operation, then administer what we have said about the treatment of burnt wounds which occur during major operations."
E si accideys flux de sanc, lahoras deyssendas en ayguas stipticas e aministra l’autra curacio.	"If bleeding occurs, then apply styptic waters and administer the other treatments."
E yeu ja e vist una femna en le ventre de la qual era fet mort, e aprop sobre aquel foc autra veguada emprenhada, e aprop foc mort es le fet autre.	"I have seen a woman whose fetus died in her womb, and again she became pregnant shortly thereafter, and the second fetus also died."
Accidit al u aprop lonc temps apostema en le sieu embelic; e inflat es entro que foc ubert, e comensec a getar brac.	"It happened that about a long time after an ulcer formed in her uterus; it became inflamed internally where it was opened, and began to emit a bad smell."
E yeu fu appelhat a la cura de lu, e medicat a lu per lonc temps, e la plagua no es consolidada.	"And I was called for its treatment, and I treated it for a long time, but the illness did not resolve."
Adonc yeu pausegui sobre lu de alscunas causas emplastra de forta atraccio, e eyssic de lu un os, e aprop passero alcus jorns, e eyssic un autre os; e yeu fu trop meravilhat, cum en le ventre no sia os.	"Therefore I suspected that it might be caused by some sort of strong attraction, and I extracted one bone from it, and about a few days later, another bone was extracted; and I was very amazed because there are no bones in the uterus."
E adonc yeu cogitegui que eran dels osses del fet mort.	"And then I thought that they were the bones of the dead fetus."
Donc yeu enguisigui la plagua, e extrayssi de lu motz osses , la femna existent en las sieuas milhos disposicios, e ja visquec en tal manieyra per lonc temps, correc de lu un petit de brac.	"So I treated the illness, and extracted many bones from it, and the woman remained in good condition, living in that way for a long time without any bad odor coming from it."
E yeu no afermegui asso esser stranh, sino quar en aquo es sciensa e ajutori ad aquo que le metge artifec am la ma per curacio aministra.	"And I did not regard this as strange, because in this there is knowledge and assistance for the physician who performs cures with his own hand."
De las formas dels instrumentz que so necessaris a extrayre le fet.	"Regarding the shapes of the instruments that are necessary to extract the fetus."
Forma de vertitge am la qual es uberta la mayre:	"The shape of a hook with which the mouth is opened:"
Aquesta es la forma de strenhedor en le qual so engualhatz les libres, al qual engualhament sian dos virtitges en doas extremitatz de dos futz.	"This is the shape of a retractor in which two hooks are attached, with each hook having one tooth at its end."
May empero aquesta virtitge cove que sia pus subtil de strictori, e sia fayt o de eba o de fust de boys.	"However, this hook should be more subtle and made of either ivory or boxwood."
E sia la latitut de quascun fust quays dos ditz e le marge de quascu amdos quays un dit, e la longitut de quascu es un palm e mig; e en le mieg loc de dos fustz so dos ajustaments de aquel meteys fustz les quals ja son fermatz, dels quals la longitut es la maytat de un palm e un pauc mes, e la latitut de quascu es quay dos ditz, o un pauc mes.	"And each tooth should be two digits wide and one digit thick at its margin, with a length of one and a half palms; and in the middle space between the two teeth there are two adjustments for fitting that middle tooth, which are already fixed, with a length of about one and three-fourths palms and a width of about two digits or slightly more."
E aquestz dos additamentz sian entromeses en la boca de la mayre per que sia uberta am aquels quan tu revolves las doas prescriptas virtigges.	"And these two adjustments are inserted into the mouth of the uterus so that it can be opened using them when you turn the two specified hooks."
Forma autra semblant de aquela pus subtil e pus leugiera:	"Another shape similar to the previous one, but more subtle and lighter:"
Sia fayta de fustz de eba o de boys segon la semblansa de forceps.	"It should be made of ivory or boxwood according to the shape of forceps."
Mays empero en la extremitat de lu so dos additament ayssi cum vezes, e la longitut de aquels additament es quays un palm, e la latitut de quascu es dos ditz.	"But at the end of it there are two additions like this: , with each addition having a length of one palm and a width of two digits."
E cum tu vols am aquels ubrir la mayre, lahoras tu fay cezer la femna sobre le lieyt les pes pendentz, ubert aquo que es entre las coyssas de lu.	"And when you want to open the uterus with them, then have the woman lie on her back with her feet hanging down, opening what is between her legs."
E aprop obre la tua ma am le instrument ayssi cum fas am forfexs engualment segon la quantitat que vols de la aprecio de la boca de la mayre entro que la metrona fassa so que vols.	"And then open your hand with the instrument just like you do with forceps, according to the amount that you want of the opening of the mouth of the uterus, until the fetus comes out as you wish."
La forma de vertitge la qual diysero les antics:	"The shape of a hook which the ancients described:"
Forma de impellent am le qual es empellit le fet:	"The shape of an elevator with which the fetus is pushed up:"
Forma de amisidat2 am le qual es conterit le cap gran	"The shape of a spoon with which the large head is contained:"
E es asemblat a forceps al qual so dentz en la extremitat, ayssi cum vezes, e alcunas veguadas es fayt lonc ayssi cum forceps segon aquesta forma, ayssi cum vezes, al qual so dentz ayssi cum dentz de ressegua am le qual es inscidit e conterit.	"And it resembles forceps, with teeth at the end like this: , and sometimes it is made long like forceps according to this shape, like this: , with teeth like those of a retractor with which it is inserted and contained."
Forma de amesidat pauc:	"The shape of a small spoon:"
Forma de unci havent una spina:	"The shape of a hook having one spine:"
Forma de unci havent doas spinas:	"The shape of a hook having two spines:"
Forma de forceps a la qual so dentz de cerra am le qual le cap del fet sia conterit:	"The shape of forceps with teeth like a ratchet, with which the head of the fetus is contained:"
Forma de spatum havent dos extremitatz am le qual le cap es abscindit:	"The shape of a spatula having two ends with which the head is cut off:"
Forma de dos espatums latz:	"The shape of two wide spatulas:"
Totz aquels instrumentz so excersitatz, e quan mes so multiplicadas las specias de aquel e so preparadas deves le artifexs, quant es pus leugier a la sua opperacio e pus aut deves les homes per la sua quantitat.	"However many of these instruments are used, and when they are most multiplied in species and prepared by the craftsmen, it is still easier to operate with them, and more convenient for people due to their quantity."
E no obres de aquels instrumentz ja sia qua sia deves tu aparalhat, quar la necessitat de aquels no es excusabla.	"And do not use those instruments if there are none available, since the need for them is not excusable."
De extraccio de la segondina.	"Regarding the extraction of a secondine:"
Quan la segondina es retenguda deves le enfantament, lahoras cove que tu comandes a la malautae que retengua le sieu ale, e aprop fay aquela stornudar am condizi, e strenh la tua ma sobre la boca de lu e sobre las nars de lu, e si per aysso es defora eyssit, bo es.	"When the secondine is retained during childbirth, then you should order the sick woman to hold her breath, and then have her sneeze with caution, and press your hand over her mouth and nose. If it comes out this way, that is good."
E sino, lahoras tu pren una ola e perfora en la cuberta un trauc e pausa en aquela erbas ubrent la boca de la mayre, ayssi cum calament e ruda e anet e camamilla e scicados arabic e cassia lignea e santaurea.	"And if not, then take a cloth and pierce a hole in it, and place it on those herbs burned over the mouth of the uterus, such as calendula and rue and aneth and chamomile and saffron and cinnamon and costus and sandalwood."
Totas aquestas erbas o alcunas de lor sian submersas en aygua en la ola, e pausa aquela sobre le foc.	"All these herbs or some of them should be submerged in water in the cloth, and then place it on the fire."
E aprop pausa una canula de canaviera en la boca de la mayre, e tengua aquela entro que la evapor vengua a la concavitat de la mayre.	"And then insert a reed cannula into the mouth of the uterus, and hold it there until steam comes to the concave part of the uterus."
E aprop fay aquela stornudar ayssi cum havem dit, e la segondina sira fora-getada am velocitat.	"And then have her sneeze as we have said, and the secondine will be expelled with great speed."
Mays si roman aprop aquesta curacio e no es eyssida, lahoras tu comanda a la matrona que submerge la sua ma sinistra en oli sizami o en micellage de altea, e aprop entrometa aquela en le conh e queresca am aquela la segondina, e cum aquela auras trobada, lahoras pren la e exten aquela pauc a pauc Mays si es annexsa en le preon de la mayre, lahoras entrometa la sua ma segon que havem recomtat, e quan aura trobat la segondina, extragua aquela petit a petit segon rectetut per so que la mayre no caja deves la atraccio vehement.	"But if this treatment does not work and the secondine remains, then you should order the midwife to immerse her left hand in sesame oil or a mixture of althea, and then insert it into the vagina and search for the secondine with that. And when she has found it, then take it out little by little. But if it is attached to the mouth of the uterus, then insert your hand as we have recommended, and when you have found the secondine, extract it little by little according to what is straight, so that the uterus does not suffer from violent attraction."
Abantz cove que sia permudada als costatz dreyt e sinestre am facilitat.	"It is necessary that they be moved with facility to both sides."
E aprop sia ajustat en la quantitat de atraccio, quar ela obedira e evasira de adhirencia.	"And then it should be adjusted according to the amount of attraction, because she will obey and evacuate from adhesion."
E si la boca de la mayre es coartada, nos ja havem recomtat la curacio am sturnutacio e am medicacio de la ola am erbas.	"And if the mouth of the uterus is constricted, we have already recommended treatment with sneezing and medicated cloth with herbs."
Mays si no es fora-getada am totas las causas las quals havem recomtadas, lahoras guarda te que no fetigues sobre aquela en iteracio de abstracio, mays empero cove que aquo que es eyssit de lu a la boca de la mayre lies a la coyssa de la femna, e aprop cristeriza aquela am enguent e tetrafarmacon; quar aquel fara poyrir aquela aprop alcus dias e sira dissolvuda e sira fora-getada.	"But if it is not expelled with all the causes that we have recommended, then be careful not to tire yourself out in repeated attempts at abstraction. But rather what comes out of her to the mouth of the uterus should be laid on the thing of the woman, and then dress it with oil and tetrafarmacon; because this will make it disappear in a few days and it will be dissolved and expelled."
Mays quan se poyreys, es de lu elevada mala audor al cap, e al estomac, e aquo ledeys la malauta; e adonc cove que sian aministradas sub-fumiguacios e convenientz ad aquo.	"But when it disappears, it leaves behind a bad odor in the head and stomach, which harms the sick woman. And then fumigations and suitable remedies should be administered for that."
Mays alcus dels Antics ja so esproatz sub-fumigacio de nazitort e de figuas seccas.	"But some of the ancients used fumigation with nazitort and dried figs."
Forma de instrument am le qual la femna es sub-fumiguada deves la retentio de mestruas e de la segondina:	"The shape of an instrument with which a woman is fumigated due to the retention of menstruation and secondines:"
Sia fayta de veyre o de eram.	"It should be made of bronze or brass."
E sia pausada la extremitat subtil en le conh e la extremitat ampla sobre le foc, e la sub-fumiguacio sia pausada sobre las brazas del foc.	"And the fine extremity should be placed in the vagina and the broad one on the fire, and fumigation should be applied to the embers of the fire."
E tengua aquela entro que sia consumida aquela sub-fumiguacio e itera·n autra.	"And keep adding more until that fumigation is consumed, then repeat another."
De curacio del cul del enfant no-perforat.	Of treating the imperforate anus of a child
Motz enfantz naysso e les culs de lu no so perforatz, les quals ya ciphac subtil e opilat.	Many children are born with imperforate anuses that are subtle and obstructed.
Adonc cove a la matrona que perfore am le sieu dit aquel ciphac; e sino, perfora aquel am spatum agut, e guarda se que no toque le lacert.	Therefore it falls to the midwife to pierce this opening with her finger, and if not, then to pierce it with a sharp spike, taking care not to touch the intestine.
E aprop pause sobre aquel lana enfusa en vi e oli; e aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia senat.	And she should place thereupon some wool soaked in wine and oil, and keep wiping until clean.
Mays si temes que sia opilat, lahoras pausa en le trauc una canula per motz dias, e osta la quan le enfant voldra degerir.	But if you fear it is obstructed, then place a catheter there for several days to drain, and remove it when the child wants to eat.
E ja accideys oppilacio del cul per consolidacio de plagua o de apostema; adonc cove que aquela consolidacio sia inscidida, e aprop sia curada am aquo que avem dit de la curacio e del plom.	And if an obstruction of the anus occurs due to a collection of pus or an abscess, then it is necessary to incise that collection and similarly treat it with the remedies mentioned above for the lead.
De curacio de las fistulas que endeveno dejos.	Of treating fistulas that develop there.
Las fistulas que endeveno en la partida dejos pus bassa so nodacio e grossetut las quals endeveno prop del cul defora o en l’espazi de la una partida.	Fistulas that develop near the passage of the anus, which are swollen and thickened, often occur close to the buttocks externally or in the space between the buttocks.
E es una fistula o motas.	And it is a fistula or warts.
E cum aquela nodacio es antiquada e corr de la humiditat aygosa blanca o poyridura subtil, e alcunas veguadas so de aquestas fistulas alcunas penetrantz.	Moreover, when that swelling is chronic and comes from moist heat, it produces a white or clear yellowish fluid, and sometimes these fistulas have penetrating openings.
E aquelas penetrantz so conogudas per aquo que es eyssit de aquelas per la egressio e per ventosetat; e alcunas vetz use le malaute de egressio, e fort leu es eyssit de aquelas verm.	And these openings are recognized by what exits from them through the exit and via windiness; sometimes the disease manifests through discharge, and it is often discharged through worms.
E so de aquelas fistulas alcunas veguadas en l’espazi penetrantz entro a la vesica, e entro al meat de la vergua; e so de aquelas penetrantz entro la junctura de la coyssa e entro al notz de la coeta.	Sometimes these fistulas have penetrating openings that extend into the bladder and into the urethra; some of these openings extend into the junction of the scrotum and into the glands of the penis.
E aquo en que es conoguda fistula penetrant entro al cul e no-penetrant, es que tu metas le tieu dit endic en le cul, e entrometas tenta subtil de eram o de ferr en la fistula quan no y es turtuositat.	And to recognize a penetrating or non-penetrating fistulous opening entering the anus, you should insert your little finger into the anus and carefully probe the fistula with a fine thread of silk or iron when there is no obstruction.
Mays si en aquela es turtuositat, lahoras entromet en aquela tenta subtil de plom o de pels de caval entro que tu sentas la tenta o le pel en le tieu dit.	But if there is an obstruction, then insert a fine thread of lead or horsehair until you feel the thread or hair against your little finger.
E si no sentas aquela de tot ni no procezeys del trauc alcuna causa de egestio ni verm ni ventositat, ayssi cum havem dit, lahoras sapias que es no-penetrant, e lahoras coyta te a la curacio.	And if you do not feel anything with it and find no cause for discharge or worms or windiness, as we have said before, then you should know that it is non-penetrating, and thus begin the treatment.
E quan la fistula es penetrant entro a la vesica o entro al meat de la vergua, lahoras la significacio de lu es eyssiment de urina de aquela e prohibicio de lu ad aysso que·l loc am medicina sia consolidat.	And when a fistula is penetrating into the bladder or into the urethra, then its significance is that urine will be discharged from it and there will be impediment to it until it becomes consolidated according to what is taught in medicine.
Mays si es penetrant entro la junctura de la coyssa o entro al os e envencio de dolor en le circuit, lahoras senhal de lu es que la tenta perve entro aqui si en lu no es turtuositat entro al os, e envencio de dolor en le circuit de la partida; e que de lu yeys poyredura tostemps; e que no val en aquela medicacio, ni es consolidada am enguent.	But if it is penetrating into the scrotum or into the bone and there is pain around it, then its sign is that the probe may penetrate here if there is no obstruction in the bone, and there will be pain around the opening; and that there is always purulent matter; and that medicine has no effect on it, nor does it become consolidated with ointments.
E en totas aquelas fistulas penetrant no es curacio de tot, e la curacio de aquelas es trebalh e vanetat dels folyls metges sobre·l qual so fermatz.	And in all penetrating fistulas there is no complete cure, and the treatment of these is merely the struggle and deception of foolish physicians, about which we are firmly convinced.
Mays en aquela que no es penetrant e no antiqua, sanacio am ferr es sperada segon que yeu a tu recomtare, e aquo que ja yeu e proat.	But in those that are not penetrating and do not open, healing with iron is expected according to what I will advise you, and that which I have already said.
E es que le malaute jagua entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos e eleva las cambas de lu entro sus, las coyssas sian enclinadas al ventre de lu, e aprop entromet tenta de plom, o de eram si es en la fistula turtuositat, entro que sapias le loc on perve la tenta.	And it is that the disease appears between your thighs, mainly on the right side and raises the scrotum within itself, with the testes inclining toward its abdomen, and carefully insert a probe of lead or silk if there is an obstruction in the fistula, until you know where the probe comes out.
E si aquela sent le malaute entorn le cuol, lahora cove que tu entrometas le tieu dit endic en le cuol.	And if that disease is felt around the anus, then it is necessary for you to insert your little finger into the anus in that direction.
E si sentas en le tieu dit la tenta ja per si meteyssa descuberta penetrar, otra aquo que sentas entre le tieu dit e aquela siphac o carn, lahoras sapias certanament que aquela es penetrant; e adonc no trebalhes en aquela, quar no es en aquela sanacio, ayssi cum havem dit.	And if you feel with your little finger that the probe is already openly penetrating inside, other than what you feel between your little finger and that siphac or flesh, then certainly know that that one is penetrating; and therefore do not struggle with it, for there is no healing of it, as we have said before.
Mays empero diyssero alcus que es sana en alcus homes tart.	But nevertheless some people say that it can be healed in certain men.
E de la medicacio per la qual es sperat juvament en lu es que tu ignes cauteri subtil segon le ample de la fistula, ayssi cum es precedit, e intrometas aquel ignit en la fistula entro que pervengua entorn le cuol; e aprop itera aquel doas o tres vetz entro que sapias que ja son adhustas totas aquelas carns ajustadas fistuladas que so semblantz a cana de pluma de ausel.	And the treatment by which it is hoped that some good may be achieved in it is this: cauterize with a subtle fire according to the width of the fistula, as has been described above, and insert that burning into the fistula until it reaches around the anus; and then repeat this two or three times until you know that all those adherent fistulous tissues have been burnt like the feathers of a bird.
E aprop cura aquela am calguas envolopadas en boder entro que en yescan totas aquelas carns que so adhustas, e aprop cura aquela am medicinas la carn engendrantz e consolidantz, e si es sanada, bo es; e sino, lahoras no es sana en degun temps per autra curacio.	And then dress it with hot fomentations wrapped in wool until all those adherent tissues have softened; and then treat it with medicines that generate and consolidate flesh, and if it heals, good. But if not, then know that it will never be healed by any other treatment.
E si la tenta intra, e no penetra entro·l tieu dit le qual es en le cul, e entre aquel e la tenta que es velament spes de carn o de ciphac, e vezes la fistula en aquo que siec la superficia de la codena, lahoras secca la codena del comensament de la fistula, e tu ve seccan am la tenta, e sia en la fistula entro que la seccio pervengua al loc en le qual perve la extremitat de la tenta, e per la tenta es liberat e catz.	And if the probe enters and does not penetrate inside your little finger which is in the anus and between that and the probe which is covered with flesh or siphac, sometimes the fistula goes along the surface of the bone, then cut the bone from the beginning of the fistula; and you will see it dry with the probe, and let it be in the fistula until the section reaches to where the end of the probe comes out; and through the probe it is freed and healed.
E aprop mundifiqua aquelas carns fistuladas las quals so asembladas a canula de pena de ausel e no romangua de aquelas alcuna causa.	And then clean those fistulous tissues which are like the feathers of a bird's quill, and do not leave any of them behind.
Mays si flux de sanc vezes que vengua entre tu e la tua opperacio quan ensideysses aquelas carns, lahoras le milh que sia e del pus leugier instrument es cauterizar am foc o am medicina acuta, quar cauteri am foc ajusta bonas doas habitutz: so es adhustio de aquelas carns ajustadas, e abscizio del sanc exseccacio de las humiditatz.	But if there is bleeding that comes between you and your operation when you cut those tissues, then the milder instrument to cauterize with fire or with an acute medicine is better, for cautery with fire has good two habits: it is adhesion of those adherent tissues, and excision of blood and drying of moisture.
E aprop cura aquela am calguas envolopadas en boder o en caus trissat entro que·l loc geta brac, e aprop lahoras cura la plagua am enguentz carn dura engendran e consolidan.	And then dress it with hot fomentations wrapped in wool or with thin cloth until that place becomes warm; and then afterwards treat the wound with hard flesh-generating and consolidating medicines.
E so medicinas en las quals so stipticitat e exseccio; quan lahoras es restaurada ja es sanada e no temes iteracio.	And these are the medicines in which there is astringency and excision; when they are applied, it will be restored and already healed, with no fear of recurrence.
Mays si la fistula ja perve entro al preon del cul e es elonguada de lu superficia del cos, lahoras entromet le tieu dit en le cul e inquireys am aquel.	But if the fistula has already reached into the anus and extends along the surface of the body, then insert your little finger into the anus and explore with it.
E donc si centes la tenta e entre tu e ela es velament de ciphac o de carn, e es propda a la penetracio, lahora no es operacio en lu sino segon via di fiducia e de speransa.	And therefore if you feel the probe and there is something like siphac or flesh between you and it, and it is close to penetration, then there is no operation for it except according to the way of faith and hope.
La qual causa es aministrar en lu una de tres manieyras: o que cauterize aquela ayssi cum havem dit; o que secces aquela entro que consieguas la conquavitat de lu per que sia a tu possible entrometre las qualcas e la curacio propdana; e no procesiscas mot am seccio per so que no inscidas le lacert contenent le cuol, e que accidisque sobre le malaute eyssiment de la egistio ses voluntat; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit quar fort leu sira sanat; o que elongues aquel velament e mondes aquel pus que seccas aquel entro prop le cul, ayssi cum havem dit, o am tenta o am autre instrument de aguda extremitat, e aprop mondifique aquelas carns fistuladas las quals so en la seccio entro la on podes am percrustacio; e aprop esforsa te a far la restauracio de tota la plagua am seccio, e si le orrifici pus desus no es consolidat, e romangua la fistula uberta en la partida del cul, e sira pus leugier per le malaute.	And this is to be administered in it in one of three ways: either cauterize it as has been said; or cut it open until you achieve the concavity of it so that you can possibly insert your finger and apply the proposed treatment; and do not proceed with cutting too much, for fear of wounding the contents of the anus and causing pain and harm without cause. And then dress it with what has been said, for flesh is easily healed there. Or else elongate that velament and clean out that pus which dries it inside close to the anus as has been said, either with a probe or with another instrument of sharp point; and then clean those fistulous tissues which are in the section by scraping them away with a curette. And then strive to heal all the wound with stitching; and if the opened orifice does not consolidate above, and the fistula remains open at its beginning near the anus, it will cause pain.
E alscunas veguadas la fistula es finida segon aquesta manieyra: es quan tu entrometas la tenta en la fistula, e es en le latz del cul entorn la superficia del cos am la codena e en le marge del cul, lahoras pren tenta de perforada extremitat, que es ayssi cum agulha de preparantz les coers segon aquesta forma:	And sometimes the fistula is finished in this way: when you insert the probe into the fistula and it comes out on the side of the anus around the surface of the body with the bone and at the margin of the anus, then take a probe with a perforated tip, which is like a needle for preparing hearts, shaped thus:
e entromet en aquela fiel envolopat de v fiels o entorn aquels; e aprop entromet tenta am fiel en la fistula entro que consiegua la conquavitat de lu.	"I will now introduce this needle into that opening of yours, turning them; and immediately I will try to insert another needle into the fistula until it reaches its cavity."
Mays si es penetrant en le marge del cul prop dedintz, lahoras tu extratz le fiel de aquel trauc ayssi que tu intrometas le tieu dit en le cul; e extraguas la extremitat del fiel e ajustes las duas extremitatz essemps, e estrenh cascuna, e leyssa aquo per un dia o per dos, e quan mays inscideys le fiel en la carn, estrenh be aquel entro que aquelas carns sian inscididas las quals so entre doas extremitatz del fiel e que cajan.	"But if you penetrate the margin of the anus properly, then you should remove that thread as such that you can insert your little finger into the anus; and after removing the end of the thread, join both ends together, strain each one separately, and leave it like this for a day or two, and whenever you notice that the thread has cut into the flesh, then carefully remove that part where those cuts are located which are between the two ends of the thread."
E aprop cura la plagua entro que sia consolidada e sanada.	"And immediately heal the wound until it is consolidated and healed."
Mays si le orrifici de la fistula no es penetrant, lahoras fay aquel penetrar, en qualque manieyre sia a tu preparat, sino que sia mot en le preon, quar no es a tu que fassas aquo per que no inscidas le lacert; e aprop fay am aquela entro que sia sanada.	"But if the opening of the fistula is not penetrated, then you should make it penetrate in whatever manner you are prepared for, but do not probe too deeply into the perineum lest you injure the skin. And immediately apply that (ointment) until it is healed."
La forma de spatum spinos am lo qual es fenduda la fistula: la curvitat del qual es mot aguda e l’autra partida es no-aguda, per so que no inscidas aquo que no es necessari, ayssi cum vezes.	"The shape of the spatula with spines on which the fistula is opened has one end very sharp and the other end not sharp, so that you do not injure what is not necessary."
De sutura de emorroydas en las quals corra sanc en la inscizio de aquelas.	"Regarding the suture of hemorrhoids in which blood flows from the opening of those (hemorrhoids),"
Emorroydas so segon dos manieyras, quar o so entre le cul semblantz aysi que es de carbos, o quays aquelas sian cum a gras de rasim.	"Hemorrhoids occur in two manners: either they are between the buttocks appearing like coal, or they seem to be filled with grease of rose hips."
E de aquelas so petitas e grans, e que le sanc corr de aquelas tostemps e es una, e so motas, e so fora·l cul, e en las extremitatz de lu.	"And those are small and large, from which blood constantly flows and is one, and are numerous, and are outside the anus, and at its ends."
Mays empero aquelas que so foro le cul so segon las mes de pauca humiditat, de las quals corr aygua citrina o un petit de sanc am cos continuabla, e so segon la color del cos.	"But those that are outside the anus occur according to the months of little humidity, from which yellow water or a bit of blood runs continuously with the body's sweat, and they vary in color."
E la curacio de aquela que es dedintz le cuol es que comandes al malaute que se assela e que se exprema entro que le cuol yesca e las emoroydas apparescan a tu.	"And the treatment for that which is inside the anus is that you command the patient to sit up and press inward until the anus opens and the hemorrhoids appear before you."
Adonc tu te coyte e suspen am uncis o que tenguas aquelas am la tua ungla, e aprop incideys aquelas deves las suas razitz.	"Then you take and suspend with forceps or whatever you may have those [hemorrhoids] with your nail, and promptly cut them at their roots."
Mays si les uncis no so tengutz en aquelas per la humiditat de lor e mollificacio de aquelas, lahoras pren aquelas am drap aspre o am coto o am flassada de lana, e extratz aquelas am les tieus ditz, e aprop inscideys aquelas e polveriza sobre lor alcunas polveras caudas aprop la inscizio, per que sian ad aquelas en loc de cauteri; o cauteriza aquelas segon que es precedit en le capitol de cauterizar.	"But if the forceps do not hold those [hemorrhoids] due to their humidity and softness, then you take them with rough cloth or with cotton or with a wool pad, and extract those with your fingers, and promptly cut them at their roots and sprinkle some powdered resin thereupon immediately after cutting so that it may serve as cautery for those; or cauterize them according to what is stated in the chapter on cauterizing."
E aprop cura aquelas am l’autra curacio entro que sian sanadas.	"And afterwards dress those with the other dressing until they are healed."
E si le cul no obezeys a egressio, lahoras cristerisa le malaute am cristeri en le qual sia mordicacio petita, e sia lavat am aquel aquo que es en le cuol e que obezesca a egressio leugierament quan le malaute s’esprem.	"And if the anus does not obey evacuation, then you catheterize the patient with a catheter in which there is a small bite and let it be washed with that water which is in the anus so that it may facilitate easy evacuation when the patient presses."
Mays si las emorroydas so defora le cul, lahoras la causa de lor es leugiera, e es que tu prenguas aquelas am la tua ungla, o que prenguas aquelas am unci, e inscidas aquelas, e aprop cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit entro que sian sanadas.	"But if the hemorrhoids are outside the anus, then their cause is light, and it suffices that you take them with your nail or that you take them with forceps and cut them, and afterwards dress them with water as has been said until they are healed."
E aquel que avoreys inscizio, cove que aministres sutura de lor segon aquesta manieyra: pren fiel envolopat e entromet aquel en agulha e aprop extratz las emorroydas a las partidas dessus, e fay aquel penetrar am la agulha en la razit del autra part, e envolveys las doas extramitatz del fiel en la partida pus dejos de la agulha, e so latitudinalment; e estrenh la emorroyda am strectura fort, e aprop noza le fiel e extratz la agulha.	"And he who cuts them should administer suture to them in this manner: take a thread wrapped and insert it into the needle and then extract the hemorrhoids at their roots above, and make the thread penetrate with the needle into the root of the other part, and wrap the two ends of the thread around that part more distant from the needle, and stretch the hemorrhoid tightly with strong tension, and then tie the thread and remove the needle."
E fay aquo a totas, e layssa de aquelas una e no la cozes, per so que la superfluitat del sanc corra de aquela.	"And do this to all of them, leaving one alone without tying it so that the superfluous blood may flow out from it."
E aprop pausa sobre le cul drap enfus en oli rozat o en cerot; e pausa aquel sobre·l cuol e comanda al malaute que·s repause.	"And then apply over the anus a dressing made of lint soaked in rose oil or wax, and apply that over the anus and command the patient to repose."
E aprop layssa aquela entro que caja; e quan es casuda, cura aquelas am enguentz o am autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	"And then leave it like that for three days; and when it is healed, dress it with ointment or with another dressing until it is completely healed."
De curacio de fistulas.	"On the treatment of fistulas."
Motas veguadas accideys per exseccacio de fenda o per costriccio de natura.	Occasionally, it happens due to the dryness of the womb or by nature's constriction.
E cum so antiquadas e no val en aquela medicina, lahoras cove que tu razas aquelas am la puncta de spatum o am la tua ungla entro que sian faytas humidas e sia hostada de aquelas la escorsa pus desus, la qual prohibeys aquelas de consolidacio; e aprop cura aquelas entro que sian consolidadas.	And if those veins are old and not useful in that medicine, then you should open those with the point of a spatula or your nail so they are moistened and remove the thick pus above them which hinders their solidification. And immediately clean those that have been solidified.
Lahoras tu osta aquelas am razio pus vehement que la primieyra entro que mot sancno e sian excoriadas; e aprop cura aquelas entro que sian sanadas.	Then you must remove it with a very strong razor so that at first there is no blood and they are not scraped. And immediately heal those that have been healed.
De curacio de almesamir, so es clau.	The key to the healing of the soul.
Sapias que alamermar, so es clau, e no es si no notz redon segon la color del cors semblant a cap de claviel, e es fayt en tot le cors e majorment en las partidas dejos les pes e als ditz, e endeve per aquels dolor deves le anament.	Know that the soul is the key, and not blood according to the color of the body resembling a small nail head. It is found throughout the body but more so in the joints of the legs and arms. Thereby pain occurs through them.
E adonc cove que sia inscidit aquo que es en le circuit del clau, e sia tengut am les forfexs o am unci, e sia eradicat de la sua razit; e aprop cura aquel.	Therefore, it is necessary that what is in the circuit of the key be incised and held with forceps or tweezers, and eradicated from its root. And immediately heal it.
E si vols, cauteriza le segont que es precedit en le sieu capitol.	And if you wish, cauterize the second one that is mentioned in its chapter.
Mays de veruca es eminencia petita aspre fistulada redonda sobre la superficia del cos, e motas veguadas veno en las mas dels enfantz.	But warts are small, rough, flesh-colored elevations on the surface of the body, often rounded and sometimes pustular. Many are seen in children.
E curacio de lu es que estendas e inscidas aquela, o que estrenhas aquela am fiel o am pel entro que caja.	And the treatment for it is that you stretch out and incise it with a knife or scrape it off with a file or pumice stone until it bleeds freely.
E si vols, cauteriza aquo, segon que havem dit, am foc o am medicina acuta.	And if you wish, cauterize it with fire or with an acute medicine, as we have said before.
E ja so eradicadas enversas e no-enversas am le instrument le qual yeu diyre.	And now let these be eradicated, both warts and not-warts, using the instrument which I shall describe.
Mays formica es eminencia petita feutrada o fistulada grossa sobre la superficia del cos anant mot en le preon, e quan le freg atroba aquela es centit en lu semblant de mordificacio de formigua, e es fayta entorn le cos.	But a pimple is a small, fatty or pustular elevation on the surface of the body that often appears on the forehead and elsewhere. When it is pressed, it becomes inflamed like the sting of an ant, and it appears around the body.
E curacio de lu es que prenguas una canula de pena de auca o de pena de voltor, e sia fort, e pausa aquela sobre la formigua entro que la contengua le cercle de la canula de las partidas de lu; e aprop revolveys la tua ma am la canula entro que inscidas aquo que es en le circuit de la formigua, e pauses aquela en le preon de la carn, e que eradiques la formigua de la sua razit.	And the treatment for it is that you take a quill from an ostrich or vulture feather and make it strong. Place it over the pimple so that its circle surrounds it. Then rotate your hand with the quill to incise what is in the circuit of the pimple, pressing it against the skin of the forehead. And eradicate the pimple from its root.
E si vols, fay aquo am canula de eram o de ferr segon aquesta forma:	And if you wish, do this with a needle made of brass or iron in this way:
Sia la partida desus de la canulha trahent a subtilitat, sorda (so es no-perforada), envolopada per so que sobre le dit la aprencio de lu sia ablaviada e la revolucio de aquela.	Let the point of the needle be drawn to a fine, blunt tip, not perforated, wrapped in such a way that when you grasp it with your fingers, its edge is smoothed and its rotation facilitated.
E si vols cauteriza la formiga segon que es denant dit en la cauterizacio de atheyl en le capitol de cauteri.	And if you wish to cauterize the pimple, do so according to what has been mentioned in the chapter on cautery concerning atheyl.
De forma dels instrumentz que so aministratz a dar cristeri.	Of the instruments used for administering cautery
Alcunas veguadas es fayt cristeri de argent o de lato o de eram fondut o malleat; e alcunas veguadas es fayt de aquels instrumentz petit e gran segon aquels als quals so aministratz, quar aquel que es aministrat en la curacio dels petitz enfants sia petit; e de aquel dels quals los culs son freuls o doloyrozes, les cristeris de aquels sian petitz.	Sometimes cautery is performed with silver or lead that has been melted and hammered. And sometimes it is performed using instruments that are small or large according to those used for the purpose. For example, the one used in treating young children should be small; and for those whose bottoms are furrowed or wrinkled, their cauteries should also be small.
La forma de cristeri gran e pauc:	The method of performing a large cautery with little injury:
Le cap de la canula de lu desus en le qual es liada la borsa sia ampla segon aquesta manieyra; e sia a lu distinacio la on la borsa es liada ayssi cum vezes.	The opening of the cannula's head should be wide in this manner, and it should be at the distinction where the bag is tied in this way.
E la extremitat de lu pus dejus, la qual es entromesa en le cul, sia sorda (so es no-uberta) mot leon, atrasent a subtilita; e en la un del latz de lu sian dos traucs, e en l’autre costat un trauc, e sia la amplesa del trauc segon la groseza dels rays e pus gros un petit.	And the lower end of the tube that is inserted into the anus should be blunt (i.e., not open), tapering to a subtlety; and on one side there are two holes, and on the other side one hole, with the width of the hole according to the thickness of the rays.
E sia la borsa en la qual sian pausadas las medicinas de vesica de bestia o de pel de ovelha, e la razit de lu sia un palm.	And let the bag in which the medicines are placed be made from bladder or sheep's skin, and its width be one palm.
E sia perforada per motz traucs ayssi cum es revolvuda; e si l’espazi le qual es entre les traucs la grossetut del dit.	And let it be perforated with many holes so that it rotates evenly; and the distance between the holes should be roughly the thickness of a finger.
E aprop entromet en aquels traucs fiel fort de fiel cru le qual sia de detz fiels, o enviro aquels; e ajusta am aquel la borsa; e quan es pausada en lu la borsa, sia streyt en le cap del cristeri entre dos distingentz am fort costriccio, e aprop cristeriza am aquel quascun trauc: Mays la qualitat de cristerizar am aquel es que tu omples la borsa de la medicina, que sia escalfada segon la quantitat de la tolleransa del malaute; e guarda te que no sia trop cauda ni trop freja.	And then insert through those holes a strong thread of raw silk that is made from ten threads, or wind it around them; and adjust it with the bag. And when you place the bag on him, tighten it at the head of the clyster syringe between two distinctions with strong constriction, and clysterize with it through each hole: But the quality of clysterizing with it is that you should heat the bag of medicine according to the quantity of the patient's tolerance; and be careful not to make it too hot nor too cold.
E aprop le malaute sia resupinat sobre le sieu dos, e eleva las suas cambas en sus e pausa dejos lu un cuer sobre le qual ja so les homes o un lansol; e aprop unta la extramitat del cauteri am oli o am album de huou o am mucellage de fenugrec o de semblantz; e aprop entromet aquel en le cul am facilitat, e aprop le ministre prengua la borsa e exprema aquel am doas mas e essemps am vehemencia entro que sia evacuat en le budelh tot aquo que es en le cristeri; e aprop extra le cristeri e le malaute leva las suas cambas a la paret.	And then the patient should lie on their back with their buttocks raised and place a cloth or towel underneath them to prevent staining of the bedding. Then anoint the tip of the clyster syringe with oil, albumen of egg white, or mucilage of fenugreek or similar substances. Then insert it into the anus gently, and then the attendant should take the bag and squeeze it two or three times forcefully until all the contents of the clyster syringe have been emptied into the bowel. Then remove the clyster syringe and the patient should raise their buttocks against the wall.
E si la medicina forsa aquel a eyssiment, tengua le tant quant poyra; e si dorm am aquel per tota una nueyt, es mays derier en juvament.	And if the medicine causes him to perspire excessively, let him hold as much of it in as he can. And if he sleeps with it for the whole night, it will be more effective in its benefit.
Mays si tu cristerizas aquel en las malautias de solucio de ventre e l’eyssiment de lu le coyta, lahoras tu itera le cauteri entro que sia sanat.	But if you clysterize him for loose bowels and diarrhea in which the excretion of the belly is copious, then repeat the clyster until he is healed.
E si en le cul so emorroydas o apostemas ledens, lahoras sia le cristeri mot subtil e leon, dels cristeris am les quals les enfantz so criterisatz.	And if there are hemorrhoids or tender fistulas in the anus, then let the clyster be very thin and gentle, of those clysters with which children are clysterized.
De curacio de las plaguas.	Regarding the treatment of plagues.
Yeu ja e dit en la divisio de la curacio de las plaguas aquo que convenia al libre, e yeu dic assi la curacio de aquelas am ma e am medicinas segon le conpliment.	I have already said in the division on the treatment of plagues what was necessary for the book, and I say now the treatment of those with more severity using medicines according to their condition.
Donc dic que las plaguas son diversificadas segon aquo en que son faytas las plaguas e segon le loc sobre le qual cazo las plaquas.	Therefore I say that plagues are diversified according to what part of the body they occur in and according to the location on which the plague manifests itself.
E las causas per que motas vetz son faytas las plaguas so ayssi cum getament de peyra, o inscisio d’espaza o de cotel, o percussio am lansa, o am fustz, o am sageta, o semblantz ad aquels de motas causas.	And the causes for which often plagues occur are such as: cutting with a spearhead, or incision with an razor blade or knife, or piercing with a lance, or beating with a club or stick, or being hit by an arrow, and similar accidents.
Mays las plaguas que so en les locz del cos so ayssi cum plagua la qual catz sobre le cap, o·l col, o·l pietz, o·l ventre, o·l fitge, e semblantz ad aquels dels membres.	But the plagues which are in certain parts of the body are such as: plague that occurs on the head, or the neck, or the foot, or the belly, or the thigh, and similar ones on the limbs.
E yeu so recomtant la curacio de alcunas plaguas per que pauses aquela ratiocinacio e regla sobre las autras plaguas.	And I am now describing the treatment of certain plagues so that you may pause this reasoning and rule about the other plagues.
E yeu comensare de las plaguas del cap simplas, quar la rememoracio de las compostas vindra al comensament del tertz capitol.	And I will begin with simple head plagues, for the reminder of the composite ones will come at the beginning of the third chapter.
Donc dic que quan accideys en le cap plagua simpla e no es fractura, lahoras considera: si es per getament de peyra o de semblant, e ja ha trinquada la codena tant solament e es gran plagla e temes sobre aquel malaute havinement de apostema caut, lahoras tu te coyta e fleubotoma la cephalica tantost, e no tardas aquo; e extrats ad aquel del sanc segon la quantitat de la vertut de lu si no mes alcuna causa prohibent de fleubotomia, majorment si·l sanc que es eyssit de la plagua es pauc.	Therefore I say that when a simple head plague occurs and it is not a fracture, then consider: if it is from a blow with a spearhead or similar object, and the bone has already broken only on its own and it is a large wound, and you fear that an abscess will develop in that patient, then immediately perform phlebotomy of the cephalic vein, and do not delay; and remove as much blood as possible according to the strength of the blow, unless there is some reason prohibiting phlebotomy, especially if the blood that has flowed from the wound is little.
E sia la flaubotomia del contrari de la partida plaguada; e guardase le malaute de replecio e de vi e de viandas grossas.	And let the phlebotomy be on the opposite side of the wounded part; and keep the patient from exertion and wine and coarse foods.
Mays si de la minuicio prohibeys alcuna causa, lahoras sia aminorat de la vianda e no apropinque a carn ni a vi.	But if for some reason you forbid phlebotomy, then let him be put on a low diet and not approach flesh nor wine.
E pausa sobre la plagua, si a lu accideys apostema caut, coto enfus en oli rozat solet o en vi en le qual es stipticat.	And pause over the wound if an abscess develops, then apply hot oil or wine that has been thickened with flour.
Mays si est segur de apostema caut, lahoras pausa sobre la plagua, si es recent am le sieu sanc e le ayre no ha mudat aquela la polvera la qual yeu recomtare aprop petit.	But if you are sure that an abscess will develop, then pause over the wound while it is still fresh with its own blood and the air has not yet changed that powder which I will recommend later on a small scale.
E si le ayre ja ha mudada aquela, lahoras pausa sobre alscus enguentz entro que sia sanada.	And if the air has already changed it, then pause over the abscess and let it drain until it is healed.
Mays si la plagua es gran o es per inscizio d’espaza e de semblantz, e no so ajustadas las labias de lu per puvils, lahoras ajusta aquelas am sutura segon que yeu recomtare de la sutura de lor.	But if the wound is large or it has occurred from an incision with a spearhead or similar object and its edges are not fitting together by themselves, then adjust those edges with stitches according to what I will recommend for the stitching of lips.
Mays si la plagua ja es discuberta del os e pen, e no es retencio de lu sino un petit suspensori, lahoras inscideys aquela e aprop cura la plagua am medicinas e restaura la carn aprop en loc de codena, e comanda al malaute que sia pescut de viandas en las quals es groceza: caps e formen coyt e semblantz a lor, entro que sia compost.	But if the wound is already exposed to bone and tendon, and there is only a slight suspension of the flesh, then incise it and cure the wound with medicines and restore the flesh properly in place of bone, and command the patient to be put on a diet of coarse foods such as cabbage and beans and similar ones until he is healed.
E si atrobas en la codena putrefaccio e no adhereys al os, lahoras tu inscideys tot aquo poyrit e geta aquo, e aprop cura aquo.	And if you find putrefaction in the bone and it does not adhere to the bone, then incise all that is rotten and remove it, and then cure it.
Mays si en aquestas plaguas es arteria o vena de la qual fluxs de sanc pot evenir, e no es abscindida per medicinas, lahoras tu inquier sobre la arteria, e si atrobas aquela no-inscidida, lahoras tu inscideys aquela am spatum, o lia aquela; e si necessitat te provoca que aquo que havem dit no comfereys, lahoras tu cauteriza entro que·l sanc sia abscidit.	But if in these wounds an artery or vein from which blood is flowing can occur and it cannot be ligated by medicines, then inquire about the artery; and if you find that one has not been incised, then incise it with a scalpel, or tie it. And if necessity compels you to do what I have said does not suit, then cauterize until the blood is stopped.
E si aquestas plaguas son simplas e petitas, lahoras la causa de lor es leugiere; enayssi que tu polverizas sobre aquelas aquesta polvera, quar consolidada aquela denant que l’ayre mude aquelas.	And if these wounds are simple and small, then their cause is light. Therefore you powder them with this powder so that it may solidify before the air changes them.
E la manieyra de la polvera es aquesta: recipe oli de enses partida una, de sanc de drago partida doas, de caus no-extincta partidas tres; sia tot mot trissat e crivellat, e de lu sia la plagua omplida, e sia constrengida per bona constriccio entro que be sobre aquela aderesca, e sia coagulada am le sanc.	And the manner of the powder is this: take one part oil of sesame seeds, two parts dragon's blood, three parts myrrh ground; let it all be finely ground and sifted, and with that fill the wound, and let it be pressed down by good pressure until it adheres to it, and then let it coagulate with its own blood.
E aprop strengeys aquela desus am pulvils e leyssa aquela, e no la deslias mentre esta ayssi que no es apostemada, quar no es eredicada de lu la medicina entro que sia sanada.	And then press it down from above with powders and leave it like that; do not remove it while it is like this until it becomes an abscess, for the medicine will not be removed from it until it is healed.
E alcuna vetz fa aquo sola cautz, quan no es a tu en present enses e sanc de drago.	And sometimes you can do this alone with just cauterization when you do not have sesame oil and dragon's blood present.
E ja fa aquesta meteyssa operacio en las grans plaguas quan conveneys que sia pausada sobre aquelas e sian streytas, e so plaguas recentz am le lor sanc, las quals le ayre no ha alteradas.	And this same operation is done in large wounds when it is appropriate to pause over them and press them down, especially fresh ones with their own blood which the air has not yet altered.
E si le ayre las ha alteradas, e majorment quan es en temps d’estiu, lahoras no es entencio a la posicio de aquesta polvera, mays adonc cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit, enayssi que tu pauses sobre aquelas alcus enguents degistius, o que pauses sobre aquelas pols de la farina del ordi am aygua e mel entro que getan poyredura; e aprop cura aquelas am l’autra curacio entro que sian sanadas.	And if the air has altered them, and especially in summer time, then it is not fitting to use this powder. But at such times cure them with what I have said, so that you put over them some fresh ointments or polish them with flour paste mixed with water and honey until they are cleansed of pus; and then cure them with the other remedies until they are healed.
Mays si accideys am la plagua fractura en os, e es petita, lahoras tu extratz aquo am gesti.	If you encounter a small fracture in bone during an operation, then extract it using tweezers.
E yeu diyre la cura de las fracturas del cap en aquo que es envenidor.	Then I will teach you the treatment of head fractures that are dangerous.
De las plaguas del col.	Of the wounds of the neck
Mays si la plagua accideys en le col, lahoras no es en lu differencia en medicacio, e entre la plagua del cap quan es simpla.	But if the wound occurs in the neck, then there is no difference in treatment between this wound and a simple head wound.
Mays si ja le nervi del col es inscis o arteria, lahoras si es nervi, no es en lu engen sino que sia evitada curacio de lu am aquo que fa vehement stipticitat, ayssi cum ziniar e zegi que es vetriol e semblantz a lor quar nozo als nervis e contrazo aquel.	But if the nerve or artery of the neck is injured, then if it is a nerve, there is no hope for recovery except to avoid treatment with anything that causes strong contraction, such as vitriol and similar substances that irritate nerves.
E no pauses sobre la plagua alcuna causa de tot freja, quar la sustancia dels nervis es freja e la continuacio de lu es am le cervel, le qual es le pus aut de totz les membres.	And do not apply any caustic substance to the wound for fear of burning the nerve, because the substance of nerves is fragile and their continuity extends to the brain, which is the pulse center of all members.
E si’ aquo am que es curat de medicinas leugieras, ayssi cum es caus lavada am aygua dousa, alcuna veguada enfusa en oli rozat o no-rozat, e thucia quan es lavada am aygua dousa e las autras peyras minarantz segon aquesta manieyra, e enguentz humitz.	And if you treat it with mild medicines, such as washing it with rosewater or applying it diluted in olive oil (with or without roses), and bandages when washed with rosewater, and other soft minerals according to this method, and then wrap it gently.
Mays si la plagua es gran, lahoras aministra sutura, o coarta las labias de lu, e aprop cura aquela am pulvils entro que sia sanada.	But if the wound is large, then apply sutures to close the lips of the wound and afterward dress it with powders until it heals.
Mays si a la plagua es profunditat o accideys en lu a la pus bassa partida poyredura, lahoras perfora aquela en le loc mays depremegut.	But if the wound is deep or if it has happened that part of the nerve has been cut off, then pierce it in the most depressed place with a needle.
Mays si en la plagua ja es inscisa arteria e es conseguit flux de sanc, lahoras separa o secca aquela, o lia aquela, o cauteriza aquela si necessitat te provoca ad aquo.	"However, if in the wound an artery has already been cut and there is blood flow, then separate or seal that, or ligate that, or cauterize that if necessary."
Mays si ja ha insciditz les spondils del golayro o tot, e so salvadas las venas del col, lahoras tu ajusta las labias de la codena am sutura sobre la cana del golayro e no toques aquel; abantz egala aquel e reduzeys aquel sobre la sua figura natural, e aprop strenh aquel am strectura decent, e leyssa aquela per alcus jorns; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz en les quals es stipticitat e excitacio entro que sia sanat.	"If the spines of the coccyx have already been cut or all, and the veins of the rectum are saved, then adjust the lips of the buttocks with suture over the canal of the coccyx without touching that; Afterwards equalize that and reduce it to its natural shape, and support it with suitable strapping, and leave it for several days; And afterwards care for it with ointments in which there is astringency and excitation until it is healed."
Mays si la plagua ja en le os a fayta enprecio, lahoras percuireys aquela, e lahoras si en lu ha fragmentz de hos, extratz totz aquels que podes de lor; e aquo que a tu no es apparelhat, leyssa aquo entro que la plagua se poyrisca, e sia separat e la egrecio de lu sia alleujada.	"If the wound has already reached the bone, then explore that and if there are fragments of bone, remove all those that you can; And whatever is not apparent to you, leave it until the wound closes, and let it separate naturally, and its inflammation be alleviated."
E si la plagua es recent lahoras polveriza sobre aquela polvera la qual t’e recomtada.	"And if the wound is fresh then sprinkle over it the powder which I have recommended to you."
Mays si en la plagua es fayta fistula, lahoras cura aquela am aquo del qual la rememoracio vindra aprop en le sieu capitol.	If a fistula is made in the anus, then treat it with that remedy of which mention will be made shortly in its chapter.
De las plaguas del col o de semblantz quan fayta entre las spallas e es fayta am spaza o am cotel o am lansa o am semblantz.	Of the wounds on the neck or similar ones that are made between the shoulders and are done with a blow, knife, sword, lance, or similar.
Si es percussio de lansa o de cotel, e vezes de lu la profunditat, lahoras considera mays si de la plagua yeys ventositat quan le malaute elena; lahoras sapias que la plagua es mortal.	If it is a wound from a lance or knife, and sometimes its depth varies, then consider more if there is wind coming out of the wound when the patient breathes; then know that the wound is fatal.
E si en lu no es profunditat e la plagua es recent am le sieu sanc, lahoras tu pauses en lu de la primieyra horo polvera, e no strenhas aquel per que no sia le sanc retengut en la profunditat de lu e que retorne al cor e que aucigua le malaute, mays pausa en lu enguent atractiu, e deslia aquela doas veguadas le dia.	And if it is not deep and the wound is fresh with its own blood, then you pause in it for the first hour with powdered plantain, and do not press it so that no blood is retained in the depth of it and returns to the heart and increases the illness, but rather pause it with an attractive ointment, and cleanse it twice daily.
E si l’enguent no es a tu present, lahoras tu pausa en le orrifici de la plagua coto viel per que sucque aquo que yeys de las humiditatz; e fay que le malaute dorma sobre la plagua per que corra aquo que es en lu ajustat.	And if the ointment is not at hand, then pause in the wound with cotton moistened so that it draws out whatever moisture there may be; and make sure that the patient sleeps on the wound so that what is inside it may flow out.
Mays si ja de la plagua son passatz tres dias o mays e no accideys al malaute spasme ni tremor de cor mal ni strictura de ale, e vezes las autras dispozicios bonas de lu, lahoras sapias que plagua es salva; e adonc cura aquela am calguas e am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanada.	But if three days have passed since the wound and there has been no spasm or trembling of the heart nor constriction of the lungs in the patient, and other good conditions of it are seen, then know that the wound is healed; and then cure it with poultices and other treatments until it is completely healed.
Mays si la sanacio de lu es excusada, e ja tot temps es uberta, lahoras sapias que ja es fayta fistula; cura donc aquela per le sieu capitol.	But if the healing of it is prevented, and it has been open all this time, then know that it has already become a fistula; cure it according to its chapter.
E si la plagua es per inscisio de spaza o de cotel, e es simpla en la superficia del pietz o del dos, lahoras cura aquela am aquo que es precedit de sutura, si es gran, o am polvera, si es petita.	And if the wound is from a cut by a sword or knife and it is simple on the surface of the foot or hand, then cure it with what is preceded by suturing if it is large, or with powder if it is small.
Mays si ja ha fayta enprecio en le os, e so ja de lu inscizas pessas, lahoras tu torqua la plagua e coyta ad extrayre aquelas pessas, si so separadas.	But if there has already been injury to the bone and pieces of it have already been cut off, then you turn the wound and try to extract those pieces, if they are separate.
Mays si no so separadas, lahoras leyssa las entro que se poyresca la plagua, que la extraccio de lor es alleujada.	But if they are not separate, then leave them inside until the wound heals, for their extraction will be easier that way.
E de las autras plaguas accidentz en les autres membres le juvament en curacio es le juvament de aquo que havem dit.	And concerning other accidental wounds on other limbs, the judgment regarding their treatment is as we have said.
De las plaguas del ventre.	Of abdominal wounds.
L’indisposicio la qual accideys en le ventre es o gran, o pauc, o migiera.	"Indisposition that occurs in the belly may be large, or small, or moderate."
De la gran alcunas veguadas yeys le budel o nervi del budel, per que es fayta intromissio de lor e la sutura de lor esser pus vehement e pus subtil.	"From a large hernia, sometimes the intestine or nerve of the intestine may be seen, so that there is intrusion of them and their suture must be made more forceful and more precise."
E disrupcio petita es fayta dificil per autra manieyra, e siec se que la reduccio de lor es pus dificil, si no te coytes de la intromissio de lor al sieu loc tantost, quar se ubre e es engrossat per que le intrament de lu es fayt difficil.	"And small rupture is done with difficulty in another way, and so its reduction is more difficult if you do not quickly extract them from their place at once, because they open and become swollen so that the entrance of them becomes difficult."
E donc la milhor disrupcio es migiera, quar en aquela no es dificil la reduccio del budel, ayssi cum es dificil en las doas specias denant ditas.	"And therefore the best rupture is moderate, because in that one it is not difficult to reduce the intestine, just as it is difficult in the two kinds mentioned above."
E sapias que sutura del ventre es segon quatre manieyras, mays doas suturas son comunas que conveneysso en suturas de las autras plaguas del cors.	"And know that there are four ways to suture the belly, but two of them are common and convenient for sutures of other wounds of the body."
E duas autras suturas proprias comunican a las autras plaguas, mays empero so mays proprias en la sutura del ventre.	"And the other two sutures are proper to other wounds, but however they are more proper to the suture of the belly."
E yeu recomti a tu quascuna am exposicio e declaracio.	"And I tell you each one with explanation and description."
Donc dic que quan la plagua es petita e es eyssit alcuna causa del budel per aquela, e es fayt dificil a reduzir aquel, lahoras aquo es en una de doas manieyras: o per parvitat de la disrupcio ayssi cum havem dit, o quan al budel es venguda inflacio per la frigiditat de l’ayre.	"Therefore it is said that when the wound is small and some cause of the intestine comes out through it, and it is difficult to reduce it, then this is in one of two ways: either because of the smallness of the rupture as we have said, or when the intestine has come into inflammation because of the coldness of the air."
E donc quan aquo es ayssi, lahora cove que tu scalfes aquel enayssi que tu submerges una sponga ho drap humit en aygua tebeza sola, o que coguas en aygua squinant, e cyperum, e spic, e embroques am aquela le budel entro que la imflacio sia resolvuda.	"And therefore when this is the case, then you should cut it so that you immerse a sponge or wet cloth in hot water alone, or take some hot water with squinant, cyperus, spice, and embrocatum with which you moisturize the intestine inside until the inflammation has been resolved."
E alcunas veguadas fa aquo vi en le qual ha stipticitat, e es milhor que la aygua sola en resolucio de la imflacio.	"And sometimes it happens that there is putrefaction in the wound, and it is better to use water alone for the resolution of inflammation."
E donc cum tu vezes la imflacio esser resolvuda, lahoras tu humecta le budel am aygua en la qual es coyta altea e malvas, quar per aquo es alleujat le intrament de lu am pauca causa.	"And therefore when you see that the inflammation has been resolved, then you should moisten the intestine with water in which is cooked mallow and malva, for by this means it is alleviated from inflammation with little cause."
Mays si es escusat le intrament de lu aprop aquesta curacio, lahoras scindeys la disrupcio un petit am strument am le qual so inscididas emorroydas.	"But if the inflammation of the intestine has not been alleviated by this treatment, then cut the rupture a little with an instrument with which you have incisedemorroids."
E la curacio primieyra es milhor, quan es propriada que no es seccio, e no sia occupacio a seccar aprop necessitat e defaliment.	"And the first treatment is better, for it is proper that it not be a section, and there should be no occupation to cut unless necessary and unavoidable."
Del instrument, sec se la forma de lu:	"Concerning the instrument, see its form:"
La una partida de lu torta aguda, e l’autra partida no-acuta, e la extremitat subtil, e no sia am la subtilitat de spatum, abantz sia obtusa un pauc.	"The one part of it is cut sharp and the other not-sharp, and the extremity is subtle but not too delicate, rather somewhat blunt."
E donc cum la plagua es amplificada e yeys fora le budel, lahoras cove que la sua reduccio sia segon la forma de lu natural, en le sieu loc propri, si es possible sobre aquo, quar milhor es.	"And therefore when the wound has been enlarged and the intestine comes out through it, then its reduction should be according to its natural form in its proper place if possible about that, for better is."
Mays quan la disrupcio es ampla, e es en la partida pu bassa del ventre, lahoras cove que tu fassas jazer le malaute sobre le sieu dos, e pausa las suas cambas pus autas que·l sieu cap; e si es en la partida pus desus del ventre, lahoras tu pause le cap de lu e·l pietz pus autz que las partidas dejos.	"But when the rupture is wide and is in the lower part of the belly, then you should make the patient lie on his back and place their buttocks higher than their head; and if it is in the upper part of the belly, then you should place the head down and the feet higher than the buttocks."
E semblantment si la disrupcio es en una de las doas partz del ventre, lahoras pausa la tua entencio e la tua consideracio tostemps en aysso per que la partida en la qual es la plagua sia pus auta que l’autra.	"And likewise if the rupture is in one of the two parts of the belly, then always place your intention and consideration on this so that the part where the wound is may be higher than the other."
E ayssi cove que tu aministres aquo en las plaguas grans e en las plaguas migieras.	"And therefore you should administer this in large wounds and in moderate wounds."
E en las plaguas petitas, pausa aquo que es a tu preparat, e aprop fay que·l ministre sia entre las tuas mas pyatados, le qual tengua la disrupcio tota am la sua ma e ajusta las labias de lu, e aprop descuebre de aquela ad aquel que siec la sutura alcuna causa aprop autra.	"And in small wounds, pause until it is prepared and make sure that the one who ministers it is among your most experienced, who holds the rupture entirely with his hand and adjusts the lips of it, and quickly discovers from that to that which sews any cause if necessary."
E aquesta es la manieyra de sutura comuna: una que prenguas la agula, o comte de agula segon la cantitat de la amplitut de la plagua; e aprop layssa de la extremitat de la disrupcio del dit anular, e strenh la agula una, otre que tu no metas fiel en las doas extremitatz de la codena, am doas extremitatz del ciphac que es dejos la codena de las partidas dedintz, entro que fassas aquela penetrar de aquela partida; e tu ja has agreguadas doas extremitatz de la codena e doas extremitatz del ciphac, e so faytas quatre ordes.	"And this is the common manner of suturing: first take a needle or count needles according to the quantity of the width of the wound; and then leave it at the end of the rupture on the tip of your finger, and thread the needle with one thread, but do not put any knot in both ends of the thread, with two knots that are left below the thread, inside which you make it penetrate from one part to another; and you have already attached four threads."
E aprop strenh am fiel doble en le circuit de la agula, e alcunas veguadas de doas partz ensemps, e aprop agregua las doas labias e la plagua per agreguacio decent; e aprop layssa la grossitut del dit e fiqua una autra agulha en aquela, e aprop lia aquela am fiel ayssi cum fiest am la primieyra agulha; e no cesses far aquo si es necessitat am las agulhas entro que ajas complida tota la contriccio de la plagua.	"And then thread with a double knot around the needle, and sometimes two parts together, and then attach both lips and the wound by proper attachment; and then leave the thickness of your finger and put another needle in that, and then tie it with thread like the first needle; and do not cease doing this until you have completed all the contraction of the wound."
E sian las agulhas migieras entre groceza e subtilitat, quar las agulhas subtils mot leugierament insciden la carn; e las grossas so de dificil intrament en la codena, e donc per aquo cove que sian migieras en subtilitat e grosseza.	"And let the needles be moderate between thickness and subtlety, for thin needles cut flesh too lightly; and thick ones are difficult to thread with the thread, therefore they should be moderate in both thickness and subtlety."
E no cove que la agulha sia ficada en doas extremitatz de la codena propdana mot, per so que la carn no sia inscidida leugierament e que la plagua se huebra devant la sua consolidacio.	"And it is not necessary for the needle to be stuck in both ends of the thread at once, lest the flesh be cut too lightly and the wound be opened before its consolidation."
E no sian prolonguadas de sutura per que la plagua no sia prohibida de consolidacio.	"And do not prolong suturing so that the wound is not hindered from healing."
E aprop inscideys las extremitatz de las agulhas per so que no ledescan le malaute deves le sieu dormier; e pausaras sobre la sutura pulvils expanduts de tota partida, les quals tenguan las extremitatz de las agulhas; e layssa aquelas entro que sapias que la plagua ja es consolidada.	"And then cut the ends of the needles so that the patient does not bother with their sleep; and you will place powdered breadcrumbs on all parts over the suture, which hold the ends of the needles; and leave them until you know that the wound is healed."
E aquestas specias de sutura am agulhas en cal manieyra es pus convenient en las plaguas petitas, quar habasta en la sutura de lor una agulha o doas o entorn aquelas.	"And these types of suturing with needles in any manner are more convenient for small wounds, because one needle or two is enough for their suturing."
Mays la segonda sutura es cominal: e es que tu aministres am sutura las quatre extremitatz, de la codena e doas extremitatz del ciphac, en una veguada, am agulha en la qual sia fiel envolopat engual en subtilitat e grosseza.	"But the second type of suturing is like this: you should use four threads for suturing, from the thread and two knots at once, with a needle that has fine silk wrapped around it in both thickness and subtlety."
E aprop quan am la agulha auras penetrat aquestas quatre extremitatz, reduzeys la agulha de aquela meteyssa partida de la qual comensest, per so que le fiel retrayt caja de la pus subirana partida a la plagua, per so que la sutura sia segon sutura de drap am la qual les draps so strengutz.	"And then, when the needle has pierced these four extremities, return the needle to that same opening from which you began, so that the wound draws back its pus-filled cavity into the abscess, so that the suture may be made according to a stitch of cloth with which the wounds are strengthened."
E pausa entre quascuna sutura la quantitat del gros del dit mendre.	"And pause between each suture the quantity of the thickness of the little finger."
E aquesta sutura sabo les homes.	"And this suture is known by men."
E am tal sutura yeu cozegui la plagua la qual era accidida a un home en le sieu ventre le qual era stat plaguat am un cotel, e era la disrrumpcio de la plagua major de un palm, e era eyssit dels budels entorn dos palms del budel del mieg loc e era la disrupcio en le mieg del membre; e adonc yeu reduzegui aquel depus que le budel havia stat foro la plagua per xxiiii horas.	"And at this suture you cauterized the wound which was inflicted on a man in his belly who had been struck with a dagger, and the disruption of the wound was more than a palm, and it was issued from the bowels around two palms of the bowels near the middle place, and the disruption was in the middle of the member; and then you reduced that deposit which the bowels had flowed out of the wound for 24 hours."
E la plagua fo consolidada en le spazi de xv dias o entorn, e curegui aquel e es sanat; e aprop aquo visquec per motz ans, e es conversat en las suas disposicios.	"And the wound was consolidated in the space of about 15 days, and that man was cured and healed; and at that time he lived for many years, and remained in his usual condition."
E les autres metges havian jutgat que no fora sanat; e per miracle foc, quar yeu no curegui aquel am enguent, quar era en loc en le qual enguent no era atrobat ni deguna medicina, mays pausegui sobre la plagua coto viel dos veguadas lo dia e ablucio assiduo am aygua de mel entro que foc sanat.	"And the other physicians had judged that he would not be healed; and it was by miracle that he was cured, because you did not cure him with an ointment, since he was in a place where no ointment could be applied nor any medicine, but you paused over the wound twice a day and washed it assiduously with water of honey until it was healed."
Mays yeu diyre dos specias de sutura proprias segon narracio de Paraula.	"But you describe two kinds of suture proper according to the narrative of the Word."
E es que tu comenses am sutura de la codena, e entrometas agulha de la partida deforo a la partida dedintz.	"And it is that you begin with the stitching of the cord, and insert the needle from without to within."
E donc cum la agulha penetra en la codena e en aquel meteys lacertz segon rectetut e en longetut de tot le cos, e layssa la extremita del ciphac en le qual has entromesa la agulha; e fay penetrar en la autra extremitat la agulha de la partida dedintz a la partida deforo en l’autra extremitat del mihat.	"And then as the needle penetrates into the cord and meets with it in length along all the body, let the extremity of the thread remain in that which you have inserted the needle; and make the needle penetrate into the other extremity from within outwards in the other extremity of the member."
E don cum tu auras fayta aquela penetrar, lahoras tu fay aquela penetrar autra veguada en aquela meteyssa extremitat del mihat de la partida deforo a la partida dedintz; e leyssa la extramitat del ciphac que es en aquest latz, e fay penetrar la agulha en l’autra extremitat de la partida dedintz a la partida deforo.	"And then when you have made it penetrate thus, afterwards make it penetrate again in that same extremity of the member from without within; and let the extremity of the thread remain on this side, and make the needle penetrate into the other extremity from within outwards."
E fay penetrar am aquela la tua penetracio am la qual fas aquela penetrar en le ciphac en la extremitat del mirat la qual es en la partida de lu entro que tot aquel penetre.	"And make it penetrate again with that penetration with which you have made it penetrate in the thread at the extremity of the member which is on the inside, so that all may penetrate."
E aprop comensa de aquest meteys costat e cus aquel am la extremitat que es del ciphac en l’autra latz, e extratz la agulha de la codena la qual penetrec, e aprop redutz aquela en aquela codena e cos la extremitat del ciphac que es en l’autra costat am aquesta extramitat del mirat; e extratz aquela de la codena la qual es de part de lu.	"And then begin from this same side and draw it with the extremity which is of the thread on the other side, and withdraw the needle from the cord which has penetrated, and reduce that in that cord and tie the extremity of the thread which is on the other side with this extremity of the member; and withdraw that from the cord which is on the part within."
E fay aquo una veguada e autra, e fay aquo una veguada aprop autre veguada entro que tu cozes tot aquo que es deforo segon aquel eysemple.	"And do this once and again, and do it once more afterwards until you have tied all that is without according to that example."
E la suma de aquesta manieyra de sutura es que tu cozes am sutura de pellicies am la qual cozo las pels, enayssi que tu cozes le ciphac una veguada de la part de la extremitat de la codena, e que leysses aquela autra veguada entro que la ajas complida.	"And the sum of this manner of suture is that you make a stitch of skin with which you sew the skin, so that you make the thread once from the extremity of the cord and let it remain again until you have completed it."
Mays la segonda specia de sutura propria la qual dieys eyssament Gualia , e aquest es de sermo de lu e per lu recomtat, es que tu cozas aquela segon semilitut am la qual alcus medicantz cozo aquela, enayssi que agreguan tota partida a la sua compar partida a lu convenient per natura; e aplican la extremitat de autre de lu e la extremitat del mirat al autra extremitat de lu, e aquo es fayt segon que yeu a tu recomti.	"But the second kind of proper suture which you describe expressly, and this is about it and for it to be sewn together, is that you sew it in half-length so that some physicians sew it thus, arranging every part with its corresponding part according to nature; and they apply the extremity of one to the other extremity and the extremity of the member to the other extremity of it, and this is done as you command."
Cove que tu fiques la agulha en la extremitat del mirat a tu propdana de la partida deforo, e fassas aquela penetrar a la partida dedintz en aquel sol, e leysses dos extremitatz del ciphac; e aprop revolveys la agulha e fay aquela penetrar de foro a la dedintz en dos extremitatz del ciphac.	"So that you leave the needle in the extremity of the member near the outside part, and make it penetrate within that part and let both extremities of the thread remain; and then turn the needle round and make it penetrate from without within at both extremities of the thread."
E aprop revolveys aquelas cascunas, e fay penetrar quascunas de la partida dededintz entro a la partida deforo en dos extremitatz del mirat autras que so en le latz contrari.	"And then turn those loops round, and make each loop penetrate from within outwards in two extremities of the member other than those which are on the opposite side."
E aquesta manieyra de sutura es milhor de la sutura comuna leugiera, e es sutura de la qual precedic rememoracio.	"And this manner of suture is better than common light suture, and it is the suture of which there was a preceding mention."
Aquest es le sermo de Gualia	"This is the discourse of Galen"
E mays le diyssero alcus, sutura del ventre es rectificada am dos agulhas, so es que tu entrometas en aquestas a quascunas un fiel, e comensa am intromiccio de agulha de aquo que es deves tu, e fay aquela penetrar entro al autra latz segon sutura de aquels les quals cozo les cuers engualment.	"And others say that the suture of the belly is corrected with two needles, so that you insert in each a thread and begin with an introduction of the needle on whichever side it is necessary for you to sew according to the suture of those who sew the heart ingeniously."
E sapias que quan disrupcio es en le mieg loc del ventre, lahoras la sutura de lu es pus difficil que dels autres locs del ventre.	"And know that when a disruption occurs in the middle part of the belly, then the suture of it is more difficult than those of other parts of the belly."
Mays le juguament de medicacio de plagua es jutgament de las autras plaguas.	"But the judgment of medical treatment of pleurisy is also the judgment of other plagues."
La qual causa es quar quan tu consieguas la plagua recent am le sieu sanc denant que l’ayre altera aquela, e reduses le budel e cozes aquela e aptas aquela decentment, lahoras pausa sobre aquela polvera encarnativa.	"The cause is because when you succeed in the recent plague with its pure blood before the air alters it and reduces the vessel and sews it up well and applies it properly afterwards, then it remains calm on that inflammatory dust."
E si le ayre ja ha alterada la plagua, lahoras pausa sobre aquela alcus enguentz les quals so a tu presens entro que fassan peyra dura e cajan les fiels, e sian consolidatz ciphac e mirat; e aprop cura aquela ayssi cum es la curacio de las autras plaguas entro que sia sanat.	"And if the air has already altered the plague, then it remains calm on some of those which are present before they make hard skin and cast out the threads, and are solidified thread and member; and then cure it thus as is the cure of other plagues until it is healed."
Mays si a tu no so presens las medicinas, lahoras pausa sobre aquela tantost, pus que comensa a getar brac, coto viel, e permuta aquel dos veguadas le dia, ayssi cum a tu e ensenhat, entro que sia sanat, quar tu no indigeysses de autra medicacio en motas disposicios quan las plaguas so simplas.	"But if you are not present with the medications then it remains calm for a short time because as soon as it begins to throw forth much sweat and bad humours and changes twice a day, as you have taught us, until it is healed, because in many dispositions when the plagues are simple you do not need other medication."
Mays si tu temes que la plagua comunique en lesio als membres principals, lahoras cove que tu submergas lana leon en oli de trempada qualiditat, o en oli rozat, e pausa aquela en le circuit dels locs que so entre les angonas e dejos las aysselas.	"But if you fear that the plague may communicate to an injury of the principal members then it is necessary for you to immerse lion's wool in pure olive oil or rose oil and apply it around those parts which are between the angles and leave them thus."
E si sent dolor o putrefaccio en les sieus budels, quar motas veguadas aquo s’endeve, lahoras cristeriza aquel am vi stiptic negre tebe, e majorment si la poyredura es pervenguda en le budel e es fayta exitura penetrant entro la conquavitat de lu.	"And if there is pain or putrefaction in its vessels because many times this happens then crystallize it with black treacle and vinegar, especially if the putrefaction has reached the vessel and a penetrating evacuation has been made into its concavity."
E sapias que aquela que es del budel gros es de pus leugiera sanacio que aquela que es en les budels subtils.	"And know that that which is in the thick vessel is of lighter healing than that which is in the subtle vessels."
E es de dificil sanacio quar le budel le qual es apelat “gegunu” no recep sanacio de plagua que caja en lu de tot; e aquo es per la gran multitut de venas que so en lu e per la magnitut de lu que so en aquelas, e per subtilitat del cos de aquel, e per propinquitat de aquel a natura de nervis.	"And it is of difficult healing because the vessel which is called 'gungu' does not receive healing from any plague that falls into it completely; and this is because of the great multitude of veins that are in it and the magnitude of them that are in those, and because of the subtlety of its body, and because of its proximity to the nature of nerves."
Mays si aquo que procezeys de la plagua es la tela, e conseguas aquela recent, redutz aquela segon la tua rectetut am la qual reduzes les budels engualment.	"But if what proceeds from the plague is tissue and you succeed in it recently then reduce it according to your discretion with which you reduce vessels ingeniously."
Mays si es passat a lu spazi e ja es feyt vert o negre, lahoras que tu strenguas aquela am fiel sobre le loc que es denigrat de lu, per so que vengua fluxs de sanc, quar en la tela so venas e arterias.	"But if it has passed into the space and is now green or black then stretch it with a thread over that part which is darkened by it, so that there comes a flow of blood because in the tissue are veins and arteries."
E aprop inscideys aquo que es otra aquel liament, e pausa dos extremitatz del fiel pendentz de la partida dejos de la plagua foro lu, per que sobre tu sia alleujada la atraccio de lu deves le cazement de la tela e emissio del brac de la plagua.	"And then incise that which is other than the thread and leave two extremities of the thread hanging from the part beyond the plague outside it, so that over you may be relieved the attraction of it you must have the stitching of the tissue and emission of the sweat of the plague."
Rememoracio de las plaguas quan accideysso en le budel.	"Remembrance of the plagues when they occur in the vessel."
Quan accideys disrupcio en le budel e es petita, lahoras es possibla que sia resteurada en alcus homes, per aysso quar yeu vi aquel le qual era stat plaguat en le sieu ventre am percussio de lansa et era la plagua de la part dreyta del stomac, e la plagua era antiquada e fayta fistula, e eyssic de lu gestio e ventositat.	"When there is a disruption in the vessel and it is small then it is possible that it may be restored in some people because I have seen this man who was struck with a spear wound in his belly which was a plague on the right side of the stomach and the plague was old and had made a fistula, but from it came management and windiness."
Adonc yeu pansegui la curacio de lu ja sia que no era confizat en la sanacio de lu, mays cessegui subtiliar aquel entro que foc sanat e le loc es consolidat.	Then I pursue the healing of him though it was not yet completed in his recovery, but ceased to explore that region which had been healed and the place is consolidated.
E yeu pus que vi le loc ja consolidat, timegui sobre le malaute que endevengues sobre lu accident de mal en le sieu ventre; e no endevenc alcu per aquo mal accident e romas en las suas milhos disposicios mangant e bevent, e aprop entrec en banh e es exercitat en sos ditz.	And I saw that the place was already consolidated, so I told him to be careful not to aggravate his condition by eating and drinking too much, or overexerting himself, and to avoid excessive bathing and exercise.
E ja diysero alcus experimentados que quan endeve plagua en le budel, e es petita, lahoras cove que sia liada segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu prenguas fromiguas de grans caps; e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua e pausa una fromigua de aquelas que aja la boca uberta sobre las doas labias de la plagua; donc quan pren sobre aquelas e strenh la sua boca, abscindeys le cap de lu, quar adhereys e no es dissolvut.	And some experienced people say that when the bowel moves and is narrow, it should be tied in this manner: take figs with large heads, adjust both lips of the movement, and place one of those figs with its mouth open over both lips of the movement. Then press on it until its head separates from it, because it adheres and does not dissolve.
E aprop pausa autra formigua prop la primieyra, e no cesses aquo a far am formiguas una aprop autra segon la quantitat de tota la plagua.	And place another fig near the first one, and continue doing so with figs one after the other according to the amount of movement there is.
E aprop reduzeys aquela e cos la plagua; e romanguan aquels caps annexces en le budel entro que·l budel sia sanat; e no accideys al malaute degun nocument.	Then reduce that and tie it with the movement; and those attached heads will remain inside the bowel until the bowel is healed, without causing any harm to the patient.
E ja es possible que·l budel sia liat am fiel subtil lo qual es fayt del budel de bestia annexs am lu, pus que es mes en agulha; e es que tu prenguas la extremitat de aquestz fiels de budel, e sia mot descarnat, e aprop lia la extremitat de lu am fiel de li, envolopat, e aprop entromet aquel fiel en agulhas e cos am aquel le budel, e areduzeys aquel en la disrupcio.	And it is possible that the bowel may be tied with a fine thread made from the bowel of an animal attached to it, because it is more like a needle. You should take the end of these bowel threads, and make sure it is well cleaned, and tie the end of it with the thread you have, wrapping it around, and then insert that thread through the needle and sew it onto the bowel, reducing it at the point of disruption.
E aquesta manieyra de sutura am formiguas no es sino segon via de fiducia e d’esperansa.	And this manner of suturing with figs is nothing but a matter of trust and hope.
Mays si la plagua es gran e ampla, majorment si es en un dels budels subtils, quar lahoras no es engen sino subtiliacio, e no es sanacio de lu de tot.	But if the movement is large and wide, especially if it is in one of the subtle bowels, because then it will only result in subtlety and not in the healing of it entirely.
De curacio de zuchem e fistula.	Of the cure for hemorrhoids and fistulas.
Sapias que tota plagua e apostema quan se envilheseys e se Antiqua, e es fayt ulcus, e no es consolidat e geta braç tot temps e no es abscindit, lahoras, en qualque membre sia, universalment es nompnada fistula e nos la apelam aquela azukem.	"I know that every ulcer and abscess, when it opens and becomes ancient, turns into an ulcer that does not heal and continually discharges pus without being cut open; universally this is called a fistula, which we call that wound."
E fistula segon veritat es nodacio feutrada, dura, blanqua am la qual no es dolor e a la qual es conquavitat ayssi cum es conquavitat de pena de ausel; e per aysso nompnat aquela alcus rizatz, id est pena.	"A fistula is indeed a hard, tough, white nodosity with which there is no pain and it has a cavity just like the cavity of a bird's egg; because of this it is called that hollow wound."
E es en alcus homes humida, la qual geta brac; e fort leu la humiditat es abscidida en alcunas horas.	"And in some men there is moistness [that causes] an ulcer which discharges pus; but if the moisture is cut away, it heals in a few hours."
E alcunas veguadas aquesta humiditat es mota, e es pauca, e es grossa, e es subtil.	"Sometimes this moisture is much, little, thick, and subtle."
E yeu ja he denant dit en la divisio, lahoras cum yeu diyssi las plaguas, que tot ulcus que no es sanat ni no es en lu nuda carn, no es aquo sino per una de ix causas: de las quals la una es o per pauquesa de sanc en le cos; o per malicia de lu; o quar entre lu e las labias es carn dura prohibent nativitat de carn; o quar es de mota legesa; o quar aquel ulcus en si meteys es poyrit e la materia que es a lu tramesa es de mala qualitat; o quar la medicina es enconvenient en la curacio de lu; o quan corrupcio catz en la regio, e es pestilencia; o per proprietat de regio ayssi cum endeve a Saragossa , en la qual es fayta difficil degestio de las malautias, e es tardada en aquela sanacio de apostema per natura; o quar en lu es os un, o motz osses.	"And I have already said before in the division, when I spoke of ulcers, that every ulcer which does not heal and is not on naked flesh is due to one of these nine causes: either from lack of blood in the body, or from malice of the ulcer, or because there is hard skin between it and its lips preventing the formation of new skin; or because it has too much lees; or because that ulcer itself is putrid and the material which passes into it is of bad quality; or because the medicine used to treat it is inappropriate; or when corruption spreads in the region, causing pestilence; or because of a property of the region, such as that of Saragossa, where difficult digestion of illnesses occurs, and healing of abscesses is delayed by nature; or because there is a bone or many bones in the ulcer."
Ja e mostrat totas aquelas causas, e·ls senhals de aquelas e la curacio de lor am medicinas en la divisio.	"I have already explained all those causes, their symptoms and the treatment of them by medicine in the division [of ulcers]."
E cove assi que yeu fassa a tu saber la curacio de fistula la qual es fayta per via de operacio am ma.	"And it is necessary that I should also tell you about the cure of fistula, which is done by operation with a knife."
E sapias que fistula accideys en totz les membres del cos; quar de aquelas son fistulas que perveno a las venas grantz e arterias, o als nervis, o al ciphac, o al budel, o a la vesica, o ad alcuna de las costas, o ad alcu dels spondils del dos, o ad alcuna de las juncturas compostas per composicio ayssi quo de la ma e del pe; e de aquelas so que dan a lu propinquitat del membre principal e de semblantz.	"And know that fistulas occur in all the members of the body: some of them extend to large veins and arteries, or to nerves, or to the bladder, or to some part of the spine, or to some of the joints composed by composition such as those of the hand and foot; and others open near the main member and its like."
E donc aquela de aquestas fistulas que es segon aquesta manieyra es de las malautias de dificil sanacio, e no recep curacio, e occupacio am aquela es trebalh e ignorancia.	"And therefore those fistulas which are of this kind are among the illnesses which are difficult to heal and do not receive cure, and dealing with them is troublesome and ignorant."
E si es de las fistulas alcuna la profunditat de la qual no perve ad aquestz locs que e dit, e esperas e confizas en la curacio de lu, e vols pervenir a cognicio de lu, lahoras pren tenta de eram o de ferr, e si la fistula va segon rectetut, e perquireys aquela am lu.	"And if among the fistulas there is one whose depth does not reach these places which I have mentioned, and you hope for its cure and trust in it, then take a thread of wool or iron and try to find that with it."
Mays si la fistula es tortuissitat, lahoras investigua aquela am tenta de plom subtil, quar plom am la levitat del sieu cors es alleujat e curvat deves la tortuositat.	"But if the fistula is winding, then investigate it with a thread of thin lead, for lead with the lightness of its body is eased and curved along the winding."
E si la fistula es havent motz horrificis, no es a tu possible que signifiques sobre lu am tenta.	"And if the fistula has many horrible openings, it will not be possible for you to mark them with a thread."
Adonc cristeriza le orrifici per sos orrificis, quar la humiditat per la qual clisterizas aquela va deves las autras orrificis e corr de lor.	"Then cauterize the openings separately, because the moisture by which you cauterize it will go towards the other openings and from them."
E aprop inquier exquisitament, segon qual manieyra a tu es possible que conoguas si aqui has os o nervi, e es la conquavitat de la fistula longinqua o propdana, o es una fistula a la qual so motz orrificis e esta sobre aquo tot am la suma de la tua fortaleza, am la tua enterroguacio, am la qual enterroguas le malaute, e la invencio de la dolor deves la tua compressio am la ma sobre le loc, e semblantz de las significacios e de las causas accidentz al apostema.	"And then inquire carefully to see if you can know whether here there are bones or nerves; and also whether the fistula is far or near; or whether it is one with many openings which is located on top of everything with your utmost strength, investigation, compression with the hand over the place, and similar signs and causes accidentally occurring in ulcers."
E cum tu auras stat sobre totas aquelas causas am stacio veraya, lahoras ve a la curacio segon confidencia: e es que tu consideras lahoras si es fistula apparent propinqua o en loc sal, longinqua de junctura, o de nervi, o de arteria, o de vena, o de un dels locs les quals yeu a tu e ditz.	"And when you have considered all those causes with careful observation, then come to the treatment according to your judgment: and this is that you consider whether it is an apparent fistula near in a healthy place, far from a joint, nerve, artery, vein, or one of the places which I have mentioned."
Lahoras tu secca la fistula segon que denant es dit de la naracio de lu, e osta aquo que es en aquela filtracio e de carns corrumpudas, e aquo que es nascut en le orrifici de la carn, o de theil e de semblantz, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	"Then dry out the fistula according to what has been said above about its narration, and remove that which is in that filtration and of corrupted flesh, and that which is born from the opening of the flesh or of the skin and similar things, and cure it so that it may be healed."
Mays si la fistula es de longinqua profunditat, e es segon rectetut, lahoras cove que inscidas aquela en le preon atant quant a tu sira possible, e aprop mondifica aquela de totas las suas carns corrompudas; e aprop administra calguas envolopadas en medicinas acutas, e intromet aquelas entro a la conquavitat de la fistula, la qual has conprenduda am ferr.	"But if the fistula is of great depth and is winding, then it is necessary that you insert it into the front as much as possible according to your ability, and also cleanse it from all its corrupted flesh; and then administer bandages wrapped in sharp medicines, and introduce those into the cavity of the fistula which you have grasped with an iron hook."
E fay aquo am aquela alcunas veguadas entro que la medicina acuta corroda tot aquo que es romas en la conquavitat de la fistula de la corrupcio.	"And do this for several days in succession so that the sharp medicine may burn away all that is rough and corrupted within the cavity of the fistula."
E aprop restaura aquela am enguentz les quals engendran carn sana entro que sia sanada.	"Then restore it with dressings which generate healthy flesh until it is healed."
Mays si no es sanada per aquo, lahoras tu cauteriza aquela segon que havem recomtat.	If it does not heal by this method, then cauterize according to what we have advised.
Mays si la causa de fistula es os e es deves tu certificat aquo, lahoras tu inquireys aquela e secca aquela segon que havem recomtat, si tu no prohibeys alcuna causa de vena o de nervi o de membre principal ayssi cum havem dit.	If the cause of the fistula is bone and it needs to be certified, then inquire about it and dry it according to what we have advised, if you do not prohibit any cause of vein or nerve or main member as we have said.
Mays si le os es a tu descubert e es en lu alcuna corrupcio e negror, lahoras tu ratz aquel entro que la corrupcio sia hostada tota; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que lu encarne entro que sia sanat.	But if the bone is exposed and there is some corruption and blackness in it, then remove that within which all the corruption has gathered; and afterwards cure it with this until it heals.
E si no es sana e gieta brac ayssi cum fazia, lahoras sapias que tu no est pervengut a la eradicacio tota de la corrupcio; e adonc tu descuebre sobre lu segondanament e exquisitament fay la razio de lu e la mundificacio de lu am la deriera fortalasa tieua, e aprop restaura aquel.	And if it does not heal and throws out again as it did before, then know that you have not reached the complete eradication of the corruption; therefore, uncover it once more and carefully examine its cause and clean it with your strongest ointment, and afterwards restore it.
E donc si es sanat, bo es; e sino, lahoras sapias que aquela corrupcio es en la profunditat longinqua del cors, la qual no ha conseguida, e adonc a tu en aquel no es engen sino laysar aquela.	And then if it is healed, well and good. But if not, then know that that corruption is in the deep interior of the body, which has not been reached, and therefore in that case there is nothing to do but leave it alone.
E si le os corromput es petit, o es a tu possible atirar aquel, lahora tu le atira am forceps subtils las quals conveno ad aquo.	And if the corrupted bone is small, or can be removed, then remove it with fine forceps suitable for that purpose.
E si so motz osses, lahoras exquisitament fay la extraccio de totz aquels, e de aquels no laysses denguna causa am la tua fortaleza.	But if there are many bones, then carefully perform the extraction of all of them, and do not leave behind any cause with your strength.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat alcuna causa de las humiditatz, e en lor inscizio no ha temor ni error, lahoras inscideys aquelas liaments o carns si so aqui, e deliura les osses.	But if you encounter any difficulty due to moisture, and there is no fear or error in their incision, then cut those membranes or flesh if it is here, and deliver the bones.
Mays si a tu no es preparacio de ostar les osses de la tua hora, lahoras pausa sobre la plagua aquo que poyresca la plagua aquela, e layssa aquela entro que aquo es al enviro de aquels osses de carns e de liamentz, e guarda la plagua que no sia consolidada, e sia constrengida la seccio la qual tu has inscidida en la tua operacio.	But if you are not prepared to remove the bones at that moment, then pause over the wound until it is closed up again, and leave that within which that closing has taken place around those flesh bones and membranes, and guard the wound so that it does not harden, and keep the incision you have made in your operation open.
Habantz, si temes, pausa sobre lu coto submers en sopre trissat am oli, o coto submers en anguent egipciac, o en alcu dels enguentz vertz, quar quan poyriran aquelas liaments, e les osses son de lor seperatz la ablacio, e de aquels atraccio es alleujada.	Have then, if you fear, a poultice soaked in treacle and honey, or in Egyptian pitch, or in some other green ointment, for when those membranes dry up and the bones are separated by ablation, attraction is relieved.
Mays si es un gran os ayssi cum le os de camba o de coyssa o semblantz ad aquels, e aquo que de lu es corromput es la facia de lu tant solament, lahoras ratz aquela am resio tant solament derriera entro que sia ostada aquela negror e corrupcio, e aprop restaura la plagua.	But if it is a large bone such as the thighbone or shinbone or similar ones, and only the surface of it is corrupted, then cut away that corruption only behind, until that blackness and corruption is removed, and then restore the wound.
Mays si aquo que de lu es corrumpyt es gran partida, e la corrupcio ja ha conseguida la medulla del os, lahoras es causa necessaria cerrar aquel e aquel tot inscidir entro al loc on es pervenguda la corrupcio, e lahoras cura aquel entro que sia consolidada.	But if that which is corrupted in it is a large part, and the corruption has reached the marrow of the bone, then it is necessary to close up that and cut off all around where the corruption has penetrated, and then cure it until it is consolidated.
E yeu recomti a tu aquo que endevenc ad un home en la sua coyssa per que pausez aquela a eyssempli e adjutori sobre la tua operacio.	And I recommend that you have with you something belonging to a man in his shinbone, so that you may pause on it as an example and assistant for your operation.
Foc un home jove per etat entorn xxx ans, al qual accideys dolor en la sua cueyssa, e de las partidas dedintz mauguda es sobre la materia dedintz le cors entro que la materia es pervenguda a la cueyssa, e es materia de apostema am gran apostema, e no foc a lu causa extrinseca.	There was once a young man about thirty years old, to whom pain occurred in his shinbone, and the cause of that pain was inside the thigh bone within which matter had penetrated into the shinbone, and it was a matter of an abscess with a large swelling, and there was no external cause for it.
E adonc foc extendut le temps am aquela per la error dels metges entro que l’apostema es hubert, e acorrero de lu materias motas, e la sua curacio foc aprop pausada entro que la camba foc fistulada, e faytz son en lu motz orrificis les quals totz getavan poyredura e las humiditatz del cos.	And then much time passed with that one because of the error of physicians while the abscess was growing, and much matter came out from it, and his treatment was finally stopped when the thighbone became fistulated, and he did many things through those orificial parts which were all emitting pus and moisture from the body.
E adonc le curec multitut de metges entorn dos ans, e no foc en aquels savia ma en la art, entro que yeu fu appelat.	And then for a long time he was treated by many doctors around two years, and there was not much knowledge among them but rather skill, until I was called.
E vi la camba de lu e las materias que corrian de lu aquels orrificis per gran cors; e ja le cos de aquel home era tot stabozit e la color de lu era citrina.	And when I saw the thighbone of that one and the matter that was running out from those orificial parts through a large part of his body, then that man's whole body was already emaciated and his complexion was yellowish.
E adonc yeu intromesi la tenta ad un de aquels orrificis e pervenguec la tenta al os.	And then I inserted the tent into one of those orificial parts and reached the bone with it.
E aprop yeu e perscrutat tostz les orrificis e trobegui aquels pervenir a lor de totas partidas de la camba.	"And then examine and probe all the orifices and find those through which fluid comes from every part of the chamber."
E adonc yeu me coytegui e inscidegui sobre un dels orrificis aquels entro que descrobegui una partida del os, e atrobegui aquel corromput, e ja era terros e corrumput e denigrat; e era ja corrumpuda una partida de la camba entro que havia penetrat entro a la mezola.	"And then you cut and incise on one of those orifices where you discovered a fracture of the bone, and you removed that decayed part which was earthy and rotten and blackened; and already a part of the chamber into which it had entered was corrupted."
E adon yeu serregui aquo que a mi era discubert e preparat del os descubert.	"And then you closed what I had discovered and prepared of the bone discovered."
E yeu cujegui que no fos en le os sino aquela corrupcio la qual abscidigui e serregui, e yeu ja havia derraziguada.	"I feared that it was not merely a fracture but some corruption which had been hidden and closed up, for I had already dressed the wound."
E aprop pausegui la restauracio de la plagua am medicina consolidativas per lonc temps, e no es consolidada.	"And therefore he paused the restoration of the plague by using medicine in a consolidative way for too long, but it was not consolidated."
E aprop yeu iteregui e descubregui sobre le os segondament sobre le descubriment primier, e atrobegui continua corrupcio am le os.	"Furthermore, I explored and exposed the bone a second time over the previous discovery, revealing continuous corruption in the bone."
E serregui aquo que a mi apares de aquela corrupcio, e aprop yeu fo perforsat fayre la curacio de lu e restauracio, e no es restaurat.	"And I closed what appeared to be that corruption, and therefore he was perforated fairly for the cure of it and restoration, but it was not restored."
E adonc yeu descubri sobre lu autra veguada e no cessegui inscidir le os petit a petit particuladament e perforsa la restauracio de lu, e no es restaurat entro que inscidigui entorn un palm de lu, e aquel extraxi am la medula sua, e aprop restauregui aquel am medicinas, e es consolidat leugierament e sanat.	"And then I discovered it again and did not cease to incise the bone little by little particularly, perforating the restoration of it, but it was not restored until he had incised around a palm's width, and that extracted with its marrow, and therefore he restored it with medicines, and it is lightly consolidated and healed."
E no es necessaria iteracio en la operacio de lu e seccio de lu sino per la disposicio de la freulesa de lu e per la paucitat de la tollerancia de lu e paor de lu de mort, quar a lu accidia en totas horas per superfluitat de evacuacio sincopi mala.	"It is not necessary to iterate the operation and section of it unless for the position of the friability of it and for the scarcity of its tolerance and fear of its death, because it had syncope in all hours due to superfuility of evacuation."
E donc sanat es per sanacio entiera, e nada es en loc de os carn dura; e es fayta bona la disposicio de lu en le sieu cors e retornec la vertut de lu; e es conversat en las suas disposicios e no fec a lu contrarietat en ambulacio ni nocument en denguna causa.	"And therefore it is healed by whole healing, and nothing is in place of hard flesh; and its position is good in its body and returns the virtue of it; and it has been converted into its positions and does not do anything contrary to it in walking nor harm in any cause."
Mays si es os eminent en loc del cors ja trauquat, lahoras cove que tu secces aquel segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu prenguas liament e strenh aquel en la extremitat de aquel os eminent, e comanda ad alcu que extenda aquel en sus; e pausa aquel liament de lana pus gros del primier liament; e aprop lia aquel sobre la carn que es dejos le os, e exten la extramitat de lu per que atires la carn a las partidas dejos, e tu descuebras la carn sobre le loc le qual voles serrar per que la serra no leda la carn.	"But if it is prominent in place of the body already broken, then you should cut it this way: Take linen and strengthen that in the extremity of that prominent bone, and order someone to stretch that out; And pause that linen of wool thicker than the first linen; And therefore tie that over the flesh that is left near the bone, and extend the extremity of it so that you draw the flesh apart from there, and you uncover the flesh upon the place where you want to saw so that the saw does not cut the flesh."
E pausa fust o taula dejos le os decentment, quar quan tu fas aquo no es prohibida la serra que no secce la carn corrumpuda.	"And pause a piece of wood or board near the bone decently, because when you do this the saw will not cut the corrupted flesh."
E cove que sia la serradura sobre le loc corrumput petit a petit, quar si es en la concavitat del os corrupcio e no appar en la sua apparicio al sentiment, e forssa a serratura de lu autra veguada.	"And it is necessary that the sawing be little by little upon the corrupted place because if it is in the concavity of the corrupt bone and does not appear in its appearance to the feeling, then the sawing must be done again."
E si le os es corrumput e no-eminent, abantz es la una partida continuada am la autra, e la corrupcio es al mieg loc o en partida de lu, lahoras tu descuebre la carn de totas partz tota; e aprop pausa fust dejos, e aprop serra aquel de la primiera partida la on es la corrupcio entro que sia continuada la serratura del autra partida.	"And if the bone is corrupted but not prominent, then one part continues with the other, and the corruption is in the middle place or at the end of it. Then uncover the flesh from all parts; And therefore pause wood near by, and saw that first part where there is corruption until the sawing of the other part is continuous."
E sia la serradura segon le loc de la corrupcio un petit, segon que havem dit.	"And let the sawing be according to the place of the corruption little by little, as we have said."
E si la corrupcio es en la junctura, inscideys aquela junctura corrumpuda, e serra le os la on es continuat del autra part.	"And if the corruption is at the joint, then cut that corrupted joint, and saw the bone where it continues from the other part."
E si de la corrupcio es en la continuacio de doas juncturas, lahoras no es en lu razio sino engen.	"But if the corruption is in the continuation of two joints, then it is not in its reason but by chance."
E si la corrupcio es en le pecte de la ma o del pe, es mot dificil; empero cove que tu inquieras la corrupcio en qual manieyra appareys a tu, e que abradas aquela, e mondes aquela segon quascuna disposicio la qual es a tu possibla, e am cascum engen sia rectificat a tu, quan no fa a tu contrarietat vena o nervi.	"And if the corruption is in the breast of the hand or foot, it is very difficult; however you should investigate the corruption in whatever way it appears to you, and remove that, and cleanse that according to every disposition which is possible for you, and with each invention be rectified by you when it does not cause any contradiction to vein or nerve."
E sapias qual es inscididors e las serras a inscidir aquestz osses son motz segon le situament dels osses, e la preparacio de aquels, e la grosseza de aquels, e la subtilitat e la grandeza e la parvitat de aquels, e la duricia e la lor raritat; per que cove que tu prepares a tota specia de operacio estrument convenient ad aquela opperacio.	"And know that there are different types of saws and sawing tools for cutting these bones. They are made according to the situation of the bones, their preparation, thickness, subtlety, size, smallness, hardness, and rarity; therefore you should prepare suitable instruments for each type of operation."
E sapias que aquela operacio significa a tu sobre la specia del strument del qual indigeysses; quan am tu es gran studi e lonc e conoyssensa de las manieyras de aquesta art, e testimoni de manieyras de malautias, quar lahoras ja tu las avias per tu meteys aquo que es convenient a lu dels sturmentz a tota malautia.	"And know that this operation implies to you regarding the type of instrument which you need when with you is great study and long knowledge of the methods of this art, and experience in the ways of diseases because then you already knew what is suitable for each tool according to each disease."
E yeu so a tu formant en la fi de aquest capitol le nombre dels instrumentz les quals pausaras cum eyssimples am les quals proceziras a la tua prohibicio la qual experimentaras sobre las autras.	"And here at the end of this chapter I give you the number of instruments which you will prepare with them simply with which you will proceed to your prohibition which you will experience on others."
Forma de serra:	Here is an example of how "serra" could be translated into English:
Forma de autra serra:	"Here's another saw."
Forma de autra serra:	Otra forma de sierra
Forma de autra serra gran:	Another large saw shape
Forma de ray:	Form of ray
Sia le cap de aquest ray segon la forma de cap de clau stellat, e les puntz de lu sian segon la forma dels puntz alstefegi.	The head of this ray is shaped like a six-pointed star, and its tips are shaped like the points of a compass.
E no conveneys sino que am aquel sian confricadatz les caps de las juncturas quan so corrumpudas, o es la boca gran ampla.	And it should be noted that when the joints become corrupted, only then should their heads be rubbed together; otherwise, the opening is too wide.
Forma de razori major dels autres:	Shape of a larger razor than the others
Forma de razori menor:	Form of small razor
Forma de razori lat:	Razor blade shape
Forma de serra autra decentment fayta: sia fayt arc de lu pus sobira e la acuitat de lu de ferr, e le membre de lu de boys punhal descentment fayt.	Form of another saw properly made: it is arched as high as possible and sharp like iron, and its wooden member is properly shaped like a punch.
Forma de lu:	Shape of it
Forma de razori en la qual ha concavitat:	Razor shape with concavity
Forma de razori autra subtil:	Another subtle razor shape
Forma de autra razori de curvada extremitat:	Form of another razor with curved tip
Forma de rasori petit semblant a tenta:	Shape of small razor resembling tentacle
Forma de incisori am le qual so inscidit les osses:	Shape of incisor used to incise bones
Forma de inscisori autra minor:	Another smaller incisor shape
Forma de un autra inscissori; aquest semblant a ray, e la extremitat de lu es cum serra, e es exhibit en motz locs en la razio dels osses:	Shape of another incisor; this one resembles a ray, and its tip is like a saw, and it is used in many places where bones are involved.
Forma de ray lo qual conveneys a rasio de aquel que es perforat dels osses:	The shape of the drill that suits the case of that which is perforated by the bones
E la extremitat de lu es triangulada e de aguda extremitat.	And its tip is triangular and has a sharp point.
E es fayt de ferr de India , e semblantment cove que totas las causas que havem ditas de rasoris e de inscissoris e de serras.	It is made of Indian steel, similarly it is necessary that all the causes that we have mentioned for razors and incisors and saws.
De inscizio extremitatz e de la serratura dels osses.	Regarding the cutting edge and the locking of bones
Las extremitatz se poyresso o per causa intrinseca o per causa extrinseca, o cum tu auras medicat aquela corrupcio per curacio de aquelas medicinas e la curacio no comfereys, o vezes la corrupcio anar deves le membre la qual no percuteys denguna causa, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquel membre entro aquo la hon acossec la corrupcio, per que le malaute evasesca per aquo de mort o de malicia que es major defeliment del membre.	The edge can be dulled either intrinsically or extrinsically. If you have treated that corruption with medicines and the cure does not help, sometimes the corruption will spread to another member without any cause. Therefore, in that case, you should incise that member where the corruption has occurred so that the illness is cured through death or mischief which is a greater impairment of the member.
E le senhal de aquel al qual accideys, es que·l membre es fayt negre entro que sia cujat que foc la ja comburit, o se poyreys aprop la negror entro que la poyredura aquela ane entro aquel membre que siec lu e que prengua tot le cors; e donc coyta te am inscizio de aquel.	The sign of that which happens is that the member becomes black where it was burned by fire or approaches darkness where the corruption has entered within that member and takes all the body. Therefore, you should incise there.
E semblantment si es causa de la corrupcio percussio de alcunas causas venenosas ayssi cum de scorpio mari o de vupera o de rutela e de semblantz.	Similarly, if it is caused by corruption due to some venomous causes such as the sting of a marine scorpion or viper or rattlesnake and similar ones.
E si la corrupcio o la percussio es en la extremitat del dit, lahoras tu inscideys le dit e no dones spazi a la corrupcio per que ane entro a la ma.	And if the corruption or the injury is at the tip of the finger, then you should incise the finger and not allow the corruption to spread into the hand.
E semblantment si accedeys a la ma, lahoras tu inscideys aquela de la razit del focil, e no dones spazi a la corrupcio entro que prengua en le focil del bras.	Similarly, if it spreads to the hand, then you should incise there from the wrist of the firearm and not allow the corruption to spread into the forearm.
E si envezeys aquel, lahoras inscideys le bras entro al coyde en la junctura.	And if it reaches up there, then you should incise the arm at the elbow in the joint.
E si passa otra la corrupcio e la vezes enviro le coyde, lahoras en aquel es la mort del malaute; e aministrar autra causa otra aquo en curacio es quantitat de vertut.	And if the corruption passes beyond that and sometimes surrounds the elbow, then in that case it is the death of the illness. And to administer another cause for cure other than that is a matter of quantity of virtue.
E semblantment fay del pe quan corrupcio envezeys le dit del pe, lahoras tu inscideys aquel entro ad un dels nozes.	Similarly, when corruption reaches the finger of the foot, then you should incise there to one of the joints
E si pren en la pente del pe, lahoras tu inscideys tot le pe.	And if it takes hold in the ankle of the foot, then you should amputate all of the foot.
Mays si pueja entro al denol, lahoras tu inscideys la camba entro a la junctura del denol.	But if it can enter into the knee, then you should incise the calf at the joint of the knee
E si la corrupcio ja es pervenguda sobre le denol, lahoras en lu no es engen sino dimissio, e layssar le malaute a la mort.	And if corruption has already reached over the knee, then in that case there is no help but release and let the illness take its course to death.
E la manieyra de inscidir le membre o de serrar lu es que tu strenhas le liament en la partida pus dejos la qual voles inscidir, e strenh autre liament sobre le loc; e extenda le ministre un liament a las partidas dejos, e extenda le ministra autra liament en sus; e tu separa la carn la qual es entre dos liamentz ain spatum lat entro que sia descuberta tota la carn; e aprop sia inscidit o serrat.	The manner of incising the member or sawing it is that you should stretch one bandage at the point where you wish to incise, and stretch another bandage above that place. And extend one bandage towards the points below, and extend another bandage above them. And separate the flesh which is between two bandages with a wide knife so that all the flesh is exposed. And then it should be incised or sawn.
E cove que sia pausat drap de li de totas partidas per so que no toque le loc sa, e que vengua al malaute lesio ajustada e apostema caut.	And care should be taken to place cloth of lime on all sides so that it does not touch the place raw, and that wound may come to the illness with proper lesion and caustic aposteme.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc quan obras, lahoras tu cauteriza le loc coytadament, o pausa sus lu alcunas polveras restrenhentz le sanc; e aprop retorna a la tua medicacio entro que sia complida.	But if bleeding occurs while working, then you should cauterize the place carefully, or place some powder on it to stop the bleeding. And then return to your medication until it is complete.
E aprop lia le membre plaguat am liament al u convenient, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And then bind the member with a bandage in whatever way seems appropriate, and treat it until it is healed.
E yeu recomti a tu aquo que endevenc a un home en le sieu pe, aquest meteys accident le qual yeu e a tu recomtat, le qual es quar accidic a lu negror en le sieu pe am adustio que era asemblada a combustio de foc.	And I relate to you what happened to a man in his foot, which is the accident that I and you are discussing, which was that it became black in his foot with burn-like discoloration resembling fire combustion.
E aquela corrupcio accidic primierament en le sieu dit entro que tendec tot le pe.	And this corruption first occurred in his toe such that it spread throughout the entire foot
E adonc aquel home preparec per si meteys pus que vic la curacio anar al membre am la vehemencia de lu que atrobec de dolor e de adustrio de lu, e el inscidic aquel pe entro a la junctura, e foc sanat.	And then that man prepared to cut off his foot himself because the cure was not going well due to its severity of pain and burning. And he incised his foot at the joint, and fire healed it.
Lonc temps accidic a lu aquela meteyssa corrupcio en le dit de la ma indic.	For a long time that same corruption occurred in the index finger of his hand
E adonc venc a mi, e so me perforsat repercutir aquela superfluitat am aquo que pausegui sobre la ma de las medicinas, aprop la mundificacio del cos de lu; e no es repercussa la superfluitat e comensec anar al autra dit entro que comensec en la ma.	And then I came to him, and he told me that that same corruption had spread over with what I had placed on his hand as medicine, especially the cleansing of his body. And the corruption did not spread back but began to go into another finger until it reached the hand
E el apelec me a inscidir la ma de lu, e yeu no volgui far aquo sperant sobre la repercussio de aquela superfluitat, e mays que temegui deves la inscizio de la ma de lu mort, quar la vertut del malaute era sobre cazement.	And he asked me to incise his hand, and I did not want to do that hoping for the repercussion of that corruption. And more so because I feared the death of the incision of his hand, since the strength of the illness was already established
E pus que el se desperec de mi, es retornat en la sua terra e pervenguec a mi que aquel home preparec e inscidic la sua ma tota, e es sanat.	And since he left me, I heard that that man had returned to his land and had incised all of his hand himself, and it healed.
E no he adhuzida aquesta narracio sino per que sia adjutori sobre aquo que catz de aquesta malautia, e que sia significacio per la qual sia significada e segon la qual sia obrat.	And I have not related this narrative except to help with what is known about this illness, and that it may be understood for which it is named and according to which it should be treated.
De cura sinuum et qualitate clisterizationis cum medicinis.	Concerning the treatment of sinus and the quality of cleansing with medicines
Quan accideys apostema en alcus membres carnozes e·l spazi de l’apostema es prolonguat entro que fa colleccio de sania, e aprop es romput e perforat, e es eyssida de lu la sania, e roman le loc vuoyt quays cum si era vayssel, e la codena que es desobre lu ayssi cum drap subtiliat, e no es pervengut a deriera corrupcio, e no inprimeys en le os o en nervi ni en liament, es apelat sinu, e no es nompnat fistula.	When an aposteme occurs on some fleshy members and the space of the aposteme becomes prolonged so that it collects pus, and then it breaks and perforates, and the pus is discharged from it, and the place remains void as if it were a vessel, and the channel that is above it is like a thin cloth, and no further corruption reaches it, and it does not print on bone or nerve or tendon, it is called a sinus, and it is not named fistula.
Mays empero si le spazi es prolonguat entro que la corrupcio enprema en alcun membre, lahoras es appelada fistula e no zukem.	But if the space is prolonged so that corruption impresses on some member, then it is called fistula and notzukem.
E la cura de lu es que inscidas aquela codena tota ayssi cum es revolvut, e majorment quan es subtiliada e es fayta cum drap, e comfizas que no adhereys al loc per la sua corrupcio.	"And the treatment of this condition is to insert that chain completely in this manner as it is rolled up, especially when it has been subtiliated and made with cloth, ensuring that it does not adhere to the location due to its corruption."
Mays si tu speras que la codena adheresca e que aquela corrupcio no aja conseguit per deriera consecucio, e en la codena ha spassitut de cara, lahoras tu cura aquel am clisteri.	"If however you suspect that the chain has adhered and that this corruption cannot be achieved by any other means, then at that time you should treat him with a clyster."
E es que consideras al sinu, e lahoras si es gran, e·l brac que yeys es de fetent odor, lahoras clisteriza aquel am medicament egipciac le qual es de oli e vi agre e ziniar recebent partidas enguals, e sian ajustadas en un vayssel, e sian coytas sobre le foc entro que’l medicament se fassa rog e pervengua a specitut de mel.	"And if you consider the sinus, and if it is large, and the arm that goes in has a foul odor, then clysterize him with an Egyptian medicine which is made of oil and sour wine and cinnamon ground together equally, put in a vessel, and cooked over the fire until it reaches the consistency of honey."
E aprop tu pren de lu aquo que es necessari e dissolveys lu am aygua e mel; e clisteriza am aquel le sinu, e strenh le orrifici de lu, e layssa la medicina en lu per la quantitat de doas horas.	"And moreover take of that which is necessary and dissolve it with water and honey; and clysterize him with this mixture into the sinus, and strengthen the orifice of it, and leave the medicine in there for the quantity of two hours."
E aprop extratz aquela am sprecio; e fay aquo per tantz dias entro que sia mundificat le sinu e sia remauguda la pudor.	"And then remove that with a sponge; and do this for so many days until the sinus is cleaned and the pus removed."
E alcunas veguadas es clisterizat am aygua de cendre, quan no es a tu prezent aquest medicament; e es que tu prenguas la cendra de vitz, e met sobre lu aygua; e aprop cola aquela e clisteriza aquel am ela entro que te confizes que·l sinu lahoras es ostat.	"And sometimes it is clysterized with hot ash water when this medicine is not present. And if you take the ashes of figs and put them on the water, then collect that and clysterize him with it until you are satisfied that the sinus has been cleaned."
E si le malaute no ha tollerancia sobre le medicament egipciac ni l’aygua de la cendre, lahoras clisteriza aquel am aygua e mel e quays sia mesclat ziniar trissat, e clisteriza aquel am vi e mel mesclat, quar de proprietat de mel es que mondifique e lave, e le vi fa adherir le sinu, e majorment quan en le vi ha superfluitat de stipticitat e de siccitat.	"And if the patient cannot tolerate the Egyptian medicine or hot ash water, then clysterize him with warm water and honey mixed together three times, and clysterize him with wine and honey mixed, for it is proper that honey should cleanse and wash, and wine makes the sinus adhere, especially when there is an abundance of astringency and dryness in the wine."
E cum tu fas aquo alcunas veguadas e te comfizes que·l sinu ja es remaugut, lahoras clisteriza aquel am aquo que fa naysser la carn en lu.	"And when you have done this several times and are satisfied that the sinus has been removed, then clysterize him with something that makes flesh grow in it."
E es que prenguas de enguent dyafinicon e dissolveys aquel am oli rozat e vi stiptic; o que clisterizas aquel am alcunas medicinas e enguentz autres que hajan las proprietatz les quals ja he yeu scritz en le tractat dels enguents.	"And take of refined diaphoretic and dissolve it with rose oil and astringent wine, or clysterize him with some other medicines and ointments that have the properties which have already been written about in the treatise on ointments."
E si le orrifici del sinu es streyt en le qual no es recebuda la canula del clisteri, lahoras tu le amplifique aquel am ferr petit a petit, e pausa en lu calgua envolopada en enguent egipciac o en enguent basilicon entro que sia amplificat.	"And if the orifice of the sinus is narrow so that the cannula of the clyster cannot be received there, then gradually dilate it with a little iron, and pause in it with hot water wrapped in Egyptian ointment or basilicon ointment until it has been dilated."
E semblantment si le orrifici es ample, lahoras tu agregua las labias de lu am sutura e layssa de lu quantitat en la qual intre le clisteri ses addicio.	"And similarly, if the orifice is wide, then gather its lips with a suture and leave in it the quantity in which the clyster enters without addition."
E si le orrifici de lu del qual corr le brac es elevat a las partidas desus, lahoras secca aquel en le pus bas loc que es en lu per que le brac corra entro dejos, quar quan le brac es coartat en la preondeza de sinu la carn esser en lu engendrada.	"And if the opening of it from which the arm comes out is elevated above its parts, then dry that place with a poultice below where it is located so that the arm may run easily, for when the arm is obstructed in the concavity of the sinus flesh may be generated there."
E si no es a tu possible seccar le sinu entro al enviro del os pus bas segon que voles, lahoras te perforssa que prepares le membre am preparacio per la qual corr de lu le brac leugierament segon que es a tu apparelhat e que no sia en lu retengut alcuna causa del brac.	"And if it is not possible to dry the sinus inside according to your will, then prepare the member with preparation so that the arm runs through it easily according to what you are accustomed to, and that there may be no cause of retention in the arm."
E pren medicinas consolidativas que sian pausadas sobre le sinu convenientz ad aquo que vols exxten aquelas sobre drap de li.	"And take consolidating medicines which are put on the sinus conveniently, such as those you wish to extend them over cloth on it."
E le drap sia de tan gran quantitat cum fa la comunicacio de tot le sinu; e aprop inscidey am las forfexs en le dreyt del orrifici del sinu un trauc pus ample un pauc que l’orrifici del sinu; e aprop exten sobre autre drap de li dels enguentz leons segon la quantitat del trauc, e pausa le sobre aquel per posicio longinqua del orrifici del sinu per que sia aleujat le eyssiment del brac de lu e no ostes le drap gran sino aprop alcus dyas una veguada.	"And let the cloth be of such a quantity as to cover all the sinus; and appropriately cut with scissors on the right side of the opening of the sinus a strip somewhat wider than the opening of the sinus; and appropriately extend over another piece of cloth some of the ointments according to the quantity of the strip, and pause it over that at a distance from the opening of the sinus so that the exit of the arm from it may be facilitated and do not let the cloth remain too long, only for a few days once."
Mays aquel que es sobre le orrifici del sinu, le qual remauguas en tota hora per so que yesca aquo que es ajust en lu del brac.	"But that which is over the opening of the sinus should be removed at all times so that nothing may be stuck in it on the arm."
E per que sapias si aquo que corr de lu del brac es mot o pauc, o es digest, o es no-digest.	"And so that you may know whether what comes out from the opening of the arm is much or little, whether it is digested or undigested."
E am aysso tu considera le loc de aquel sinu, si en lu sent le pacient dolor o no, e si es en lu apostema.	"And also consider the place where that sinus is located, if the patient feels pain there or not, and whether it is an abscess."
E cum la tua medicacio es prolonguada en la tal manieyra, e vesas la matiera que es gitada sobre le orrifici del sinu ja adhereys, o se apropria adherencia, lahoras le mayti tu le deslia o le tertz dia, e quan deslias la plagua, lahoras muda le drap per autre e renova le enguent.	"Given that your treatment has lasted this long in such a manner, and you see the matter that is thrown onto the wound of the sinus already adhering or becoming properly adhered, then remove it on the third day. And when you remove the cloth, then replace it with another one and renew the ointment."
Mays si del sinu aprop lon spazi yeys virus subtil, lahoras no te desperes de la adherencia de li, quar la sanacio de lu se apropria, quar so alcus homes en les quals tarda generacio de carn en las lors plaguas, e de aquels so en les quals es fayt le contrari de lu.	"However, if the sinus has a long and narrow space that is filled with subtle virus, then do not despair about its adhesion, because its healing will be proper. For there are some people in whom the generation of flesh in the wounds is delayed, and among those are also those in whom it happens otherwise."
E si del sinu aprop motz dias es yssit brac indigest, lahoras sapias que·l sinu no adhereys; e si es tardada la adherencia del sinu e es la causa prolonguada, lahoras tu ajusta en exsiccacio de las medicinas, e si las medicinas so humidas en lor substancia e en la sua vertut, son seccas ayssi cum enguent dyafinicon, quan es en lu ajustada superfluitat de addicio de zegi.	"If the sinus has remained dry for many days without discharging any matter, then you should know that the sinus is not adhering. And if the adhesion of the sinus is delayed and prolonged as a result, then adjust the drying out of the medications. If the medications are humid in their substance and virtue, they will be dry like fine ointment when they have reached the appropriate amount of addition of pitch."
E le mays derier am le qual es curat, es que prenguas de enguent dyafinicon e sia dissout en oli rozat, e sia sobre lu vojat vi antic engual en la sua substancia, e aprop comfeys aquel am lu, e usa de aquel.	"And the last remedy with which it is cured is that you take some fine ointment and dissolve it in rose oil. Then pour it over the wound while hot, like ancient wine. And then apply this remedy to it, using it."
E ja fa semblant en aquela accio, quan no y a brac, enguent dyafinicon, mel quan es coyt entro que sia engrossat, e usa de lu; o que prenguas mirra e aloen e enses, e trissa tot e polveriza sobre le mel quan es sus le foc, e aprop lineys aquo sobre drap e strenh aquel sobre le sinu; e lineys aquel am le mel le qual has cuoyt entro que es engrossat, e polveriza sobre drap e strenh aquel.	"And it seems like that action, when there is no matter present, ointment should be used. And if honey has been cooked until it becomes thickened, use it; or you may take myrrh and aloe wood and nutmeg, grind all of them together and powder them over the honey while it is still on the fire. Then spread that over a cloth and apply it to the sinus; and also spread that with the honey which has been cooked until it becomes thickened, and powder it over the cloth."
E alcunas veguadas so administratz am lu aristologia longua e razitz de lili celesti (e es lili celesti) e farina de errs e centaurea, e usa de aquels simples o ajustatz, trissa aquels e cribela e polveriza sobre le mel le qual he recomtat; e husa de lu.	"And sometimes it is administered with long and thin roots of celestial lily (which is celery) and barley flour and centaurea. Use these simple remedies or adjust them as needed, grind them up and sift them, then powder them onto the honey which has been thickened, and apply it."
E si es prolonguat le sinu, e no es sanat per aquesta curacio, lahoras sapias que la corrupcio es en le preon de lu, e ja fa enquisicio en les osses o en les autres membres durs o als liaments; lahoras tu le cura am curacio fistular, ayssi cum desus es dit.	"And if the sinus remains prolonged and is not healed by this treatment, then you should know that the corruption is in the bone of it. And you should make an investigation in the bones or in the other hard members or in the ligaments. Then treat it with fistular cure, as was said above."
De curacio de panarici et unguis attritae et incisione digiti additi et sectione.	"On treating panaricium (a whitlow) by rubbing with ointment, making an incision in the nail and adding a finger, and cutting it off."
Panarici es apostema le qual nays dejos la ungla del dit pous de la ma o del pe, e fort leu nays en les autres ditz, e cum es prolonguat e la sua curacio es mens prezada, o es apostemat de apostema caut, o es corrumput, e gieta brac entro que corrodeys la razitz de la ungla, e fort leu corromp aquela tota, e fort leu perve la sua corrupcio al os entro que es a lu odor fetent, e es fayta la extremitat del dit lada, e la color de lu es fayta fusca.	A pimple is an abscess that appears beneath the nail of the toe or finger, and often appears in other digits as well. When it becomes prolonged and its cure is more difficult, it is called an abscess of an abscess or it is corrupted, and it emits a thick liquid that corrupts the root of the nail. Often the entire nail becomes corrupted, and frequently its corruption extends to the bone, which gives off a foul odor. The tip of the toe or finger becomes reddened, and the color appears dark.
E donc quan tu auras aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu inscidas am ferr tota la superfluitat que es romasa de la ungla e aprop cauteriza la plagla aprop aquo, quar cauteri mot es juvatiu en aysso.	Therefore, when you have that which we have spoken of in the division and your cure does not confirm itself, it is necessary then to cut with iron all the superfluous part that remains of the nail and cauterize the wound immediately afterwards, for cautery is very helpful in this case.
Mays si le os es sa e la ungla es sana, e las addicios de la ungla vuoydas ja compremen las carns a las partidas dedintz, e comensan lu punger e ledeysso aquela, lahoras cove que tu pauses ray subtil dejos le angle de la ungla que pungeys la carn, e impelleys aquela sus e inscideys aquela carn am facilitat, e pausa sobre aquo que roman de la carn de las medicinas comburentz corrosivas entro que sia tot remaugut; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	But if the bone is sound and the nail is healthy, and the corners of the nail begin to push into the flesh beneath, causing pain and inflammation there, then you should make a subtle incision at the angle of the nail that is pushing into the flesh, lift it up, and cut away that flesh with ease. Then place over what remains of the flesh medications that burn corrosively until all is removed; and immediately afterwards dress that wound with an ointment so that it may heal.
Mays si la corrupcio ja enprem en le os, lahoras cove que tu inscidas le os aquel e le extraguas, car nul temps no es sanat que sia en lu le os corrumput.	But if the corruption has already entered the bone, then you should cut into the bone and extract it, for there is no time when the bone can be healed once it becomes corrupted.
E si vezes la corrozio e la corupcio anar en le dit, lahoras tu inscideys aquel en un dels nozes segons que es premesa la sua rememoracio, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if the corrosion and corruption extend to the finger itself, then you should cut into it at one of its joints according to what is remembered regarding its movement, and dress that wound until it heals.
Mays si a la ungla endeve percussio o atricio, e endeve en aquela dolor vehement, lahoras cove que tu al comensament fleubotomes le malaute, e aprop secca la ungla am spatum agut am seccio transversa desus en jus, e guarda te que la seccio no pervengua entro a la carn que es dejos la ungla, quar tu faras accidir al malaute dolor vehement, e sira causa a nativitat de la carn ajustada superflua en le loc; e aprop cura aquel loc am aquo que ceda dolor.	But if the nail receives a blow or rubbing and there is violent pain in that place, then you should first bleed the affected part. Then dry the nail with a sharp spatula made transverse from above to below, taking care that the cut does not extend into the flesh beneath the nail. Otherwise you will cause severe pain and provoke the formation of excess flesh in that location. And dress that place with something that relieves pain.
Mays dit ajustat, le qual es nat en las mas de alcus homes, fort leu es carnos tot, e fort leu so en lu osses, o fort leu es en lu ungla.	"Yet it was said that some men are born with excessive flesh in their bodies, and they have excessively fleshy skin, or bones, or nails."
E alcus de lu son natz en la razit de la junctura, o es la nativitat de lu en alcus nozes dels ditz.	"And some of them are born at the root of the joint, or their birth takes place in certain knots of these aforementioned bones."
Mays aquel que es nat en alcus nozes del dit no se mau, e aquest que es nat en las juncturas fort leu es maugut.	"But he who is born in some knots of the finger does not suffer pain, and this one who is born at the joints is much afflicted."
E de aquels que son natz carnoses, la seccio es leugiera, e es que tu inscidas aquel deves la sua razitz am spatum lat.	"And those who are born fleshy, their section should be lighter, and you should incise the root of this one with a broad knife."
Mays de aquel que es nat en la razitz de la junctura, la curacio es dificil; e donc guarda te de la abscizio de lu.	"Yet the treatment of that which is born at the root of the joint is difficult; therefore beware of cutting it off."
Mays en aquel que es nat en dit deves les nozes, cove que tu inscidas al comensament la carn de lu am inscizio redonda entro al os, e aprop serra am una de aquelas serras convenientz ad aquo, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	"Yet in that which is born on the knuckle of the finger, you should incise the beginning of the flesh with a round incision into the bone, and then saw it off with one of those convenient saws appropriate for this purpose, and afterwards cure it until it heals."
Mays consolidacio la qual accideys als ditz entre lor motas veguadas o per nativitat del home que nays enayssi, o per consolidacio de plagua o per combustio de foc, o per semblantz, adonc cove que secces aquela consolidacio entro que les ditz retorno a la sua forma natural.	"Yet the consolidation which occurs in these among their veins visible, or by birth of man, or by the consolidation of plague, or by combustion of fire, or by similarity, then it is necessary to cut away that consolidation until these aforementioned return to their natural form."
E aprop pausa entre lor draps de li enfuzes en oli rozat per que no sian consolidatz leugierament, e separa entre aquels, o pausa entre aquels una lamina de plom subtil entro que sia consolidat segon que cove.	"And also interpose between their membranes of the inflamed ones with fine rose oil so that they are not consolidated lightly, and separate them or interpose between them a thin sheet of lead so that it may be consolidated according to what is necessary."
E semblantment si accideys consolidacio en alcus ditz am la palma, lahoras tu secca aquela consolidacio segon que es preparada e conveneys a la figura del membre.	"And similarly if consolidation occurs in some of these at the palm, then you should cut away that consolidation according to what is prepared and appropriate for the figure of the member."
De inscizio de vices, so son varicas.	"Of incisions of veins, there are eight."
Vices so son varicas, e so venas envolutas grossas plenas de superfluitatz melencolicas las quals veno en motz dels membres del cors, e le major adveniment de lor en las cambas, e majorment en las cambas dels itinerantz e dels laborantz e dels portantz.	"Veins are veins, and they are wrapped-around thick veins full of superfluous black bile which come into the muscles of the body's members, and their greatest occurrence is in the calves, and especially in the calves of those who travel, those who work, and those who carry things."
Adonc cove que tu administres purguacio del cors de colera negra alcunas veguadas am expulcio fort, e aprop sangna le pacient de la vena basilica.	"Therefore you should administer purgation of the body from black bile several times with strong evacuation, and also bleed the patient from the basilic vein."
Mays la curacio de lor am ferr es segon dos manieyras: la una es que sia inscizas e sia atirat aquel sanc negre, e l’autra manieyra es que sia elevada la vena e sia extrayta tota.	"Yet the treatment of these with iron is according to two methods: one is that it be incised and that black blood be drawn out, and the other method is that the vein be elevated and that all of it be extracted."
La seccio de lu es segon aquesta manieyra: embroca al comensament la camba am aygua cauda mot entro que le sanc gros sia resolvut, que es feculent de la camba, e aprop strenh la camba del malaute a la partida pus sobirana de la coyssa entro a la partida dejos del denol am una benda, e aprop secca la vena en un loc, o en dos, o en tres am seccio ampla, e aprop eleva le sanc negra am la tieua ma de la partida dejos de la camba entro en sus, e desus en jus, entro que del sanc sia yssida la quantitat que voles e que vezes habastar, e la qual tollera la vertut del malaute.	"The section of the leg is according to this method: irrigate the beginning of the calf with cold water until thick blood is resolved, which is the sediment of the calf, and then bind the calf of the sick person at the superior part of the hip joint up to the joint of the anus with a bandage, and then cut the vein in one place, or two, or three with a wide section, and then elevate black blood with the tie-up hand from the joint below the calf upwards downwards until as much blood as you wish is let out, which will suffice for relieving the virtue of the sickness."
E aprop lia aquela, e comanda a lu que abstengua de las viandas colera negra engendrantz.	"And also tie it up, and command him to abstain from foods that generate black bile."
E itera la curacio per fleubotomia quan las venas so umplidas e aquo notz al malaute.	"And repeat the treatment by phlebotomy when veins are filled and this is noticeable to the sick person."
Mays la elevacio de lor es segon aquesta manieyra: tu que razas la camba del malaute, si en lu so motz pels, e aprop met le en banh e embroca la camba de lu am aygua cauda entro que s’enrogesesca e las venas sian exuberadas; o que sia exercitat per exercici fort, si banh no es a tu present, entro que·l membre sia scalfat.	"Yet the elevation of these is according to this method: you who shaves the calf of the sick person if it has hairs, and then place him in a bath and irrigate the calf with cold water until it reddens and veins are visible; or have him exercised vigorously if a bath is not available, until the member is warmed."
E aprop secsa la codena en le dreyt de la vena per seccio en le lonc o en le derier de lu deves le denol, o en le pus bas de lu deves lo talo.	"And then cut the cord at the right of the vein by section in its length or thickness, either near the buttock on the side of the anus, or lower down near the heel."
E aprop uobre la codena am uncis e excorja la vena de tota part entro que appara al sentiment, e es deves la appericio de lu que vezes aquela roga declinant a negror.	"And then tie up the cord with forceps and strip off the vein on all sides until it appears to the touch, and it is desirable that its appearance be several times requested declining towards blackness."
E donc cum evazeys e de la codena tu vezes aquela blanca quays sia corda.	"And then after evacuating tie up the cord white like a rope several times."
E aprop tu met dejos aquela le ray entro que sia elevada e sia gitada de la codena, e sospen aquela am onci orp leon.	"And then you place below that one which has been elevated and cast off from the cord, and suspend it with a golden forceps."
E aprop secsa autra seccio aprop aquela seccio per tres ditz, e aprop excorja la codena de la partida desus de la vena entro que apparia.	"And then cut another section near that one by three fingers, and strip off the cord from above the vein until it appears."
E aprop eleva aquela e inscideys aquela en deriera seccio deves le talo, e aprop extratz aquela e eleva aquela entro que sia yssida per la seccio segonda, e aprop extratz aquela de la seccio que es sobre aquela.	"And then elevate that one and incise it in a second section near the heel, and then extract that one and elevate that one until it is let out through the second section, and then extract that one from the section that is above it."
E fay aquo entro que extraguas aquela de la seccio que es pus sobirana o pus auta de totas las seccios, entro que tota es yssida; e lahoras inscideys aquela.	"And do this until you have extracted that one from the section which is above all sections, or highest of all, until everything has been let out; and then close it up."
E si no obezeys a tu ad extrayre e elevar, lahoras intromet una agulha am fiel fort doble e ligua aquela e extratz la, o intromet dejos lu le ray e revolveys la tua ma a tota part entro qu’en sia getada.	"And if you do not succeed in extracting and elevating it, then insert a double-threaded needle with strong thread and bind it up and extract it, or else place below that one which has been elevated and turn your hand round on all sides until it is cast off."
E guarda te que no sia inscidida; quar si es trencada, es fayt a tu dificil elevar aquela mot e es vengut sobre le malaute per aquela nocument.	"And be careful that it is not cut; for if it is broken, it will be difficult for you to elevate that one much, and harm comes upon the sick person through that injury."
E cum aquela tota auras fora-gitada, lahoras pausa sobre le loc de la plagua lana submerssa en vi e oli rozat e oli no-rozat, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	"And when all has been cast out, then place over the wound a bandage moistened in wine and oil raw and oil not raw, and heal it until it is healed."
E si la vit es contrayta havent tortuositat a la qual sia envolucio a las partidas, e no es segon rectitut segon que havem dit, lahoras cove que tu fendas sobre aquela a tota partida de tortuositat de lu e als locs de envolucio de lu, e aprop suspen aquela am uncis entro que eleves aquela tota.	"And if the vein is contracted having tortuosity to which there is no wrapping at its parts, and it is not straight according to what we have said, then you must cut over that one all along the tortuosity of it and at the places where there is wrapping of it, and suspend it with forceps until you elevate that one entirely."
E guarda te deves la tua seccio que no inscidas la vena e que no plagues aquela, quar dificil sira a tu elevar aquela; e serva la tua prudencia en aquela.	"And be careful of your section lest thou cut the vein and lest thou wound that one, for it will be difficult for you to elevate that one if thou doest so; and take care with thy prudence in that."
Forma del inscident am le qual es seccada vit:	Here is the form of the incident in which a vein is cut:
Forma de unci orp:	"Form of an ointment for ulcers:"
No es a lu accuitat ayssi cum als uncis ni es de aguda extremitat per so que no plague la vena; e es de grossa flexibilitat leon, quar si era subtil, inscidira la vena per la sua subtilitat; habantz es en lu superflua grosseza ayssi cum havem dit.	"It is not made like other ointments and does not have sharp edges so that it does not injure the vein, and it is of thick consistency, lest if it were thin, it would cut the vein due to its thinness; there is superfluous thickness in it, as we have said."
De extraccio venae cruris.	"Of the extraction of a vein from the leg."
Aquesta vena es engendrada en las cambas en terras caudas ayssi cum al- Ategi en terra de Arabics e en las terras de India caudas e aridas de pauca teneritat e en las quals no nays erba ni aybre.	"This vein is generated in the caves located on dry lands, like those found in Arab lands and in the dry lands of India, which have little tenderness and where there is no grass or herbs."
E fort leu es engendrada en autres locs del cors otra las cambas.	"And it is also generated in other places of the body besides caves."
E la gestacio de lu es de putrefaccio que ve dejos la codena ayssi cum venen dedintz le cors serpentz e vermps e scarides e verms engendrantz entre la codena e la carn.	"And its formation is due to putrefaction, which rises from the spine like venom from inside the body serpents and worms and crabs and worms generating between the spine and the flesh."
E senhal de la suscepcio de l’adveniment de lu es de aquesta vena que accideys en la camba enflammacio vehement; e aprop le loc es vesicat; e aprop comensa la vena yssir del loc de aquela vesicacio quays sembla razit de planta.	"And the sign of the onset of its occurrence is that this vein happens to be inflamed in the cave, and around the location it is infected; and from there begins the vein to exit from the location of that infection, which appears like a plant root."
E adonc cum appar de lu la extremitat, lahoras cove que tu envolvas sobre aquela una pessa de plom del qual sia le pes de una drac. entro a ii drac., e noza aquela e layssa le plom suspendut de la camba.	"And then when the extremity of it appears, at that time you should wrap around it a piece of lead weighing about two and a half drachmas, without touching the lead, and let it hang from the cave."
E tantas veguadas cum yeys de lu alcuna causa a las partidas defora, envolveys aquo em plom e noza aquel.	"And whenever any cause arises outside of it that causes it to swell up, wrap that in lead without touching it."
E si mot es prolonguat, lahoras tu inscideys una partida de lu e envolopa le romanent; e no inscidas aquela de razit entro que sia fora yssida, quar si inscideys aquela es contrayta e intra en la carn e fa accidir apostema e poyredura en le loc e ulceracio mala.	"And if it does not become longer, then cut off a piece of it and wrap the remaining part; and do not cut it too close to the root, for if you do so it will retract and go into the flesh and cause inflammation and putrefaction in that location and produce a bad ulcer."
Per que cove que sia tractada suaument e sia extrayta petit a petit, entro que sia fora-gitada del derier de lu e no remangua de lu alcuna causa en le cors.	"So that it may be treated gently and extracted little by little until it is completely gone from the body and nothing remains of it inside the body."
E de aquesta vena es yssit en alcus homes que es en la sua longitut de v palms e de detz e ja es pervengut a mi que yssic un de xx palms.	"And this vein can be up to two and twenty palms in length, and I have heard of one that was thirty palms."
E si es inscidida en la hora de la sua medicacio, lahoras intromet lo ray en le trauc de lu e perfora aquela am lonc trauc am le cors, entro que sia evacuat tot aquo que es en la materia, e administra putrefaccio del loc per alcus dias am medicinas; e aprop cura aquela per la curacio de apostemas.	"And if it is cut during the time of its treatment, then insert a thread into the opening and pierce that with a long thread through the body until all that is inside the matter is evacuated, and administer putrefaction to the location for some days with medications; and cure it with the cure of apostemes."
E aquesta vena alcunas veguadas ha motz ramps, e majorment quan apar a la junctura del pe o en le pe, e veno a lu motz orrificis, e es yssit de quascu orrifici ram.	"And this vein sometimes has many branches, especially when it appears at the joint of the foot or in the foot, and it comes from many openings, and each opening has its own branch."
E donc cura aquela ayssi cum havem dit en la divisio e am aquo que es desus dit.	"And therefore cure it as we have said in the division above, with what has been said about it."
De sectione super vermes generatos sub cute et dicitur aegritudo bovina.	"Regarding cutting for worms generated under the skin and called bovine disease."
Aquesta malautia es nompnada en alcuna terra deves nos malautia bovina per so quar motas veguadas endeve als bious e es verm pauc un le qual es nat entre la codena e la carn, e va en tot le cos pujan e devalan, e es mostrat al sentiment deves le sieu anament de membre en membre entro que disromp la codena e yeys fora.	"This disease is called in some lands 'bovine disease' because it often happens to oxen and is a worm that is born between the sinew and the flesh, and goes throughout the body pushing and pulling, and can be felt by its movement from member to member until it breaks the sinew and comes out."
E la generacio de lu es per putrefaccio de alcunas humors ayssi cum accideysso verms e serpentz e lombrics e ascaridas en le ventre.	"And its generation is due to putrefaction of certain humors, just as worms, serpents, earthworms, and ascarids are generated in the belly."
E es temut per la malicia de lu, quar quan el va en le cors e es elevat al cap, e es pervengut al huel, lahoras fort leu uebre en lu e intra e destruzeys le huel, e aquo endeve motas veguadas.	"And it is feared for its mischief because when it goes into the body and rises to the head and reaches the eye, then it strongly beats in it and enters and destroys the eye, which often happens."
E donc quan tu voles curar aquel e extraire lu, lahoras no se fa si no deves la sieua ambulacio e apparacio de lu al sentiment, e adonc cove que tu strenhas aquo que es sobre lu e aquo que es dejos lu am liament e constriccio fort, e aprop secca sobre lu e extratz aquel.	"And therefore when you want to cure it and extract it, then do not do so unless you know its movement and appearance by feeling, and then bind what is above it and what is below it with linen and strong binding, and dry it on top of it and pull it out."
E si es preondat en la carn e no le atrobes, lahoras tu pausa cauteri am foc sobre le loc entro que mora, e la major causa que es temuda es corrupcio de lu am la qual corrump le loc ayssi cum havem dit.	"And if it is caught in the flesh and not removed, then apply a cautery with fire to the location where it is until it is killed, for its corruption is what is most feared because it corrupts that location as has been said."
May si tu vezes aquel esser pervengut al cap prop del huel, lahoras strenh sobre le sobrecil am fort strictura, e aprop secsa sobre lu, e extratz aquel; e cove que·l malaute use de mondificacio del sieu cors am medicinas evacuantz humors putridas malas, e guarda se de viandas generantz putrefaccio.	"But if it has reached the head near the eye, then bind above the eyebrow with strong binding and dry on top of it and pull it out; and the patient should use purgation of his body with medicines that expel bad putrid humors, and should avoid foods that cause putrefaction."
De sectione super aegritudinem nafir.	"Regarding cutting for the disease called nafir."
Aquesta malautia es nompnada en nostra terra nafir, e es dolor la qual ve en alcus membres, e aprop es permudada de membre en membre.	"This disease is called in our land 'nafir' and it is pain that comes to some members and also changes from member to member."
E yeu ja e vista aquela segon que yeu te recomtare.	"And you will see this as I will describe it to you."
Yeu fu apelat a una femna malauta ad una vila, e descubric le sieu bras e vi una imflacio petita en la vena funis del bras, e pus que fu romas per una hora, vi aquela imflacio anar ayssi cum va verm pujan ad aquest, mays pus leugierament que esser por, ayssi cum si fos argent viu quan corr de loc en loc.	"I was called to see a woman patient in a village, and I uncovered her arm and saw a small inflammation in the vein of the elbow joint of the arm, and after it had been broken for an hour, I saw that inflammation moving thus as if a worm were pushing towards this place but more lightly than could be seen, just like flowing liquid silver from place to place."
E adonc anet s’en la dolor de aquel loc e fiquet se en le muscle, e aprop aqui stec per una hora.	"And then the pain moved away from that place and fixed itself in the muscle, and stayed there for an hour."
E aprop correc en l’autre cors entro que pervenc al autre bras.	And now correct what was done in the other body until it reaches the other arm.
E aprop recomtec a mi que revolvia se per tot le cors sieu segon que yeu vi; e fo trop meravelat de la permutacio de lu e de la velocitat de membre en membre.	And now I recall that you said to turn yourself throughout your body according to what I saw; and he was greatly amazed at the transformation of him and the speed of member by member.
E yeu ja havia vist denant aquo en les mieus huels segon aquela manieyra, empero yeu he vistz motz les quals atroban dolor esser permutada de membra a membre.	And I had already seen before that in my eyes according to that manner, but I have heard many who affirm that it hurts to be transformed from member to member.
Mays no vi aquo am les huels ayssi cum en la femna.	But I do not see that in the eyes like in women.
E yeu no cogiti esser aquo sino que es per aquo quar la femna era de viela, on so de secs cors e de venas descubertas, e en aquesta apparec al sentiment aquela ventositat permutada.	And you think that is because the woman was of old age, where there are many bodies and veins uncovered, and in this appearance it seems to feel that windy transformation.
E es necessari que no apparesca segon aquesta retro-curacio en aquels que son delicioses e am cors humitz de venas ameguadas.	And it is necessary that it does not appear according to this backwards curve in those who are delightful and have moist bodies with veins intertwined.
E cum tu voles la curacio de lu, e le pacient sent aquela dolor, lahoras no es a tu aparent al huel ayssi cum havem dit, lahoras tu strenh sobre aquel e dejos lu leugierament e secse sobre aquel entro que sia yssida aquela ventositat coartada, e cauterize le loc.	And when you want the cure of him, and the patient feels that pain, then it is not apparent to your eye as we have said, then you press on him gently and let go lightly and cautiously over him where that windy oppression has come out, and cauterize the place.
Mays si tu no la vezes am los tieus huels, alhoras tu cura aquel am excussio del cors e am aquo que expelleys ventositatz, e carmina aquelas am pillulas fetidas e am pillulas de serapi e semblantz.	But if you do not see it with your eyes, then cure him with exercise of the body and with that which expels windiness, and treat him with pills made from bitter herbs and with pills made from saffron and similar things.
De extraccio de sagetas.	Of removing arrows.
Sagetas son diversificadas segon las specias, e segon les locs dels cors en les quals cazo, quar la lor diversitat es que de aquellas so que han grans puntas, e petitas, e concavas, e sordas, so es solidas; e de lor so que han tres angles, e de aquelas a las quals so que han lenguas; e de aquelas a las quals so astelas.	Arrows are diversified according to their species and according to the places of the body where they strike, because their diversity is that some have large points and some small and concave ones, some are blunt and others solid. Some have three angles, others have tongues or feathers.
E aquela que es segon les membres e las pessas en las quals cazo es segon dos manieyras: quar les membres o so membres principals concaus, ayssi cum le cervel, le cor, e·l fitge, e le pulmo, e les ronhos, e les budels, e la vezica, e a lor semblantz; e donc quan catz en alcu de aquestz membres e aparo a tu senhals de mort, la qual causa yeu recomtare aprop, lahoras cove que tu evites extraccio de aquela sageta en aquels quar la mort siec aquel en le qual en las majors disposicios, e quan a tu no appareysso aquestz mals senhals, e la sageta no es amaguada en la profunditat del membre, lahoras tu extratz aquela e cura la plagua.	And those that are according to the members and weights where they strike are divided into two methods: for some members or principal members cause death, such as the brain, heart, liver, lung, intestines, gallbladder, etc. And therefore when they hit one of these members and there appear signs of death, which I will explain later, then it is necessary that you avoid extracting that arrow in those where death is certain in the most favorable conditions, and when you do not see these bad signs and the arrow is not hidden in the depth of the member, then extract it and treat the wound.
E dels senhals del servel es quan catz en lu sageta, e trespassa le os, e es yssit del cyphac le qual es sobre le cervel, quar accideys per lu soda vehement, e scotomia, e vertige, e rogor en les huels, e imflamacio e rogor de la lengua, e spasme e permixtio de entendament e vomi de colera, e fort leu es abscindida la paraula e es destruida la votz, e es yssit del loc de la plagua humiditat blanca semblant a pols, e yeys de lu semblant ad aquositat de la carn.	And the signs of death from being struck by an arrow are: when it passes through the bone and exits from the cranium above the brain, because it happens suddenly with loss of consciousness, vertigo, roaring in the ears, inflammation and redness of the tongue, spasm and confusion of understanding and vomiting of bile. The breath is suddenly cut off and speech is destroyed, and there is an exit of moisture resembling white powder from the wound, and a yellowish discharge like watery matter comes out of the flesh.
E donc si appareyso a tu aquestz senhals, lahoras tu abste de la curacio e de la extraccio de la sageta, si non es fora.	And therefore if these signs appear to you, then abstain from treating and extracting the arrow unless it is outside of the body.
Mays les senhals de la sageta quan catz en le cor, so que ela es prop de la mamila senestra, e sent am aquela quays sia ficada en causa dura, e no es causa vueda; e fort leu le movement de la sageta es semblant a movement del pols, e corr de la plagua sanc negra, e siec aquel fregiditat de las extremitatz, e suzor freja, e sincopi; e donc sapias que la mort descen ses tot dopte.	But the signs of an arrow when it strikes the heart are: it is near the left nipple, and it seems to be stuck in hard flesh and not soft. The movement of the arrow is like the beating of the pulse, and there flows black blood from the wound, there is coldness of the extremities, chills, and syncope; therefore know that death will come without delay.
E les senhals quan la sageta ha plaglat le pulmo so eyssiment de sanc spumos de la plagua, e les vayssels que so prop del col so apostematz, e es mudada la color del malaute, e expira sperit gran aut, e demanda atraccio de ayre freg.	And the signs when an arrow has pierced the lung are: there is emission of frothy blood from the wound, and the vessels near the neck become obstructed, the complexion changes to pale, and there is great expiration or sighing for breath, and a desire for cold air.
E si catz la sageta en le velament le qual es en le pietz, e la dolor lahoras es prop de las costas petitas, e es fayt le ale gran am vehement dolor e am sospir, e no so maugutz totz les membres dels muscles.	And if the arrow strikes the diaphragm which is in the chest, then the pain will be near the little ribs, and there will be great swelling of the lung with violent pain and sighing, and all the members of the muscles will become paralyzed.
E si catz la sageta en le stomac, lahoras fort leu yeys de la plagua vianda alcuna indigesta.	And if the arrow strikes the stomach, then there will be immediate vomiting of some undigested food from the wound.
E si catz la sageta en le ventre, e es ficada en lu, yeys alcuna fenda de la plagua, o la tela, o budel le qual es disromput, e no es speransa en la curacio de lu extraccio de la sageta.	And if the arrow strikes the abdomen and is stuck there, then there will be some opening of the wound, or the skin, or a ruptured intestine, and there is no hope for cure by extraction of the arrow.
E si la sageta catz en la vesica, e es yssida defora urina, e procesesca de lu alcuna causa a las partidas defora, e fort leu es dolor sobre le malaute, lahoras sapias que es mortal.	And if the arrow strikes the bladder and urine is expelled from outside, and there is some process around the parts outside, then there will be great pain above the wound, therefore know that it is mortal.
Mays les autres membres ayssi cum es la cara, le col, e·l golayro, e las spallas e le adjutori, e les spondils del dos, e la furcula, e la coysa, e la camba e a lor semblantz dels membres, son salvatz segon las majors disposicios quan la sageta no atroba vena ni arteria e no es sageta venenosa.	But the other members such as the face, neck, throat, shoulders, arms, and shoulder blades, spine, collarbone, thigh, leg, and their like are saved according to the most favorable conditions when the arrow does not strike a vein or artery and is not a poisoned arrow.
E yeu recomtare aquo a tu que he vist del esser de aquestas sagetas, per que signifiques per aquo sobre la curacio tieua.	And I advise you to consider this concerning these arrows, so that you may know how to proceed with their treatment.
La qual causa es, quar en un home cazec sageta en le lacrimal del huel de lu en la razitz del nas, e yeu extrayssi aquela a lu del autra partida, dejos le grays de l’aurelha de lu, e es sanat, e no accidic en le huel de lu nocument.	For example: there was a man who received an arrow in the lacrimal bone of his eye near the root of his nose, and I extracted it from another part, leaving behind only the graze of the ear, and he healed without any harm to his eye.
E extrayssi autra sageta a un Juzeu la qual cazec en lu en lo grays del sieu huel, dejos la palpebra pus dejos, e la sageta ja era occultada e no so conseguit de aquela sino una petita extremitat am la qual adhereys al sieu fust, e era gran sageta de las sagetas agudas dels Turcs , am ferr leon en la qual no havia aurelhas.	And I extracted another arrow from a Jew which had struck him in the graze of his eyebrow, leaving behind only the eyelid. The arrow was already hidden and could not be seen, except for a small extremity with which it adhered to its shaft. It was a large, pointed arrow of the Turks, with a lion-headed ferrule, which had no feathers.
E senat es le Juzieu , e no accidic en le sieu huel mal accident.	And the Jew healed completely without any harm to his eye.
E extrayssi una autra sageta a un home Crestia la qual era cazuta en le golayro, e era sageta arabica, e es aquela a la qual so aurelhas; e adonc yeu inscidegui sobre aquela entre doas guidegi, e ja era submersa en le golayro de lu; e adonc yeu so subtiliat am aquela, e aprop extraxi aquela, e es sanat le Crestia .	And I extracted another arrow from a Christian man which had fallen into his throat. It was an Arabic arrow with feathers, and it was already submerged in his throat. Then I incised between two guide fingers and carefully extracted it, and the Christian man healed.
E extraxi autra sageta a un home la qual era cazuta en le sieu ventre, e cogitegui que moris per aquela; e donc, pus que foro passatz xxx dias e no es mudat sobre lu alcuna causa de las suas disposicios, inscidegui sobre la sageta e engenagui sobre aquela, e es sanat, e no accidic a lu accident mal.	And I extracted another arrow from a man who had received it in his belly and thought that he would die from it. Therefore, since thirty days had passed without any change in his condition or symptoms, I incised over the arrow and removed it, and he healed without suffering any serious harm.
E vi mays un home en le qual cazec una sageta en le dos de lu, e consolidada es la plagua sobre lu, e pus que foc aprop set ans, yssic la sageta en la razitz de la coyssa.	And I saw another man in whom an arrow had struck the back and the wound had healed over it. After about seventy years, the arrow came out at the root of his thigh.
E vi una femna a la qual cazec sageta en le sieu ventre, e la plagua es consolidada dedintz lu, e no es mudada en las suas disposicios en re, e la femna no atrobec nocument en alcunas de las suas opperacios naturals.	And I saw a woman in whom an arrow had struck her belly and the wound had healed over inside her without any change in her condition or symptoms. The woman did not suffer any harm to any of her natural operations.
E vi un autre home al qual cazec sageta en la sua cara e consolidada es la plagua e romas la sageta, no atrobant aqui mota dolor, e motz semblantz ad aquestz.	And I saw another man in whom an arrow struck his face and the wound healed over and the arrowhead broke off without causing much pain. Many similar cases have been seen to this effect.
E extrayssi la sageta del home dels princeps del rey que era cazuda en le mieg loc del nas sieu e ja havia declinat a la partida dreyta un petit, e occultada era tota la sageta.	And I extracted the arrow from the man of the princes of the king which had struck in the middle of his nose and had deviated slightly to the right. The entire arrow was hidden.
E yeu fu appelat a la curacio de lu aprop le cazement de la sageta entro a tres dias.	And I was called for the treatment of him about three days after he was struck by the arrow.
E adonc yeu atrobegui la plagua de la sageta mot streyta; e adonc yeu inquirigui aquela am tenta subtil, e no sentigui aquela; mays el la sentia puncio dejos la aurelha dreyta, e adonc speregui que aquela punccio era per la extremitat de la sageta.	And then I opened the wound of the arrow quite narrow. And then I inquired about it with a delicate touch and did not feel it; but he felt a puncture on the right ear, and therefore I believed that this puncture was due to the extremity of the arrow.
E amplastregui le loc am emplaustre en le qual es vertut atrectiva e digestiva, confizant de mi que·l loc se apostemes per que appares a mi le loc de la sageta, per que secces sobre aquela.	"I have plastered the area with a plaster that has attractive and digestive virtue, ensuring that the area is covered so that I can see the arrowhead, for it is dry."
E no accidic en le loc accident significant que la sageta hagues conseguit aquel loc; e yeu continuegui am le emplaustre sobre lu per motz dias e no accidic accident; e consolidada es la plagua entretant, e romas le malaute de la extreccio de lu per spazi de motz dias entro que un jorn sentic la sageta dintz le sieu nas e recontec aquo a mi.	"There was no accidental occurrence in the area where the arrow had reached; and I continued applying the plaster for many days without any accident occurring; and the wound has since healed, and the patient recovered from his injury within several days until one day he felt the arrow inside his nose and recognized it."
E adonc yeu pausegui sobre la plagua medicina acuta corrosiva per motz dias entro que foc ubert, e am la tenta yeu assagegui aquel, e atrobegui la extremitat de la sageta subtil, la qual adhereys al fust.	"Then I applied acute corrosive medicine on the wound for several days until it opened; and with the forceps I grasped that [the arrowhead], and extracted the thin extremity of the arrow, which adhered to the shaft."
E aprop yeu ajustegui en la apersio de la plagua per aquela medicina acuta entro que apparec a mi visiblament la extremitat de la sageta, e passec a mi temps am aquo per le spazi de temps entro quatre meses.	"And then I applied that acute medicine on the opening of the wound until it appeared visible to me; and I spent some time with this for the period of four months."
E aprop pus que la plagua foc amplificada, e foc a mi possible entrometre las forfexs en lu, e remaure aquela, e no obezic ad eyssiment, lahoras yeu no cessegui subtiliar e ingeniar sobre aquela am manieyras de engen, entro que comensegui un dia sobre aquela am manieyras de engens pendre lu am forceps descentment faytas, segon que vindra la forma de aquelas en la fi del capitol, entro que extraxi aquela; e aprop restauregui aquela plagua.	"And then when the wound was enlarged and it was possible for me to insert the forceps into it, I grasped that [the arrowhead], but I did not succeed in extracting it immediately. Then, however, I did not cease subtly manipulating and devising ways with ingenuity until one day I began to remove it by using methods of extraction described below, according to what came at the end of this chapter, so that I was able to extract it; and then I restored that wound."
E alcus metges jutgavan que la cartillage del nas no es restaurada, e yeu restauregui aquela e la plagua es consolidada, e sanat es le malaute per sanetat entiera, e no noguec en lu en deguna causa.	"And some physicians judged that the cartilage of the nose could not be restored, but I did restore it and the wound became consolidated, and the illness was completely healed, without any remainder or cause for complaint."
E yeu recomti a tu la qualitat de extraccio de alcunas sagetas per que pauses aquo regla e significacio sobre aquo que no he dit, quar las partidas de aquesta art e las difinicios de aquela no so conprehendudas am narracio ni no comprehen aquelas le libre.	"And I recount to you the method of extracting certain arrows because I have not given any rule or significance regarding that which has not been mentioned in this narrative, for the parts of this art and the definitions thereof are not understood with a mere narration nor is the book itself comprehended."
E le artifexs savi compara am pauc sobre mot; e am aquo que es present sobre aquo que es absent; e atroba operacio novela e instrument novel deves le descendement de las causas extranhas del art quan accideysso.	"And the wise artist compares little about matter; and that which is present he considers more than that which is absent; and he discovers new operations and new instruments whenever foreign causes of the art occur."
E donc yeu dic que sagetas no son fora-gitadas dels membres en les quals son ficadas sino segon dos manieyras: o per atraccio del loc en le qual intrec; o per le contrari de la autra partida.	"And therefore I say that arrows are not forgotten in the members into which they have been fixed, but rather according to two methods: either by attraction of the place where it enters, or by the opposite method of withdrawal."
E aquela que es gitada per le loc don es intrada, o es sageta procedent en loc carnos, e es atirada e fora-gitada.	"And that which is cast in by the entrance point, or is an arrow proceeding from a fleshy location, is drawn out and extracted."
E si no obezeys a eyssiment de la hora en la qual catz, lahoras cove que tu la laysses per alcus dias entro que poyresca la carn que es al enviro de lu, e sia alleujada l‘atraccio de lu e la sua egressio.	"And if it does not obey extraction at the time when cast, then you should leave it for a few days until the flesh that is around it becomes softened, and so that its attraction and exit may be alleviated."
E semblantment si es ficada en os e no obezeys a tu a eyssiment, lahoras layssa aquela per alcus dias e itera aquela am atraccio e mocio en quascun dia, e ja es fora-gitada.	"Similarly, if it is fixed in bone and does not obey extraction, then you should leave it for a few days and repeat the traction and motion each day, and then it will be extracted."
E si no obezeys a tu eyssiment aprop alcus dias, lahoras cove que tu perforas en le circuit de la sageta en aquel os de tota partida am taravel subtil entro que·l loc sia amplificat de la sageta, e aprop extratz aquela.	"And if it does not obey extraction even after several days, then you must perforate around the arrow in that bone with a subtle awl so that the location may be widened by the arrow, and then extract it."
E si la sageta es ficada en le os del cap e ja ha procezit en un dels ventres del cervel, e apparo en le malaute alcus de aquels accidentz les quals yeu e ditz, lahoras abste de la extraccio de la sageta e layssa aquela entro que·l sieu esser sia equat aprop alcus dias; quar si la sageta perve al ciphac, lahoras la mort no es a lu prolonguada.	"And if the arrow is fixed in the bone of the head and has already proceeded into one of the ventricles of the brain, and some of those accidents which I have mentioned appear in the illness, then abstain from extracting the arrow and leave it alone until the condition of the patient is equated after a few days; for if the arrow pierces the cerebrum, then death will not be prolonged."
E si la sageta no es ficada sino en le cors del os tant solament e no passa entro al ciphac, e roman le malaute per alcus dias, e no accideys a lu denguna causa de aquels accidentz, lahoras tu engenia en la atraccio de la sageta e en la atraccio de lu.	"And if the arrow is fixed only in the body of the bone and does not pass into the cerebrum, and the illness remains for several days without any cause of those accidents occurring, then you should endeavor to extract the arrow and alleviate its attraction."
Mays si es mot ficada e no obezeys a tu a extraccio, lahoras tu aministra taravels en le circuit de la sageta ayssi cum havem recomtat, e aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat.	"But if it is deeply fixed and does not obey extraction, then you must administer awls around the arrow as we have described, and then treat the location so that it may be healed."
Mays si la sageta ja es amaguada en le loc del cors, e es amaguada del sentiment, lahoras tu inquireys aquela am tenta, e si tu sentas aquela, lahoras atira aquela am alcus sturmentz les quals so convenientz a la atraccio de lu.	"But if the arrow is deeply buried in the location of the body and concealed from sensation, then you must search for it with a probe, and if you feel it, then extract it with some instruments which are suitable for its attraction."
E si no podes sobre lu per la constriccio de la plagua e per la longitut del preon, e aqui no es os ni nervi ni vena, lahoras tu fen sobre la plagua entro que sia amplificada e que sia possible extrayre la sageta.	"And if you cannot reach it due to the constriction of the wound and the length of the probe, and there is neither bone nor nerve nor vein there, then cut through the flesh until it is widened so that it may be possible to extract the arrow."
E si so a lu aurelhas am las quals sia tenguda, lahoras tu deliura la carn en la qual es ficada de tota partida am tot le engen que poyras far; e ingenia sobre aquo, si no podes sobre la evasio de la carn en la fractura de las aurelhas e en torssio de aquelas entro que obezesca.	"And if it is held by the ears with which it may be retained, then separate the flesh in which it is fixed on all sides with whatever effort you can make; and endeavor to achieve this without fracturing the ears or twisting them, so that you may succeed."
E quan tu administras la extraccio de la sageta en quascun loc on sia, lahoras tu usa am torcio de la tua ma am forceps a totas partidas entro que fassa aquela obezir; e subtilia am deriera subtilitat que la sageta no sia trencada e que sia fayta a tu dificil atraccio de lu e de aquela extraccio.	"And when you administer the extraction of the arrow in any location, then use twisting with your hand and forceps on all sides so that it may obey; and do this with such subtlety that the arrow is not broken, and so that its extraction may be easily accomplished."
E si no podes sobre aquela de la tua hora, lahoras tu layssa per alcus dias entro que se poyrescan las partidas que so en le circuit de lu, e aprop itera aquela quar lahoras es alleujada.	"And if you cannot accomplish this at that time, then leave it for a few days until the surrounding parts have softened, and then repeat it since it will be alleviated."
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat flux de sanc, lahoras tu administra aquo que havem dit de curacio en le sieu capitol.	"But if you find that there is opposition to the flow of blood, then administer what we have said about cure in its chapter."
E guarda la tua vertut de inscizio de vena o de nervi, o de corda, e aministra engen en tota manieyra a tu possibla de la evasio de la sageta; e fay aquo am facilitat e tranquillitat e tarditat e fermetat ayssi cum yeu e a tu recomtat.	"And guard against injuring any vein or nerve or tendon, and exert all possible effort to avoid the arrow; and do this with gentleness, calmness, slowness, and steadfastness as I have recommended."
E donc que fassas contrayre la sageta per so que·l malaute sia segon la figura segon la qual foc deves le cazement de la sageta en lu, quar es mays juvatiu.	"And therefore when you extract the arrow, do so in such a way that the illness is according to the figure according to which the case of the arrow was situated in it, for this is more beneficial."
Mays si aquo no es a tu possible, lahoras tu aministra aquo que es a tu possible per las figuras.	"But if this is not possible for you, then administer what is possible for you according to the figures."
Mays las sagetas que son fora-gitadas per le contrari del autra partida, o que ja de lu procezeys alcuna partida a las partidas de fora, o fa gilbositat la extramitat de la sageta per sentiment de la partida pus desus de la codena propdana e vezes aquela eminent; adonc tu secsa sobre aquela; e sia la seccio segon la quantitat en la qual prenguan las forceps; e aprop atira aquela, quar ela es fayta leugiera a eyssiment.	"But arrows which are extracted against the other side of another part, or those from which some part has already proceeded into other parts outside it, or those which have their point or end concealed due to sensation of the flesh above them and are prominent in that area; then cut through that area. Let the section be according to the quantity which the forceps grasp; and then extract it, for it will be easy to extract."
Mays si es retenguda en le os, lahoras tu tortz lama segon contrarietat entro que la sageta enprema en le os, e amplifique a si meteys, e aprop extratz aquela.	"But if it is retained in the bone, then twist it backwards according to its opposition until the arrow presses against the bone and widens it on both sides, and then extract it."
E sino, layssa aquela per alcus dias, e aprop itera aquela entro qu’en yesca.	"And otherwise, leave it alone for a few days, and then repeat it when it is necessary to do so."
E si le fust de la sageta es en aquela, lahoras tu impelleys aquela am lu.	"If the arrow's shaft is in that [place], then you push it there with force."
Mays si le fust es cazut e voles aministrar inpulsio, lahoras tu intromet e aquela, si es sorda, sturment concau per so que intre la concavitat de lu en la coa de la sageta e aprop impelleys aquela am lu.	"But if the shaft has fallen and you wish to administer momentum, then insert it there, if it's rigid, use a smooth instrument concave so that between the concavity of it and the end of the arrow it pushes gently against it."
Mays si la sageta es concava, lahoras tu impelleys aquela am sturment fort intrant en aquela, quar la sageta es alleujada per aquela.	"But if the arrow is concave, then you push it with an instrument inserted in that, because the arrow is opened by it."
E si la sageta es entoxiguada, lahoras cove que tu concaves tota la carn en la qual es le vere, si es a tu possible aquo, e aprop cura aquela am aquo que si conveneys.	"And if the arrowhead is poisoned, then you must cut away all the flesh around where it is inserted, if that is possible for you, and immediately treat it with whatever remedy you deem appropriate."
E si la sageta catz en le pietz, o en le ventre, o en la vesica, o en le costat, e es propinqua per so que tu tocas aquela am la tenta, e es a tu possible secsar sobre aquela, lahoras secsa sobre aquela e guarda te de inscizio de vena o de nervi, e extratz aquela, e aprop cos la plagua si indigeys, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	"And if the arrow strikes bone, or enters the abdomen, bladder, side, and is close to touching it with your hand, and if you can safely cut around that area, then cut around it and guard against cutting any veins or nerves, and extract it, and apply a bandage if necessary, and treat it until it heals."
Forma de forceps am las quals so atiradas las sagetas:	"Forms of forceps with which arrows are extracted:"
Sian las extremitatz de lor cum a bec de ausel que son faytas cum serra quan prendon sobre la sageta per so que no la layssen.	"[They] have the ends like the beak of a bird, made sharp like a saw when they grasp the arrow so that it does not slip away."
E de aquelas son faytas motas specias, grans, paucas e migieras, segon la quantitat de la grandeza de la sageta e de la sieua pauqueza, e de la amplitud de la plagua, e de la constriccio de lu.	"And there are many types of them: large, small and medium-sized ones according to the amount of the size of the arrow and its thickness, and also according to the width of the wound and the constriction of it."
Forma de impellent concau de aquesta extremitat conquava ayssi cum pena de ausel per so que sia alleujat le intrament de la sageta en lu, e impulcio de aquela sorda:	"Form of concave impulse made from this hollow end like the quill of a bird for extracting the arrowhead from inside it, and pushing back that wound:"
Forma de impellent de sorda extremitat:	"Form of pushing with a blunt end:"
ayssi cum ray per so que sia alleujat le intrament de lu en la sageta concava e es impellida am aquel.	"like a rod, in order to facilitate the entrance of the concave arrowhead and push it with that."
De fleubotomia de las venas.	"On flebotomy of veins:"
Las venas de fleubotomia de las quals corr costuma de fleubotomar so xxx, de las quals so en le cap xvi, so es doas venas pulsatils las quals so aprop las aurelhas, dic alhasisain; doas herbas que so en les dos templars apparentz; e doas venas que so en dos lacrimals de dos huels que son appeladas aspicientz; e la vena preparada en le mieg loc del front, e la vena que es en la extremitat del nas; e doas guidegi que so al col; e doas venas que so en la labia desus; e doas venas que so en la labia dejos; e — aquestas so las venas que so appeladas algelic —; e so doas venas que so dejos la lengua.	"The veins that are usually flebotomized are thirty-two in number, of which sixteen are in the head. These include two pulsating veins near the ears called 'alizain'; two herbs on the temples; two veins on either side of the nasal cartilage called 'aspicients'; one vein in the middle of the forehead; one vein at the tip of the nose; two branches of the neck; two veins above the upper lip; two veins below the lower lip, which are called 'aleglic', and two veins on either side of the tongue."
Mays las venas que so fleubotomadas en les brasses so v; quar de aquelas es una cephalica, e es deves le latz silvestre; e le poble appela “la vena del cap”, e sorda, e es vena migiera, e es composta de un ram de la basilica, e de autre ram de la cephalica; e nomna aquela le poble “vena de tot le cors”, e basilica es vena la qual es pausada en le latz domestic, e es nomnada “citillar”, e nompnan aquela les vulguars “vena del ventre”; e funis del bras, e es pausada sobre le focil, e es aquela en la qual es fleubotomat, e es aquela que appar sobre le poutz per apparicio manifesta; e salvatella, e es la vena que es entre lo dit auricular e·l pus petit dit, e so en lu dos ramps.	"In the arms there are five veins that are flebotomized. Of these, one is cephalic and is located on the outer side of the arm; it is called 'the vein of the head' by the people. Another is median and is composed of a branch from the basilica and another from the cephalic vein; this is called 'the vein of all the body' by the people. The basilica is a vein that lies on the inner side of the arm, called 'citillar' by the vulgar people. There are also the funis veins located above the elbow, in which flebotomy is usually performed and where it appears most visibly on the forearm. Lastly, there is the salvatella vein located between the little finger and the next one."
E en le pe e la camba so tres venas; la una de aquelas es que es dejos la curvatura del denolh del latz silvestre; e la segonda es sophena, e·l loc de lu es dejos la camba del latz domestic; e la vena sciatica, e·l loc de lu es dejos la camba del latz silvestre; e en la camba son autras venas semblantz ad aquelas.	"And in the foot and ankle there are three veins: one on the outer side of the curvature of the little finger of the outer side of the foot, another is the saphenous vein located on the inner side of the ankle on the inner side of the foot, and the third is the sciatic vein located on the outer side of the ankle on the outer side of the foot. There are also other veins in the ankle that resemble these."
Le juvament de las venas que so aprop las aurelhas es a cataris antics e emigranea e sahafati e ulceracios del cap malas antiquas.	"The benefit of flebotomizing the veins near the ears is for treating ancient catarrhs, migraines, and headaches, as well as ulcers on the head that are of long standing."
E la qualitat de sagnar aquelas es segon que yeu recomti a tu: es que sia ras le cap del malaute, e sia freguat le cap del malaute en le occipiti en le loc de amdoas las venas am drap ample am bona fricacio; aprop strenha le malaute le sieu col am una benda entro que apparan las doas e les locs de lor so aprop las aurelhas en dos locs depremegutz del cap; e quereys aquela am le tieu dit, e si tu sentes le pols de aquelas am le dit tieu, aqui senha am tenta.	"And the method of performing flebotomy on these veins is as follows: first, shave the head of the patient and rub it with oil on the occiput where both veins are located. Then, place a wide cloth on the head of the patient and apply firm friction. Next, wrap a bandage around the patient's neck so that both veins appear near the ears in two depressions on the head. Finally, grasp those veins with your thumb and if you feel their pulse with your thumb, then proceed to perform the flebotomy."
Aprop tu pren la lancea cutellar, e es aquela que es inscident, e aprop tu intromet aquel dejos la vena en la codena entro que·l fleubotomi vengua al os.	"Then take the cutting lancet and insert it into the vein on the arm until blood flows to the bone."
E aprop eleva la tua ma am la vena e la codena a las partidas desus e inscideys la vena am inscizio inscident.	"And then raise your hand with the vein and arm upwards and make an oblique incision into the vein, cutting it obliquely."
E sia la longitut de la inscizio la quantitat de dos ditz ajustatz o entorn de aquo; e fay yssir del sanc atant quant voles.	"And let the length of the incision be about two fingers or thereabouts. Then allow as much blood to flow out as desired."
E aprop strenh am pulvils e layssa aquela entro que sia sanada.	"And then apply powder and a bandage, leaving it in place until healed."
E ja e precedit en le comensament del libre la inscizio de aquelas e de lor la cauterizacio.	"And it has been preceded at the beginning of this book, the incision of those affected by cauterization."
Mays de las doas venas arterias que so als templars le juvament de la fleubotomia es a emigranea antiqua e sode malvada e obtalmia assidua e cors de superfluitatz acutas effusas als huels.	"The two veins leading to the temples, which is beneficial for phlebotomy, are useful for ancient headaches and persistent migraines, and for frequent eye disorders. It also has sharp, abundant effusions in the hips."
E la qualitat de fleubotomar aquelas es segon que yeu recomti a tu: constrengua le malaute le sieu col mot entro que apparan las doas venas al sentiment per appericio manifesta e sia demonstrat le pols de lor dejos le tieu dit; e lahoras tu senha am tenta.	"And the quality of performing phlebotomy on them is as follows, which I recommend to you: compress the patient's arm with a bandage until both veins appear clearly at the surface and are demonstrated by touching them. Then proceed."
E aprop tu eleva la codena desobre la vena a las partidas desus am le tieu dit indic, e intromet le fleubotomi inscident dejos, e eleva la vena en sus; e inscidey aquela ayssi cum has fayt en las doas venas autras; e fay correr del sanc segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	"Then raise the arm over the vein at its intersection with your index finger, insert the phlebotomy lancet into it, and elevate the vein above. Incise it as you have done on other veins, and let the blood flow according to your need."
E aprop deslia la coartacio del malaute, e pausa le tieu dit sobre la vena per una hora, e aprop pausa sobre aquela coto e pulvils e strenh aquela desus am fort constriccio, e layssa aquela entro que sia sanada.	"And then release the compression from the patient, keep your finger on the vein for an hour. Then apply cotton and powder, and strengthen that area with firm pressure. Leave it alone until it is healed."
E ja es precedida la rememoracio de lor, e de aquelas la inscizio, e la atraccio en le comensament del libre.	"And already in the beginning of this book, I have described their remembrance and incision, and attraction."
E donc le juvament de fleubotomia de la vena del front es aprop la fleubotomia de la cephalica a las malautias antiquas de la cara e a emigranea e rogor e ulceracios fetidas.	"And therefore phlebotomy of the frontal vein is appropriate for treating ancient headaches, migraines, and severe or foul ulcers on the face."
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es segon que yeu recomti a tu; so es que·l malaute strenha le sieu col am una benda entro que apparesca la vena; e aprop pren le insturment le qual es nompnat fossori del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	"And the quality of phlebotomy on it is as follows, which I recommend to you: have the patient compress their forehead with a bandage until the vein appears. Then take the instrument called 'fossor', whose shape is as follows:"
Pausa la puncta eminent la qual es al cap del fossori sobre aquela vena e percuteys sobre lu am penche o am autre causa en la manieyra de lu, e layssa lo sanc correr segon la quantitat la qual voles; e aprop deslia la perforacio del malaute e strenh aquela entro que sia sanada.	"Press the pointed tip of the 'fossor', which is at its head, against that vein and pierce it with a quick movement or another cause. Let the blood flow according to how much you want. Then release the puncture from the patient and compress it until it is healed."
E alcunas veguadas es uberta am fleubotomi lat, empero no cove que·l fleubotomi sia de acuta extremitat ayssi cum les autres fleubotomis, abantz sia de lada extremitat, e fleubotoma aquela segon le tranvers, quar le os es propda e fort leu trencaria en lu le fleubotomi quan es subtil.	"And sometimes it is useful to perform phlebotomy in a lateral direction, but it is not necessary that the phlebotomy be of acute termination like other phlebotomies. Rather, it should be performed transversely because the bone is nearby and would easily break if the phlebotomy were too fine."
Mays le juvament de las duas venas que so als lacrimals de dos huels per scabia del huels per rogor e sebol en les huels, e a las malautias de la cara.	"But the advantage of these two veins that are on the lacrimals of both eyes for scabies of the eyelids due to heat and sweat in them, and for diseases of the face."
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia es que·l malaute strenha le col sieu am una benda, e aprop fleubotoma aquelas, e tu sias stant sobre le cap de lu.	"And the quality of phlebotomy is this: have the patient compress their eyelid with a bandage, then perform phlebotomy on it while you are standing over their head."
E sia fayta la fleubotomia segon le transvers a longitut un pauc am fleubotomi pauc, quar en le loc no es carn; e si le fleubotomi es subtil, fort leu la extremitat de lu es trencada.	"And the phlebotomy should be performed transversely and slightly diagonally with a fine phlebotomy needle because there is little flesh in that location. If the phlebotomy is too fine, it will easily break."
E aprop fay correr del sanc atant quant es a tu necessari, e pausa sobre aquelas coto, e strenh aquelas per una nueyt, e aprop deslia aquelas.	"And then make the blood flow as much as you need, and pause over those wounds. Then compress them for one night, and finally release them."
Mays le fleubotomi de la vena del nas es conferent a febre acuta e a soda vehement, e a las malautias de la cara e emigranea e rogor que accideys en la cara, e majorment quan es antiqua.	"But phlebotomy of the nasal vein is beneficial for acute fever and sudden sneezing, and for diseases of the face and migraines that occur there, especially when they are chronic."
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute strenha le sieu col e aprop te le sieu nas am la tua ma sinistra, e pren le fleubotomi subtil lonc e fica aquela en le mieg loc del cap del nas segon rectitut, quar la vena no appar al sentiment aqui, e quar le sanc comensa a fluir tantost.	"And the quality of phlebotomy on it is this: have the patient hold their head and then take your left hand and place it over their nose. Then take a fine, long phlebotomy needle and insert it into the middle of the head of the nose in a straight line because the vein does not appear by touch here, and blood will begin to flow soon."
Cove que tu ultimes la tua ma am le fleubotomi petit a petit e fassas correr del sanc segon la tua necessitat; e aprop lia aquela per una nuoyt, quar aquela es restaurada leugierament.	"It is necessary that you slowly withdraw your hand with the phlebotomy needle and make the blood flow according to your needs. Then compress it for one night because it will heal easily."
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de las doas guidegui a constriccio de ale e a comensament de lepra e a motas malautias e inpetige e malas ulceracios corrosivas ayssi cum herpotromeno.	"But the benefit of phlebotomy on both wrists is for constriction of the armpit and the beginning of leprosy, as well as for many diseases, itching, and corrupting ulcers like herpes."
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquelas es que el malaute strenha dejos quascuna en le sieu col am liament; e estia le artifexs sobre le cap del malaute, e le malaute sia sezent sobre una sezela.	"And the quality of phlebotomy on them is this: have each patient hold their arm with a cloth. Then stand over the head of the patient and have the patient sit on a seat."
E aprop fleubotoma la vena al lonc am fleubotomi ample petit a petit; e aprop extratz de sanc segon temprada quantitat o segon aquo que vezes de necessitat que es ad aquo; e aprop fay semblant del autra vena.	"And then perform phlebotomy on the vein along the arm with a wide, fine needle little by little. Then remove blood according to a moderate quantity or as much as is needed. And do the same for the other vein."
E aprop deslia le liament e strenh las doas venas am strictura migiera per so que·l malaute no sia prefocat, e laysa entro al mati quar la plagua es sanada.	"And then release the cloth and compress both veins with moderate pressure so that the patient is not fainted. Then leave them for the night because the wound will have healed by morning."
E le juvament de la fleubotomia de las venas algerich, comfereys a petitas apostemas e pustulas de la boca e corrupcio de las gengivas e malas ulceracios e fissuras, e a malas ulceracios que so en le nas e en le circuit de lu.	"And the benefit of phlebotomy on the veins in the armpits is for small apostemes and pustules of the mouth and corruption of the gums and ulcers and fissures, as well as ulcers that are in the nose and around it."
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquelas es que fases cezer le malaute denant tu, e strenh le col de lu am una benda, e aprop revolveys las labias de lu e reguarda a doas venas de las quals la una es de la dextra de la labia e la segonda de la senestra; e la demonstracio de quascuna es per la negror de quascuna de amdos, e aquo mays es quar en le circuit de aquelas so venas menudas negras; e adonc inscideys cascuna per inscizio inscident.	"And the quality of phlebotomy on them is this: have the patient sit in front of you and compress their head with a bandage. Then turn their lips up and look for two veins, one on the right side of the lip and the other on the left. The demonstration of each is by its darkness, and this is more so because there are small black veins around them. Then incise each with an incident incision."
Mays si dubitacio es dejos tu, e no sabes qual es de aquelas, lahoras tu enten a inscisio de la major de aquelas, e de la pus manifesta de aquelas.	"But if you have any doubt and do not know which is one of them, then listen to the sound of their pulsation or observe the visible pus of those."
E fay le semblant de las doas venas que so en las labias desus.	"And perform the same on both veins that are in the upper lips."
Mays costuma corr mays a inscidir las doas venas que so en la labia dejos.	"However, it's customary to incise both veins located on the thigh."
Mays de doas venas que so dejos la lengua le juvament es aprop la fleubotomia de la cephalica a prefocacios que so en le guolayro, a la malautia de la uvula, e a malautias de la boca.	"It is appropriate to perform flebotomy of the cephalic vein at the forearm, in cases of uvula inflammation, and mouth infections."
E la qualitat de fleubotomar aquelas es que segue le malaute entre las tuas mas denant le solel, e eleva la lengua de lu, e reguarda dejos la lengua, de la un latz de lu vena e del autre latz vena, e la color de quascuna es declinant a negror.	"And the quality of flebotomy is such that it should be done between the thumb and index finger, towards the sun, raising the tongue and observing both sides of the vein, noting the change in color to black."
E adonc fleubotoma quascuna; e guarda te que no ultimes la tua ma en fleubotoman aquelas, quar dejos aquelas so arterias.	"And then flebotomize each one; be careful not to exceed your hand in flebotomizing those, for there are arteries beneath them."
E las tuas venas que so fleubotomadas en le coyde so en las quals corr costuma en totz les homes, e la fleubotomia de lor es fayta segon dos manieyras, o pongen am le fleubotomi mirtilat o olivar a subtilitat declinant; o secsar am fleubotomi cutellar, e apelha si alnessil, e aquesta es la forma de lu:	"And the veins that are flebotomized in the elbow are those in which blood is customarily drawn from all men. The flebotomy of these is performed in two ways: either by putting a mirtilated or olive-shaped lancet to it with subtle inclination; or by cutting with a cuticular flebotomy lancet, called 'alnessil', and this is the shape of it:"
E aquest alnessil es que conveneys a seccio e de aquels so specias latz e subtils segon la amplitut de las venas e segon la strictura de aquelas.	"And this alnessil is that which conforms to the section and these are special edges and subtle according to the width of the veins and according to the thickness of those."
Forma de fleubotomi mirti:	"Form of a mirtilated flebotomy:"
sia le latz de lu ayssi cum vezes, e conveneys a obrir las venas concavas plenas procedentz apparentz grossas, e ad aquelas que conteno sanc gros torbat.	"It should have edges like this: so that it may open the concave veins full of blood appearing thickly, and those which contain dark, turbid blood."
E aquesta es la forma de fleubotomi olivar:	"And this is the shape of a olive-shaped flebotomy:"
E aquest fleubotomi es de menor latitut e de pus subtil extremitat, e conveneys a fleubotomia de venas subtils que conteno sanc subtil citri.	"And this flebotomy has less width and more subtle extremity; it is suitable for flebotomizing the subtle veins that contain clear, citrine-colored blood."
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de la vena basilica la qual es una de tres venas: quar extratz le sanc de las malautias que so dejos le guolayro e·l col, e de aquo que siec le pietz e·l ventre.	"But the benefit of flebotomizing the basilica vein, which is one of three veins, is that it draws out blood from illnesses that are located in the head and neck, and that which affects the feet and belly."
E conveneys al fleubotomador, quan fleubotomia aquela, que guarde be aquela e sia sobre-temor en aquela, quar dejos lu ha arteria, e si erra e ajusta en la punctura del fleubotomi, inscidira aquela arteria e accidira fluxs de sanc, per so que cove que no fleubotomes aquela am fleubotomi pungent, abantz sia sectant cum alnessil.	"And it is convenient for the flebotomist, when flebotomizing this one, that he guard this carefully and be above all fearful of it, because beneath it there is an artery. If he errs in the puncturing of the flebotomy lancet, he will incise that artery and cause a flux of blood to flow forth, therefore he should not flebotomize this with a puncturing flebotomy lancet, but rather cut with alnessil."
E si no appar la basilica per apparicio manifesta, lahoras cove que tu laysses aquela e que tu mudes a la autre, o que cerques alcun ram sieu; o que fleubotomes en loc de lu finis del bras, quar aquela es manifesta; e secsa aquela am fleubotomi alnessil ayssi cum havem dit.	"And if the basilica is not apparent by manifest appearance, then you should leave it and move to another, seeking some of its branches; or you should flebotomize in place of that the end of the arm where it is manifest, and cut that with an alnessil flebotomy lancet as we have said."
Mays si tu voles la fleubotomia de lu meteyssa, lahoras cove denant la strictura del bras que toques le loc entro que conogues le loc dels pols, e aprop senha sobre lu am tencha; e aprop lia le bras e secsa la vena am seccio concava am fleubotomi alnessil ayssi cum havem dit; e guarda te que caja la percussio per alcu spazi del loc de la arteria.	"But if you wish to flebotomize the elbow, then first at the thickness of the arm where you feel the pulse, press gently upon it with your thumb; and raise the arm and cut the vein with a concave section using an alnessil flebotomy lancet as we have said; and guard against percussing near some space of the location of the artery."
E quan tu vezes, cum strenhes le liament, imflacio en le loc que has senhat am tencha, lahoras aquela inflacio es inflacio de la arteria, e donc squiva aquela.	"And when you bind with a bandage, if there is swelling in the place that you have pressed with your thumb, then this swelling is swelling of the artery; therefore leave it."
E si vezes le sanc fluir en la fleubotomia ayssi cum aurina de enfant, e·l sanc es subtil rog, lahoras sapias que es del sanc de la arteria; e lahoras tu coyta e pausa le tieu dit sobre aquel per lonc spazi; e aprop osta le tieu dit, e si lo sanc es abscindit, quar motas veguadas es abscindit, lahoras tu strenh le bras e layssa aquel.	"And if the blood flows in the flebotomy like a child's urine and the blood is thin red, then know that it is the blood of the artery; and therefore tighten your finger above that for some space; and then remove your finger, and if the blood is cut off, because many times it is cut off, then bind the arm and leave it."
E guardes le malaute de la moccio de lu, e sia sobre-temor de lu e no maugua aquel per alcus dias entro que sia sanat.	"And guard against the illness of the wound, and be above all fearful of it, and do not move that for some days until it is healed."
Mays si le sanc no es abscindit, e vezes que deves tu no es present medicina ad aquo, lahoras tu inscideys la arteria, si appar a tu; quar la extremitat de lu es contrayta, e es abscindit le sanc; o que prenguas scorsa de fistic, e fen aquela, e pren la una maytat e strenh aquela sobre le loc de la vena am strictura descent am liament e am pulvils entro al autra dia.	"But if the blood is not cut off and yet it continues to flow, then this medicine is not present; therefore you have incised the artery if it appears to you. Because the extremity of it is contracted and the blood is cut off, or take some cotton wool, compress that, and apply it over the location of the vein with pressure using a bandage and powder for another day."
E lahoras si le sanc es abscindit, bo es; e sino, lahoras cura aquel am aquo del qual es precedit a la rememoracio del loc de las polveras abscindentz flux de sanc.	"And therefore if the blood is cut off, good. But if not, then cure it with that of which we have spoken at the recollection of the location of the powders cutting off flux of blood."
E la abscizio del sanc de lu es dificil en motas disposicios per le loc petit de la plagua e la possibilitat del liament del bras.	"And the stopping of the flow of blood from it is difficult in many dispositions because of the smallness of the wound and the possibility of tying the arm."
Mays de la vena fusca la fleubotomia es juvament que extratz lo sanc de la partida subirana del cap e a la partida dejos del cors; per aquo quar es composta de ram de la basilica e de ram de cephalica, ayssi cum havem dit.	"But the flebotomy of the black vein is beneficial because it draws out blood from the upper part of the head and from below the body. Because it is composed of branches of the basilica and branches of the cephalica, as we have said."
E cove al fleubotomant aquela que sia sobre-temor en la fleubotomia de lu, quar dejos aquela es un nervi; e adonc si ajusta en la punctura del fleubotomi e atroba le nervi, accidira a lu stupor, e es difficil la sanacio de lu, e fort leu no es sanat de tot, E aquest nervi motas veguadas apar al sentiment; e si es ocultat ad alcus homes e es subtil e no es monstrat, lahoras cove que tu pauses le fleubotomi am le qual tu fleubotomas am seccio de alnessil, e evita le nervi am la tua fortalesa.	"And it is necessary for the flebotomist to be above all fearful in the flebotomy of that one because below it there is a nerve. And therefore if he errs in the puncturing of the flebotomy lancet and strikes the nerve, then numbness will occur, and its healing is difficult and sometimes it cannot be completely healed. This nerve can often be felt; but if it is hidden to some people and is subtle and does not appear, then you should pause the flebotomy with the lancet with which you are flebotomizing with a concave section, and avoid the nerve with your strength."
E si la vena es entre dos nervis, lahoras tu fen la vena en la longitut.	"And if the vein is between two nerves, then cut the vein along its length."
Le juvament de la fleubotomia de la vena cephalica es que atratz le sanc del cap e comfereys a las malautias dels huels.	"The benefit of phlebotomy on the temporal vein is that it draws blood from the head and alleviates illnesses of the eyes."
E cove en aquest propriament, si vols que la fleubotomes pungen am fleubotomi olivar o am fleubotomi mirti; quar es la pus salva de totas las venas, quar no es dejos lu arteria ni nervi.	"And this is where you should puncture if you want to perform phlebotomy with the olive style or the myrtle style; for it is the safest vein, since neither artery nor nerve is left."
Mays empero conveneys a tu deves la fleubotomia que guardes que am le fleubotomi no punguas le cap del lacert tant solament, e cerques le loc pus leugier, e no notz a lu, si no es atrobat am la percussio primieyra que sia sobre aquela am fleubotomia alcunas veguadas.	"But remember that you must perform phlebotomy so as not to puncture the head of the lacert only lightly, seek out the spot carefully, and do not strike it unless it is first anesthetized with percussion several times at that location for phlebotomy."
Mays empero fort leu es apostemat en alcus homes, quan no es fleubotomat en la primieyra percussio, mays no notz en re aquel apostema.	"But sometimes an abscess forms in some people if they are not phlebotomized during the first percussion; but do not touch that abscess."
Mays la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquela e les accidentz de lu so motz, en les quals te cove cogitar en lor rectificacio.	"But the quality of this phlebotomy and its accidents are such that you must consider their correction."
Le primier de lu es del qual cove que sapias que fleubotomia no es aministrada sino en conservacio de sanetat e per speransa de lu e cautela de aveniment de malautias, e que sia fayta fleubotomia en la una de las venas que so en le coyde, so es: cephalica, fusca e basilica; e que sia fayta fleubotomia al comensament de primaveyra, sobre dejun en primaviera e autunppne, e en invern aprop la comestio, quan apparo significacios de replecio.	"The first thing you should know is that phlebotomy is administered only for the preservation of health and in hopes of preventing illnesses, and with caution against their occurrence. And that phlebotomy should be performed on one of the veins that are located on the elbow, namely: the cephalic, the basilic, and the median cubital vein; and that it should be performed at the beginning of spring, after fasting in spring and autumn, and near mealtime in winter, when signs ofpletion appear."
E sia fayta fleubotomia e le tertz dia o al primier pus que del jorn siran passadas tres horas.	"And phlebotomy should be performed on the third day or even earlier, provided that at least three hours have passed since the previous meal."
Mays fleubotomia que es aministrada, mays quan provoca convenencia e necessitat ad aquo, o de nuoyt o de dia, en tota hora e en tot temps.	"But phlebotomy should be administered whenever it provokes convenience and necessity for that person, whether at night or during the day, at any hour and at all times."
E cove que efant no sia fleubotomat entro que aja xiiii ans, e femna que sia prenhs no sia fleubotomada sino del quart mes entro al sete, e les viels no sian fleubotomatz les quals ja han passatz lx ans.	"And children should not be phlebotomized until they have reached the age of fourteen; pregnant women should not be phlebotomized until the fourth month has passed from conception to the seventh month; and the elderly, once they have surpassed seventy years of age, should not be phlebotomized."
E cum alcu vol esser fleubotomat per qualque manieyra sia, cove que mondifique les sieus budels denant la fleubotomia am clisteri leon, si en aquels ha mota fenda retenguda, per so que las venas no atiro las superfluitatz en la fleubotomia dels budels, que son puridas, e que no noguan als membres principals.	"And before anyone wishes to be phlebotomized, they must cleanse their intestines with a lion's clister if there is much retained feces in them, so that the veins do not draw the superfluities from the purification of the intestines during phlebotomy, which would harm the principal members."
E no sian fleubotomatz les pascientz naucea sacertiva e crapula, ni evasent de malautia ni de ebretat entro que aquo sia remaugut aquo de lor, ni malaute de ydropici, e mays que fleubotomia sia temuda aprop colica passio e aprop vomit, e aprop cos de ventre, e aprop multiplicacio de coyt e de trebal e de exercici de dejunis o de vigilias e de tota causa que dissolveys la vertut, o sia corpore28 o animal.	"And patients with sacred illness or drunkenness should not be phlebotomized until they have recovered from their condition; nor those who are suffering from fever or intoxication. Phlebotomy should be avoided near colic pain and vomiting, and near abdominal complaints, and near multiplication of coitus and work and exercise during fasting or vigils, and due to any cause that dissolves the virtues, i.e., bodily or animal."
E aprop considera en subtiliacio de humos denant aquo si le sanc es gros, am viandas e beures, e am medicinas si aquo es a lu possible ad aquo.	"And before phlebotomy, consider the refinement of humors, and if the blood is thick, use foods and drinks to thin it out, and medications if possible."
E aprop intre en banh si alcuna causa no prohibeys, o sia excersitat per alcun exercici per so que·l sanc sia subtiliat.	"And before phlebotomy, take a bath if there is no prohibition due to any cause, or stimulate with some exercise so that the blood may be subtilized."
E pausa la fleubotomia de lu en le pietz del dia, so es enviro la hora de tercia, ayssi cum havem dit.	"And pause phlebotomy at the foot of the day, especially around the hour of terce, as we have said."
E perforsa te que·l pietz de aquel sia guardat en aquel dia de totz mals accidentz animals, ayssi cum es angustia, ira, temor, e de totz accidentz corporals, ayssi cum es trebal e pena superflua e coyt e semblantz a lor.	"And perform phlebotomy only when the foot of that day is guarded from all harmful animal accidents, such as anxiety, anger, fear, and from all harmful bodily accidents, such as excessive work, fatigue, coitus, etc."
E a la sua sezelha fassa esser presentz las causas en le us de la qual corr costuma dels homes am aromaticitat e odorament e am bals e semblantz ad aquels segon la cantitat de possibilitat.	"And at his seat, let there be present the causes in use which are customary for men with aromatics and perfumes, balms, etc., according to their quantity of possibility."
E segua le fleubotomador sobre un coyssi que sia pus aut que·l coyssi de aquel que deu esser fleubotomat.	"And let the phlebotomist sit on a stool that is higher than the stool of the person who is to be phlebotomized."
E aprop extragua le sieu bras, e fregue aquel am la sua ma le fleubotomador doas o tres veguadas; e aprop strenha le liament am correia e involva aquel doas veguadas.	"And first, extract his arm and rub it with the phlebotomist's hand two or three times to warm it up; then tie the limb with a bandage twice."
E sia la strictura temprada, quar la strictura quant no es engual, o la strictura es am superfluitat, lahoras prohibeys de fluxs del sanc; o es am mollificacio, e lahoras prohibeys le cors del sanc eyssament.	"And let the tying be moderate, for if it is too tight or there is an excess of superfluity in the tying, it will impede the flow of blood; but if it is too loose, it will cause weakness of the blood."
E aprop la strictura, cove que aquel que deu esser fleubotomat fregue las suas mas ensemps entre lor entro que las venas sian imfladas, e sian declaradas al sentiment.	"And after tying, let him who is to be phlebotomized rub his hands together until the veins are swollen and can be felt."
E aprop le fleubotomador unte le sieu fleubotomi am un pauc de oli antic propriament; e aprop pausa le sieu di indic de la ma senestra sobre aquela vena, dejos le loc del qual vol la fleubotomia, per que la vena fuja un pauc, e la percussio sia sessada quar de las venas es la qual atrobas ayssi cum corda fugent deves la fleubotomia, e de aquelas es que es plena de ventositat e quan pauses le fleubotomi sobre aquela es contrayta deves le fleubotomi, e es desceubut le fleubotomador; e le fleubotomi no uobre la vena, e si uobre, aquela es streyta.	"And the phlebotomist should anoint his lancet with a little ancient olive oil specifically; and then place his left index finger on that vein where he wishes to perform phlebotomy, so that the vein may swell slightly and the percussion be steady, for one of the veins which is about to be opened will throb like a string, and that one which is full of windiness will contract under the lancet, revealing itself to the phlebotomist; and he should not open the vein until it has been felt by the finger, and if he opens it, it must be narrow."
E donc, per aquo cove que·l fleubotomador sia fermat e sia sollicit en totas aquestas causas.	"And therefore, it is necessary that the phlebotomist be firm and attentive to all these causes."
E aprop depause le fleubotomi, mays si la vena es huberta en una veguada, lahoras bo es; e sino, tu itera aquo autra vaguada dejos aquel loc un pauc, o sobre lu am festinacio, si le loc no es apostemat.	"And then withdraw the lancet, but if the vein fills up at once, that is good. But if not, repeat this process in another part nearby, or even above it, with haste, provided there is no apostema."
Et si le loc es apostemat, o le malaute se spauresca, lahoras tu le layssa per un dia o per dos, e no strenha le liament, quar fort leu atirara apostema caut, ni no intre en banh.	"But if the location is inflamed or the condition worsens, then leave it for a day or two, do not tighten the bandage, lest it draw forth an ulcerated inflammation, nor take a bath."
E aprop itera la fleubotomia si la ama.	"And repeat phlebotomy if necessary."
E si la apercio es petita e corr sanc subtilment, e temes que non yesca sanc la cantitat que voles, lahoras tu itera le fleubotomi en aquel trauc segon rectitut e ajusta en la appercio un pauc, e fay aquo am festinacio denant que·l loc sia apostemat, quar le loc es apostemat en motz homes deves pauca apercio.	"If the opening is small and blood flows out subtly, and you fear that not enough blood will come out, then repeat the lancet in that same place according to rectitude and adjust the opening slightly, and do this with haste before the location becomes inflamed, for many people's locations become inflamed due to a small opening."
Mays si vezes aquel ja apostemat, lahoras no iteres sobre lu, quar no escusa a tu alcuna causa; e pausa sobre aquel alcuna partida de la fenda de oli, quar alleuja le cors del sanc.	"But if the location is already inflamed, then do not repeat it there, for it will serve no purpose. Rather, pause on some part of the oil groove to ease the flow of blood."
E es milhor en aquest loc que oli e que les autres olis.	"And oil is better in this location than any other ointment."
E semblantment aministra fenda de oli en tota fleubotomia am la qual fleubotomes las venas deves la prohibicio de cors de sanc, e fan aquo tyriaca alfadoc e sagzenea quan es pausat de la una de aquelas sobre le loc, quar le sanc es subtiliat e es revolvut quan es gros.	"And similarly, administer an oil groove in every phlebotomy where veins are opened with the prohibition of blood flow, and they do this by applying treacle, alfalfa, and sage when pausing on one of those locations, for blood is subtilized and made to revolve when it is thick."
E si en le loc de la fleubotomia es engendrat gran apostema, quar motas veguadas accideys, e majorment ad aquel que no es stat sangnat sino aquela veguada, o en la apercio de la vena pauca, e lahoras tu coyta, e pausa sobre le loc sponja infuza en aygua e sal, un pauc scalfada, e strenh aquela per una hora, quar es dissolvut.	"If a large inflammation has arisen in the location of phlebotomy, which happens many times, especially to those who have not been bled before or whose vein opening was small, then apply a sponge soaked in water and salt, lightly scorched, over that place for an hour, for it will be dissolved."
E cove que fassa aquo aprop le yssiment del sanc de aquela vena am compliment de lu o de autra vena.	"And this should be done immediately after the blood has flowed from that vein or another one."
E si roman en le loc per alcus dias alcuna negror o viriditat, no notz aquo; e si voles, pausa sobre aquel alcuna causa de aloen e de mirra dissolvut, o alcuna causa de suc de mentastre o de calament o semblant de lu.	"If a blackness or greenness remains in the location for several days, do not worry about it. But if you wish, apply some solution of aloe and myrrh, or some juice of mint, chamomile, or the like."
E motas veguadas accideysso apostemas e eminencias deves fleubotomia de la basilica.	"And many times apostemes and elevations happen due to phlebotomy at the basilica."
E donc pausa la tua ma sobre aquela, e si lahoras tu atrobas mollicia deves la tua compressio sobre aquela, lahoras aquela eminencia es malvada e mala; e adonc guarda te que pauses sobre aquela alcuna causa de aquo que havem dit, quar fort leu fluira de la arteria sanc.	"Then place your hand over that and if you still feel softness under your pressure, then that elevation is harmful and bad. And therefore be sure to apply some of what we have said there to prevent the flow of arterial blood."
E fay emplaustre am aquo en que es stipticitat, per que le loc sia endurat, e aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	"Prepare a plaster with something that has astringent properties to harden the area, then treat it with another cure until it is healed."
E cove que extraguas del sanc a tot hom segon la quantitat de la sua vertut e segon la color vencent sobrc le sanc segon que appar.	"It is necessary to draw blood from each person according to their quantity of vital force and the prevailing color above their blood."
Quar si le sanc es negre, lahoras tu le layssa yssir entro que sia rog; e semblantment si tu le vezes gros, lahoras tu le layssa yssir entro que sia subtiliat; e semblantment si es agut, entro que sia ostada la acuitat de lu.	"But if the blood is black, then let it flow until it becomes red; and similarly if you find it thick, then let it flow until it becomes subtiliated; and similarly if it is sharp, until its sharpness has been diminished."
E cove ad aquel que es ple e fort e ha necessitat de extraccio de sanc en una veguada, que sia amplificada la fleubotomia de la vena e le fleubotomi sia lat.	"And for someone who is full and robust and needs bloodletting at one time, the venipuncture should be widened and the incision made wide."
E en aquel que es freul, sia fayt le contrari de aquel, e cove que extragua aquel en tropas veguadas, e que le trauc sia streyt.	"And for someone who is cold, do the opposite of what was done for the previous person, and let them bleed in several sessions, with a narrow incision."
E le milhor que es administrat en fleubotomia de vena es que sia la seccio transversa, no punctura.	"It is better to make a transverse section of the vein when performing venipuncture than to prick it."
E aquesta manieyra de fleubotomia es salva de flux de sanc e de inscizio de nervi, e es pus lausabla e pus salva que fleubotomia segon latitut e longitut.	"And this method of bloodletting preserves against the flow of blood and injury to nerves, and it is safer and more laudable than bloodletting by width and length."
E a la qual es acostumat sobrevenir sincopi deves la fleubotomia, e cove que tu cures aquel denant la fleubotomia am un petit de pa infus en vi de milgranas o de oximel simple scalfat; e extratz a l u del sanc en tres veguadas o quatre.	"And when syncope is about to occur during bloodletting, you should care for the patient beforehand with a little powder of millet seeds or simple sage infused in wine; and let out their blood in three or four sessions."
E si es enfregiditat de compleccio, lahoras prengua denant la fleubotomia pa infus en eyssarop de mirra o en eyssarop de mel aromatizat am specias ayssi cum am pebre, canela, gingiebre e semblantz, o en eyssarop aromatizat e mot odorant.	"And if it is coldness of temperament, then take before bloodletting a powder to infuse in a syrup of myrrh or in an aromatic syrup sweetened with spices such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger and the like, or in a highly fragrant aromatic syrup."
E si accideys sincopi deves la fleubotomia, e es causa de lu issiment de mot sanc, lahoras cove que prengua en beure aygua de carn e eyssarop mot odorant subtil; e use de aromaticitat am algualea, e sia linit le sieu pietz am aquela.	"And if syncope occurs during bloodletting and it is due to the letting out of much blood, then you should give them to drink water of meat and highly fragrant syrup; and apply aromatics with aloe, and let them lie quietly on their side."
E usa de las autras causas que havem ditas en la divisio en le capitol de sincopi per evacuacio.	"And use the other causes that we have mentioned in the division of syncope by evacuation."
E qui vol eventar le sieu bras e dissolver le sieu sanc segonda veguada, cove a lu del qual la fleubotomia es per mota evacuacio, e la vertut de lu es freol, que evacue le sanc petit a petit, so es segon la quantitat de la vertut en les dias continuables.	"And whoever wants to expand his veins and dissolve his blood according to the second method should let out blood from him with venipuncture for much evacuation, and the power of it is cold, which evacuates blood little by little, so it depends on the amount of power in consecutive days."
Mays qui vol eventar le sieu bras, e gitar lo sieu sanc segonda vetz, e le sieu cors es fort, lahoras fassa aquo aprop vii horas o ix de la primieyra fleubotomia.	"But whoever wants to expand his veins and draw out his blood a second time, and his body is strong, then do so about seven or nine hours after the first venipuncture."
Mays qui vol atirar le sanc del cors sieu al contrari de la partida a la qual declina, cove que sia eventat en le segon dia o le tertz.	"But whoever wants to draw out blood from his body contrary to the direction that it declines, should have it expanded on the second or third day."
Mays aquel cors en le qual es mot sanc ja scalfat e es acuit e fa accidir febre, cove que sia gitat de lu sanc en una veguada e sia de lu gitada gran cantitat e sia amplificada la apercio entro que accidesca sincopi, pus que tu auras conservadas totas las condicios de fleubotomia; e que pauses la tua ma sobre le pols de lu deves le cors del sanc, per que no endevengua mort en loc de sincopi, quar motas veguadas endeve aquo quan le fleubotomador es ignorant e negligent.	"But in that body in which there is little blood already let out and it is acrid and causes fever to occur, you should draw out blood from him in one session and draw out a large quantity of it, and amplify the aperture until syncope occurs; for you will have preserved all the conditions of bloodletting; and place your hand on his pulse before the body's blood, so that death does not happen instead of syncope, for many times this happens when the phlebotomist is ignorant and negligent."
E no cove quan tu voles desliar le bras e evacua le sanc segonda veguada, cum ja sia claus le orrifici de la vena e sia fayt difficil issiment del sanc, que tu premas subre aquel am vehemencia e encurvat sia extendut leugierament, quar aquo es trop mal.	"And when you want to release the veins and evacuate blood a second time, since the opening of the vein is closed and it is difficult to draw out blood, do not press with violence and curvature, but gently extend it; for this is very bad."
Habantz le layssa entro que sia fleubotomat segondament; o remau aquo am la acuitat del fleubotomi que es coagulat del sanc en le orrifici de la vena; o pausa sobre aquel de tyriaca alfarach, o de sagzenea, e comprem aquel am compressio leugiera entro que·l sanc sia fora yssit.	"Let him lie down again until he is phlebotomized a second time; or remove it with the acuteness of the bloodletting that has coagulated in the opening of the vein; or place upon it tyriaca alfarach, or sage, and press it gently until the blood flows out."
E si la vena es apostemada, lahoras layssa aquela e no la toques entro que·l apostema sia sedat.	"And if the vein is inflamed, then leave that one alone and do not touch it until the inflammation has subsided."
E si necessitat te provoca a evacuar le sanc segondament, e no es excusacio, lahoras tu sagna aquel sobre aquel loc o en l’autre bras en autra vena.	"And if necessity provokes you to evacuate blood a second time, and there is no excuse for it, then draw blood from him on that spot or in the other arm in another vein."
E la vena apelada “funis del bras” es fleubotomada en loc de la fusca o de la basilica, quan no so atrobadas o so amaguadas, quar es composta de aquelas.	"And the vein called 'funis of the arm' is bloodletted in place of the furca or the basilica when they are not available or concealed, for it is composed of those."
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute intrometa la sua ma en aygua cauda entro que·l focil se enrogezesca e que la vena apparia manifestament.	"And the quality of bloodletting from it is that the patient should immerse his hand in cold water until the fleshy part reddens and the vein appears manifestly."
E aprop sia strengut sobre aquel am liament am strictura migana; e aprop fleubotoma segon le tranvers petit, no latitudinalment ni segon la longitut.	"And it should be stretched out with a linen bandage with moderate tension; and bloodletting should be done according to the transverse line, not latitudinally nor according to the longitude."
E sia la apercio ampla e sia la tua fleubotomia am la qual tu fleubotomas aquela sobre la junctura de la ma un petit.	"And let the aperture be wide and your bloodletting with which you bloodlet him be on the junction of his hand a little bit."
E si es prohibit le fluxs del sanc, lahoras tu itera la ma en l’aygua cauda e layssa le sanc correr en la aygua entro que consieguas la tua necessitat.	"And if the flow of blood is prohibited, then immerse your hand in cold water again and let the blood run into the water until your necessity is satisfied."
Mays si tu eras en les dias d’estiu, lahoras tu yest excusat de la iteracio de la ma en l’aygua cauda, e le mes es pausat le cors del sanc en aygua cauda en temps de yvern.	"But if you are in the days of summer, then you are exempt from immersing your hand in cold water; and let the body's blood be placed in cold water during wintertime."
E la fleubotomia de aquesta vena es pus salva que de totas las autras venas, quar dejos lu no ha vena pulsatil, ni nervi.	"And bloodletting from this vein is safer than from all other veins, for it has neither a pulsating vein nor nerves."
E la fleubotomia de la savatella de la ma dreyta es conferent a las malautias del fetge.	"And bloodletting from the little bag of the right hand is beneficial for diseases of the liver."
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que tu strenguas la ma am liament o am la tua ma, pus que tu l’as mesa en ayga cauda, entro que la vena sia imflada e sia be demostrada al vezement; e aprop fleubotoma aquela transversan; e si inscidas aquela de tot no nozera aquo en re.	"And the quality of bloodletting from it is that you should stretch out the hand with linen or your hand, since you have placed it in cold water, until the vein is inflated and clearly demonstrated to view; and draw blood transversely from it; and if you should happen to miss it entirely, do not concern yourself about it."
E conserve que no ultimes la tua ma am la fleubotomi, quar dejos lu so les nervis dels ditz denudatz de carn.	"And take care that you do not extend your hand too much during bloodletting, for there are the nerves of these veins denuded of flesh."
E aprop itera la ma en l’aygua cauda e laysse correr le sanc en aquela, quar si tu no iteras aquela en l’aygua cauda, le sanc sira coagulat en lo orrifici de la vena, e es prohibit de flux.	"And appropriately immerse the hand in cold water and let the blood run into it, for if you do not immerse it in cold water, the blood will coagulate in the opening of the vein and its flow is prohibited."
E cum es extrayt le sanc segon la quantitat de necessitat, lahoras tu pausa sobre la vena oli e sal, per que no sia consolidada coytadament; e semblantment cove que tu fassas en tot ram streyt.	"And when blood has been extracted according to the quantity required, then place oil and salt on the vein so that it does not close suddenly; and do likewise in every straight vein."
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de aquela de la ma senestra, es que es conferent a las malautias de la melsa.	"But the benefit of bloodletting from that of the left hand is that it is beneficial for diseases of the spleen."
E fay semblantment en la fleubotomia de lu ayssi cum has fayt en l’autra.	"And do likewise in bloodletting from it as you have done with the other."
E le juvament de la vena sephena de la fleubotomia es a las malautias que so en la partida dejos del cos, ayssi cum so malautias de la mayre, e a retencio de mestruas, et a las malautias dels ronhos e ulceracios de coyssas e de cambas antiquas, e a lor semblantz de las malautias.	"And the benefit of bloodletting from the vein called sephena is for diseases that are in the parting of the limbs, such as diseases of the womb, and retention of menses, and for diseases of the joints and ulcers of skin and old scars, and their like diseases."
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute entrometa lo sieu pe en aygua cauda e fassa sobre aquel fricacio entro que be apparen las venas; e lia sobre la junctura del pe am correia; e le loc de la vena le talo apparent deves le dit pous, e de aquela so ramificatz en la facia del pe motz ramps.	"And the quality of bloodletting from it is that the patient should immerse his foot in cold water and make friction upon it until the veins appear clearly; and tie a bandage on the junction of the foot; and the place where the vein appears is behind the said foot, and it branches out into many ramifications on the front of the foot."
E donc fleubotoma le pus ample ram o dejos la camba deves le talo deves la agreguacio de lu, quar es milhor e pus sal.	"And therefore draw blood from the most abundant branch or that which is nearest to the heel behind the aggregation of it; for it is better and safer."
E si fleubotomas aquela en la facia del pe, lahoras tu te guarda dels nervis que so dejos aquela sobre la facia del pe, e pausa la tua fleubotomia am la qual tu fleubotomas per le travers, quays cum si tu la volias inscidir.	"And if you draw blood from it on the face of the foot, then take care of the nerves that are close to it on the face of the foot, and make your bloodletting with that with which you would cut, namely transversely."
E sia le fleubotomi vosil.	"And if you wish, perform a phlebotomy."
Mays si es prohibit le issiment del sanc; lahoras tu itera le pe de lu en l’aygua cauda e layssa correr le sanc en aquela entro que sia evacuat.	"But if the bleeding is forbidden; then immerse the patient's foot in cold water and let the blood flow into that container until it has stopped."
E si le fleubotomador erra en la primieyra veguada, lahoras itera am le fleubotomi en sus un pauc, quar le loc es sal; e no temes de lu malician, mays que te guardes dels nervis ayssi cum havem dit.	"And if the phlebotomist errs on the first attempt, then retry with the phlebotomy later in that area because it will have healed by now. And do not fear the patient's maliciousness but be wary of the nerves as we have said."
E semblantment fay de la sophena del autre pe engualment.	"And similarly act regarding the vein of the other foot accordingly."
E de la vena sciatica, le loc ayssi cum havem dit es deves le talo dejos la cavilha de la partida silvestra.	"And concerning the sciatic vein, the location is roughly at the level of the heel on the posterior aspect of the leg."
E le juvament de la fleubotomia de lu es a dolo de anca quan es per sanc caut.	"The benefit of phlebotomy for him is to ease his hip pain when it is due to hot blood."
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute intre en banh, e festine e strenha la cueyssa de lu del latz de la ancha entro desus le talo desus quatre ditz an una benda longua subtil, quar no appar sino per aquo.	"The quality of the phlebotomy for him is that the patient enters into a bath, and he quickly and strongly ties his left hip joint with a long thin bandage so that only that appears."
E donc quan appar, lahoras tu fleubotoma aquela segon cascun engen que es a tu possible e segon le tranvers, e es milhor; o inscidas aquela per inscizio o secces aquela per seccio, quar le loc de lu es sal.	"And then when it appears, immediately phlebotomize that vein according to your ability and according to the transverse vein, and this is better. Or else cut that with an incision or dissect it with a section because the location of it has healed."
E ela es en motz homes mot ameguada; e si atrobas aquela, e no appar al sentiment de tot, lahoras fleubotoma alcun ram de lu, e es aquel que appar en le dos del pe enves le dit auricular e le anular.	"And it is in many men not visible; and if you find that vein, but it does not appear at all to the touch, then phlebotomize some branch of it, and that is which appears on the back of the hand towards the said auricular and the annular bones."
E guarda te dels nervis, e fay correr del sanc la quantitat que voles.	"And beware of the nerves, and let flow as much blood as you wish."
E aprop deslia la strictura e pausa sobre le loc de la fleubotomia coto e strenh le loc, quar leugierament es sanat.	"And then untie the ligation and pause over the site of phlebotomy until it stops flowing, because it heals quickly."
De ventozacio e de las qualitatz de uzar de aquelas.	"Regarding venesection and its qualities for use."
Ventozas so de corns, o de eram, o de veyre.	"Wounds are of horn, or of iron, or of vein."
E ventozacio es fayta segon doas manieyras: la una de lor es am scarificacio e extracio de sanc, e l’autra es ventozacio ses scarificacio.	"And ventosing is done in two ways: one is by scarification and extraction of blood, and the other is ventosing without scarification."
E aquesta ventozacio que es ses scarificacio es segon doas manieyras, quar o es am foc o ses foc.	"And this ventosing which is done without scarification is performed in two ways: with fire or without fire."
E a las ventozas que so administradas am scarificacio e extraccio de sanc son xiiii locs del cors, dels quals la un en lo qual so pausadas ventozas es alnocrati, e es la deriera partida del cap; e le mieg loc d’el de doas partz del col ensemp; e ventozas del mento dejos la mandibula pus dejos de la boca; e ventozas de doas spatulas; e ventozas de alohoster, e es sobre la fi de la coeta; e ventozas de dos focils, e so de dos brasses; e ventozas de doas cavilhas; e ventozas de doas cuoyssas.	"And the locations on the body where ventosas are administered with scarification and extraction of blood are fourteen in number, of which the first one is placed near the bladder, which is the last section of the head; and the middle location of it, divided into two parts, is at the nape of the neck; and ventosas of the chin beneath the jawbone below the mouth; and ventosas of both shoulders; and ventosas of the hip bones, which are above the buttocks; and ventosas of both knees, which are on both thighs; and ventosas of both ankles; and ventosas of both elbows."
E ventozacio no extratz le sanc sino de las venas menudas sparssas en la carn, e per aquo no catz la vertut per aquelas, ayssi cum es cazement per fleubotomia; ni no cove que ventozacio sia fayta am foc o ses foc en alcuna malautia fayta per replecio entro que le cors tot sia evacuat.	"And ventosing does not extract blood from the large veins, but only from the small ones scattered throughout the flesh, and for this reason it does not draw out the humor by that means, as is done by phlebotomy. And it is not necessary to perform ventosing with fire or without fire in any illness caused bypletion until the whole body has been evacuated."
Mays si necessitat provoca a ventozacio per malautia o per continua, aministrem aquela en tota hora al comensament del mes e en la fi de lu, e en le mieg loc de lu e en qualque temps sia.	"But if there is a need to provoke ventosing for an illness or continuous fever, we administer it at the beginning of the month and at the end of it, and in the middle of it, and at any time."
La qual causa es quar dels homes es en les quals es sanc multiplicat entro que indigeys de extraccio de lu per ventozacio e atroba en le sieu cap graveza e soda; e de aquels es que atroba replecio e rogor en la sua cara e en le sieu cap, e en le sieu col; e de aquels es que atroba pruziment en la sua cara e en le sieu front e tenebrositat e hebetut en les sieus huels; e de aquels que gieta le loc de la sua ventozacio; e de aquels es que le lor ris es multiplicat; e de aquels es que atroba gustament de sanc en la sua boca, o que la lengua es apostemada e escup sanc; e de aquels es que lor dormir es multiplicat, e de aquels que vetz sanc en lo dormir rogor e antics e plaguas e autras causas a lor semblantz.	"This is why in men there are those in whom blood is multiplied so that they need extraction of it by ventosing and they find heaviness and sadness; and those who findpletion and heat in their face and head, and neck; and those who find pressure in their face and forehead and darkness and dullness in their eyes; and those whose location for ventosing is difficult to find; and those whose laughter is multiplied; and those who find a taste of blood in their mouth, or whose tongue is covered with blood and they spit it out; and those whose sleep is multiplied, and those who see blood in their dreams, redness and ants and plagues and other causes according to their appearance."
E donc quan vezes en alcuna causa de aquelas, e propriament si es en le tertz o miga del mes, lahoras comandam ventozacio esser fayta pus que so passadas del dia dos o tres horas.	"And therefore, whenever there is such a cause in any of those cases, and especially if it is on the third or midday of the month, we command that ventosing be performed after two or three hours have passed since that time."
E juvament de ventozacio de la nuca es que quan aquela confereys a gravitat en le cap e ad aquo que es efondit als huels; mays cove que aquo sia aprop evacuacio de tot le cors.	"And the benefit of ventosing on the nape is that when it relieves heaviness in the head and causes sinking into the eyes. But this should be accompanied by evacuation of the whole body."
E aquesta ventoza es en le loc de fleubotomia de la cephalica.	"And this ventosing is in the place of phlebotomy on the cephalic vein."
E no es legut que use de lu aquel que es de frega complecio, o en le qual es catarr, quar dona ad aquel gran nocument.	"And it is not lawful to use it for one who has full flesh, or in whom there is catarrh, because it causes great harm."
E per aquo no cove que uso de aquela les vielhs, e en les caps dels quals so malautias frejas.	"And therefore, one should not use it on the elderly, and on those whose heads have hot illnesses."
Mays ad aquel que sobre aquela es continuant sobre lu es fayta oblivio; e per aquo cove que tu comandes al ventozador que depause la sua ma un petit am la ventosa a las partidas dejos, temen de la generacio de oblivio.	"But one who is continuous about it may cause forgetfulness. And therefore, you should command the ventosing to pause his hand a little at the beginning of the operation, fearing the generation of forgetfulness."
Mays ventozacio de alkehel es en loc de fleubotomia de la vena fusca e de la basilica: e per aquo confereys a asma, e a la constriccio de ale e a la scissura del sturment de ale, e a tos, e a replecio.	"But ventosing of alkehel (madder) is in the place of phlebotomy on the vein nigra and basilica: And therefore it causes asthma, and constriction of the lung, and splitting of the windpipe of the lung, and coughing, andpletion."
E cove que sia enpellida la ventoza alkehel un petit, quar si es pausada dejos, engendra debilitat en le cors e en le stomac.	"And therefore, madder ventosing should be a little paced out, because if it is too sudden it causes weakness in the body and stomach."
E la ventozacio de alhagdahan confereys a las dolors accident en le cap e a obtalmia, e emigranea, e prefocacio, e a dolors en las razitz de las dentz; e es en loc de fleubotomia de la basiliqua.	"And the ventosing of alhagadhan (henbane) causes accidental pains in the head and inflammation of the eyes, migraine, suffocation, and pains in the roots of teeth. And it is in the place of phlebotomy on the basilica vein."
E cove que comandes al ventozador que no prema la sua ma am scarificacio per que no inscida la arteria e accida fluxs de sanc.	"And you should command the ventoser not to press his hand with the scarification so that he does not wound the artery and cause bleeding."
E ventozacio dejos le mento comfereys a alcola en la boca, e a corrupcio de la gingiva, e a semblantz a lor de las malautias que so en la boca, e stan en loc de fleubotomia de aliheric que so en las doas labias.	"And ventosing of the chin causes coldness in the mouth, corruption of the gums, and appearance of diseases that are in the mouth. And it is in the place of phlebotomy on those veins that are on the two lips."
Mays la ventozacio que es fayta sobre las doas spatulas confereys a caphatan, le qual es fayt per replecio de caliditat.	"But ventosing that is performed on the two spatulas causes headache, which occurs due topletion of heat."
E la ventosacio de las doas partidas dedintz dels focils confereys juvament de la fleubotomia de tres venas, so es de la basilica, fusca e cephalica, quar aquela atratz le sanc de totas aquelas venas pus manudas que so en la carn, e aquelas venas menudas de las autras venas pus grossas entro que pervengua la atraccio a las tres venas.	"And the ventosing of both sides of the temples causes benefit from phlebotomy on three veins: namely the basilica, nigra and cephalica. Because it attracts blood from all those veins that are in the flesh, and those small veins that are between the other thicker veins so that the attraction reaches the three veins."
E comanda al ventozador que trop no procezesca en scarificacio, quar le loc es denudat de carn, e dejos lu so nervis e arterias.	"And command the ventoser not to proceed with scarification because the place is devoid of flesh, and too near are nerves and arteries."
E es una ventoza am la qual es ventozat sobre alshosses e confereys a las emorroydas del cul e a las ulceracios pus dejos.	"And it is a ventosing performed on the buttocks which causes hemorrhoids of the anus and ulcers nearby."
E cove que comandes al ventozador que sia gran ventoza, e que sia de eram, quar le loc indigeys de fort seccio; e fort leu so traucadas ventozas subtils e sia scarificat am scarificacio.	"And you should command the ventoser to perform a large ventosing with an earthen pot. Because that place requires strong suction; and few subtle attracted ventosings are performed, and it should be scarified with scarification."
Mays ventozas de las cambas minueysso per minuicio manifesta, quar atiran le sanc de tot le cors, e comfereysso a dolors antiquas dels ronhos e de la mayre, e de la vesica; e provocan las mestruas, e comfereysso a bothor e ademil; e stan en loc de fleubotomia de doas sophenas, e alahorcoben, e de doas cavilhas.	"But ventosings on the fleshy camels [thighs] cause strong diminution by clear diminution. Because they attract blood from all over the body and cause old pains in the kidneys and belly, and stimulate menstruation, and cause botch and ademoma [hemorrhoids]. And they are in the place of phlebotomy on two saphenas, alarcochan, and two cavillas."
Enpero mot debelitan tot le cors e fan accidir sincopi en motz homes.	"However, they debilitate the whole body and cause fainting in many people."
E de las ventozas alahorcoben le juvament es propda al juvament a las ventozas de doas cambas.	"And from the benefits of alarcochan ventosing, the benefit is close to the benefit of two camber [thigh] ventosings."
E la qualitat de la posicio de las ventozas es que pauses la ventoza al comensament vueda e sucguas per succio temprada, e no prolongues la posicio de las ventozas, mays pausa aquelas leugierament, e reman aquelas coytadament, e que las humors venguan al loc per adveniment engual.	"And the quality of the position of ventosings is that you pause the ventosing at the beginning, wait and suck moderately, and do not prolong the position of the ventosings, but rather pause them lightly and remain them carefully. And let the humors come to the place by gentle arrival."
E no cesses iterar aquo e continuar entro que veja le loc ja enrojezir e inflar e que appara la rogor del sanc.	"And do not cease iterating this and continuing until you see the place already reddened, swollen, and the appearance of blood's hue."
E lahoras tu scarifiqua e itera la succio pauc a pauc, e aprop considera en la dispozicio dels cors.	"And then you should scarify and iterate suction little by little, and carefully consider the disposition of the body."
Quar aquel home que es de tendra carn de rars pors, cove que tu le scarifiques una veguada e no pus, per que le loc no sia ulcerat.	"Because that person who has tender flesh and few pores should be scarified once only, not more than that. Because the place may become ulcerated."
E comanda al ventozador que amplifique la scarificacio e pronde un pauc, e atempre la succio am facilitat.	"And command the ventoser to enlarge the scarification a little and press gently, and temper the suction with ease."
E si en le sanc es grossitut, lahoras cove que scarifiques doas veguadas, quar en la primieyra veguada es uberta la via de subtiliacio al sanc e a la aquositat de lu.	"And if the blood is thickened then you should scarify twice. Because in the first time the way of subtilization of blood and its wateriness is opened."
Mays en la segunda a la perscrutacio aquisida de la extraccio del sanc gros.	"But in the second one, the extraction of thick blood is obtained through scrutinization."
E si le sanc es mot feculent, lahoras sia fayta scarificacio la tersa veguada per que consiegua le derier.	"And if the blood is very fetid then there should be no scarification in the third time so that it can succeed [the ventosing]."
E derierament, quan volem extrayre le sanc pauc a pauc o un petit, abasta a nos una scarificacio.	"Finally, when we want to extract blood little by little or a little, one scarification is enough for us."
E si volem extraccio de mot sanc, scarificam am mota scarificacio; e si nos conoyssem que·l sanc es gros, lahoras cove que scarifiquem per scarificacio preonda.	"And if we want to extract a lot of blood, we should scarify with many scarifications. And if we know that the blood is thick then we should scarify by pressing scarification."
E le terme de scarificacio en la qual es la profunditat de la codena tant solament.	"And the term of scarification means only the depth of the skin."
E si aquel del qual la codena es grossa, dura, fusca, e les sieus pors so streytz, cove que les locs de las ventosas sian untatz lenitius, apertius resolutius; si es en temps d’estiu, ayssi cum es oli de aloen o oli de violat, o oli de amellas dossas, o oli de cemensa de coja; e si es en temps ivern, lahoras oli narci, o oli de liri, o oli de camamilla, o de sanc, e ad aquels semblantz.	If the chain is thick, hard, dark, and its pores are narrow, make sure the places for cups are anointed leniently, opened, loosened; if it is summer time, thus with oil of aloe or violet oil, or oil of crushed walnuts, or oil of chamomile flowers; but if it is winter time, then use narcissus oil, or lily oil, or camomile oil, or blood oil, and those like these.
E si la superfluitat es grossa, freja, lahoras le oli sia amaranti, o oli de balsamita, o oli de aloen, o oli aneti, e a lor semblantz.	If the swelling is large and fiery, then use oil of amaranth, or balm oil, or aloe oil, or pennyroyal oil, and those like these.
Mays si le ventozador es de amples pors de tendra carn, lahoras cove que sia prohibit de oli, e cove que ad aquest les locs de ventozas de lor aprop la ventozacio sian lavatz am ayguaros o am aygua freja de solatrum, o am aygua de coja, o am aygua de bordolaguas, e semblantz ad aquelas.	But if the cupping glass has wide pores of tender flesh, then it is necessary to prohibit oil, and for this one the places of cups near the cupping should be washed with warm or hot water of solatrum, or chamomile water, or borages water, and similar things.
E aquel del qual le sanc es de mota humiditat, lava las suas ventozas am vi agre, o am aygua de mirt e sumac e semblant ad aquels.	And for him whose blood is of much humidity, wash his cups with sour wine or myrtle and sumac water, and similar things.
E de aquel del qual las superfluitatz son grossas, lava las suas ventozas am vi antic, o am aygua de sansuc, que es majorana, o de decoccio de anet, o de camamilla, e a lor semblantz.	And for him whose swellings are large, wash his cups with old wine or water of sanicle, which is marjoram, or decoction of fennel, or chamomile, and those like these.
E cove que la ventozacio sia guardada denant de banh; habantz cove que sia aministrada aprop issiment del banh per una hora o per doas, e cove que dorma aprop la ventozacio.	And it is necessary that cupping should be guarded beforehand from bathing. It is also necessary that it should be administered near immersion in the bath for one or two hours, and it is necessary that he should sleep near cupping.
Quid est quo oportet ut regatur ventosandus aus phlebotomatus ante ventosationem.	"What is this: That it is necessary to guard the person being cupped before cupping."
Cove que consideras al comensament: lahoras si le ventozador o aquel que·s deu fleubotomar es coleric e ventz sobre lu sanc agut e imflamacio, lahoras cove que prengua causas infrigidantz, ayssi cum milgranas acetosas, e endivia an vi agre e laytuguas, e secanabin, e julep, e a lor semblantz.	At the beginning you should consider: if the one doing the cupping or bleeding is choleric and vents upon hot blood and inflammation, then he should take cooling causes, such as sour cherries, endive with vinegar and lettuce, and secanolbin, and julep, and those like these.
E pausa a lor viandas ayssi cum poletz, e carns de auzels serbiges, e viandas conditas am agras, e a lu semblantz.	And pause their foods thus as polenta, and fowl meats roasted, and foods seasoned with sour things, and those like these.
E de aquel del qual la compleccio es freja, cove que prengua en beure eyssarop almiva, o eyssarop de alsecanabin de semensas, e sumac, e vi mot odorant migier entre viel et noel; e que a lu sia comendat que use de paucitat de beure e de mangar, e pausa las viandas de lu poletz e canabir e pissers e petitz auzels e colombat.	And for him whose complexion is cold, it is necessary that he should drink hippocrates syrup of almonds or hippocrates syrup of fennel seeds and sumac, and fragrant wine better between young and old; and that he be commanded to use scarcity of drinking and eating, and pause foods of polenta and canabis and fish and small birds and pigeons.
E cove que en lo dia de ventozacio e de fleubotomia le beure sia major que la vianda.	And it is necessary that on the day of cupping and bleeding he should drink more than eat food.
E cove que sia donat en beure en alcunas horas ad alcus homes tyriaca alpharac, o medicamentz de musc, so es muscada, o alcelita denant la ventozacio o denant fleubotomia o aprop, per so que·ls membres principals sian confortatz e que·l sanc sia subtiliat; e no cove que prenguan aquela scalfatz.	And it is necessary that in some hours certain people should be given tyriaca altharac or musk medicaments, such as musk or muscated wine before cupping or bleeding or near them, so that the principal members may be comforted and the blood subtilized; but they should not take that scalding.
Mays las ventozas que so ses scarificacio sian ventozas que so pausadas sus le fetge, e sobre la melsa e podagra, e sobre le umbelic, en les locs dels jonolhs, e la pixida del ancha, quar aquestz membres no suffertan scarificacio sobre si.	Mark those cupping glasses that are without scarification as being on the liver, and on the spleen and podagra, and on the navel, in the joints of the loins, and on the anus, because these members do not suffer scarification upon them.
E no es querit per aquelas sino atraccio de sanc de membre, ayssi cum pausam ventosa sobre mamilha en malautia de flux de sanc del sanc de las nars; e usam de aquela per que sia dissolvuda ventositat freja inviscade del membre, ayssi cum pausam sobre le ventre e l’umbelic; quar aquela rarifique le membre e scalfa lu e ramau la dolor quar resolveys ventositat.	And it is not desired by those except for attraction of blood from the member, thus as pause cupping on the breast in illness of flux of blood from the nose; and they use that for the dissolution of cold ventosity undissolved from the member, such as pause on the belly and navel; because that rarifies the member and scalds it and removes pain because it resolves ventosity.
E ja es pausada sobre les ronhos quan accideys en lor opilacio o poyra, quar per vertut de atraccio fort leu huobre opilacio e erradica le poyra de son loc.	And already cupping is paused on the nostrils when there occurs in their obstruction or phlegm because by virtue of strong attraction it draws out obstruction and expels phlegm from its place.
E semblantment fa quan es pausada sobre le fetge e la melsa deves ventositat en aquels enclausa.	Similarly, it does when paused on the liver and spleen to draw forth ventosity that is enclosed within them.
E aquestas ventozas so administradas vuedas amb succio tant solament; e alcunas veguadas so administradas am foc.	These cupping glasses are administered with suction alone; some times they are administered with fire.
E alcunas veguadas so administradas plenas de aygua tebeza en las malautias de la melsa.	Some times they are administered full of cold water in illnesses of the spleen.
E aquo es per que la ventoza sia umplida e sia pus gran, so es aygua cauda sola o aygua en la qual sian cuytas herbas ad aquo convenientz.	And this is why the cupping glass should be filled and made larger, that is cold water alone or water in which herbs are cooked according to what is convenient.
Forma de ventoza aministrada am foc: sia la amplitud del orrifici de dos ditz, segon que nos la havem formada; e la quantitat del preon sia la maytat de un palm; e sia en lo latz de lu, en le loc que es en le circuit, la maytat de lu, le trauc sia petit segon la quantitat que intre en lu una agulha.	Form of cupping glass administered with fire: the width of the mouth should be as we have formed it; and the quantity of the preon should be the most of a palm; and it should be on the side of him, in the place that is in the circuit, the most of him, the traction should be little according to the quantity that enters him through a needle.
Sia fayta de eram rog o citri, de grosses marges, leon, enguals e terses per so que no leda le membre deves la sua posicio sobre lu.	It should be made of red earthenware or glass, with thick rims, lion's teeth, edges and smooth for that it does not wound the member through its position on him.
E sia al mieg de lu vergua transversa de eram o de ferr, on es pausada candela am lo foc.	And in the middle of it a transverse wick of earthenware or iron should be placed on which a candle is paused with fire.
E ja sia aquesta ventoza gran major de aquela la qual havem recomtat; e la pauca mendre de aquela segon las malautias e la etat de aquel que usa de aquela.	And already this cupping glass should be much larger than that which we have recommended; and the little one less according to the illnesses and the state of him who uses it.
E las ventosas dels efantz e extenuatz so autres que las ventozas dels joves e de grosses corssas.	The cupping glasses of children and weak ones are other than those of youths and strong-bodied people.
E la qualitat de pausar aquesta ventoza am foc sobre le membre es que extenda la meca am foc de lenha decentment denant una pauca candela de cera, e pausa aquela sobre le mieg de la vergua transversa en le mieg loc de la ventoza, per que le foc sia accendut enviro la partida dejos per que no sia comburit le cors del malaute.	The quality of pausing this cupping glass with fire on the member is that it extends the mecha with fire of wood decently before a small candle of wax, and pauses that on the middle of the transverse wick in the middle place of the cupping glass, so that the fire may be kindled around the partition of the sides so that not the skin of the sick person may be burned.
E aprop sia pausada sobre le membre del malaute, e le dit sia sobre le trauc que havem dit, entro que quan tenem las ventozas e non indigem que osten le dit e que yesca la vapor sobre aquel trauc, lahoras la ventoza sira tantost dissolvuda.	And soon it should be paused on the member of the sick person, and the said thread should be on the traction that we have said, until when we hold the cupping glasses and do not desire to pull the thread, then the vapor will rise over that traction, at that time the cupping glass will soon be dissolved.
E prop igneys la meca segon la sua manieyra, e itera aquela si indigeyssas de aquela.	And then light the wick according to its manner, and renew it if necessary.
Mays en ventosa que es aministrada en la malautia de plauressi, am aygua, en la qual no ha vergua transversa ni trauc, e no es aministrada sino que sia umplida de aygua, e es pausada sobre le membre tant solament.	But in cupping glass that is administered in the illness of pleurisy with water, in which there is no transverse wick nor traction, and it is not administered except that it should be filled with water, and it is paused on the member alone.
E aquesta es la forma de lu: E aquesta ventoza quant plus es gran, tant es milhor, per que puya recebre gran quantitat de aygua.	And this is its shape: This cupping glass the larger it is, the better, for that it can receive a large quantity of water.
Capitol .xcvii.	Chapter XCVII
Sanguissuguas no so administradas en motz membres sino en les membres en les quals non es possible posicio de ventosas, per la parvitat de aquels, ayssi cum le pot e gingiva e semblantz a lor; o en membre denudat de carn, ayssi cum le dit e·l nas e lors semblantz.	Blood-letting cups are not administered on large members except on those in which the position of cupping glasses is not possible because of their smallness, such as the throat and gums and similar ones; or on member denuded of flesh, such as the thigh and nose and theirs.
E la qualitat de usar de aquelas que si has trobadas sanguisugas que so en las ayguas dossas de poyredura mundas.	And the quality of using them is that if found blood-sucking leeches that are in the waters of putridity clean.
E aprop sian layssadas le dia e la nueyt en aygua dossa entro que sian famolentas, e que no romangua alcuna causa en le ventre de aquelas; e aprop sia evacuat le cors en le comensament am fleubotomia e am ventozas; e aprop fregua le membre del malaute entro que s’enrojezesca; e aprop sian pausadas sobre lu.	And soon they should be placed day and night in putrid water until they are hungry, and that no cause remains in the belly of them; and soon the body should be evacuated at the beginning with phlebotomy and cupping glasses; and soon rub the member of the sick person until it becomes red; and soon pause them on him.
E cum son umplidas e caso.	And when they are full and satisfied.
E si es possible succio del loc am ventoza, es mays derier en juvament.	And if it is possible to draw out the matter with cupping glass, it is better in judgment.
E sino, lahoras lava le loc am vi agre e aprop am mota aygua; e sia freguat e expremut.	But if not, then wash the place with sour wine and soon with much water; and let it be rubbed and expressed.
E si es prolonguat le cors del sanc aprop le cazement de las sanguissuguas, e es aquo resudan, lahoras tu enfon un drap de li en aygua freja, e pausa aquel de sobre entro que sia abdida la resudacio.	And if the course of blood is prolonged because of the wound of the blood-sucking leeches, and it becomes red, then you should put a cloth soaked in hot water on him so that the bleeding may be stopped.
E si le sanc es multiplicat, lahoras polveriza sobre lu vitriol trissat, o guallas e semblantz a lor de las causas stipticas, entro que·l sanc sia abscidit; o sian pausadas sobre le loc las maytatz de favas excocicadas, e sian layssadas entro que las favas aderescan al loc, e es le sanc abscidit.	"When blood is increased, then powdered vitriol trisulfate is applied, or poultices and similar causes of obstruction are used until the bleeding is stopped; or raw mung beans may be placed on the spot."
E cove, si es necessaria, iteracio de sanguissuguas, quan es possible mudar aquelas.	"And also, if necessary, the application of leeches for bloodletting should be repeated when possible.
E si las sanguissuguas son prohibidas de suspenssio, lahoras sia freguat le loc am sanc recent o fique una agulha en les locs entro que yesca sanc; e aprop sian pausadas, quar aquelas quan sento alcun sanc tantost adarysso.	"And if the application of leeches by suspension is prohibited, then the spot should be rubbed with fresh blood or a needle inserted into it until some blood flows out; and immediately afterward compresses should be applied, because those who feel any blood flowing at once should adhere to them."
E quan voles que cajan, polveriza sobre aquelas un pauc de aloen trissat, o sal, o cendre, e cazo tantost.	"And when you want them to stop, powder a little alum Trisulfate or salt or ash on them, and immediately they will cease."
Ayssi comensa lo prolec de la tersa partida: de restauracio.	Here begins the prologue of the third part: On restoration.
Aquest capitol es motas veguadas necessari en la art de medicina; e es restauracio de fractura e de dislocacio accident en les osses.	This chapter is very often necessary in the art of medicine, and it concerns the reduction (setting) of fractures and accidental luxations of bones.
O, filh, sapiatz que jactan se de aquest capitol les fols metges e les vulguars e aquels que degun temps no reguardero les libres dels Antics ni legiro de aquels una letra.	"Oh son, know that those who boast about this chapter are foolish doctors and common folk, and those who at any time have not regarded the books of the Ancients nor read even one letter of them."
E per aquesta causa es fayt que aquesta manieyra dels scients in terra nostra es privat; e yeu no ho e obliat en aquo degun temps be de tot; e no he adhibit aquo que apres, sino per longitut de lectio dels libres dels Antics e studi sobre le entendement de aquels, entro que extrayssi la sciencia de aquels.	"And because of this, the manner of practicing the science in our land has become private; and I myself am not oblivious at all to this during this good time. And I have not added what follows except out of respect for the length of reading the books of the Ancients and study on their understanding, so that I might extract the knowledge from them."
E aprop adirigui a experiment e studi en la longitut de la mieua vida.	"And moreover, I direct this to experiment and study throughout the length of my life."
E yeu ja he de aquo descrit en aquest capitol tot aquo que conte la mieua sciencia e sobre le qual es passat lo mieu experiment; pus que agui abreujat aquo a vos autres e deliuregui aquo de occupacio de elonguacio; e abreujegui aquo en la fi de abreujacio; et e monstrat aquo en la fi de declaracio; e formegui en aquo motas formas dels sturmentz que so administratz en aquel, cum es fayt per addicio de declaracio, ayssi cum he fayt en dos capitols precedentz.	"And I have already described in this chapter everything that my knowledge contains and on which my experiment has passed; because here I have abbreviated it for you others and delivered it from the occupation of lengthening. And I have abbreviated it to the utmost degree of abbreviation, and I have demonstrated it to the utmost degree of declaration, and I have formed many forms of the instruments that are administered in this one, as is done by addition of declaration, just as I have done in two preceding chapters."
Capitol primier.	Chapter One
Summae et collectiones ex esse fracturae ossium, ex eis quarum praemissio necessaria est, antequam incipiamus rememorationem membrorum fraftorum et diversorum si uniuscuiusque.	"Summary and collections from the essence of bone fractures, from which a preamble is necessary before we begin to remember the members that have been broken and their different types."
Cove donc que diguam en le prohemi de aquest capitol las summas del sermo; e les capitols al entendament dels quals en le comensament es forsat le artifexs e a stacio sobre la veritat de aquels; so es vos e aquels que so promptz que sapian o aprenguan aquesta art nobla autres de vos.	"Therefore, I will begin this chapter by stating the summaries of what will be said, and the chapters that require understanding at the beginning for those who wish to master this art and remain firm on its truth; namely you and others who are eager to know or learn this noble art."
E donc dic que quan accideys a alcu fractura o dislocacio o torcio o cazement, lahoras cove que tu te coytes al comensament am fleubotomia o aleyar aquel, o quascu ensemps, si no prohibeys alcuna causa, ayssi cum debelitat de vertut, o es aquel al qual accideys effant, o viel en decrepitat, o es temps de vehement calor, o de vehement freg.	"And so I say that when an accident occurs such as a fracture or dislocation or torsion or compression, it is necessary at the beginning to apply flebotomy or bleeding to that person, or sometimes both, if there is no prohibition of any cause such as debility of power, or if he is an infant or old in decrepitude, or during times of great heat or cold."
E aprop sia content en vianda sieua de erbas frejas e de carns de auzels e de crabotz; e prohibem carns grossas e umplir si de viandas e de tota vianda que umple las venas de sanc, entro que siras segurat de apostema caut, e si no temes efusio de materia al membre.	"And moreover, let him be content with his food of fresh herbs and the flesh of birds and crabs; and let him prohibit heavy meats and filling foods, and all foods that fill the veins with blood, so that you may be sure of a safe cauterization, and not fear an effusion of matter to the member."
E lahoras retorne le malaute al sieu regiment primier am le qual corr costuma de lu.	"And then return the patient to his first regimen, with which he is accustomed to live."
E donc cum le os trencat comensa esser restaurat, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia pascut de viandas nutritivas de nutriment mot e gros e greu en les quals sia viscositat, ayssi cum so viandas faytas de froment cueyt am aygua, e ris, e caps, e pes, e ventres de vacas, e huous, e peys fresc, e vi gros e semblants ad aquels, e am aquest regiment es fayta coagulacio de fractura pus leugierament e miels.	"And then, when the broken bone begins to be restored, it is necessary that the patient be fed nutritious foods of abundant and heavy nutrition with viscosity, such as foods made from wheat cooked with water, rice, chickpeas, eggs, beef, butter, fresh cheese, thick wine, and similar foods. And with this regimen, coagulation of the fracture occurs more gently and quickly."
E sapias que les osses trinquatz quan so en les homes que so en la primiera vilura e en los decrepitz, no es possible que sian continuatz e sian consolidatz segon lur natura per la exsiccacio dels membres de lor.	"And know that bones are more brittle in men who are in the first age of life and in the decrepit, it is not possible for them to be continued and consolidated according to their nature due to the drying out of their members."
E son consolidatz e continuatz segon lor natura tot temps per la exsiccacio de aquels membres, e so continuatz e consolidatz aquels que so de lor en la fi de la lenitat, ayssi cum les osses dels petitz effantz.	"And they are consolidated and continued according to their nature at all times due to the drying out of those members, and they are continued and consolidated in those that are of them at the end of old age, just as the bones of young infants."
Mays empero natura ajusta e amnecteys sobre le os trencat de tota partida alcuna causa semblant a glut en le qual es grossitut que adhereys e strenh aquel entro que so ensemps conglutinatz e liatz ensemps, entro que venen la fi de fortitut e de fermesa, ayssi cum foc al comensament, entro que denguna causa no prohibeys aquel de las suas obres.	"But nevertheless, nature adjusts and unites the bone that has been broken from any cause similar to glue with which it adheres and strengthens it until they are simultaneously conglutinated and united together, until the end of its strength and firmness, just as fire at the beginning until no cause prohibits it from its work."
E per aquesta causa es necessari que pauses las viandas del malaute, viandas en las quals so gravitat e viscozitat e grosseza, ayssi cum havem dit.	"And for this reason it is necessary that you pause the foods of the patient, foods in which there is gravity and viscosity and heaviness, as we have said."
Mota diversitat de fractura segon diversitat del membre.	"Great diversity in fractures according to the diversity of the member."
E sapias que las specias de fractura son diversas segon la diversitat dels membres, quar fractura del os de la camba es diversa de la fractura del os del cap; e la fractura del os del pietz es divers de la fractura del os del dos; e semblantment totz les autres membres son diverses entre lor.	"And know that the species of fractures are diverse according to the diversity of the members, for a fracture of the bone of the leg is different from a fracture of the bone of the head; and a fracture of the bone of the foot is different from a fracture of the bone of the hand; and similarly all other members are diverse among themselves."
E yeu venc am rememoracio de tota specia de fractura, expausada en le sieu capitol distincta del autre.	"And I come with remembrance of every species of fracture, explained in its own chapter distinguished from the others."
Mota diversitat de fractura en si meteyssa.	"Great diversity even within the same fracture."
E son diversificadas las specias de fractura del os en lor meteyssas; quar es fayta fractura arcuada otra aquo que accidan en lu stellas; e alcunas veguadas es fayta fractura segon la longitut del os: e so las fracturas de lu satagia e astelhas e addicios procedentz e no-procedentz, ayssi cum es fayt en la pena quan es preparada a escriure, e es fractura am plagua e disrupcio en le cap, e es fractura fissura petita.	"And the species of bone fractures are diversified among themselves; for there is an arched fracture that occurs sometimes in stars; and sometimes there is a fracture according to the length of the bone: these are the fractures of the lower jaw, upper jaw, and additional proceeding and non-proceeding ones, such as those made when preparing a pen to write, and there is a fracture with swelling and disruption at the head, and there is a small fissure-like fracture."
E a tota specia es engen o turment propri en restauracio de lu segon que vindra rememoracio de lu distincta en les sieus locs.	"And for each species there will be its own treatment in the restoration of it, according to what will come later distinguished in its places."
Mota senhal de fractura del os.	"Many signs of bone fracture."
E per aquo es conoguda fractura del os: es tortuositat de lu, e de aquel eminencia e appericio de lu al sentiment, e so de lu quan compremes aquel am la tua ma.	"And for this reason a fracture of the bone is known: its twisting, and the prominence and appearance of it to the touch, and that of it when you compress it with your hand."
E donc quan no es en le loc tortuositat apparent ni so no es feyt deves le tieu tocament quan toques le os am agitacio e le malaute no atroba gran dolor, lahoras no es aqui fractura.	"And then when there is no twisting apparent in the place nor is it done by your touch when you touch the bone with agitation and the patient finds little pain, then there is no fracture here."
Habantz es possible que sia tortuositat o petita fissura, adon no cove que tu mauguas aquel am la tua ma e am compressio de tot; habantz pausa sobre lu de las medicinas de las quals ve rememoracio aprop aquel moment le qual conveneys al loc; e aprop sia streyt per strictura subtil.	"It may happen that there is only slight twisting or a small fissure, so it is not necessary to move it with your hand and compress all of it. Rather, pause on this place with the medicines about which remembrance will come at that moment which is appropriate for the place; and especially let there be strictness by means of subtle constriction."
E sapias que·l loc quan es arcuat e no es scindit en dos o otra aquo que no accidan en lu satagie, cum es remauguda tota partida de la sua compar, lahoras cove que comenses de la tua hora a rectificacio de lu habantz que a lu accida apostema caut.	"And know that the place when it is arched and not split into two or other than those that occur in the jawbone, if all the parts of its companion are removed, then you should begin from your own hour to rectify it having applied a cauterizing plaster to it."
E si a lu accida apostema caut, lahoras layssa aquel per alcus dias entro que cesse le apostema; e aprop engualha aquel segon quascuna manieyra que podes de levitat e de engen.	"And if a cauterizing plaster is applied to it, then leave it alone for several days until the plaster stops. And then move it according to each manner that you are able by raising and moving."
E sapias que restauracio de lu e agulacio de lu es pus leugiera que del os en le qual accideysso sathagie.	"And know that the restoration and alignment of it is easier than for the bone in which a jawbone fracture has occurred."
E aprop strenh aquel segon que vindra la rememoracio de lu.	"And then strengthen it according to what will come later its remembrance."
Mays si en le os so satagias, lahoras es necessaria extencio de aquest membre trencat de doas partz, si es la ma o le pe; o am la tua ma si le membre es petit; o am doas cordas o am una corda e la ma.	"But if it is the jawbone, then it will be necessary to extend this broken member from both parts, if it is the hand or foot. Or with your hand if the member is small. Or with two ropes or one rope and your hand."
E sia la tua posicio am la qual pauses le membre loc engual segon la sua figura natural, mentre que las partidas so extandudas del membre trenquat, lahoras te perforsa que fassas retornar aquelas addicios am engen e segon quascuna manieyra que poyras en lor locs.	"And let your position be such that you place the affected limb according to its natural shape, while ensuring that the parts are extended as much as possible. Then proceed to remove any excess fluid in accordance with each manner that you may find in their places."
E guarda te segon la tua forssa que no accida sobre le malaute per la tua operacio delor ni lesio; e perforsa te segon le tieu poder que tu appliques la un os am l’autre son companho segon lors milhors formas.	"And be careful according to your skill that you do not harm the patient through your operation of their limbs or cause them any injury. And proceed according to your ability, applying one bone with another according to their best forms."
E cove que en aquela hora aprofitablament tu toques am la tua ma aquel, e si vezes aqui alcuna causa diversa, rectifiqua aquel e enguala aquel per la quantitat de la tua vertut.	"And see that at this opportune moment you touch the patient with your hand gently and if there should be any other cause, correct it and reduce it according to the amount of your strength."
E exquiva vehement extenssio e compressio, ayssi cum fan mots fols metges que motas veguadas fan accidir apostema caut per la sua operacio, o fan accidir contraccio en le membre ayssi cum havem vist aquo per la operacio de lor motas veguadas.	"And avoid violent extension and compression, as do many foolish physicians who often cause an abscess to form through their operation, or cause contraction in the limb, as we have seen happen many times."
E aprop annecteys, aprop equacio e decent operacio e strictura de aquel membre, e repaus e tranquilitat; amoneste le malaute sobre aquo e fay le squivar que no maugua aquel en la hora de las suas vigilias e del sieu dormir, e ves la sua revolucio e agitacio, e deves la sua egestio, e deves totz les sieus movementz am tota la sua vertut; e aguarda se que la posicio del membre sia posicio am la qual sia asegurada la dolor, la qual causa es quar quan sent en la disposicio de la posicio del membre delor o lesio; lahoras cove que permutes aquel ad autra disposicio de aquela am la qual non senta dolor; e guarda am aquo que la posicio de lu aquela sia dreyta e engual, per so que al membre non accida tortuositat quan es restaurat.	"And apply annexes, appropriate extension and gentle operation with strapping of the limb, and rest and tranquility. Instruct the patient about this and warn them not to move that member during their waking hours or sleeping, nor twist it nor cause any disturbance to its movement nor evacuation. And await until the position of the limb is such that there is no pain; for when they feel discomfort in the disposition of the limb due to their injury, then you must change it to another disposition where there is no pain. And ensure that the position of that member is correct and even so that the limb does not become twisted upon its restoration."
E la qualitat de la strictura del membre tranquat es aquela que yeu recomti; per que sapias que·ls membres trencatz so diversificatz en lor parvitat e en lor grandeza e en la forma de aquels.	"And the quality of strapping for a tranquil limb is what I recommend; because you should know that broken limbs are diverse in their smallness and greatness, and in their form."
E de aquels que son petits ayssi cum le bras e·l dit e·l focil e semblantz ad aquels, lahoras cove que la envolucio sia de drap mol subtil.	"And for those that are small, such as the arm, hand, and foot, and similar ones, then the wrapping should be made of very soft cloth."
Mays aquels que so grosses ayssi cum la cuoyssa o la camba, cove que en aquels sia envolucio lada e dura, quar la liadura lada connecteys le membre gran e strenh aquel de tota part am strictura engual, enayssi que en lu no intre macula.	"But those that are large, such as the thigh or calf, should have a firm and hard wrapping; because the tight wrapping connects the limb strongly on all sides with equal strapping, so that there is no gap."
E aprop comensa, aprop la tua evacuacio de equacio, pausar liament convenient ad aquo, sobre le loc de aquela fractura am tres envolucios o quatre segon que·l membre mereys; e strenh la tua ma un petit am le liament.	"And first, begin your evacuation of the hematoma by placing suitable linen on that location for three or four wrappings according to the size of the limb. And bind it tightly with your hand using the linen."
E aprop ve am aquel a la partida pus sobirana del loc de la fractura, e strenh mens que no foc la tua strictura am la qual has strengut le loc de la fractura.	"And then, above that at the beginning of the location of the fracture, bind again with another wrapping so that your previous strapping is not loosened from where you have strapped the fracture."
E aprop elongua te am envolucio del loc de la fractura un pauc, e mollifiqua la strictura petit a petit, entro que prenguas del loc sa una gran partida.	"And then extend your wrapping of the location of the fracture a little further downwards and slowly loosen the strapping a bit at a time until you reach its upper part."
E aprop pren una autra benda e envolveys aquela autra veguada sobre le loc trenquat am envolucio, e aprop ve am las envolucios a la partida pus dejos de la fractura; e sia la tua operacio en la strictura de la envolucio e en mollificacio de aquela segon que havem dit en la envolucio primieyra desus.	"And then take another bandage and wrap it again over the location of the fracture with a wrapping, and then proceed upwards with the wrappings away from the fracture; and your operation should be in the tightening of the wrapping and loosening of it according to what has been said regarding the first wrapping."
E aprop pausa entre las volucios de stopa leon o drap am le qual sia engualada la tortuositat de la fractura, si en lu es tortuositat; e sino, no pauses en lu alcuna causa.	"And then insert between the wrappings a wisp of wool or cloth with which to correct any twisting of the fracture if there is any twisting in it. And if not, do not place anything in it for any reason."
E aprop pausa sobre lu autra benda, e aprop enguala sobre aquestas envolucios stelhas decentment faytas tantost, si en le loc no es imflacio o apostema caut, e lahoras pausa sobre lu aquo que sede le apostema aquel e que oste la imflacio; e layssa aquela per alcus jorns; e lahoras tu strenh sobre lu las stelhas.	"And then place another bandage on top and bind it gently over these wrappings with proper care, if there is no inflammation or abscess in that location. And if there is an inflammation or abscess, then place the bandage over what covers the inflammation or sits on the abscess; and leave it for a few days. And then you should tighten the wrappings."
E sian las stelhas de la maytat de canna lada raza, e be formada saviament; o sian de fust de pi; o de ramps de palma ; e sia le ample de quascuna stelha segon aquesta forma e aquesta figura:	"And the splints should be made of soft, fine-grained cane, well-formed; or they may be made of hazelwood; or branches of palm tree. And each splint should be of this width and shape:"
Empero cove que la astelha que es pausada sobre aquela fractura sia pus grossa e pus lada un petit que las autras astelhas, e la longitut de la stela segon qu’es legut al membre en magnitut e parvitat; e aprop strenh sobre las astelhas am autra benda segon la tua primieyra strictura; e aprop lia desus am fiel decentment segon que havem dit de strictura, e es que sia la tua strictura segon le loc de la fractura mes, e quant mes es alonguat de la fractura, es mendre la strictura.	"However, the splint placed over that fracture should be thicker and broader than the other splints, and its length should correspond to the size of the limb. And then bind over the splints with another bandage according to your first strapping. And then tie it gently on top according to what has been said about strapping; and ensure that your strapping is according to the location of the fracture, and the further away from the fracture, the looser should be the strapping."
E cove que les fils sian migiers en grossesa e subtilitat, e sian de li mol; e si les fils so grosses, ayssi cum yeu he vist per la operacio de alcus fols pausantz les lors fils de cordas de li tort, e es error gran, quan catz la strictura fora equalitat.	"And the threads should be soft and fine in thickness. And if the threads are thick, as I have seen some people do when they use cords of twisted flax, it is a great mistake because it makes the strapping uneven."
E eyssament fils subtils no so convenientz, quar tu no consaguiras per strictura am aquels aquo que voles, e no cove que entre astela e astela haja mens de un dit.	"And very fine threads are not suitable either because you will not be able to tighten as much with them as you want. And there should not be less than a finger's width between splint and splint."
E si le malaute es ledit per las extremitatz de las stelas aprop la strictura en les locs sas, lahoras pausa dejos aquelas de stopa leon o lana carmenada entro que aquo no li fassa lesio.	"And if the patient feels discomfort at the ends of the splints near the strapping, then place some wool or lamb's wool between them until it ceases to cause injury."
Alcunas veguadas fractura es am plagua, e accideys disrupcio en la codena, e yeu vindre am rememoracio en aquela en le capitol segon singularitat.	"Some fractures are with displacement, such as in the elbow joint, and this happens occasionally. I have spoken about this in Chapter II on Particularities."
E sapias que ges tot membre trencat no es streyt am stelhas al primier dia; la qual causa es quar le membre, quan es gran, no cove que pauses sobre lu stelhas sino aprop v dias o vii o mays, segon la tua seguratat de adveniment de apostema caut.	"And know that not every fractured limb should be immobilized with splints on the first day. The reason for this is that when a limb is large, it does not require splints to be placed over it immediately, but rather after 2, 3 or more days depending on your assurance of whether an abscess will form."
E aquesta es la manieyra dels emplaustres am les quals les Antics restauravan, les quals so pausatz sobre fractura e dislocacio e torcio.	"And this is the method used by plasterers with which the Ancients used to treat fractures and dislocations and twists."
Manieyra de emplaustra comu abruejat de restaurament de fractura, convenient a motas compleccios e majorment a las femnas e als efantz, quar es de aquo sobre le qual no ventz calor ni freg: e es que prenguas de polvera de moli, e es la medula de la farina que pen deves le movement de la mola en las paretz del moli.	"Method of plastering commonly used for treating fractures, suitable especially for complicated cases and mainly for women and children because it does not allow heat or friction. And this is how you should proceed: Take some powder from the mill, which is the bran left behind after sifting the flour."
E comfeys aquel ayssi cum es, sino que cribelles aquel am album de huou, e pausa la comfeccio de lu no-spessa ni subtil; e aprop usa de aquela.	"And then sieve it with album of egg whites and make a paste that is neither too thick nor too thin. And then use this."
Autra manieyra de emplaustre restaurant fractura e dislocacio e torcio: recipe de assafetida, de lapdanum, de acacia, de enula, e migrach, que es razit de milgraner salvage, de totz ana drac. x; de mirra e aloen ana drac. v; alochil ana drac. xx; totz sian trissatz e cribellatz e sian mesclatz am aygua alichil o am album de huou si la compleccio del malaute es scalfada; e aprop usa de aquest emplaustre, quar es de bona composicio e restaura les osses trencatz leugierament, e confereys a motz homes.	"Another method of plastering for treating fractures and dislocations and twists: Take assafetida, ladanum, acacia, enula, and millet flour, which is ground from wild grains; mix them together with mirrh and aloe in equal parts. Then sift everything thoroughly and combine it with chicory water or egg whites if the condition is scalded. And then use this plaster because it has a good composition and treats lightly fractured bones well. It benefits many people."
Autra manieyra de emplaustre le qual comfereys a fractura e torcio: recipe migrach e met de altea blanca ana drac. x; de mirra e de aloen ana drac v; de acacia drac. vi; de bol armenic drac. .xx.	"Another method of plastering that is suitable for treating fractures and twists: Take millet flour and white wheat flour in equal parts, 10 drachms each; mirrh and aloe, one-half drachm each; acacia, six drachms; and bol armenic, twenty drachms."
Totz sian trissatz en mortier am mota contricio, e sian cribellatz, e sian comfitz am aygua o am album de huou e sia administrat.	"All these are ground together in a mortar with great care and sifted. Then they are mixed with water or egg whites and applied."
Manieyra de emplaustre a juncturas e osses separatz de lors locs, e seda dolor accident en aquels e a fissuras e fractaduras: sia presa lana sutza e sia submersa en vi agre e oli cuyt e sia pausat sobre le loc.	"Method of plastering for joints and bones separated from their places, which cause pain in those areas and for cracks and fractures: Take raw wool, immerse it in sour wine and cooked oil, and place it over the location."
Mays en aquest emplastre no es vertut de restauracio, de apostema caut e expelleys dolors propriament.	"But this plaster is not useful for restoring broken bones or drawing out pus. It only serves to relieve pain."
Autra manieyra de emplastre que restaura os trancat: pren fuelas de figuier sort e fuelas de papaver salvatge; contereys tot e fay emplastre de lor.	"Another method of plastering that restores broken bones: Take fig leaves and wild poppy leaves; combine them together and make a plaster from them."
Manieyra de emplastre abreujat aministrat deves la restauracio de fractura de os e quan tu voles resolucio del romanent de apostema: recipe razitz de altea, de camamilla e flors de violes, de farina de ers, de totz ana partida i; sian totz trissatz e sian cofitz am vi, si·l membre no es scalfat.	"A plaster for healing and treating fractures of the bone and to resolve any remaining abscess: take roots of mallow, chamomile flowers, violet flowers, flour from oats, all in equal parts; all ground together and cooked with wine. If the member is not cut."
Mays si es scalfat, lahoras comfeys aquel am aygua de coliandre humit o am aygua e usa de lu.	"If it is scratched, then wash it with cold water or with water from a bunch of celery, and use it."
Autra manieyra de emplastra pus fort en resolucio que aquest primier, quan accideys apostema dur deves la restauracio del membre: recipe de razitz de altea e de semensa de li, e de balaustia, e mellilot, majorana, flors de viol, de camamilla, de totz ana partida i engual; totz sian trissatz e sian cofitz am aygua de sauze o am aygua dousa o am vi, tot aquo segon la qualitat del membre e le repaus de la color de lu.	"Another plaster for healing abscesses that is stronger than the first one, when an abscess occurs during the restoration of a member: take roots of mallow and its seeds, and balm, melilot, marjoram, violet flowers, chamomile, all ground together; all are ground together and cooked with water from walnut trees or with sweet water or with wine, all according to the quality of the member and the restfulness of its color."
Mays Ypocras no diyssec en le sieu libre que sia pausat sobre le membre trenquat deves la restauracio de lu sino cerot fayt de cera e de oli e no autre causa; e recomtec que sia migier entre grossitut e subtilitat.	"But Hippocrates does not specify in his book that it should be placed on the member when the restoration of it is broken, but rather a plaster made from wax and oil and nothing else; and he recommends that it should be mixed between thickness and fineness."
Mays a Gualia es vist que sian pausatz sobre le membre trencat deves la restauracio de lu e las causas en las quals es exsiccacio am petit de caliditat so ayssi cum mirra, enses e semblantz a lor de aquelas causas que havem recomtadas.	"However, Galen says that they should be placed on the broken member during its restoration and he gives as causes of drying with little heat, like myrrh, incense and similar things, those same causes which we have recommended."
Manieyra de emplastre que comfereys a lesio e dolor: recipe migat, de cezes, de pels de home inscizes o pena de auzel, e de altea, e sal, partidas enguals; sian trissatz e cribellatz e sian cofitz, e sia fayt emplastre.	"A way to make a plaster that relieves injury and pain: take ground frankincense, aloes, peeled human skin or chicken feathers, mallow, salt, all ground together; they should be sieved and sifted and cooked, and made into a plaster."
Mays la quantitat segon la qual cove que romangua la liadura e aprop sia disliada, es que consideres si no es accidit dolor ni pruziment ni le os es trencat no es maugut de son loc, lahoras tu no deslies de motz jorns.	"However, the quantity that should remain on the bandage and which should be gradually removed is this: if there is no pain or swelling nor is the bone broken, then you do not need to remove it for many days."
E si accideys al loc dolor vehement o prusiment o imflacio, lahoras tu te coyte o deslie aquel en la hora, e osta le emplastre de lu.	"And if pain or swelling or inflammation occurs in the place, then you should immediately remove it and discard that plaster."
E pren drap de li e spongia marina leon humida, e submergeys aquela en aygua tebeza, e am aquela lava le loc entro que cesse aquel pruziment e la dolor sia sedada; e aprop layssa repausar le membre per una hora; e aprop pausa sobre lu lana sutza submersa en vi agre e oli o oli rozat, e lia sobre lu per una nuoyt entro que sias segur de apostema caut, e que repause la imflacio del membre, e sia remauguda la dolor de lu.	"And take a cloth and wet sea sponge, and immerse that in hot water, and with it wash the inner part of the place until that swelling has ceased and the pain has been soothed; and then let the member rest for an hour; and then apply over it clean wool immersed in sour wine and oil or rose oil, and wrap it around it for a night so that you are sure of cauterizing the abscess and that the inflammation of the member is removed and the pain from it has gone away."
E aprop itera aquela strictura subtil e emplastre petit e no·l strenhas per la tua constriccio primieyra, e subtilia am aquel entro que sia sanat.	"And then apply that fine dressing and plaster again in small quantity and do not tighten too much with your first binding, but rather bind it more subtly until it is healed."
E si vezes que le apostema e la rogor e la dolor e la imflacio e tots les accidentz ja so remaugutz de tot, e indigeysses de emplastre e de strictura, lahoras tu itera aquel ayssi cum has fayt al comensant engualment.	"And if at some point the abscess and heat and pain and inflammation and all accidents have been removed entirely, and you need plaster and binding again, then you should apply it in the same way as you did at the beginning."
E si no accideys al membre alcuna causa de aquelas que havem ditas, lahoras no deslies aquel sino aprop tres dias o quatre o v o vii; e alcunas veguadas tot aquo es layssat per xx dias segon que a tu appar per la desliadura del membre, ayssi cum havem dit, entro que la fractura adhereys, e se acosta a la coagulacio de la carn sobre aquel.	"And if no cause of those that we have mentioned occurs to the member, then you should not remove it but rather leave it on for three or four or five or seven days; and sometimes all of this is left on for twenty days according to how it appears to you through the removal of the bandage from the member, as we have said, until the fracture adheres and approaches the coagulation of the flesh over it."
E lahoras ajusta en la strictura mays que en la tua strictura primieyra tota, e ayusta en la engrossacio de la vianda del malaute, segon que es precedida la rememoracio de lu.	"And then tighten the binding more than your first binding all around, and adjust it according to the swelling of the wound of the sick person, as it is recalled."
Mays si tu vezes le loc de la fractura ja desiccar e extenuar mays que no cove, lahoras sapias que·l nutriment es prohibit pervenir ad aquel; e donc embroca aquel am aygua tebeza deves tota veguada que delias aquel; e sia aquo en totz tres dias; e alleuja la strictura un petit, e per aquesta operacio corr al membre le nutriment, e es sanat leugierament.	"But if you see that the place of the fracture has dried out and become shriveled more than it should, then you should know that nourishment is prohibited from coming to that place; therefore, immerse that in hot water every time you remove it, and do this for all three days; and loosen the binding a little, and by this operation the member will receive nourishment, and it will be healed easily."
Mays aquo que fan les fols restauradors de la fractura del membre autra veguada quan no es restaurat al comensament, segon que cove, e es restaurat segon tortuositat, es error segon la operacio de lor, e temor gran, e si fos dreyturier aquo agrandit les Antics en lors libres e agueran am aquo obrat.	"But what foolish restorers of the fracture of the member do again when it is not restored at first, according to what is necessary, and is restored crookedly, is error according to their operation, great fear, and if they had been right this would have enlarged the Ancients in their books and taught with that operated."
E yeu no he vist ad alcu de lor aquo far, per que es pus razonable que aquo no fassa.	"And I have not seen any of them do this, so it is more reasonable that they should not do it."
Capitol segon: De fractura quan accideys en le cap.	"Chapter according to: On fracture when it occurs in the head."
Las specias de fracturas son motas, e las figuras de lor son diversas, e las causas son distinctas, quar de fracturas alcuna es fayta per percussio de spaza, e la percussio osta tot le os entro al ciphac, le qual es dejos le os, ayssi cum fay ayssa en le fust, e per aquo aquesta specia es nompnada ascial; o la spaza inscideys alcuna partida del os, e inscideys la carn de lu e no passa la inscizio entro al derier de lu; e aquesta specia de fractura es nompnada levatio absoluta.	"The kinds of fractures are many, and their figures are diverse, and their causes are distinct. For some fractures happen by percussion of a blow, and the percussion leaves all the bone inside the head, which is left behind like the wood in the tree trunk, and for this reason this species is called 'asciacion.' Or the blow cuts through some part of the bone, cutting into the flesh but not passing through to the other side. This species of fracture is called 'levation absolute.'"
E la plagua de aquestas doas fracturas o es gran o pauca, e de fractura que es contricio o atricio; e causa de lu es percussio am poyra o cazement sobre peyra, e a lor semblantz.	"And the plague of these two fractures is great or little, and of fracture that is contusion or abrasion. The cause of it is percussion with heavy blow or impact on stone, and things similar to them."
E aquesta fractura o es penetrant que ja apropinqua al pannicol le qual es dejos le os; o es en la facia del os, e la plagua de aquestas doas fracturas o es gran o pauca.	"And this fracture is penetrating and approaches the periosteum, which is left behind with the bone, or it is on the surface of the bone. The plague of these two fractures is great or little."
E de fractura es que es ameguada en le os, en la subtilitat del cabel petita, e per aquo es nompnada aquesta specia fractura capillar.	"And there is fracture that is jammed into the bone in the thinness of a hair's breadth, and for this reason this species is called 'capillary fracture.'"
E es fractura que es fayta o per cazement o per percussio de peyra e a lu semblantz, que fa intrar alcuna lamina del os a las partidas dedintz, e es fayta en le loc concavitat ayssi cum accideys als payroles de eram quan accideys a lor percussio e es partida de lor intrada a las partidas dedintz.	"And it is fracture that happens by impact or blow of stone and things similar to it, which causes some lamina of the bone to enter into its parts from within, as happens to the wings of birds when they suffer percussion and their bones are driven in from within."
E majorment es fayt aquo en les cors de osses humitz, ayssi cum so caps de efantz.	"And this happens especially in the bodies of moist bones, like those of elephants' heads."
E so a totas aquestas specias fracturas satagias, so son pessas ayssi cum stelhas separadas.	"And therefore for all these species of fractures sought after, they are painful like separated stars."
E yeu vindre am reremoracio de tot aquo en son loc.	"And I will come back with remembrance of all this in its place."
E conoyssem totas aquestas specias de fractura per deteccio sobre aquelas e per inquisicio de lor am tentas e ostament de carn corrumpuda que es sobre lor.	"And you should know all these species of fracture by detection of those and by inquiry about them with touch and inspection of rotting flesh that is over them."
E specia capillar es conoguda per aysso que es descubert sobre le os, e es abstergit, e linit sobre lu am tentha, quar la fractura appar negra.	"And the capillary species is known by this: it is discovered on the bone and cleaned, and touched with a thread, because the fracture appears black."
Mays en la curacio de fractura considera al comensament les accidentz del malaute, e lahoras si tu vezes per los accidentz que signifique per significacio manifesta sobre paor, ayssi cum es vomit de colera, e extencio, e perdement de entendament, e abscizio de votz, e sincopi, e febre acuta, e eyssiment dels huels e rogor de aquels, e semblantz a lor dels accidentz en las majors disposicios, ses dopte no es sanat.	"But in the treatment of fracture, first consider the accidents of the illness. And then if you see through those accidents that it signifies by clear indication about fear, like vomiting from cholera and extension and loss of consciousness and fainting and syncope and acute fever and discharge of eyes and redness of them and similar things to these in the major dispositions, it is not cured."
E si vezes accidentz no-correntz tu speras salut, lahoras tu comensa la curacio de lu.	"And if you see accidents that are not usual, then hope for health, and then begin the treatment of it."
La qual causa es quar si es vengut a tu le plaguat en le comensament cum es plaguat e aquo es en les dias de ivern, lahoras cove que tu studias en le ostament del os denant le dia xiiii segon tota disposicio.	"And this is because if the plague has come to you at first as it was and that happened in winter days, then you should study the inspection of the bone before the fourteenth day according to all disposition."
E si es en les dias d’estiu, lahoras cove que te coytes ostar le os denant le vii dia, habantz que aquo que es dejos le os sia corromput del pannicol, e que accidescan les accidentz que havem recomtatz.	"And if it is in summer days, then you should have the bone inspected on the seventh day, having that which is left behind with the bone corrupted by the periosteum, and let those accidents happen that we have recommended."
E si la fractura ja es pervenguda al pannicol cubrent le cervel, e es am partidas menudas e atricio, lahoras cove que inscidas la partida conminuta e atrita, segon que yeu recomtare a tu.	"And if the fracture has already reached the periosteum covering the brain and is with small partitions and attrition, then you should incise the committed and crushed partition, according to what I will recommend to you."
E es que tu razas le cap del malaute plaguat, e descuebres sobre le os segon costuma e manieyra a tu possible segon la figura de la plagua, e que sia leugier sobre le malaute.	"It is necessary that you raise the head of the sick person gently, uncover it according to custom and manner as much as possible in accordance with the shape of the plague, and that it be light upon the sick."
E si accideys a tu deves la deteccio del os, fluxs de sanc o apostema caut, lahora tu te oppausa a lu am aquo que cove, e es que huemplas le loc de draps infuzes en vi e oli rozat, e fassa repausar la plagua entro que sia sedat le apostema, e sies segur de fluxs del sanc; e aprop comensa en la circuicio del os e en la ablatio de lu.	"If you detect the swelling, fluxes of blood or hard abscess, then you should pause and prepare what is necessary, and if possible, place cloths infused in wine and rose oil on it, and let the swelling rest until the abscess has sedated, being sure that there are no fluxes of blood; and immediately begin with the circumcision of the swelling and its ablation."
E aquo sia segon una de dos manieyras de operacio.	"This is according to one or two methods of operation."
E la una manieyra es que tu inscidas le os am inscisori de streyt tal, e aquesta es la forma de lu: E aprop administra un autre inscissori aquest, un pauc pus lat que aquel; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	"And the first method is that you cut the swelling with a straight incision thus: And immediately administer another incision somewhat further on than this one..."
E aprop administra mays le inscissori pus lat que·l segon.	"And immediately administer another incision further yet."
E cove que sia deves tu nombre de inscissoris diverses, dels quals alcus so pus latz que alcus autres; e alcus de lor so pus breus que·ls autres e sian en le derier de acuitat de las suas extremitatz, e sian de ferr indi o felod.	"And it is necessary that you make diverse incisions of various lengths, some of which are further apart than others; and some of them are shorter than others and sharp at their ends, made with a knife or scalpel."
E usa de lor am facilitat en percussio sobre le inscissori per so que no concutesca le cap e leda aquel.	"And use them with ease in percussion upon the incisions so that you do not wound the head and harm him."
E si le os es fort, dur, lahoras cove que perfores en le circuit de lu denant que tu administres los inscissoris am les taravels, les quals so nomnatz taravels no-profundantz.	"And if the swelling is hard and tough, then you should first make a perforation around it before administering the incisions with the tweezers, which are called non-penetrating tweezers."
E no so nomnatz ayssi sino quar aquels no pausan le terme de l’os del test ad aquo que es aprop lu, per so quar al taravel es redonda extremitat o marge sobre aquel que es dejos le cap de lu agut semblant a marge o a cercle petit, le qual prohibeys esser submergit e passar la spissitut del os.	"And they are not called thus because those do not reach the end of the swelling near where it is thickest, so that the tweezers have a rounded extremity or margin over that which leaves the head sharp like a margin or small circle, which should be submerged and pass through the thickness of the swelling."
E es convenient que tu prenguas de aquestz taravels gran nombre dels quals quascu convenesca a la spicitut de quascun os, entro que sia a tu present en tottz testz del cervel la extremitat del qual sia aguda, la quantitat en longitut e brevitat sia segon la quantitat de spicitut de aquest test.	"And it is convenient that you take from these tweezers a large number of them, each one convenient for the thickness of each swelling, so that there may be present in all swellings of the brain an extremity which is sharp, and its quantity in length and breadth will be according to the quantity of thickness of this swelling."
E aquesta es la forma de tres specias de teravels: La qualitat de perforar en le circuit del os trencat es que pauses le teravel sobre le os e revolvas aquel am les tieus ditz entro que sapias que l’os ja es penetrat; e aprop permuda le terevel ad autre loc, e pausa aquo que es entre tot trauc la quantitat de la grosseza del ray o enviro aquo.	"And this is the manner of three kinds of tweezers: The quality of perforating around the broken swelling is that you place the tweezer on the swelling and turn it with your fingers until you know that the swelling has been penetrated; and immediately move the tweezer to another place, and pause when there is between everything the quantity of the thickness of a ray or environ."
E aprop inscideys am inscissoris aquo que es entre quascun trauc del os, e fay aquel pus subtil que podes sobre aquo en fi de levitat, ayssi cum havem dit, entro que erradiques le os, o am la tua ma, o am alcuna autra causa per alcus sturmentz les quals auras apparelhatz ad aquo, ayssi cum tanalhas e forceps subtils.	"And immediately incise with incisions that which is between each tract of the swelling, and make it as subtle as possible by means of levitation, as we have said before, until you eradicate the swelling, or with your hand, or with some other cause through certain instruments which you will have prepared for this purpose, such as forceps and delicate tweezers."
E cove que tu guardes am tota cautela que l’inscissori no toque alcuna causa del ciphac.	"And it is necessary that you guard with all caution that the incisions do not touch any cause of the pharynx."
E donc cum auras circuit le os perforan, e sira separat del ciphac si es continuat am lu, e auras aquel extrayt, cove que razas e enguales aquel en la asperitat de lu de aquo que es en le os am autra sturment semblant a inscissori, mays empero cove que sia pus teon e pus subtil que les autres inscissoris.	"And then when you have circumcised the swelling with perforations, and if it is separate from the pharynx if it is continuous with it, you will extract it, taking care to raise and separate it in the thickness of it from that which is in the swelling with another instrument similar to incisions, but nevertheless it should be more thin and subtle than other incisions."
E si roman alcuna partida dels osses petitz e satagias, lahoras pren aquela am facilitat am aquo que es deves tu dels sturmentz; e aprop aquo cura la plagua am lichinis e enguentz les quals havem ditz.	"And if any fragment of the little bones remains and sticks out, then take it with ease with that which you have to use among the instruments; and immediately cure the wound with stitches and dressings which we have mentioned."
E l’autra manieyra de operacio es leugiera, longinqua de paor, la qual diyssec Gualia e la lauzec per gran lausor; e aquest es le sermo de lu: necessari es a tu en le comensament que comenses descobrir la partida del os del loc en le qual es la fractura pus vehement e pus manifesta, entro que quan auras descubert aquela partida e auras pausat dejos lu la extremitat de aquest inscissori lent e alegre del qual aquesta es la forma:	"And the other manner of operation is light and distant from fear, which is praised by Galen and Avicenna for great praise; and this is their speech: It is necessary for you at the beginning that you begin to uncover the fracture of the bone in the place where it is most violent and manifest, until when you have uncovered that fracture and paused beside it, you will place the extremity of this lent and gentle incision of which this is the form:"
E es que la partida lenticular es leon e no inscideys alcuna causa, e la partida aguda es de lu en dos latz avantz en longitut, ayssi cum vezes; que la partida lenticular sia ajustada al ciphac am la facia de lu inscident aguda en le os.	"And it is that the lenticular incision is long and does not incise any cause, and the acute incision is of it on both sides forward in length, as times are; so that the lenticular incision is adapted to the pharynx with the face of the incident acute bone."
E aprop percuteys sobre le inscissori de una partida am un petit malhet entro que inscidas tot le os am facilitat ayssi cum es revolvut, e tu sias segur del pannicol que no accida en lu accident que temas en denguna manieyra, e si le medicant14 era le pus fol de totz les homes e le mays ignorant de lor; certament, e si era dorment.	"And then strike with a small hammer on the incision with one blow so that you incise all the bone with ease as it revolves, and you are sure of the paniculus that does not occur in it accidentally that you fear in any manner, and if the patient was the most foolish of all men and the most ignorant of them; certainly he was asleep."
Lahoras si romania alcuna causa annexa al os del pannicol en alcus locs de os, inscidira aquel de lu am la extremitat del inscissori aquel lenticular, e deliuraria aquel de lu am facilitat, quar es deliurat de lu ses nocument e ses paor.	"Then if any cause is attached to the bone of the paniculus in some places of the bone, incise it with the extremity of this lenticular incision and detach it from it with ease because it has been detached from it without harm and without fear."
E si fractura del os no penetra entro al pannicol, e aquo que es abscidit o es ostat del os es la facia de lu, e roman en lu asperitat e satagias subtils, lahoras cove que razas aquela asperitat e erradiques aquelas satagias am razoris subtils per les quals tu has preparat le nombre, de diversas quantitatz per que sia a tu possible administrar de aquels en tot loc les pus convenientz de lor e le pus dreyt de aquels segon aquo en que te perduzeys la tua operacio aquel os trencat e la figura de lu.	"And if the fracture of the bone does not penetrate into the paniculus, and that which is cut off or remains on the bone is its face, and remains in it thickness and subtle adherences, then you should raise this thickness and eradicate those adherences with delicate razors by means of which you have prepared a number of different quantities so that you can use them in all places the most convenient for them and the most upright according to what you perceive about your operation on that broken bone and its figure."
E cove que administres en la tua razio am la qual razes le os al comensament le pus lat de aquels razoris, e aprop usa aprop lu del pus subtil de lu, e no cesses far aquo segon continuitat entro que pervenguas ad aministrar le pus teon e·l pus subtil de totz aquels.	"And you should administer in your operation with which you scrape the bone at the beginning the widest of those razors, and immediately use the most subtle of them, and do not cease to do this continuously until you arrive at administering the thinnest and the most subtle of all of them."
Mays en quascuna de las autras fracturas petitas capillars e fractura subtil, cove que administres cura segon aquo que perduseys ad rectificacio de lu.	"But in each of the other little capillary fractures and subtle fractures, you should administer cure according to what you perceive regarding their correction."
E es causa que no es ameguada sobre totz les quals han studi en aquela art.	"And this is because it is not agreed upon by all those who have studied that art."
E stec sobre aquo que nos scriut havem mostrat en grans fracturas.	"And we have shown in large fractures regarding this that was mentioned above."
E si le pannicol es retangut quan tu erradiques le os, lahoras cove que prenguas drap de li segon la quantitat de la plagua, e submergeys aquel en oli rozat, e pausa aquel sobre le orrifici de la plagua; e aprop pren autre drap doblat o triplicat e submergeys lu en vi e oli rozat e pausa aquel sobre drap prim e fay aquo al pus leugierament que podes sobre aquel, que no graves le ciphac; e aprop administra sobre aquel liament lat, e no strenhas aquel sino per quantitat que tengua la plagua tant solament.	"And if the paniculus is torn when you eradicate the bone, then you should take cloth according to the quantity of the wound and immerse it in rose oil and place it on the opening of the wound; and immediately take another folded or tripled cloth and immerse it in wine and rose oil and place it on the first cloth and do this as lightly as possible so that you do not press the pharynx and immediately apply a wide bandage, and do not stretch it except by the quantity that the wound has alone."
E layssa aquel am aquesta cura per un dia o per dos entro que sias segur de apostema caut; e aprop deslia aquel e aprop aministra medicinas am las quals es superflua siccitat, ayssi cum razitz de lin e farina de errs, e polvera de enses e de aristologia, e de semblantz ad aquels.	"And leave it with this cure for one or two days until you are sure of the formation of cauterization; and then untie it and immediately apply medicines with which there is superfluous dryness, such as rose water and barley flour, powder of hyssop and aristolochia, and similar things to them."
E es que tu fassas de aquestas medicinas polvera que sia pulverizada sobre la plagua, ayssi cum son secas; e universalment, administra en aquel tota medicina de proprietat de la qual es que abstergesca e no mordique.	"And it is that you make these medicines into powder that is finely powdered on the wound as they are dry; and generally, apply to it every medicine with the property of cleaning without biting."
E guarda te segon la tua vertut que la plagua en la tua curacio sia neta; e no sia en lu surdicia de enguent ni autra; ni no layssas agreguar virulencia en lu; quar quan es ajustada sobre le pannicol del cervel, corromp aquel e poyreys aquel, e accideys sobre le malaute aprop aquo malicia maligna.	"And guard yourself according to your skill that the wound in your treatment is clean and not in its dirtiness of dressing or other; nor do you allow virulence to gather on it, for when it settles on the brain's paniculus, it corrupts it and makes it putrefy, and immediately brings about severe illness."
E accideys en le ciphac del cap, cum de lu es mondificat le os e majorment quan es menspresada la cura de lu, e es negror en la superficia de lu; e donc considera lahoras si accideys al malaute les accidentz que havem ditz, sapias que es parnicios ses tot dopte.	"And it happens in the pharynx of the head, especially when the bone is scraped and most when its cure is neglected, and blackness appears on its surface; therefore consider immediately if it happens to the patient the accidents that we have mentioned, you would know that they are fatal without doubt."
E si no accideys negror sino de la medicina que es pausada desus, e es en vertut de aquela medicina que fassa aquela negror, lahoras cove que tu prenguas de mel una partida e de oli rozat partidas iii, e am aquels linieys un drap, e aprop pausa aquel sobre le ciphac; e aprop cura aquel am las specias de curacio que conveneys entro que sia sanat.	If blackness occurs only from the medicine applied above and it is due to that medicine causing this blackness, then you should take some honey and three parts of rose oil, line a cloth with them, place it on the head, and cure it with appropriate remedies until it is healed.
Capitol .iii.	Here comes another sentence:
De restauracio del nas quan es trincat.	"On restoring a crushed nose."
Sapias que no es trencat del nas sino doas partidas ensemps pus sobiranas, o una de aquelas alcunas veguadas, per so quar en lu has dos osses, quar la partida dejos es cartillaginosa, e no es trencada e no accideys a lu sino atricio e tortuositat e sinuitat.	"You should know that it is not broken but rather two fractures occurring simultaneously and then healing, or one of those injuries seen sometimes, for which reason in the nose there are two bones, since the fracture leaves behind cartilage, not bone, and therefore what happens here is merely a bruise with tortuosity and sinuosity."
Mays si es trencada la una de las doas partidas de lu, lahoras cove que tu intrometas le dit petit en le sieu nas, e que engualhas aquela fractura dedintz am le tieu dit indic, e am le dit pous defora, entro que retorne le nas segon la sua figura natural.	"But if one of the two fractures in the nose is broken, then you must insert your little finger into its nasal cavity and use it to push back that fracture with your thumb inside and index finger outside until the nose returns to its natural shape."
E sia fayt aquo per tu am facilitat, e guarda te que no caja per aquela tua operacio sobre le malaute delor.	"And may you accomplish this with ease, but guard against causing any harm to that person in your operation."
E si la fractura es en la pus sobirana partida del nas, e le dit no perve ad aquela, lahoras cove que sia equat am la extremitat del ray en le qual sia petita grossitut.	"And if the fracture is in the previously healed part of the nose and your finger cannot reach it, then you should use the tip of a needle with a small thickness."
E si la fractura es en doas partidas, lahoras tu fay le semblant de aquo.	"And if there are fractures on both sides, then proceed as follows:"
E coyta te am restauracio de lu en le primier dia de la fractura, si es possible; e sino, lahoras aprop le vii o·l x deves le repaus del apostema caut.	"And strive for restoration of it on the first day following the fracture, if possible; otherwise, you should apply a poultice of boiled linseed or oil, as is appropriate, to avoid an abscess."
E aprop entromet en la extremitat del nas una meca de drap de li, si la fractura es en una partida, o metz doas calguas, si la fractura es en doas partidas, e sia en la calgua grossitut de tanta quantitat que umpla le trauc del nas.	"And appropriate to the fracture, insert a wick of cloth into the tip of the nose if it is on one side, or two wicks if it is on both sides, and make them thick enough that they fill the space in the nose."
E diysso alcus dels antics restauradors que las calguas sian enfundudas en boder, e sian permudadas en tot dia, mays no es vist a mi; habantz cove que la meca sia enfunduda en album de huou comfit am polvera de moli; e aprop layssa la qualgua entro que l’os sia fermat e sia endurazida la cartillage.	"And some of the ancient restorers say that the wicks should be wound at the edges and changed daily, but this is not seen by me. However, it is necessary that the wick be wrapped in album honey comfits with powdered myrrh; and appropriate that the wick remains until the bone is firm and the cartilage has hardened."
E alcunas veguadas sia entromes en le nas, en loc de calgua, pena de auca pus que es envolopada de drap de li leon; e sia que ja te la fractura del nas pus vehement e que le malaute no sia prohibit de inspiracio.	"And sometimes, instead of wicks, pieces of linen cloth are inserted into the nose, which can cause an accumulation of pus to form and be wrapped in linen. This is especially true if the fracture of the nose is very violent and the patient cannot breathe."
E aquesta causa no es a tu necessaria; e si voles, fay aquo, e si voles, fay calguas.	"And this cause is not necessary for you; do as you wish, either use wicks or cloths."
E si accideys autra veguada apostema caut, emplastra le nas am cerot o am coto enfus en vi agre e oli rozat, o am diaquilon.	"And if there occurs another abscess, plaster the nose with wax or with cotton soaked in vinegar and rose oil, or with diachylon."
Mays si no accideys apostema caut, lahoras cove que emplaustres aquel defora am farina de sizami e am polvera de enses cofitz am album de huou; e aprop pausa sobre lu stopa leon, e no lies le nas am alcuna causa.	"But if no abscess occurs, then you should plaster it externally with a mixture of barley flour and powdered comfits of iris with honey; appropriate to pause on it with linen bandages, and do not touch the nose for any reason."
Mays si so trencats les osses del nas am fractura petita o so conminuitz, lahoras cove que scindas sobre aquels, e extraguas aquels am insturmentz que conveno ad aquels; e aprop cos la scissura, e cura aquela am aquo que encarna e consolida, e am emplastres ad aquo convenientz.	"But if the bones of the nose are broken with a small fracture or comminuted, then you should split them open and remove them using appropriate instruments; appropriate to suture the wound and heal it with what binds and consolidates, and apply appropriate plasters."
E si accideys plagua dedintz le nas, lahoras cove que cures aquela am calguas e administra canulas de plom entro que sia de tot sanat.	"And if inflammation occurs inside the nose, then you should treat it with wicks and insert lead cannulae until it is completely healed."
Capitol .iiii.	Chapter IV
De restauracio de la mandibula quan es trincada.	On the restoration of the jawbone when it is broken.
Quan la mandibula dejos es rompuda e la fractura de lu no es am plagua, reguarda lahoras si la fractura es deforas tant solament, e no es trencada en dos e es curvada a las partidas dedintz, lahoras la sua cognicio es leugiera.	When the lower jawbone is broken and there is no inflammation in the fracture, observe whether it is broken only externally, not in two pieces and curved at the ends inside; then its recognition will be easy.
E cove donc, si la fractura es en la part dreyta, que tu intrometas le tieu indic senestre en la boca del malaute; e semblantment si la fractura es an la mandibula senestra, lahoras intromet le dit indic de la ma dreyta; e impelleys am aquel la gilbositat de la fractura dedintz am facilitat a las partidas defora, am la tua autra ma de la partida defora del os; am aquel decentment equa aquelam.	And therefore, if the fracture is on the right side, you should insert your left index finger into the mouth of the patient; and similarly if the fracture is on the left jawbone, then insert the right index finger; and press gently with that finger on the prominence of the fracture inside with facility at the edges outside, using your other hand to hold the edge of the bone outside; do this carefully.
E si la fractura de la mandibula ja es separada en doas, lahoras cove que administres extensio de doas partz segon rectitut entro que sia possibla la equacio de lu.	And if the fracture of the jawbone is already separated into two pieces, then you should apply extension to both parts according to a straight line until it is possible to achieve reduction.
E si accideys conmocio de dentz a disrupcio, lahoras strenh aquelas de las quals speras que romandran am fil de aur o de argent o de ceda; e aprop pausa sobre la mandibula trencada cerot, e aprop pausa sobre lu drap duplicat, e pausa sobre le drap gran stelha decentment fayta, o una pessa de sola engual a la longitut de la mandibula; e aprop lia aquela desus segon que a tu es apparelhada la liadura de lu e que conveneys la applicacio, entro que no es destruida.	And if there is commotion of teeth with disruption, then strengthen those that you expect to break with gold or silver wire or thread; appropriate to plaster the broken jawbone with wax and also plaster it externally with doubled cloth and plaster it externally with a large linen bandage carefully done, or a splint of bone along the length of the jawbone; appropriate to bind it above according to how you have prepared the bandage and what is convenient for its application, until it is not destroyed.
E comanda al malaute que use de repaus e tranquilitat, e pausa la vianda de lu sorbicios leons.	And command the patient to rest and remain quiet, and avoid drinking hot liquids.
E si extimas que ja es alterada la figura en alcuna manieyra, lahoras tu te coyta e deslia aquel al tertz dia; e aprop rectifica aquo que ja es alterat de lu e emplaustra aquel am polvera de moli, am album de huou, o am farina de cisami, pus que tu auras ostat le cerot de lu, e pausa sobre le emplastra lana leon.	And if you estimate that the figure has already been altered in some way, then wait and remove it on the third day; appropriate to correct what is altered about it and plaster it with powdered myrrh, honey, or barley flour, since you will have removed the wax from it, and apply a linen bandage over the plaster.
E adonc cum sta annex e ajustat aquel emplastre sobre lu, e la disposicio del os no es alterada, layssa aquel, que no le deslies entro que sia sanat e strenh la fractura; quar motas veguadas aquesta fractura es streyta en tres sempmanas.	And then with this annexed and properly adjusted plaster on it, if the position of the bone is not altered, leave it in place until it is healed and strengthened; for many times this fracture heals in three weeks.
E si autra veguada accida apostema caut, lahoras administra aquo que havem dit motas veguadas en la sedacio de lu entro que sia sanat, e sia remaugut aquel apostema.	And if another time an abscess occurs, then apply what has been said many times in its seduction until it is healed and the abscess is removed.
E si la fractura es am plagua, lahoras considera si es pessa del os separada o satagias, lahoras tu te subtilia que ostes aquelas satagias am aquo que conveneys ad aquo en la remocio de aquelas dels sturmentz.	And if the fracture is with inflammation, then consider whether it is a piece of bone separated or displaced; then be careful to remove those displacements using what is appropriate for that purpose among the instruments.
E si le orrifici de la plagua es streyt, lahoras tu le amplifique am le fleubotomi segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	And if the opening of the inflammation is narrow, then you should dilate it with a trocar according to your need.
E aprop quan tu auras ostat aquelas satagias, e de aquelas no sira remaugut re, lahoras tu cos le orrifici de la plagua si es ampla; e sino, pausa sobre aquela un dels emplaustres que conveneysso ad aquo e encarnan aquela, entro que sia sanada.	And appropriate when you have removed those displacements and if there remains no remainder from them, then close the opening of the inflammation if it is wide; and if not, plaster that with one of the plasters that are suitable for that purpose and heal it until it is healed.
Capitol .v.	Chapter V
De restauracio de la furcula quan es trinquada.	On the restoration of the collarbone when it is broken.
Motas veguadas es trencada la furcula de la partida denant deves le muscle, e aquela fractura es fayta en una de tres manieyras.	Many times the collarbone is broken at its anterior part near the muscle, and this fracture occurs in one of three ways.
Quar o es trencada, o seperada, o es seperada en doas partz otra que no accidan satagias; e es leugier a la restauracio de lu; o es ayssi que accideysso en lu satagias, e es dificil a restauracio de lu; o es ayssi que la fractura es am plagua.	For it may be broken, or separated, or separated into two parts without displacements; and this is easy to restore. Or it may be such that displacements occur in it, and this is difficult to restore. Or it may be such that the fracture is with inflammation.
E la operacio en aquela, quan la fractura es ses plagua, es que tu fassas esser present dos ministres, per so que la un tengua le adjutori e siegua la furcula trencada, e l’autre extenda le col ves aquela partida.	And the operation in that case, when the fracture is without inflammation, is for you to have two assistants present, so that one holds the collarbone with forceps and follows the broken bone, and the other extends the neck at that part.
E aprop enguala la fractura am les tieus ditz entro que sia fayta la forma de lu segon que cove, e no sia en lu eminencia pauca ni concavitat.	And appropriate to align the fracture with your fingers until it has been properly shaped according to what is necessary, and there remains neither prominence nor concavity.
E si indigeysses mes de extencio, lahoras cove que pauses dejos le titillic del malaute spera de drap o de lana, e sia la grandesa de lu segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat; e exten e eleva la furcula e coarta la spera am la tua ma entro que enguales la frectura segon que cove.	And if you need more extension, then it is necessary to place a pad of cloth or wool on the patient's chin according to its size based on your need; elevate and extend the collarbone and compress the pad with your hand while aligning the fracture properly.
E si no podes atirar la extremitat de la furcula a las partidas defora, per so quar es pervenguda al preon, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sua cervitz, e pauses sobre le muscle de lu un coyssi migier en grandeza.	And if you cannot draw the end of the collarbone to its external part because it has been pushed forward towards the sternum, then it is necessary for the patient to be seated upright on his neck and place a large folded pad over that muscle.
E le ministre prema le muscle de lu a las partidas dejos entro que l’os de la furcula sia elevat que es en le preon en sus, e lahoras tu rectifique la fractura e enguala aquela am les tieus ditz.	And the assistant presses on that muscle at its external part until the bone of the collarbone is elevated and brought back to its normal position; then you should correct the fracture and align it with your fingers.
Mays si sentes satagias de la furcula e so maugudas, lahoras cove que fendes sobre aquela e extraguas aquelas satagias am facilitat.	"If you feel pulsations in the collarbone and they are disturbing, then it is necessary to cut over that area and remove those pulsations with ease."
E si es retenguda en le os, lahoras tu ingenia inscisio de lu am un dels inscissoris les quals has apparelhatz ad aquo, pus que havias pausat dejos la furcula le sturment que serve le ciphac; e es sturment de fust o de ferr del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	"And if it is retained in the bone, then you should make an incision on that area with one of the incising knives that you have prepared for this purpose, since you had already placed aside the collarbone, which serves as a lever; and it is a tool made of wood or iron, whose shape is thus:"
E es semblant a culier del qual aquesta es la concavitat; e sia la sua latitut segon aquo que has necessitat de lu, segon la grandeza del os o la pauqueza de lu.	"And it resembles a spatula, the concave side of which corresponds to this shape; and its width should be according to your needs, depending on the size of the bone or the thickness of it."
Mays la longitut de lu sia segon que es a tu possible a la operacio; que haja doas extremitatz ayssi cum vezes, e la una extremitat sia ample e l’autre streyta.	"But its length should be according to what is possible for you in the operation; it should have two extremities thus, one of which is wide and the other is narrow."
E si la disrupcio de la plagua la qual has inscidida quan has extraytas la satagia del os es ampla, e yest segur de apostema caut, lahoras tu ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura.	"And if the disruption of the wound that you have incised when you extracted the pulsation from the bone is large, and you are certain that it will heal without infection, then you should approximate the two lips of the wound with suturing."
E si la disrupcio es pauca, o temes apostema caut, lahoras tu uemple la plagua am draps e pulvils segon la quantitat de la scissura de la plagua.	"And if the disruption is small, or you fear infection, then you should fill the wound with dressings and powders according to the quantity of the opening of the wound."
E si accideys apostema caut, lahoras infon drap en vi agre e oli rozat e vi, e pausa sobre aquel.	"And if an abscess occurs, then take a cloth soaked in vinegar and rose oil and wine, and place it on that area."
Mays la strictura del os quan es ses plagua e ses seccio, es que pauses emplastre fayt de farina de moli am album de huou, e pausa sobre lu stopa leon, e aprop pausa la spera dejos le titillic de lu, si indigeyssas de aquela, e aprop pren humemate, so es torca la qual teno les Sarrazis , que sia mot longua, e sia latitut de lu de un palm o entorn aquel; e aprop pausa pulvils duplicatz sobre la stopa e l’emplastre; e aprop pren una stela de taula subtil de la qual la latitut d’ela sia de tres ditz e en longitut semblantment; e aprop envolopa aquela en drap, e aprop envolopa aquel drap am la stela en lo loc sobre le loc de la fractura; e aprop pausa humemati ayssi cum es revout, e revol aquela sobre le col de lu e dejos le titillic de lu sa e dejos le titillic de lu malaute, e reduzeys aquela sobre tota partida, e quan vezes que la strictura de la fractura am strictura descent, e es aquo que no es occultat sobre tu.	"But the compression of the bone when the wound and section are closed is that you should apply a plaster made of flour from the mill mixed with egg white, and place it on top of the lion's skin, and also place the bandage around the joint of it if necessary, and also take humectant, which is the long cloth that the Saracens use, which should be about the width of a palm or somewhat less; and also apply doubled powders over the plaster and the bandage; and also take a thin table steel whose width is three digits and similarly in length; and wrap it in cloth and also wrap that cloth with the steel on the location over the location of the fracture; and also apply humectant thus as it revolves, and roll it around the neck of it and around the joint of it above and below, and reduce it over all parts, and whenever the compression of the fracture is reduced by compression."
E tot, que no sia mauguda la stelha desobre le os trencat; e per so cove que tu vejas le malaute quascun dia, que quan le liament es mollificat o vezas la stela ja esser remauguda, lahoras tu rectifica aquo e strenh la liadura.	"And all of that, that the steel not be placed on top of the broken bone; and also so that you may see the injury every day, when the bandage becomes moist or you see that the steel is already loosened, then you should correct this and tighten the bandage."
E aprop pausa le dormir del malaute sobre le col de lu, e pausa dejos le titillic de lu deves le dormir de lu en la nueyt un petit coyssi; per so que am aquel sia elevat le adjutori de lu del latz de aquel, e donc es elevada la la fractura de la furcula a elevacio del muscle; o sia le bras de lu liat al col de aquel.	"And also place the sleeping of the injured on top of his neck, and place it somewhat away from his side at night; so that with that the adjutors of him are elevated from the side of him, and therefore the fracture of the clavicle is elevated due to the elevation of the muscle; or the arm of him is tied to his neck."
E no deslies le liament si no accideys en le loc prusiment o apostema, entro a xii dias.	"And do not remove the bandage until after twelve days if there is no swelling or abscess in that location."
E aprop renovelha le emplastre si has vista la facia de lu ad aquo, e ajusta en la strictura e restaura aquel e layssa entro que sia restaurat e sia coagulat la fractura de la furcula.	"And also renew the plaster if you see the face of him become moist from that, and adjust it in the compression and restore that until it is restored and the fracture of the clavicle has coagulated."
E es strenguda e comfortada segon le mes en xxviii dias, e alcunas veguadas en alcus homes es fayt en mens de temps de aquel.	"And it is strengthened and comforted in about twenty-eight days, and sometimes in some men it can be done in less time than that."
Capitol .vi.	**Chapter VI.**
De restauracio de fractura de la spalla.	"For the restoration of a shoulder fracture."
Spatula tart es trencada en le loc lat de lu e no so trencatz de lu sino les marges.	"The spatula is broken at its lateral side and not completely but only on its edges."
E donc quan es trencat le loc de lu — e es trencat en le mieg loc de lu — e no es conogut sino per tocament, lahoras segon que es la figura de la fractura sforsa te la preparacio de lu e reduzir aquela segon la figura natural en tota manieyra de engen la qual es a tu possible.	"And therefore when it is broken at its middle side — and it is broken in the middle of it — and not known except by touch, then according to the figure of the fracture forcefully prepare it and reduce it according to its natural shape in every way that you can."
E aprop pausa sobre le loc polvera de moli am album de huou e stopa leon; e aprop pausa pulvil de drap duplicat; e aprop pausa sobre lu stela lada de taula subtil segon la quantitat de la spatula tota o mays un pauc.	"And appropriately pause over the location of powdered chalk with egg white and cover it with linen; and also pause with doubled cloth powder; and also pause over the selected side of the subtle table according to the quantity of the entire spatula or a little more."
Mays si dejos la stela es concavitat en alcu dels locs de la spatula, lahoras tu enguala aquela concavitat am stopa leon, e aprop pueja la stela segon equalitat.	"But if you leave the selected side with concavity in some of the locations of the spatula, then you fill that concavity with linen and appropriately press the selected side evenly."
E aprop strenh desus am humemati longua ab constriccio decent e am fermesa de la stela entro que no sia remauguda del sieu loc.	"And also strengthen it from above with a long bandage with appropriate compression and with firmness of the selected side so that it is not displaced from its location."
E considera le liament en quascun dia; e totas veguadas que sia mollificat, lia autra veguada e stren le e equa la stela si es remauguda del sieu loc.	"And check the bandage every day; and whenever it becomes softened, apply another layer and strengthen it and press the selected side if it has become displaced from its location."
E jagua le malaute sobre le sieu latz sa.	"And apply the plaster over its own side."
E la spatula es restaurada en xx dias o en .xxv.	"And the bandage is restored in 20 days or 25 days."
E donc quan es complit aquest nombre, lahoras tu dissolveys le liament, e que tu scias ensegurat quar aquela es dels osses dels quals la cominicio no es temuda ni lor dissolucio.	"And therefore when this number is completed, then you dissolve the bandage, and be assured that it is of those bones from which the beginning was not feared nor their dissolution."
E si procezeys del loc del os pessa e pongeys dejos la codena, lahoras tu scindeys sobre lu, e osta le, e fay segon que havem dit en la fractura de la furcula de sadacio de apostema caut si accideys aqui.	"And if you proceed from the location of the bone of the elbow and leave the upper arm, then incise over it, evacuate it, and do according to what we have said in the fracture of the collarbone concerning the removal of an abscess if one should occur here."
Capitol .vii.	Chapter VII.
De restauracio de la fractura del pietz.	On the restoration of a fracture of the foot.
Le pietz alcunas veguadas es romput en le mieg loc de lu e aquo tart endeve; mays las extremitatz de lu mot endeve que so ciccadas e comminuidas.	"The feet sometimes break in the middle of the body, but this is less common. The extremities are more often lame and shattered."
E dels accidentz de lu quan es trencat le mieg de lu es que declina a las partidas dedintz e accideys a lu gran dolor, e dificultat en lo hale, e tos, e fort leu e vomeys sanc; e es declarada en lu cavitat en le os trencat e no es occulta al sentiment.	"When the middle of the body is broken by accident, it declines towards the parts within and causes great pain, difficulty in breathing, coughing, and vomiting blood. The fracture is evident in the cavity of the bone and cannot be hidden from sensation."
E la restauracio de lu es que sia resupinat le malaute sobre le sieu dos, e pausa entre las spallas de lu un coyssi; e aprop prem als muscles de lu, e ajusta las costas de lu am las mas de dos costatz, e subtilia te en la operacio de lu e en la equacio segon tota manieyra que es ad aquo possibla e que conveneys ad aquo, entro que retorne la figura del os segon que cove.	"And the restoration of it is that the sick person should be laid upon their back on a couch; and between the shoulders of them let there be placed a cushion. And gently press upon the muscles of them, and adjust the bones of them with the hands of two persons, handling the operation with subtilty, and adjusting according to all manner of way that is possible and convenient, until the figure of the bone returneth again into its proper place."
E aprop pausa sobre lu emplastre e estopa e pausa desobre astela de taula subtil de sauze o de caligi e de a lor semblantz en levitat, pus que tu envolopas aquela en drap; e aprop subtilia te en lian aquela sobre le os trencat que no sia maugut; e vay am liadura segon retonditat al dors alcunas veguadas, e strenh aquel am strictura decent; e aprop considera la liadura en tota hora, e quan es mollificada strenh aquela.	"And then apply plaster and lint, and place them on a subtle table of saunders or of chalk, and let them lie in levitation until you wrap them in cloth. And then handle that upon the broken bone with subtilty, taking care that it be not moved. And sometimes bind it around the back according to its roundness, and strengthen that with decent straitness; and always consider the bandage at every hour, and when it is softened, strengthen it."
E si necessitat provoca a desliament de aquela deves corrossio o pruziment, o dolor, o apostema que accideysso en le loc, lahoras tu coyta e deslia aquela e erradica le emplastre e rectifique aquo que accideys per aquo am manieyra de curacio de lu; e aprop reduzeys le emplastre, si vezes ad aquo la facia; e ajusta a lu strictura entro que sia sanat.	"And if there is occasion to remove that bandage through breaking or pressing, pain, swelling, or apostume happening in the place, then thou shalt cut and loose that, and eradicate the plaster, and rectify whatsoever happened thereby with manner of cure thereof. And then again reduce the plaster, sometimes upon the face; and adjust the straitness until it be whole."
Capitol .viii.	Chapter VIII
De restauracio de las costas quan son trincadas.	"Of the restoration of the ribs when they are broken."
Sapias que fractura de las costas no catz sino en locs grosses que siegon le dos; e de las extremitatz de lor de la partida denant no accideys ad aquelas contricio sino per aquo quar so cartillaginosas.	"Know that fractures of the ribs occur only in large spaces that lie along the back, and at the extremities of their ends, no injury occurs except for this one because they are cartilage."
E cognicio de lu no es amaguada al sentiment deves la inquisicio de lu am les ditz.	"You will recognize it by feeling during its inquiry with your fingers."
E la restauracio sia ayssi que enguales la fractura am les ditz segon la manieyra possibla, entro que sia engulhat segon que cove, e aprop emplastre e strenh le os trencat am stela, si indigeys de aquel.	"And the restoration should be done by setting the fracture with your fingers according to the most possible manner, ensuring that it is well aligned depending on what is necessary, and then apply plaster and strengthen the broken bone with steel if needed."
E si la fractura de las costas es declinant a las partidas dedintz, lahoras accideys al malaute dolor vehement e punctura, ayssi cum punctura que accideys ad aquel que ha pleureci, e per aquo quar le os ponh le velament; e accideys a lu difficultat de hanelit, e tos, e vomit de mot sanc; e aquesta es de dificil curacio.	"And if the rib fracture is displaced inward, then it causes violent pain and puncture, like the puncture that occurs in those who have coughed up blood, because the bone pierces the pleura. It also causes difficulty breathing, coughing, and vomiting of much blood; this is difficult to treat."
E ja les Antixs so engeniatz en aquela am motz engientz.	"And already the Ancients knew how to treat it with many devices."
E de lor so que diso: cove que pauses viandas del malaute que engendro imflacio e ventositat, per que le ventre sia imflat e sia extendut, e la fractura sia impellida a las partidas defora.	"And they said that one should pause from eating for the duration of the illness that causes inflammation and windiness, so that the abdomen may be inflated and extended, and thus the fracture may be pushed outward."
Mays nos avoreyssem aquo per so que no sia causa leugiera a generar apostema caut, si no accideys; e si ja accideys, lahoras ja ajuda ad aquo.	"But we should not do this because it could easily cause an abscess to form if it is not done carefully. And if one has already formed, then it would be too late."
E diyssero alcus de lor que sia pausada desus ventoza e aprop que sucque am fortitut; e es semblant a ratiocinacio, mays empero es temut que la ventoza atire las superfluitatz al loc per la debilitat.	"And some of them said that one should pause from the windiness and then suck it with force. This is similar reasoning, but however it is feared that the windiness drives the impurities to the place through weakness."
E diyssero alcus de lor: cove que·l loc sia cubert am lana que ja es submersa en oli caut, e sian pausatz pulvils entre las costas entro que sia umplida, que sia la liadura engual quan envolopas aquela segon retonditat; e aprop sia curat le malaute am curacio de pleuresi de vianda e de medicina.	"And some of them said: one should cover the place with wool that has already been immersed in hot oil, and then pause while powders are placed between the ribs until it is full. Then wrap it according to its roundness; and finally treat the illness with food and medicine for pleurisy."
E si causa vehement constrenh le malaute la qual no sufferta, e le os punh le velament am punctura ledent, temem sobre le malaute, lahoras cove que fendam sobre le loc, descubram de la costa trencada, e aprop pausem desobre aquela instrument que conserve le ciphac, la rememoracio del qual es precedida, e que inscidam le os am facilitat, e extraguam aquel.	"And if the illness causes violent constriction that cannot be endured, and the bone pierces the pleura with painful puncture, then one fears for the illness. Therefore, it is necessary to cut over the place, uncovering the broken rib, and then place on top of that instrument which retains the cyathiscus, whose memory is recalled earlier, in order to facilitate removing the bone and extracting it."
E aprop que ajustem las doas labias de la plagua, si es gran, am cozidura, e curem aquela am emplastres entro que sia sanada.	"And then join the two lips of the wound, if it is large, with suturing, and treat it with plasters until it heals."
E si accideys dedintz apostema, lahoras tu coyta e enfon pulvils en oli rozat e pausa sobre le loc, e que sia curat le malaute am aquo que cove a la apostema dedintz.	"And if an abscess forms inside, then you can also apply powdered rose oil and pause over the place. And treat the illness with what is appropriate for an internal abscess."
E sia ressupinat sobre le latz sobre le qual dorm, entro que sia sanat.	"And let him be propped up on pillows while he lies in bed until he is healed."
Capitol .ix.	Chapter IX
De restauracio de fractura del spondil del dos e del col.	On the Restoration of Fractures of the Spine and Neck.
Alcunas veguadas endeve fractura als osses del col, e tart endeve a lor atricio, e semblantment als spondils del dos.	Sometimes fractures occur in the bones of the neck, and sometimes they cause attrition there, and similarly with the spines of the back.
E cum aquo accideys ad alcu e voles saber si sara sanat o no, lahoras considera, quar si vezes las sieuas mas ja mollificadas e stupefaytas e mortas e no pot maure aquelas ni extendre ni strenher aquelas e quan constrenges aquelas am les tieus ditz o punges aquelas am agulha e no sent en aquelas dolor, lahoras sapias que no es sanat, e en las mes de disposicios es mortal.	"And when this happens to someone and you want to know whether it will heal or not, then consider this: if the sinews are already softened, stunned, deadened, and cannot be moved or extended or stretched, and when you constrict them with your fingers or prick them with a needle they do not feel pain, then you know that it will not heal, and in such cases it is mortal."
E si mau aquelas e sent en aquelas constriccio am les ditz e punctura, lahoras sapias que la nucha de l’os es salva e que le malaute guereys am curacio.	"And if they can be moved and feel constriction with your fingers or puncture, then you know that the nape of the neck is safe and the illness will be cured with treatment."
E si ve als spondils del col le semblant ad aquo e voles saber si sira sanat o no, lahoras considera als pes de lu.	"And if it seems similar to fractures of the spines of the neck, then consider their weight."
Lahoras si tu vezes que so ja mollificatz, accideys ad aquels aquo que es accidit en las mas, e aprop quan jatz sobre le sieu dos, yeys ventozitat e egestio ses la sua volontat, e alcunas veguadas es resupinat sobre le sieu dos e vol urinar e no pot, lahoras sapias que es mortal, e adonc no trebales en la curacio de lu.	"And then if you find that they are already softened like the sinews discussed earlier, and moreover when he lies on his back he feels windiness and expulsion without his will, and sometimes he is propped up on his back and wants to urinate but cannot, then you know that it is mortal, and do not attempt treatment for it."
Mays si no accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, la causa es milhor e pus leugiera.	"But if none of these causes are found, then the cause is better and easier to treat."
E la curacio de lu es que te perforses a la sedacio del apostema caut que pauses sobre le spondil atrissat oli rozat sol, o am mugols de huous asatz; pausa sobre aquela aquel alcunas veguadas le dia entro que sia sedat le apostema caut.	"And the treatment for it is to apply hot compresses made with powdered rose oil or hot poultices of wheat flour and honey; pause over that place several times a day until the hard abscess is sedated."
E lahoras pausa un dels emplastres confortantz e exsitans, e strenh sobre aquel am liament; e comanda al malaute que use de repaus e de tranquillitat e que no dorme sobre la partida am la qual atroba dolor entro que sia sanat.	"And then apply one of the comforting and stimulating plasters, and stretch it over that place with linen; and command the patient to use rest and tranquility, and not to sleep on the part where he feels pain until he is healed."
E si accideys deves la atricio del os satagias o alcuna causa que ja es seperada de lu, lahoras cove que secces sobre la codena e que ostes aquel os; e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua, am sutura si es gran; e aprop cura aquela am alcu encarnatiu dels enguentz, entro que sia sanat.	"And if you find deviances or some other cause that has already separated from it, then you must cut over the spine and remove that bone; and moreover join the two lips of the wound with suturing if it is large; and treat it with some medication for inflammation until it heals."
Mays si es trencat le derier del os alhoses, e es la fi de la coeta, lahoras cove que tu entrometas le dit pous de la ma senestra en le cul, e que enguales le os trencat am l’autra ma segon que es possible per equacio segonda; e aprop pausa sobre lu emplastre e astelha, si indigeysses de aquels, e aprop strenh aquel.	"But if the end of the bone is broken off, and it is the end of the coccyx, then you must insert your left hand's little finger into the anus, and grasp the broken bone with your other hand according to what is possible for balance's sake; and moreover pause over that place with plaster and bandage if necessary, and also stretch it."
E si sentes satagias trencadas en lu, lahoras tu fen sobre aquela, e osta aquel, e cura la plagua am la curacio que es precedida entro que sia sanada.	"And if you feel deviant breaks in it, then make an incision over that place, remove that, and treat the wound with the treatment that has been mentioned until it heals."
Capitol .x.	Chapter X.
De restauracio de la ancha.	"Of the restoration of health."
Les osses de las anchas tart so trencats, e si trencan, lahoras la fractura de lor no es sino communicio en las extremitatz de aquelas e son inscidas en la longitut e declinan a las partidas dedintz; e accideys al malaute dolor en le loc e punctura, e la camba es stupefacta quan es fractura.	"The bones of the thighs are often broken, and if they break, the fracture of them is but a communication in the extremities thereof and are inserted in the longitude and decline into the interior parts; and it happens to the patient pain in the place and puncture, and the limb is stunned when it is fractured."
E la restauracio de lu es que tu extendas la tua ma sobre aquel entro que sia sobre la fractura qual es la figura de lu.	"And the restoration of it is that you stretch your hand over that which is above the fracture which is its figure."
E si fractura es en la extremitat de lu tant solament, lahoras tu enguala aquela segon que a tu es apparelhat per equacio engual entro que sia asemblat a la sua figura natural.	"And if the fracture is only in the extremity thereof, then you shall join it according as it appeareth unto you by Equity, joining together that which is assembled to its natural figure."
Mays si la fractura es en le lonc o que ja declina a las partidas dejos, lahoras tu fay jaser le malaute sobre le sieu ventre entro que sia preparada a tu la restauracio de aquela fractura.	"But if the fracture is in the long or that which hath declined to the interior parts thereof, then thou shalt make the patient lie upon his belly within such preparation as thou hast for the restoration of that fracture."
E donc quan auras engualada aquela, pausa sobre lu emplastre, e aprop pausa sobre aquel astela de fust o de codena, e strenh per strictura sobre la qual no temas punctacio de fractura ni remocio de la stelha.	"And then when you have joined it, lay upon it a plaster, and apply also upon that asthma of wood or bone, and strengthen it by straitness so that thou needest not fear puncture of fracture nor removal of the splint."
E enguala la concavitat am aquo que uempla aquela entro que aquela prengua la strictura segon equalitat, e comanda al malaute que dorma sobre le sieu dos o desobre le sieu costat sa.	"And join also the concavity with that which filleth it within, and then let him take the straitness according to equality; and command the patient to sleep upon his back or upon his side."
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras tu cessa de extencio de lu e de la sua restauracio entro que sia sedat le apostema caut, e pausa sobre lu aquo que sede aquel segon que es precedit; e aprop retorna a la restauracio de lu, e strenh aquel ayssi cum cove.	"But if thou shalt perceive an aposteme hard or hot, then cease from the extension and restoration thereof until such time as that aposteme be assuaged, and lay upon it that which assuageth it according as is before spoken; and then return to the restoration of it, and strengthen it even as it behoveth."
E si accideysso en le os satagias o son comminuidas, lahoras tu las tratz.	"And if thou shalt perceive such in the bone set or comminuted, then thou shall make them whole."
Capitol .xi.	"Chapter xi"
De restauracio de la fractura del adjutori.	"Of the restoration of a fracture of the thumb."
Adjutori es aquo que es entre le coyde entro al cap de la spalla.	"The thumb is that which is between the elbow and the head of the shoulder."
E si es trencat, lahoras la restauracio de lu es en una de doas manieyras, de las quals es la una que tu prenguas fust pla de migiera groceza segon aquesta forma:	"And if it be broken, then the restoration of it is in one of two manners: and the first manner is this, thou shalt take a flat piece of wood of medium thickness of this fashion:"
E sian liatz en doas extremitatz dos liamentz, e aprop sia suspendut del loc elevat.	There are two bands at both extremes, and it should be suspended from a raised place.
E segua le malaute sobre una sezela; e aprop gieta fora le sieu bras trencat sobre le fust entro que pervengua al titillic de lu en le mieg loc del qual sia annexa la curvitat del fust.	The patient should lie on a chair, and extend their broken arm over the backrest so that it reaches the tip of the backrest where the curve of the backrest is attached.
E aprop suspen sobre aquel alcuna causa greu, o·l minestre extenda aquel a las partidas dejos; e aprop le metge eque la fractura am las sieuas mas ensemps, entro que la fractura retorne segon que cove.	And suspend some heavy weight over that, or the servant stretches it out towards its parts; and then the doctor places his hands on the fracture with his fingers together, so that the fracture returns according to what is necessary.
E l’autra manieyra es que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sieua cervitz e suspen la ma del col de lu am liament; e aprop comanda a dos ministres que la un de lor tengua aquo que es desobre la fractura am las suas mas; e l’autre tengua le pus dejos de lu; e quascu de lor extenda a la sua partida.	Another method is for the patient to be propped up on their back and their arm suspended from a sling around their neck. Then, two servants are commanded: one holds what is above the fracture with both hands, while the other holds what is below it; each extends their part accordingly.
E si voles que la extencio sia pus fort, lahoras tu strenh sobre la fractura am liament e sobre aquela am autre liament, e quascu dels dos ministres extendan a doas suas partidas.	And if you want the extension to be stronger, then tie another bandage over the fracture and also tie one onto that, and each of the two servants extends their part accordingly.
E donc si la fractura es propinquada a la extremitat del muscle, lahoras cove que sia pausat la mitat del liament sobre le citillic e l’autre dejos la fractura deves le coyde.	And if the fracture is close to the end of the muscle, then one half of the bandage should be placed on the tip and the other below the fracture towards the elbow.
E semblantment si la fractura es propdana al coyde, lahoras cove que sia pausat le liament sobre aquel loc e sobre aquel coyde.	"If a fracture extends to the hip joint, then it is necessary to place a bandage over that area and around the hip."
Enguala aquela am facilitat e ses trebal, e aprop quant sira engualada segon que cove e es applicada per bona applicacio, lahoras strenh aquela si no accideys apostema caut.	"If it heals easily and without difficulty, and especially when it is healing properly with good application, then stretch it a little if there is no inflammation."
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras layssa la strictura entro al vii dia, e pausa sobre lu lana sutza enbeguda en vi agre e oli rozat entro que repause le apostema, e lahoras tu stren aquela.	"However, if inflammation occurs, then leave the bandage in place for about 7 days and change it frequently with warm water and rose oil compresses until the inflammation subsides."
E la manieyra de strenher aquela es que pauses emplastre sobre la fractura, e aprop pausa envolopament de drap nau sobre le emplastre; e aprop ajuste le bras sobre aquel adjutori, e pause la sua ma uberta sobre le sieu muscle.	"The method of stretching it is to apply a plaster cast over the fracture and also place a napkin wrap over the plaster cast. Then adjust the arm with that device and place your hand gently on their muscle."
E pausa le drap e strenh sobre le adjutori le bras per so que·l bras sia en loc de stelhas, si no prohibeys de aquo alcuna causa del os trencat.	"And pause the napkin and stretch over the arm support device so that the arm is in a fixed position, unless prohibited due to some cause by the broken bone."
E lahoras usa de stelhas.	"Then use splints."
E es que pauses sobre la fractura aquela stela que sia pus lada e pus fort de las autras stelas; e pausa entre quascuna stela la latitut del dit, e sia la longitut de las stelas segon la trencadura am addicio de tres ditz de tota partida.	"And it is necessary to apply that splint which is placed on the inside and fits tightly with the others; place between each splint a pad of suitable width and make the length of the splints according to the fracture, adding three fingers' breadth beyond either side of the break."
E aprop strenh sobre las stelas am la strictura la qual he dita al comensament del capitol.	"And also stretch over the splints with the tension which has been mentioned at the beginning of this chapter."
E es que la tua strictura sobre le loc de la fractura sia pus streyt.	"And it is necessary that your tension be stronger at the site of the fracture."
E quant pus es alonguada la fractura sia la strictura menor.	"The longer the fracture, the less tension should be applied."
E donc si vezes le situament de las stelas e la strictura ayssi cum havem dit en la hora en la qual restauras le membre al sieu assituament, lahoras tu fay.	"Therefore, if you find yourself in the situation of having placed the splints and tension as we have said when restoring the member to its normal position, then do it."
E si temes apostema caut, lahoras tu layssa la strictura e las stelas entro al dia vii ayssi cum havem dit.	"And if you suspect inflammation is developing, then leave the tension and splints on for about 7 days as we have said."
E aprop considera le liament en totas partidas per tres dias per so que no accida en le loc pruziment o imflacio; o es prohibida la vianda pervenir al membre per disposicio de superfluitat de strictura; e donc rectifiqua tot aquo segon que havem dit.	"And also consider the limb in all cases for three days so that no pressure or inflammation occurs; or if food cannot reach the member due to excess tension, then correct everything as we have said."
Mays si tu yest sobre confizanssa que no accida alcuna causa de aquo, lahoras no deslias la liguadura sino aprop tres dias o mays.	"But if you are uncertain whether this might cause some harm, do not remove the bandage for at least three days or more."
E sia la sua dormicio del malaute sobre le sieu dos, e las sieuas mas sian sobre le stomac.	"And let his bed be inclined upwards at the head so that he may sleep comfortably and have his hands on his stomach."
E pausa sobre le adjutori cocena plena de lana engualment, e considera en tota hora de la nueyt o del dia que no sia deliada ni dissolta la figura del membre trencat, o que sia le liament mollificat, donc rectifica aquo tot am la tua vertut.	"And place over the cooking support a full pot of wool wadding and consider every hour of the night or day that the figure of the broken limb is not displaced nor dissolved, or if the limb is softened, then correct everything with your skill."
E pausa la vianda del malaute segon le orde le qual havem denant mes, enayssi que la vianda sia subtil en le comensament entro que es comensat strenher; e lahoras cove que egrossas la vianda de lu.	"And place food for the patient according to the order which we have mentioned earlier, ensuring that the food is finely chopped at first so that it can be swallowed easily; and then gradually make the food coarser."
Quar de constuma del adjutori e de la camba de lu es que sian strengutz en xl dias; e lahoras cove que sian desliatz e sia administrat banh e sia medicat am enguentz los quals rectifican aquel.	"However, it is customary for the splint and bandage to be left on for 40 days, after which they should be removed and a warm bath administered along with medicines that will correct any remaining issues."
E si la fractura es layha atrita, lahoras tu no deslies de aquela le liament e las stelhas entro a l dias o entro a dos meses.	"And if the fracture is still unhealed, do not remove the limb and splints for up to 10 days or even up to two months."
Capitol .xii.	"Chapter XII."
De restauracio de fractura del bras.	"On the reduction of fractures of the arm."
Bras es compost de dos osses les quals so appelatz dos focils; dels quals la un es petit, e es aquel que siec le dit pous, e l’autre es gran e es aquel le qual es pausat dejos le petit dit, de la partida pus dejus.	"The arm consists of two bones called the 'two forks'; one is small and it is this that supports the thumb, while the other is large and is situated below the small finger."
E fort leu es trencat le focil major solament, o le petit, e fort leu son trincatz ensemps.	"And sometimes only the larger fork may be fractured, or just the smaller one, but it also happens that they are both broken together."
E quan es trencat le focil petit desus, lahoras la restauracio de lu es leugiera, e la sanacio de lu es pus leugiera.	"And when the small fork is fractured above, its reduction will be easier and its healing will also be quicker."
E quan es trencat le focil de lu dejos la fractura de lu es mala, e la sanacio de lu es dificil.	"However, when the fork of the arm below the fracture is broken, its reduction is difficult and its healing is slow."
E pus mala de aquela es quan son trencatz dos osses essemps.	"And it is even worse when both bones are fractured together."
Donc si l’os le qual es trencat es le focil petit desus, lahoras es convenient al metge, deves la restauracio de lu, que pauze petita extencio am facilitat entro que aquel sia engualhat.	"Therefore, if the bone that is fractured is the small fork above, it is appropriate for the physician to perform its reduction by gently pulling on it until it becomes straight."
Mays si le focil gran es aquo que es trincat, lahoras cove que pause extencio pus vehement.	"But if it is the large fork that is broken, then more forceful traction must be applied."
E si les dos focils so ensemps trincatz, lahoras cove que tu pauses la extritura mot pus fort.	"And if both forks are broken together, then you must apply traction with even greater force."
E cove que pauses la figura de la ma deves la restauracio de lu e la extencio de lu estenduda sobre un coyssi, e sia le pols de la ma a las partidas desus, pus aut que totz les autres ditz, e le dit auricular sia pus bas dels autres ditz, e le malaute sia cezent sobre una cezela cayrada.	"And during the reduction and traction of the arm, it is necessary for the hand to be placed on a pillow with the palm facing upwards, and for the thumb to be kept above all the other fingers and for the patient to be centered on a well-cushioned chair."
E sia un coyssi denant lu en la altetut o endreyt de lu, per so que·l malaute no encorra trebalh.	"And place a pillow in front of him at the level of his elbow or shoulder, so that he does not exert himself."
E aprop le ministre extenda le bras de la partida pus dejos am la sieua ma o am liament, e autre ministre extenda desus semblantment.	"Then one assistant should extend the arm from below with their hand or a bandage, while another assistant extends it from above in the same manner."
E aprop le metge engualhe le os entro que redugua aquel segon la milhor figura que pot.	"And then the physician should align the bone so that it can be reduced to its best possible position."
E si en la factura del os so satagias, lahoras te perforsa raduzir tota pessa en le sieu loc am la tua vertut.	"If during the reduction of the bone any resistance is felt, then you must use all your skill to overcome it and reduce it completely into its place."
E si appar en lu satagia separada que punh la codena e no es a tu speransa en la restauracio de lu, lahoras tu fen sobre lu e osta aquela segon la manieyra la qual havem dita desus.	"And if during reduction it appears that the elbow joint is dislocated and this was not expected, then you must reduce it according to the method which we have described above."
Mays si la fractura es am plagua, yeu ja he fayt ad aquo capitol singular, e donc pren la curacio de aquel.	"But if the fracture is accompanied by inflammation, I have already spoken of this in another chapter, so take care to treat it accordingly."
E si accideys apostema caut al comensament de la tua restauracio, lahoras tu lineys un drap am cerot fayt de oli rozat e cera blanca, e sia migier entre specitut e subtilitat, e strenh drap sobre aquel am strictura subtil entro que le apostema sia cedat; e lahoras remau le cerot e pausa emplastre preparat de polvera de moli am clayre de huou, e aprop pausa stelhas; e sia la stela la qual es pauzada sobre aquela fractura pus lada e pus fort.	"And if an abscess forms at the beginning of your reduction, then take a cloth soaked in cerot made from rose oil and white wax, which should be neither too thick nor too thin, and apply it with gentle pressure until the abscess subsides. Then remove the cerot and apply a plaster made from powdered mallow with clay of egg whites, along with splints; and ensure that the splint placed over the fracture is broad and strong."
E sapias que·l nombre de las stelas del bras so vi en las majors disposicios, o sia la fractura en un focil o en dos focils ensemps.	"And know that in the case of fractures of the arm, it usually requires from two to four splints, depending on whether there is a fracture of one fork or both forks together."
E aprop pausa la tua strictura sobre le loc de la fractura pus fort e pus vehement, e quan mays sira la extrictura a las partidas desus de la fractura o a las partidas pus bassas de lu, pausa la strictura un pauc pus molh segon que es precedida la rememoracio de lu en le comensament del capitol.	"And then apply your bandage over the site of the fracture with great force and firmness; but if the traction is towards the upper part of the fracture or below it, then apply the bandage a little more loosely according to what was said at the beginning of this chapter."
E les draps que so envolopatz sobre la fractura sian draps mols humitz, e no sian durs ni aspres, e·l fiel am le qual es strenhut sia de li propriament migier entre subtil e gros, ayssi cum havem recomtat.	"And the bandages wrapped around the fracture should be soft and moist, not hard or rough; and the plaster with which it is strengthened should be neither too thick nor too thin, as we have recommended."
E considera le membre e·l liament aprop alcus dias.	"And consider the limb and splint after several days."
E si accideys alcuna causa de la qual rectificacio es necessaria, ayssi cum prusiment le qual accideys al membre, e lahoras cove que tu enbroques le membre am aygua cauda entro que cesse aquel pruziment.	"And if any cause arises which requires adjustment, such as swelling of the limb, then you must immerse the limb in warm water until the swelling ceases."
E leysses le membre no costreyt entro que repause, e aprop torna la strictura.	"Then allow the limb to rest without constraint until it has regained its strength, and then reapply the bandage."
E si la extrictura ja es mollificada e l’os ja es remaugut e semblantz ad aquels, lahoras rectifiqua tot aquo am la tua vertut.	"And if the traction is softened and the bone has returned to its proper position, then correct everything with your skill."
E considera mays si le nutriment es prohibit pervenir al membre per superfluitat de strictura, quar lahoras cove que mollifiques aquel un petit e laysses aquel per alcus dias entro que corra ad aquel le nutriment, e aprop strenh aquel.	"And also consider whether the limb is being deprived of nutrition due to excessive tightness of the bandage; if so, then loosen it a little and leave it like that for several days until nourishment can reach the limb again, and then reapply it."
Mays si al malaute no accideys alcuna causa de aquelas que havem ditas, lahoras no cove que sia desliat entro aprop xx dias o enviro de aquels.	"But if the patient does not experience any of the causes that we have mentioned, then it is not necessary to remove the bandage for at least twenty days or so."
E aprop sia suspenduda la ma del malaute per la sua vertut de movement agitatius, e fay aquel dormir sobre le sieu dos.	"And then hang the patient's hand from its own strength of movement, and have them lie on their back to sleep."
E sapias que aquesta fractura es restaurada en xxx dias o en xxxii dias, o fort leu es restaurada en xxviii dias, e tot aquo es segon la disposicio de las compleccios e las disposicios de la vertut.	"And know that this fracture is usually restored in thirty days or thirty-two days, but it may be restored even more quickly depending on the disposition of the complexion and the strength of the individual."
Capitol .xiii.	"Chapter XIII."
De restauracio de fractura de la pinche de la ma e dels ditz.	"On the restoration of fractures of the little finger and those mentioned above."
Sapias que a la pinche de la ma e als nuzes dels ditz tart endeve fractura, e no accideys a lor sino atricio motas veguadas.	"You should know that in the little finger and the toes of the said hand, fracture often occurs, but this rarely happens except for contusions many times."
E quan accideys a la ma fractura o atrissio, lahoras cove que·l malaute segua cayrat e denant lu lies cezent segon equalitat, e aprop pausa la ma de lu sobre aquela extenduda.	"And when fracture or contusion occurs in the hand, it is necessary for the patient to lie down and rest on their back with their arms at equal height, placing the affected hand gently above the other extended one."
E aprop le ministre extenda les osses trencatz e·l metge engualhe aquels entro que sian congongitz am bona congoncio.	"And then the servant extends the broken bones and the doctor puts them back together so that they fit well with good alignment."
E lahoras cove que pause emplastre e estopa, si no accideys apostema caut; e aprop pausa stela desus segon la quantitat del loc, e tu ja has envolopada aquela en drap de li.	"And then it is necessary to apply a plaster and gauze, unless there is a wound that needs cauterization. Afterwards, the splint should be applied on top according to the size of the location, and you already have that wrapped in linen cloth."
Mays si la trincadura es en las partidas dedintz deves le ventre de la palma, e lahoras fay semblant de spera de drap, e comanda al malaute que strenha aquela am la sua palma trincada; aprop sia strenguda am drap lonc.	"But if the fracture is on the inner side of the palm near the belly of the hand, then make a similar bandage out of cloth and command the patient to hold that with their palm wrapped tightly; afterwards it should be wrapped with a long cloth."
E sia la stelha de cuer am drap en le qual sia levitat, per so que le cuer sia aplicat a la palma; e strenh aquela segon que cove.	"And let the splint be made of leather covered in cloth so that the leather adheres to the palm. And wrap it according to what is necessary."
Mays si la fractura es a las partidas defora, lahoras cove que pauses desus stela e autre estela de la partida dejos en la palma, per so que la ma sia uberta e dreyta; e aprop pausa la strictura, ayssi cum es revolvuda la ma a la rateta entre les ditz am liamentz.	"But if the fracture is on the outer side of the palm, then it is necessary to apply splints above and below the metacarpal bones on the palm so that the hand is elevated and straight. And afterwards bind with a bandage, as if wrapping around a nut between these said ligaments."
E si accideys fractura a alcu dels nozes dels ditz, lahoras si es le dit pous, sia engualat segon que cove e aprop sia strenhut am la palma e si·t voles, pausa a lu astela petita dreyta per so que sia elevada la fractura e no sia mauguda.	"And if there is a fracture in one of the bones of the said fingers, then if it is the thumb, it should be aligned as necessary and then wrapped around the palm. And if you wish, apply a small splint on top to elevate the fracture and prevent movement."
Mays si la fractura es en les autres ditz, ayssi cum en aquel del mieg loc, o en le indic, o en le auricular, o en le anular, lahoras sia engualhat e liat am le dit sa le qual siec aquel; o sian totz liatz segon continuacio, e es milhor; o pausa sobre aquel stela petita, ayssi cum havem dit en le pous.	"But if the fracture is in one of these fingers such as the middle finger, index finger, ring finger or little finger, then align it and wrap it with its respective finger. Or they can all be wrapped together continuously, which is better. Or apply a small splint on top, as we have said for the thumb."
E considera, en la tua restauracio, e aprop aquela, la disposicio de apostema caut e oppose — am la tieua operacio — am aquo que cove quan accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, segon que es iterada la narracio de lu.	"And consider, in your treatment, and especially that one, the position of an abscess if it is hot and opposed — with your operation — to what should be done when such a cause occurs according to what has been said about this."
Capitol .xiv.	"Chapter XIV"
De restauracio de fractura del os de la coyssa.	"On the treatment of fractures of the hipbone."
Le os de la cueyssa motas veguadas es trencat e es declarat al sentiment segon que es convertit a la partida denant e a la pus sobirana.	"The hip bone of the thigh is often broken, its condition declared by feeling according to its transformation at the groin and the pubic region."
E la restauracio de lu se fa enayssi que·l liament es strenhut sobre la fractura e autre liament dejos la fractura, e le malaute sia prostrat sobre le sieu ventre e sobre la cara.	"And its restoration is accomplished in such a way that the ligaments are stretched over the fracture and other ligaments leave the fracture, and the patient lies prostrate on their stomach and face."
E aprop le ministre extenda tot le liament a la sua partida segon la qualitat, quan la fractura es en le mieg loc del os.	"And accordingly, the minister extends all the ligament to its part according to its quality when the fracture is in the middle of the bone."
Mays si es propdana a la razitz de la cueyssa, lahoras sia le liament propda al denolh a la partida del pentenilh, per so que la extencio caja en sus, e le autre liament dejos la fractura.	"But if it is displaced at the root of the thigh, then the ligament should be brought close to the back at the part of the knee, so that the extension goes downwards, and the other ligament leaves the fracture."
E semblantment si la trencadura es propdana al denolh, lahoras sia fayt le liament propda al denol, e sia la extencio a las partidas dejos.	"And similarly, if the break is displaced at the back, then the ligament should be brought close to the back and the extension should go to the parts that are left."
E aprop le metge enguale le os am amduas las sieuas mas entro que reduzesca aquel segon la semblansa natural e l’os es conjungit per bona conjunccio; lahoras cove que pauses emplastre e strictura, si no accideys al membre apostema.	"And accordingly the doctor tightens the bone on both its sides until it reduces according to its natural shape and the bone is joined by good union. At this point it is necessary to apply plaster and strapping, so that there may not occur gangrene in the limb."
Mays si accideys en lu apostema, lahoras tu layssa aquel per alcus dias entro que l’apostema caut sia cedat, e aprop retorna a la tua curacio.	"But if gangrene occurs, then you should leave it for several days until the gangrene is completely healed and then return to your treatment."
La strictura de lu sia ayssi fayta: cove que envolopes sobre la fractura una benda dura, e dobla aquela dos o tres veguadas, e remaugua de lu superfluitat; e aprop envolopa la camba entro que pervengua al talo e a la razitz de la cueyssa.	"The strapping should be done in this way: you should wrap a firm bandage over the fracture and fold it two or three times, removing any excess. Then you should wrap the leg so that it reaches the ankle and root of the thigh."
E intromet lonc fiel entre la cueyssa e la camba prop del denol a las partidas dejos, e venguan las extremitatz del fiel de la partida pus sobirana de las doas partz, e aprop revolveys sobre la camba e la cueyssa aquo que superflueys de la benda.	"And you should insert a long needle between the thigh and the leg near the knee joint on both sides. Then bring the ends of the thread out from above each of the two parts, and then wind them around the leg and thigh to remove any excess bandage."
E aprop pausa sobre la cueyssa en le loc de aquela fractura astelhas, e pausa de aquelas una stela sobre le os de la camba.	"And then you should tie it over the thigh at the site of that fracture once or twice, and tie one knot on the bone of the leg."
E aprop uempli las vacuitatz entre la camba e la cuoyssa am draps mols, per so que sia coagulada la extrictura.	"And then fill in any spaces between the leg and thigh with soft cloths, so that the strapping is firm."
E aprop comensa am strictura fort del mieg sobre le loc de la fractura am tres envolucios o quatre, e quant mays tu te alonhas am liament del loc de la fractura, la tua strictura sia menor e pus leugiera e pus molha.	"And then you should begin with a strong strapping of the middle over the site of the fracture with three or four wraps. And whenever you tighten the ligament at the site of the fracture, your strapping should be looser and lighter and softer."
E aprop exten a doas extremitatz del fiel a las partidas dejos entro que pervengua a la cavilha del pe, e strenh amdoas las extremitatz de las stelhas del autra part per so que·l liament no sia remaugut del sieu loc.	"And then extend both ends of the thread to the ankle joint on both sides, and tighten them with knots on the other side so that the ligament does not come loose from its place."
E aprop leyssa la strectura sobre aquel, don esta ayssi que no accideys al membre corrosio ni apostema caut ni emflacio e semblantz ad aquels; e si accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, adonc cueta te am desliament de lu, e rectifica aquo que accideys tot aprop, segon que havem dit motas veguadas.	"And then leave the strapping on until there is no occurrence of corrosion of the limb, gangrene, cauterization, inflammation or resemblance to those. And if any such condition occurs, then you should remove it immediately and correct what has happened at once, as we have said many times."
Mays si en le os es pessa del os la qual pongua, lahoras cove que tu engualhes aquel segon que a tu es possibla; e sino, fen sobre lu e remau aquel, e cura am aquo del qual es precedida la rememoracio entro que sia sanat.	"But if the bone sticks out where it has been broken, then you should reduce it as much as possible. And if not, then make a cut over it and remove that, and treat it with what is customary for such cases until it heals."
E alcunas veguadas es strenhuda aquesta fractura de la coyssa otra aquo que sian ajustadas a lu stelhas, ayssi cum havem dit en le adjutori e·n le bras.	"And sometimes this fracture of the thigh is strengthened with stitches tied around it as we have said in the case of the adjutator and the arm."
Mays empero en la restauracio de lu en tal manieyra fayta no accideys al malaute claudicacio; e si es restaurada sola, otra aquo que li sia applicada l’autra camba, lahoras es necessari que claudique aquel del qual es tostemps.	"But however you restore it in this way, do not let the patient limp. And if it is restored alone, without applying the other leg, then it will be necessary for him to limp."
E sapias que la coyssa es strenhuda en xl dias o un pauc mes o un pauc mens, e tot aquo es segon la diversitat de las compleccios e de las autras dispozicios.	"And know that the thigh is strengthened in forty days or a few months, depending on the diversity of constitutions and other conditions."
Capitol .xv.	"Chapter XV."
De restauracio de la fractura de la rodela del denolh.	"On the restoration of a fracture of the kneecap."
Sapias que fractura de la rodela del denol tart endeve, mays accideys a lu motas veguadas atrissio.	"You should know that a fracture of the patella rarely happens on its own, but often occurs along with bruising."
Mays si accideys a lu fractura, lahoras no es sino fissura o trauc en las suas partidas, e aquo es am plagua o ses plagua, e sobre aquo tot es estat am le sentiment.	"But if it does happen, then it is only a crack or split in its parts, and this is with pain or without pain. And that is all about the sensation."
E la restauracio de lu es enayssi que sia engualat aquo que es romput de las partidas de lu am les ditz entro que sia agreguat e conjongit segon que es possible per equacio e facilitat e fabricacio.	"To restore him, it is necessary that what has been broken in his limbs be bound with the said entrails and joined together as much as possible for equality and ease of construction."
E aprop pausa emplastre e pausa sobre aquel stela redonda, si indigeysses de aquela; e strenh desus am strictura ad aquo convenient.	"Then apply plaster and compress over that round stone if needed. Then bind it with sufficient strength according to what is appropriate."
E aprop considera totas las disposicios las quals havem recomtadas en las autras fracturas, ayssi cum es apostema caut e semblant ad aquels enaissi que se oppause a tot accident am aquo que a lu es convenient entro que sia sanat.	"And consider all the dispositions which we have recommended in other fractures, thus as if it were an apostem caut and similar to those so that it opposes all accidents with what is convenient for him until he is healed."
Capitol .xvi.	"Chapter XVI"
De restauracio de la fractura de la camba.	"Of the restoration of a fracture of the thighbone."
Sapias que en la camba so dos osses dels quals la un es gros, e es le nompnat per nom de la camba; e l’autra es subtil, e es nompnat focil.	"Know that in the thighbone there are two bones of which one is thick and is called by the name 'thighbone'; and the other is thin, and is called 'focil'."
E accideys a quascus de las specias de fractura aquo que accideys als dos osses del bras, e per aquo es fayta restauracio de lu ayssi cum restauracio del bras engualment, e la operacio de lu es una.	"And it happens to some of the kinds of fracture that happen to the two bones of the arm, and therefore its restoration is made like the restoration of the arm simultaneously, and its operation is one."
E si so trincatz dos osses ensemps, la camba es convertida a totas partidas.	"And if both bones are broken together, the thighbone becomes completely shattered."
E si es trinquat le os pus subtil, la camba es convertida a las partidas Denant.	"If only the thin bone is broken, the thighbone becomes partially broken anteriorly."
E si es trincat le os pus gros, atrobas aquel dejos, e es de aquelas causas que no so a tu ameguadas.	"And if only the thick bone is broken, it remains behind that one, and it belongs to those causes which are not simultaneous ones."
E aprop aministra extencio e equacio e liguacio de las astelas segon aquel engualment.	"And therefore administer extension and equatio and ligament of the splinters according to this equality."
Mays empero cove, si la fractura de la camba es laja havent motas satagias, que la extencio sia mendre e pus leugiera, e alleuja am la tua vertut.	"But nevertheless it is necessary, if the fracture of the thighbone is high having many attempts, that extension be lesser and lighter, and alleviate with your virtue."
E en la camba es alcuna causa de operacio sobre le bras, e es quan tu engualas las stelhas e que comples tota la tieua operacio, lahoras tu prendras pessas de fustz de pi le qual es pausat dejos las cauzas las quals so pausades en solies, e so faytas eyssament de brancas de palma; aligeys de aquelas a las quals es petita groceza, e no sia ges de las manudas, e sia la longuesa de aquelas segon la longuesa de la camba, e del denol entro al pus dejos.	"And in the thighbone there is some cause of operation over the arm, and it is when you align the splinters and complete all your operation, then you will take pieces of wood from pine which is placed behind the causes which are placed below, and they are made similarly to branches of palm; select those that are less thick and not too many, and their length should be according to the length of the thighbone, and from the navel to the middle."
E aprop envolopa sobre quascuna drap en doas envolucios segon la longitut de lu, e pausa la una sobre la partida de la camba de la una part e l’autra del autra part, e sian del denol entro al pus bas loc del pe.	"And therefore wrap it around each rope in two wrappings according to its length, and place one on the fracture of the thighbone on one side and the other on the other side, and they should be from the navel to about a third below the knee."
E aprop lias las doas stelhas en tres locs de doas extremitatz e al mieg loc, quar am aquesta strectura la camba es prohibida de clinar a la partida dextra e sinistra, e sta per bona stacio.	"And therefore bind the two splinters in three places on both extremities and at the middle one, for with this strapping the thighbone is prevented from bending to the right or left side, and stands in good position."
E ja es aministrat un brasset de fust segon la longuesa de la camba; e sia pausada en lu la camba per so que conserve aquel de movement.	"And now a splint of wood according to the length of the thighbone has been administered; and it is placed on it so that it retains its movement."
E majorment cove que tu fassas aquo en fractura, e quan am aquela es plagua propriament.	"Especially it is necessary that you do this in fracture, especially when with it there is abundant bleeding."
E aprop considera en quascun jorn la camba e studia am aquel per derier studi, e tu le guardes de apostema e de imflacio o de autres causas semblantz; e cum accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, lahoras opausa te a lu am aquo que cove entro que sia sanat.	"And therefore examine the thighbone every day and study with it for final study, and you guard against apostema and inflammation or other similar causes; and whenever some cause of those occurs, then place it on it again with what is necessary until it is healed."
Capitol .xvii.	"Chapter XVII."
De la fractura del talo e dels osses del pe e dels ditz.	"Of the fracture of the ankle bone and of the bones of the foot and of those ones."
Al talo no accideys fractura de tot; mays als osses del pe accideys fractura alcunas veguadas; e als ditz del pe pauc accideys fractura, e no accideys a lor sino atricio en las mes de disposicio.	"In the heel, there is no fracture ever; but in the bones of the foot, fractures happen sometimes; and in those of the foot, scarcely ever, and only attrition occurs during periods of disposition."
E si als osses del pe endeve fractura e vezes aquels osses esser elevatz sobre si entre lor, lahoras le malaute pause le sieu pe sobre la terra preparat ayssi cum anant.	"If the bones of the foot happen to be fractured, sometimes those bones become elevated above themselves among them, then the patient places their foot on the ground prepared thus while walking."
E aprop pausa la un pe sobre aquo que es elevat de aquels osses, e aprop calca aquels, e prem, e engualha aquels entro que torno en los locs.	"And properly pauses the foot over that which is elevated by those bones, and presses them down, grinds them, and pinches them around where they return."
E aprop pausa emplastre e stopa desus, e pausa dejos le ventre del pe una petita taula a la qual sian dos caps plas.	"And properly applies plaster and stops on top, and places under the sole of the foot a small table with two flat heads."
E aprop strenh aquela am le pe am strectura descent, pus que tu has envolopada aquela am draps e am autres causes de las quals indigeys.	"And properly stretch that ankle with downward traction, since you have wrapped it with cloths and other causes of which you stand in need."
E cum a lu passan tres dias o quatre, lahoras tu deslia le liament, quar tu atrobaras les osses engualatz, o sian trincatz o sian dislocatz, e la operacio en aquels es ayssi co coneysses.	"And after three or four days have passed, then you untie the bandage, for you will find the bones squeezed together, either pinched or displaced, and the operation in those is thus known."
Mays si alcus ditz son trincatz, lahoras restaura aquels, e enguala aquels ayssi cum yeu e recomtat a tu en la restauracio dels ditz de la ma.	"But if some are pinched together, then you restore them and squeeze them thus with oil and join them together as you would in the restoration of those fingers."
E aprop pausa al dit trincat stela segon la longitut del dit, e sia pus lada de lu un pauc; e aprop dejos le pe aquesta taula la qual e a tu recomtada, e strenh aquela am strictura decent.	"And properly applies splint to the pinched finger according to its length, and places it thus with some slant; and properly places under the foot this table which has been recommended to you, and stretches that ankle with downward traction."
Mays si aquo que es trincat dels osses so dos o tres o mays, lahoras tu pausa sobre quascun dit astela de la sua quantitat envolopada en drap leon, e strenh la taula en le pus bas del pe, e sia stant sobre la un dels caps de la taula foro le ventre del pe per que la tengua am bona retencio.	"But if what is pinched among the bones are two or three or more, then you apply splints to each finger according to its quantity wrapped in lion's skin, and stretches the table under the sole of the foot, with one of the heads of the table facing up towards the sole of the foot so that it may have good retention."
E es convenient a tu que no oblides que no consideres totas las causas las quals que e ditas a tu en las autras fracturas dels accidentz que havem dit; e opausa te a tot accident am aquo que cove.	"And remember, do not neglect that you should not consider all the causes which have been mentioned to you in the other fractures of accidents that we have said; and apply treatment according to each accident with what is appropriate."
Capitol .xviii.	"Chapter XVIII."
De fractura del conh de la femna e del os del pentenilh e de la vergua del home.	"Of the fracture of the hip bone in women and of the bone of the pubis and the penis in men."
Quan le conh de la femna es trincat, lahoras fay aquela ceser en cezela cayrada, e aprop enclina aquela a la partida del dos un petit, e sia tenguda detras.	"When the hip bone of a woman is pinched together, then cut that with this saw, and properly incline it at the junction of both sides slightly towards the back."
E aprop la matrona umpla le conh de coto, e sia fayt en le conh de lu ayssi cum spera; e aprop la femna sia concutida, e eleva le dos de lu petit a petit, quar tot aquo es fora-getat entro que sia denant la partida del conh ayssi cum spera e l’os trincat retorna.	"And properly the midwife pushes the hip bone together and makes it so that it may fit together like a sphere; and properly the woman is turned upside down, and gradually lifts up both sides of her until all is forgotten before the hip bone comes to fit together like a sphere with the bones pinched together."
E aprop pausa pulvils sobre le dos de lu, e quan vol urinar remaugua le coto am facilitat e aprop urine, e reduzeys e retorna aquel segon la manieyra segon la qual mezist aquel al comensament, e aprop retorne al sieu pulvil primier.	"And properly applies powders on the hip bone, and when she wants to urinate, gently moves the hip bone with ease and then she urinates, and reduces it back again in the manner by which it was moved at the beginning, and then returns to her first powder."
E fassa ayssi per vii dias o enviro aquels, quar aquel es restaurat.	"And do this for seven days or about those days, because that is restored."
E si voles, pren una vezica de ovela e strenh sobre le trauc de lu una canula de canavera; e entromet tota la vesica en le conh de lu, e aprop ensuffla en la canula am vertut entro que la vesica sia imflada dedintz le conh, quar la fractura retorna.	"And if you wish, take an ovine bladder and stretch over the hip bone a reed cannula; and introduce all of the bladder into the hip bone, and then insufflate through the cannula with force until the bladder is inflated within the hip bone because the fracture returns."
E aprop sia umplida de coto e estia per alcus dias segon que havem recomtat, entro que sia sanat.	"And properly she is turned upright and stays like that for some days as we have recommended, until it is healed."
E quan le os del pentenil de home o de femna es trincat, lahoras aministra en la restauracio e agulacio de lu aquo que havem recomtat en l’os del anca.	"And when the bone of the pubis in a man or woman is pinched together, then administers in its restoration and fixation that which we have recommended for the hip bone."
E aquo que es dreyt no es occultat en aquestas fracturas proprinquas e que pauc endeveno, majorment ad aquel al qual es alcun studi e us e enten aquest meu libre mot; quar aquela fractura significa a tu en las majors disposicios via dreyturiera en la restauracio e en la strictura de lu, e donc enten be.	"And that which is right is not hidden in these fractures close together and which have little expense, especially for those who study much and use and understand this my book; because that fracture signifies to you the greatest positions straight up in the restoration and tightening of it, and therefore understand well."
Mays en la vergua del home quan es trincada, pren guarguamela de auca, e met la vergua en aquela; e aprop pausa sobre lu envolucio de drap, e sia envolopada, e aprop sia layssada per tres dias o enviro aquels, e sia sanada.	"But in the penis of a man when it is pinched together, take a gourd of oil and put the penis into that; and properly applies around it wrapping with cloth, and then leaves it for three days or about those days, and it will be healed."
Capitol .xix.	"Chapter XIX."
De restauracio de fractura dels osses quan es am plagua.	"Of the restoration of fractures of bones when they are with pus."
Convenient es ad aquel al qual accideys fractura am plagua, e majorment si le os es gran ayssi cum es le os de la cuoyssa o de l’adjutori, o semblant ad aquel, que tu te cuoytes e fleubotomes aquel tantost si las condicios de fleubotomia a tu o testifican ayssi cum desus havem dit.	"It is convenient for that one to whom it happens a fracture with pus, especially if the bone is large such as the thighbone or humerus, or similar to that one of which you are careful and perform phlebotomy at once if the conditions for phlebotomy to you or testify like this as we have said above."
E si la plagua eflueys sanc, lahoras cove que tu te coytes a la retencio de lu enayssi que tu polverizes sobre lu zegi trissat, si a tu autra causa no es present.	"And if the pus flows out bloody, then it is necessary for you to retain that in such a way that you powder over it with dry plaster, unless another cause is present."
E aprop comensa restaurar la fractura en aquel meteys dia, e no prolongues aquo, si no accideys apostema.	"And properly begins restoring the fracture on that same day, and do not prolong it if otherwise an abscess does not occur."
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras tu layssa la restauracio de lu entro al ix dia, entro que sia cedat le apostema, e no apropinques a lu en le tertz dia e·l iiii de tot, quar tu faras accidir mals accidentz.	"But if an abscess occurs hard, then you leave the restoration of it for nine days until the abscess is softened, and do not approach it on the third or fourth day of all, because you will cause bad accidents."
Mays si le os trencat es eminent sobre la codena descubert, lahoras cove que te perforses reduzir aquel e engualar aquel am las tuas mas am facilitat e am pauca extencio.	"But if the broken bone protrudes over the uncovered elbow joint, then it is necessary for you to perforate that and reduce it and align it with your hands gently and with little extension."
Mays si extencio no es a tu preparada e la equacio de lu am las tieuas mas, lahoras tu reduzeys aquel am las tuas mas am aquest sturment; e es sturment le qual es fayt de ferr, la longitut del qual es de vii ditz o de viii e la latitut del qual es segon la quantitat de la plagua; e per aquo es necessari al metge que prengua de aquels tres o quatre segon la quantitat que indigeys ad aquo en la curacio en tota specia de fractura.	"But if extension is not prepared for you and the equating of it with your hands, then reduce that with your hands with this instrument; and this instrument is made of iron, the length of which is seven digits or eight and its width according to the quantity of pus. And therefore it is necessary for the physician to take from those three or four according to the quantity that is needed for that in the cure in all kinds of fracture."
E sia redon, e sia en lu pauca groceza per so que no sia doblat deves la comprecio sobre aquel en la hora de la operacio.	"And let it be round and let there be little roughness on it so that it is not doubled by the pressure over it at the time of the operation."
E sia de aguda extremitat al qual sia marge en las sieuas extremitatz; e sia le desus de lu a grossetut tendent, e de la maytat de lu entro a las partidas.	"And let it have an acute extremity with which to insert into its extremities; and let the top of it be thicker tending, and of its middle part thin."
E aquesta es la forma de lu:	"And this is the shape of it:"
E es nompnat en grec “labre volentz atelarem”, so es paleta pauca.	"In Greek it is named 'la brake ventez atelarem', which means little shovel."
Per que cove que sia pausada la extremitat de lu acuda elevada sobre la extremitat del os eminent.	"Why should the extremity of the leg be elevated above the prominence of the bone?"
E inpelleys aquel en una veguada entro que retorne le os, e sia engualat am alcuna equacio.	"And press it in such a way that the bone returns to its place, and remains stable with some device."
E donc esforsa te engualar las extremitatz de la fractura entre lor, e si la extremitat de lu trencada es subtil, e no pren aquela le sturment per bona axcepcio, lahoras cove que tu inscidas la extremitat de aquel os entro que l’insturment haja poder de aquo.	"And then try to align the extremities of the fracture between them. If one extremity is thin and does not take well with the tool for good reason, you should insert the extremity of that bone so that the tool has power over it."
Mays si no podes reduzir le os de tot am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras enscideys aquel am aquo que coveneys a lu dels inscizoris les quals havem ditz; o serra aquel am una de las serras en qualque manieyra sia a tu possible.	"But if you cannot reduce the bone with what has been recommended, then use whatever tool you deem fit among those mentioned; or saw it with one of the saws in whichever way is possible for you."
E aprop ratz aquel que roman en le os de asperitat e de scorsas menudas.	"And finally polish that which remains on the bone of its roughness and small scratches."
E cum le os es reduzit, e aprop la reduccio le malaute atroba dolor vehement ledent, lahoras sapias que le os no es retornat al sieu loc natural; e adonc fay aquo quar tu confereyses al malaute gran juvament.	And when the bone is reduced and yet the reduction causes the patient to feel violent pain, then know that the bone has not returned to its natural place; therefore do this that you may greatly benefit the patient.
Cum es complida la tua restauracio la qual fas al os, e lahoras submergeys drap en vi stiptic negre, e propriament si es en estiu, e no pauses sobre la plagua cerot ni autre causa en la qual sia oli, per so que no fassa en lu accidir poyredura e corropcio.	Once you have completed your reduction of the bone and then immerse a piece of linen in black wine vinegar, especially if it is summer, do not allow any grease or other ointment to remain on the surface, so that no foulness or corruption may occur.
E aprop aministra stelas en la hora del tieu compliment de la restauracio de l’os, e layssa la plagua descuberta enayssi que inscidas le trauc am forfexs e uses de envolucios segon la quantitat de la plagua.	And precisely at the time of completing your reduction of the bone, administer plaster bandages and leave the surface uncovered in such a way that you may insert them folded and use wrappings according to the quantity of the bandage.
E guarda te am tota cautela que no strenhas la plagua am la fractura, quar motas veguadas an fayt aquo les fols metges, e fero accidir sobre les sieus malautes mort o malautia corrodent o zuthement, so es sania.	And be very careful that you do not stretch the plaster bandage over the fracture, for many times foolish doctors have done this and caused harm to their patients by producing mortification or gangrene.
E si la tieua strictura leugiera, molli, diversa de la strictura de las autras fracturas.	And if your reduction is light, soft, and different from the usual reduction of other fractures.
E si la plagua es gran o es plagua mala, e temes sobre aquel alcus accidentz mals les quals havem recomtatz, e atrobas dolor en le loc, lahoras no cove que pauses sobre aquel astelas, mays fay ad aquel envolucio de draps durs en loc de stelas e strenh lu am aquelas.	And if the bandage is too large or of poor quality, and you fear that it might cause one of those harmful accidents which we have mentioned, and there is pain in the place, then it would not be appropriate to use plaster bandages. Instead, use a dressing of hard linen cloth and stretch it over with great care.
E cum aprop un dia o dos vezes ja la plagua comensar, que en lu sia engendrat brac, lahoras tu osta desus le drap le qual havias pausat sobre aquel am vi, e aprop aministra calguas, enguentz am les quals de nostra constuma es que mediquem las plaguas, ayssi cum enguentz tetrafarmacon e semblantz ad aquel.	And after about two days, when the bandage has become dry and hard, remove it carefully with vinegar. Then apply compresses to keep warm, using those of our usual custom for treating plaster bandages, such as tetrafarmacon ointment or similar ones.
E conveneys a tu que deslias le liament e considera la plagua en quascun dia mati e vespre entro que sia consolidada e fermada, e cove que·l membre sia preparat en tal manieyra que la poyredura corra de lu a las partidas dejos am facilitat.	You should also remove the lining and examine the bandage every morning and evening until it is consolidated and firm. Make sure that the limb is positioned in such a way that the pus can flow easily from the wound to its outer parts.
si a la plagua passan motz dias, e no es consolidada ni es abscindit de lu le brac, lahoras sapias que aqui so satagias de las petitas per que cove enquieras la plagua am tenta.	If many days have passed and the plaster bandage is not consolidated nor separated from the limb, then you should know that this is due to some small errors. Therefore, you should examine the bandage with care.
E de aquelas satagias aquelas que so separadas remau e extratz, aquelas que de lor no so separadas e pongen le membre e fan accidir dolor, perforsa te a inscidir aquelas segon que a tu aquo es possibla.	And of those errors, those that are separated and removed should be replaced, while those that do not separate but compress the limb and cause pain should be incised according to what is possible for you to do.
E si accideys a la plagua zuchem o eluchen, so es stiomenios, o autra specia de corrupcio e de putrefaccio, lahoras cove que pauses a quada un de aquels am aquo que conveneys a lu de la curacio del qual es precedida narracio en le sieu capitol.	And if the bandage becomes warm or inflamed, this is a sign of inflammation or some other kind of corruption and putrefaction. Therefore, you should pause here for one of those which are mentioned in their own chapter regarding its treatment.
E de aquo en le qual cove que stia lo mieu sermo e tu fassas present la tua pessa: quan os gros es trincat, emineys sobre le membre ayssi cum le os de la coyssa e del ajutori e semblantz ad aquels dels membres grans, e que no presumas atraccio de lu, ni la extraccio de lu quar motas veguadas accideys per aquo la mort; habantz layssa aquel entro que poyresca, quar fort leu cayra per si aprop xx dias o xxx; e lahoras cura la plagua si a tu es vist, e si no layssa aquela.	And as for this matter where I should speak more plainly and you present your opinion: when the bone is crushed, do not attempt to expose it like the bones of the wrist or elbow or similar ones of the large limbs. Do not try to attract it nor extract it because many times death has occurred due to this. Leave that alone until it has fallen out by itself in about twenty to thirty days. Then treat the wound if you can see it, otherwise leave it be.
Capitol .xx.	Chapter XX.
De la curacio de nodacio que accideys en le vestigi de alcuna fractura.	Of the treatment of node formation that occurs at the site of some fracture.
Motas veguadas accideys aquesta nodacio en le vestigi de sanacio de fractura, e majorment que es prop de las juncturas, e es orrasada per lu la figura del membre; e fort leu prohibeys le membre de la sua operacio natural.	Very often node formation occurs at the site of fracture healing, especially near joints, and it distorts the shape of the limb, preventing its natural movement.
Adonc considera si la nodacio es recent e aministra en aquela medicinas que han stipticat ayssi co es aloen, e enses, e mira, e sercacollo, e acrassia, e semblantz ad aquels; enayssi que prenguas de aquela alcunas o totas, e comfesiys aquelas am vi stiptic, o am album de huou, o am vi agre, e pausa aquela sobre la nodacio en estopa, e constringeys aquelas sobre lu per bona constriccio.	Therefore, if the node is recent, apply to it medicines that have astringent properties such as Aloes, Rue, and Myrrh. Also consider using Serracollo or Acacia and similar ones. Take some of these and mix them with wine that has been astringent, or with albumen of egg white, or with vinegar, and apply this mixture to the node using linen cloth, securing it with a good dressing.
E leyssa extrictura que no deslies aquela per motz dias; e aprop deslia aquela e itera autra, entro que sia remauguda la nodacio; o strenh sobre aquela lamina de plom descentment, quar plom ha proprietat de remaure tot aquo que es imflat en les membres.	"Leave the bandage on for several days without removing it; then remove it and apply another until the swelling has gone down; or press this sheet of lead descended onto it, for lead has the property to reduce everything that is swollen in the members."
Mays si nodacio ja es en peyra convertida e streyta es e nessessitat provoca a ostar aquela coytadament, e lahoras scindeys aquela per la partida pus sobirana de lu, e inscideys la superfluitat e eminent, o ratz aquela am alcus rezoris entro que sia remauguda; e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	"If the swelling has already turned into bone and needs to be cut open, then carefully cut it along the upper part of the wound, incise the excess flesh and membrane, then rinse it with warm water until it is healed."
Capitol .xxi.	"Chapter XX."
De restauracio de fractura quan es restaurada e aprop aquo roman le membre subtil e freul no segon la sieua natura.	"The restoration of a fracture when it has been restored, and if the limb remains subtle and does not grow according to its nature."
Quan fractura de os es restaurada, e aprop aquo roman le membre subtil e freul, lahoras aquo no es fayt sino per motas causas: de las quals la una es multitut de solucio del liament e de la liguacio de lu fayta no segon que cove; o per superfluitat de strictura dels liamentz entro que·l nutriment sia prohibit correr al membre; o per multitut de embrocaccio superflua; o per movement superfluent no en la sua hora; o per pauquesa de sanc en le cors del malaute e per debelitat de lu.	"When a bone fracture is restored, and if the limb remains subtle and frail, this usually happens for several reasons: one of which is an excess of solution of the ligaments and their formation not according to what is appropriate; or due to excess scarring of the ligaments preventing proper nutrition from reaching the limb; or due to excessive broaching of joints; or due to excessive movement not at its proper time; or due to weakness of blood in the body and debility."
E curacio de aquo es dar a mengar al malaute e far le cor de lu tendre entro que·l sanc sia multiplicat en lu; e aministra banh; e entromet gaug e leticia sobre lu.	"The treatment for this is to give the patient food so that their body becomes robust and blood is multiplied within them; administer baths; and apply warmth and joy upon them."
E aprop pausa pegua sobre le membre, per so que la pegua atire a lu mot nutriment, o continua embrocacio de lu am aygua tebeza, entro que·l nutriment corr e retorne a la sua figura natural.	"And if there is still weakness in the limb, apply a plaster above it so that the plaster draws out excess moisture, or continue to massage it with warm water until nutrition returns to its natural state."
Capitol .xxii.	"Chapter XXII"
De curacio dels osses trincatz quan so restauratz tortuozament e prohibeys la operacio de lor de aquo que cove.	"Regarding the treatment of crushed bones that are restored crookedly and require surgical correction."
Quan accideys al membre ja restaurat aprop la sanacio de lu de tortuositat e eminencia al os trincat e nodacio, e es per aquo fededa de forma del membre, mays empero le membre no es prohibit de la sieua operacio natural, lahora no cove que tu recipias la paraula de aquel que exsistima aquel membre sia de novel trincat.	"When it happens that a limb has healed with crookedness and prominence at the crushed bone site, causing deformity of the limb but not preventing its natural operation, then do not listen to those who claim that the limb is newly crushed."
Mays ja so statz motz fols metges e restauradors les quals han fayt aquo en nostra tera; e aquesta operacio es mot vituperable perduzent a gran temor le senhal de la qual es mortal.	"But many foolish doctors and healers have done this in our land, and this operation is very blameworthy and leads to great fear whose sign is death."
Mays si claudicacio e nodacio son recentz, lahoras cove que sian enbrocatz am aygua tebeza en la qual so coytas erbas mollificantz, ayssi cum son fuelas de altea e razitz de lu, e mellilot, e semblantz ad aquels; e sia fayt a lu emplastre am emplastre mollificatio ayssi cum dyallaquilon ben fayt; o que sia preza mucillage de razit de altea e sia contucida am gray de gualina o am oli de cirami, e sia emplastrat am aquel; o que sian prezes figuas grassas e sian trissadas am fems de colom, e semblantz ad aquels de las medicinas que son nompnadas amermans consolidacio.	"But if lameness and stiffness are recent, then they should be massaged with warm water containing softening herbs such as marshmallow and rose hips, mallows, and similar ones; and a plaster made from mallows should be applied; or a poultice made from rose hip mucilage and kneaded with dough or oil of cirami should be applied; or figs fried in pigeon droppings and ground together should be applied as those medicines known as consolidators."
E alcunas vetz es dissolvuda am assidua fricacio leugiera que sia am las mas humidas, e sia administrat movement del membre a tota partida en totas horas.	"And sometimes with continuous light friction it can be dissolved even in the most humid parts, and movement of the limb should be administered in all directions at all times."
Mays si tortuositat ja es anada denant e es fayta fort e convertida es en peyra e provocada es necessitat a curacio de lu am ferr, lahoras cove que sia le pus desus cecsat e la continuacio del os sia dissolvut, e sia inscidit aquo que superflueys de nodacio de aquel meteys am le os am inscissoris subtils, e sia aministrada facilitat en aquel am sollicitut e studi.	"But if the crookedness has already advanced and is hard and converted into bone and surgery with iron is necessary, then it is appropriate to cut off what is above the break and dissolve the continuity of the bone, and carefully remove excess callus from that place using fine scissors, and facilitate mobility in that area through diligent and careful study."
Capitol .xxiii.	"Chapter XXIII"
De sermo en dislocacio.	Of speech in dislocation
Dislocacio es eyssiment de alcuna de las juncturas del sieu loc, per que es prohibida de movement, e es orrezada la figura del membre, e fa venir sobre le malaute dolors e lesios grans.	Dislocation is the displacement of some of the joints in their location, preventing them from moving, distorting the shape of the limb, and causing great pain and injury to the patient.
Donc quan accideys ad alcu dislocacio, lahoras cove tantost perforsar que sia reduzit, e no tarde aquela reduzir, quar si es tardada, le loc es apostemat e fort leu am aquo es fayta dificil la reduccio de dislocaccio.	Therefore when dislocation occurs, it should be reduced as soon as possible, and not delayed, because if it is delayed, the joint becomes inflamed and it is difficult to reduce the dislocation.
E per aysso no cove que sia maugut ni stendut en la hora de la apostemacio, quar motas veguadas fa venir spasme e dolors ledentz.	And therefore at that time one should not be moved or stretched out, because many times it causes spasm and severe pain to the patient.
Mays quan aquo accideys, lahoras cove que tu te coytes a la flaubotomia del malaute, e aprop sia layssat entro que repause le apostema; e aprop le membre sia embrocat am aygua cauda e oli, e aprop sia reduzit am facilitat.	But when this happens, then one should resort to the phlebotomy of the patient, and let him rest until the inflammation subsides; and then the limb should be immersed in hot water and oil, and thus reduced with ease.
E tot membre sia curat am aquo del qual la rememoracio vindra en son loc.	And every joint should be treated with that which brings it back to its original position.
E yeu ja e ordenatz les capitols de dislocacio segon que es precedit en fractura; de la partida del cos pus sobirana entro a la partida pus dejos.	And hereafter I will explain the chapters on dislocation as they are presented in fracture, from the head downwards to the foot.
Capitol .xxiiii.	Chapter XXIV.
De curacio de dislocacio de la mandibula dejos.	Of the treatment of dislocation of the lower jaw.
So dislocadas las doas mandibulas si no tart; e la dislocacio de amdos es fayta segon una de dos manieyras: que o son remaugudas de lurs locs per pauca remocio, e so mollificadas un petit; o so dislocadas per entiera dislocacio e complida, entro que sian mollificadas a la partida de la junctura entro que corro saliva del malaute e que no puesca tenir aquela ni puesca claure la sua boca, e la lengua de lu sia envolopada en sa paraula.	When both jaws are dislocated at once, they are reduced by little movement and mollified a bit; or sometimes they are completely dislocated, until they can be mollified at the point of articulation, when saliva begins to flow from the patient's mouth, indicating that he cannot open his mouth nor close it, and his tongue is stuck in his throat.
Mays quan la dislocacio de lu es pauca, lahoras en las majors disposicios retorna per si an pauca causa.	But when the dislocation of the jaw is slight, in many cases it returns to its place by itself without any help.
Mays si la dislocacio es entiera e complida, lahoras cove que sia administrada reduccio de lu leugierament, e no sia tardada de tot.	But if the dislocation is complete and entire, then reduction should be administered gently, and not delayed at all.
E es que·l ministre tengua le cap del malaute, e entrometa lo metge le dit pous de la una sieua ma en la razit de la dislocacio de la mandibula dedintz la boca de lu, si la dislocacio es de la una part; o que entrometa les sieus dos pouzes ensemps, si la dislocacio es de doas partz, e les autres ditz de las mas de lu sian defora am les quals enguale; e comanda al malaute que cesse las suas mandibulas e absolva aquelas anar de quascuna partida; e le metge engualhe la mandibula e enpellisca la mandibula entro que retorne al sieu loc.	And let the attendant hold the patient's head, and insert his finger into the joint of the dislocation of the jaw inside the mouth, if the dislocation is on one side; or insert both fingers together, if the dislocation is on both sides, and the others should press from outside with which to balance. And tell the patient to keep his jaws still and not move them from their position; then gently push the jaw back into place until it returns to its proper position.
E si dificil es la reducio de lu, e majorment si amdos las mandibulas so essemps dislocadas, lahoras aministra evoporacio am aygua cauda e oli, entro que sia fayta leugiera la reduccio de amdos e no tardes la reduccio de amdos de tot, ayssi quo havem dit.	And if the reduction is difficult, especially if both jaws are dislocated at once, then evaporation with hot water and oil should be administered until easy reduction can be made without delay.
E donc cum retornam e so engualadas, e es clausa la boca del malaute e no es mollificada, lahoras pausa sobre aquelas polvils de drap am cerot, e sia fayt de cera e oli rozat; e aprop sia liat am facilitat am liamens mols.	And when they return to their place and are well engaged, and the mouth of the patient is closed but not mollified, then apply poultices of cloth with cerot, and make them of wax and rose oil; and let them be tied on easily with soft linen.
E sia le dormir del malaute sobre le sieu dos, e·l cap de lu sia stant entre dos aurelhes, per so que no maugue aquel a la partida dreyta ni a la sinistra; e no li fassas per forsa masteguar alcuna causa; habans la sieua vianda sia forbicio leon, entro que quan las dolors sian remaugudas e las mandibulas so nozadas, lahoras maugue aquo que vol.	And let the patient sleep on his back, with his head between two pillows, so that he cannot move it to the right or left; and do not force him to mastication at all until the pain is gone and the jaws are well engaged. Then he may chew what he wishes.
E aquo sia aministrat am facilita, e no trebalhe sobre la apercio de la boca deves la comestio e beure e ocitatio, entro que la mandibula sia nozada e sanada.	And when this is administered with ease, and do not work upon the opening of the mouth for eating, drinking, or occlusion until the jaw is engaged and healed.
E si es dificil la reduccio de duas mandibulas quan so dislocadas en alcuna hora e no so convertidas als lors locs, lahoras motas veguadas accideysso febres e soda assidua, e fort leu es alerguat le ventre del malaute, e fort leu e vomeys colera pura.	And if the reduction of both jaws is difficult when they are dislocated and not returning to their places at once, then often hot applications may be used with soda, and sometimes a gentle purgative is administered to relieve the belly of the patient, and sometimes pure calomel.
E quan tu vezes aquo, lahoras sapias que es perdicio; e motas veguadas mor aquel al qual accideys aquo en x dias.	And when you do this, know that it is harmful; for many times the person to whom this happens dies in a few days.
Capitol .xxv.	Chapter XXV
De reduccio de la dislocacio de la furcula e de la extremitat del muscle.	Of the reduction of dislocation of the collarbone and the extremity of the muscle.
Furcula no es dislocada del latz dedintz per la sua continuacio am le pietz; e alcunas veguadas es dislocada a la partida defora, e aquo es declarat al sentiment.	The collarbone is not dislocated from its place by the side due to its continuity with the sternum; but sometimes it is dislocated on the outside and this is detected by touch.
E la restauracio de lu es que·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu dos e extenda les sieus brasses.	And the restoration of it is that the patient should lie on his back and extend his arms.
E aprop coarta le loc am la tua palma am fort coartacio, quar ela retornara.	Then press the dislocation with your palm with a strong pressure, for it will return to its place.
E aprop pausa sobre aquela emplastre e pulvils e strenh aquela.	And then apply plasters and poultices and strengthen that side.
Mays la extremitat de aquel que siec le coyde e·s continuat am aquel, no es dislocada en alcun dia; lahoras cove que sia reduzida e engualhada segon que havem dit e segon que es a tu aparelhat.	But the extremity of that which seizes the heart and is continuous with it is not dislocated at any time. Therefore, it must be reduced and engaged as has been said, according to your ability.
E aprop pausa sobre aquela emplastre, e pulvils, e extrictura, e comanda al malaute adherir a trenquilitat e a repaus entro que sia sanat.	And then apply plasters, poultices, and bandages, and tell the patient to adhere to tranquility and rest until it is healed.
E am aquesta meteyssa curacio es reduzida la extremita del muscle quan es separada del sieu loc.	And with this same treatment, the extremity of the muscle is reduced when it is separated from its place.
Capitol .xxvi.	Chapter XXVI
De la reduccio de la dislocacio del muscle.	"On the reduction of a dislocation of the muscle."
Sapias que·l muscle no es dislocat sino segon tres manieras, de las quals es la una que sia dislocat a la partida del titillic a la partida dejos.	"You should know that the muscle cannot be dislocated except in three ways, one of which is that it is dislocated at the beginning of the little finger."
E la segonda es que sia dislocat a la partida desus del muscle, e aquo es fayt tart; e no es dislocat a las partidas detras per la spalla; e no es dislocat a las partidas denant per les nervis.	"And the second way is that it is dislocated at the top of the muscle, which happens rarely. It does not dislocate at the joints behind the shoulder or in front by the nerves."
E majorment es dislocat e defora eyssit a las partidas dejos deves le titillic, e majorment en aquels dels quals las carns son paucas, leugierament es dislocat; mays en aquels en les quals so motas carns, es eyssit fora am dificultat.	"And especially it is dislocated and pushed out at the joints of the little finger near the thumb, and this happens more easily in those with less flesh, whereas in those with much flesh, it comes out with difficulty."
E fort leu accideys ad alcus homes percussio o cazement, e le muscle de lu es apostemat de apostema caut, e es cujat per aquo que ja sia dislocat.	"And sometimes it happens to some men that the muscle swells due to a blow or contusion, and an abscess forms which bursts open, causing the muscle to become dislocated."
Adonc cove que tu sproes aquo entro que estias sobre-sertetut de lu, e lahoras procesiscas en la curacio de lu.	"Therefore you should proceed with caution in treating such a case, and then proceed with its cure."
E es conoguda la dislocacio de lu quan es a las partidas dejos deves le titillic; per so que distingescas entre le muscle dislocat e·l muscle sa, quar tu atrobas entre aquels diversitat manifesta; e atrobas en le cap del muscle concavitat e dejos le titillic deves le tocament del cap del muscle ayssi quo un huou, e al malaute no pot redusir la sua ma a la sieua aurelha, ni maure aquela per totz movementz.	"And the dislocation of it is known when it occurs at the joints of the little finger near the thumb; so that you may distinguish between the dislocated muscle and the sound one, because there is great diversity among them. And you find a concavity in the head of the muscle on the side of the little finger near the touch of the head of the muscle like a hole, and the sick person cannot bring his hand to his ear nor move it with any movement."
Si es dislocat deves le pietz o ensus, e tu lahoras atrobas manifest tocament, e no es amaguat.	"If it is dislocated towards the foot or above, you will then find a clear and visible touch, not hidden."
E de aquesta dislocacio es fayta leugiera reduccio quan es fresca e le malaute es enfant.	"And this dislocation can be easily reduced when it is fresh and the patient is young."
E la reduccio de lu es que·l ministre eleva la ma de lu a las partidas desus; e aprop pause les tieus pouses dejos le titillic de lu, e eleva la junctura am fortaleza en sus al sieu loc, e·l ministre eleva la ma de lu, e extenda aquela en sus; e aprop pausa aquela dejos quar ela retorna leugierament.	"And the reduction of it is that the physician raises the hand of the patient above its joints; and approaches with his fingers on either side of the little finger of the patient, and raises the joint with strength to its proper place, while the physician raises the hand of the patient, and extends it upwards; and then approaches it again for it returns easily."
Mays si per aquo que havem dit no retorna, e so del comensament que accidic la dislocacio, motz dias, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia banhat en aygua cauda e sia aministrada enbrocacio que mollifique e liniesca ayssi cum si so coytz razitz de altea, e fenugrec, e melillot en aygua, e sia administrada.	"But if it does not return by what we have said, and some days have passed since the dislocation occurred, then the patient should be bathed in warm water, and administered an embrocation that softens and lubricates like if it were a poultice made of althea root, fenugreek, and marshmallow in water."
E aprop le malaute sia ressupinat sobre le sieu dos e sia pausat dejos le titillic de lu espera de lana que sia engual entre levitat e strictura, e aprop le metge pause le sieu talo sobre la spera, e eleva le cap del muscle am vertut, e atire la ma del malaute per que no sia mauguda a las partidas dejos, e autre ministre tengua le cap del malaute, que no sia maugut a las partidas dejos, quar aquela tantost retorna al sieu loc.	"And then the patient should be propped up on his back and paused with his fingers on either side of the little finger until it is loosened between elevation and tension, and then the physician places his heel on the sphere and raises the head of the muscle with strength, and draws the hand of the patient so that it is not hidden at its joints, and another attendant holds the head of the patient so that it is not hidden at its joints for it soon returns to its proper place."
E si voles, reduzeys aquel segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu fassas esser prezent un home le qual sia pus lonc que·l malaute, e estia de la part de aquel latz, e entrometa le sieu muscle dejos le titillic del malaute e eleve le titillic de lu a las partidas desus entro que·l malaute sia suspendut en ayre, e autre ministre tire la ma del malaute de las partidas dejos del sieu ventre.	"And if you wish, reduce it in this manner: And have present a man who is taller than the patient, and let him stand on that side; and insert his muscle between the little finger of the patient and raise the little finger of the patient to its joints while the patient is suspended in air, and another attendant draws the hand of the patient from its joints towards its belly."
Mays si le malaute es leugier, lahoras cove que am lu que autre causa sia suspenduda, per so que grave aquel, quar la dislocacio retorna tantost.	"But if the patient is thin, then another cause should be suspended for him to lean on, lest he cause harm, for the dislocation returns quickly."
E es reduzit eysament segon autra manieyra: e es que sia ficat en terra un fust lonc le cap del qual sia redon de figura, ayssi cum pilo de mortier, que no sia gros ni subtil, e aprop sia pausat dejos le malaute; pus que so pausatz sobre·l cap del fust draps leons, e·l malaute sia stant segon la longitut del fust, e aprop sia extenduda la ma de lu a las partidas dejos del autra part; e sia extendut le cos de lu del autre part am fortaleza, quar la junctura retorna al sieu loc am velocitat.	"And it is reduced in the same way according to another manner: And have placed on the ground a staff whose head is round in shape like a mortar pestle, neither thick nor thin; and let the patient lean on its side; then let him place his hands on either side of the other end of the staff; then let him extend his hand on the other side; and let him extend his body from that side with strength for the joint returns to its proper place with speed."
E si es dificil reduccio de lu per totas las causas que havem ditas, lahoras usa de aquesta cura: e es que tu prenguas un fust la quantitat del qual sia en le lonc de dos brasses, e latitut de aquel sia de quatre ditz, e la grossetut de lu sia aleujat en le preon del tittilic segon aquesta forma:	"And if the reduction of it is difficult by all the causes that we have mentioned, then use this cure: And take a staff whose length is two cubits and whose width is four digits; and let its thickness be lessened at the end of the little finger in this shape:"
E aprop sobre le cap redon sian liatz drap leons per so que·l fust no ledesca le malaute.	"And place lions' skin on the round head of it for fear that the staff should slip from the patient."
E aprop sia pausat dejos le titillic del malaute, e sia extenduda la ma o le bras sobre·l fust entro a las partidas dejos, e sia liat le fust sobre le adjutori e le bras e la extremitat de la ma.	"And let it be placed on either side of the little finger of the patient; and let his hand or arm be extended over the staff to its joints; and let the staff be tied on the assistant's back, on the arm and on the end of the hand."
Aprop sia pausat le bras sobre un scalo de scala segon la latitut, e la ma sia extenduda a las partidas dejos, e l’autre cos sia suspendut de l’autre part, quar la junctura intra tantost.	"And let him place his arm on a step of a ladder according to its width, and let his hand be extended at its joints; and let the other body be suspended from the other side for the joint enters quickly."
E cum le intrament de lu es complit segon quascuna maniera que es a tu possibla, e lahoras cove que tu pauses dejos le titillic spera de lana de engual quantitat; e aprop pauza emplastre perparat de polvera de moli am enses e album de huou sobre tot le muscle, ayssi quo es revolvut desus, e aprop strenh dejos le titillic am strictura decent; e le liament sia revolvut sobre le emplastre, e la ma de lu sia annectida al col de lu, e sia leyssat, e no sia mauguda la ma de lu per vii dias.	"And when the entrance of it is completed according to each manner that is possible for you; then place a bandage of wool of equal quantity on either side of the little finger; and then place an emplaster made from powder of millstone with frankincense and album of egg over all the muscle, thus as it is turned upwards; and then bind it tightly with tension decently; and let the bandage be turned around the emplaster; and let his hand be joined to its collar; and let him be left; and let not his hand be moved for seven days."
E cove que sia pausada la vianda del malaute pauca, entro que·l membre sia confortat, quar es pus leugier a la sanacio de lu.	"And it is necessary that the diet of the patient be lightened until the member is comforted, for it is easier for it to be healed."
E aprop la vianda sia donada major aprop vii o v e sia exercitat un movement; e donc si es fermat e no es mollificat, lahoras ja es sanat.	"And then let him be given abundant food after seven or eight days when he has exercised a movement; and if it is firm and not softened, then it is healed."
Mays si la junctura es dislocada motas veguadas per humiditat que accideys a lu o per autra causa, lahoras cove que en aquela sia administrat cauteri am tres traucs, segon que denant es dit en le capitol de cauteri.	"But if the joint is dislocated many times by humidity that occurs to it or by another cause, then cauterization should be administered to it with three strokes according to what is said before in the chapter on cauterization."
E si tot aysso es fayt e aprop vii dias es desliat le liament e la junctura no es fermada, e le emplastre e la strictura son reduzitz sobre lu alcunas veguadas, e no es fermada e catz e no pot elevar aquel bras a las partidas desus, lahoras sapias que·ls nervis de lu, les quals so al cap del muscle, ja so inscizes o extendutz o mollificatz, e sapia que la junctura nul temps no sira ficada en loc sieu.	"And if all this is done and after seven days the bandage is untied and the joint is not firm; and the emplaster and the binding are reduced upon it many times; and it is not firm or hard; and he cannot raise his arm to its joints, then know that the nerves of it, which are at the head of the muscle, are either cut off or stretched or softened; and know that the joint will never be placed in its proper place."
De la dislocacio de aquela qu’es fayta deves le pietz e la mamilha o las partidas detras, la reduccio es fayta am impulcio e extencio am las mas, entro que retorne.	"For the dislocation of that which is made in the knee and breast or joints behind, the reduction is done with impulse and extension with the hands until it returns."
E sia administrada en aquela l’autra strictura, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	"And let another binding be administered to it; and cure it until it is healed."
E si accideys aprop la sanacio gravitat en le membre e tarditat en le movement de lu, lahoras le malaute uze de banh motas veguadas entro que aquela gravitat sia alleujada e que retorne a la natura de lu primiera.	"And if heaviness occurs in the member during healing and slowness in its movement, then the patient should use baths many times until that heaviness is lessened and it returns to its former nature."
Capitol .xxvii.	"Chapter xxvii."
De curacio de dislocacio del coyde.	"Of the treatment of dislocation of the shoulder."
Sapias que la junctura del coyde es dislocada am difficultat e semblantment retorna am difficultat; e aquela es dislocada a totas partidas, e majorment a la partida denant a la partida detras, e la dislocacio de lu no es amaguada a tu quar es cazent dejos le vezement o dejos le tocament segon qualque figura sia dislocat, e quan ajustes le coyde disloguat am le sa, aquo es a tu declarat manifestament, quar la junctura es concavada e no pot doblar le bras, ni tocar am aquel le sieu muscle.	"Know that the joint of the shoulder is dislocated with difficulty and returns likewise; and it is dislocated at all parts, but especially at the front part behind, and its dislocation is not hidden from you because it is evident by looking or touching according to whatever figure it may be dislocated. And when you adjust the dislocated shoulder blade with the palm of your hand, that is made manifestly clear to you because the joint is concave and cannot bend the arm nor touch itself with its muscle."
E cove que·t coytes, e reduzescas la dislocacio tantost denant que vengua a lu apostema caut, quar si ve a lu apostema caut, dificil es la reduccio de lu, e fort leu no es sanat de tot; e majorment quan es a las partidas detras, quar pus mala es de totas las autras specias de dislocacio, e de major dolor, e motas veguadas deyssen am aquela la mort.	"And you should choose it and reduce the dislocation as soon as the hot swelling comes because if the hot swelling comes to it, the reduction becomes difficult; and even then it is not completely healed. And especially when it is at the back parts because there it is worse than all other kinds of dislocations and causes more pain, and many deaths occur with that."
E la restauracio de lu, quan es aquela que es possibla reduzir, es que la ma de lu sia extenduda am doas mas, e le bras de lu sia expandut, e las mas del metge sian sobre le coyde e dejos lu, e el empellisca la junctura am les pouzes de las suas mas ensemps, o am la razit de la sua palma entro que torne en son loc.	The restoration of the patient, when it is possible to reduce him, is that his hand be extended with two masses and his arm be expanded, and the physician's hands be on his knee and let him press the joint with the fists of both his hands together or with the back of his palm.
Mays si la dislocacio es a las partidas denant, lahoras retorna ayssi que dobla la ma am la sua ma, entro que percuta le coyde am la razit de la sua palma.	However if the dislocation is at the palms in front, then he should return as follows: by bending his hand on his own hand, so that he strikes his knee with the back of his palm.
E si la dislocacio no obezeys a la reduccio, lahoras aministra vehement extencio e mot fort.	And if the dislocation does not yield to reduction, then apply strong traction and powerful force.
E es que dos ministres extendan le bras, e tenguan aquel eyssament dos ministres per so que no sia remaugut deves la extencio.	And two assistants should extend the arm, holding it firmly with two assistants so that it is not moved during traction.
E aprop sia revolvut le bras deves tota part, pus que es envolopat drap doblat lonc sobre la ma de lu, o liament.	And furthermore the arm should be rotated in every direction, because it is wrapped around with doubled cloth or bandage.
E quant le metge toca la junctura am la sua ma, unte aquela am alcun oli per so que aquo sia aquelas causas las quals ajudan en lubricitat de la junctura am facilitat; e aprop empellesca la junctura am empulcio vehement entro que retorne.	And when the physician touches the joint with his hand, he should anoint it with some oil to facilitate lubrication of the joint; and moreover he should press the joint vigorously until it returns.
E aprop la reduccio de lu cove que sia pausat sobre aquela empastre en le qual sia stipticitat e excequacio am album de huou, e sia extrenhut am strictura descent, e·l bras sia suspendut del col, e sia layssat per alcus dias.	And also the reduction of the elbow that is paused on that empastre in which there is stipitation and excretion with albumen of a bird's egg, and let it be extracted with gentle compression, and the arm should be suspended from the neck for several days.
E aprop sia desliat; e donc si la junctura es formada en le sieu loc, lahoras tu deslia le liament de lu e layssa aquela.	And also if it is dislocated again, then untie it; and afterwards if the joint has been formed in its proper place, then untie the bandage from it and leave it alone.
E si vezas la junctura no be strenher, lahoras tu itera le emplastre e·l liament, e layssa aquela per alcus dias entro que sia extrenhuda; e aprop deslia aquela.	And if the joint does not become stronger, then repeat the emplaster and bandage, leaving it for several days until it is healed; and moreover untie that.
Mays si accideys a lu gravitat aprop la reduccio de la junctura, e la disposicio de lu es en movement, lahoras aministra humectacio en banh e fricacio subtil, e comprecio, entro que sia aleujat; o pausa sobre la junctura aleliati, so es coyssa de moto grassa; e aprop sia liada, e layssa aquela sobre le os le dia e la nueyt.	But if during the reduction of the joint there occurs gravity in that part, and the disposition is in motion, then apply humidification in a bath with friction and compression until it is alleviated; or place on the joint an alleviation plaster so that it may be of great benefit; and moreover bind it up, leaving it over the bone day and night.
E aprop osta aquela, e met aquel en banh; e quan suza, lahoras tu fregua la junctura am fricacio temprada, e aprop itera sobre aquela aleliati, so es ronhonal de moto, una veguada, e la segonda, e la .iii.a.,	And afterwards take off the plaster, and put him in a bath; and when he gets up, then rub the joint with gentle friction, and moreover repeat over it an alleviating plaster so that it may be of great benefit, once, twice, three times
am intrament de banh, entro que sia linit.	And meanwhile keep him in bed until he is cured.
E si voles, pausa sobre aquela fenda de vaca humida e scalfada am boder e stren sobre aquel; e fay aquo alcunas veguadas, quar aquela es humida e reduzeys a la sua disposicio.	And if you wish, place on that a wet cowhide fold and stick it on him; and do this several times, because it is moist and reduces inflammation.
Capitol .xxviii.	Chapter XXVIII
De curacio de dislocacio de malassen, so es de la junctura que es entre·l bras e la ma.	Of the treatment of dislocation of the shoulder blade, which is the joint between the arm and the hand
Malassen de la ma alcunas vetz es deslocada, e la reduccio de la dislocacio de lu es leugiera, e·l contrari es de las autras juncturas, mays empero cove que sia velocitat en la reduccio de lu en la hora en la qual es deslocada, denant que le loc sia apostemat o que accida en lu apostema caut.	When the shoulder blade of the arm is dislocated occasionally, its reduction is easy; and on the contrary with other joints, but there should be speed in reducing it at the very moment when it has been dislocated before an apostema occurs or that some accident happens in the apostema caut.
E la reduccio de la dislocacio de lu es que tu pauses la junctura de la ma del malaute sobre una taula e le ministre extenda la ma de aquel, e le metge pause la sua ma o o la sua palma sobre la iminencia de la junctura, e empellisca aquela entro que retorne al sieu loc.	And the reduction of its dislocation is that you place the joint of the hand of the patient on a table and make him extend his arm; and then the doctor places his hand or his palm over the prominence of the joint and pushes it gently until it returns to its proper place.
Mays empero cove que sia considerat si la palma ja es ostada al ventre de la ma, lahoras le malaute pause le dos de la sua ma sobre una taula deves la extencio e la reduccio; e si la dislocacio es precedent deves le dos de la ma, lahoras sia la posicio de la ma de aquel intrinicequement sobre la taula, per so que la ma del metge caja sobre aquela iminencia de la junctura.	But it should be taken into consideration whether the palm is already turned towards the front of the hand; if it is, then let the patient place the back of his hand on a table for extension and reduction; but if the dislocation was behind the hand, then let the position of his hand be intrinsically upon the table so that the hand of the doctor may fall upon that prominence of the joint.
E donc si retorna tantost, bon es; e sino, lahoras strenh aquela am empastre cedant le apostema e layssa aquel; e no iteres aquo, quar sino, no soferta ni no podes sobre la reduccio de lu pus que passan a lu dias.	And therefore if it returns soon, that is good. But if not, then strengthen it with an emplaster which allows the apostema to subside and leave him; and do not repeat this, because otherwise it would be impossible for you to effect its reduction afterwards when several days have passed.
Mays empero la junctura roman segon la sua tortuositat; e no notz al malaute alcuna causa, sino que la ma es mollificada e no pot strenher alcuna causa; lahoras sapias que les nervis son trincatz o trissatz, e lahoras no es engen en lu sino que sia strenhuda am cauteri prop le cazament de lu e fort leu aquo confereys alcuna causa.	But if the joint remains tortuous then do not inform the patient of any cause, but tell him that his arm is softened and cannot be strengthened because of some cause. Then you should know that the nerves are pressed or cut, and therefore it does not improve unless it is strengthened by cautery near its attachment and this procedure is followed several times with some cause.
Donc cum malassem es retornada, lahoras pausa sobre lu empastre le qual havem recomtat, e sia layssat e strenhut per v dias; e aprop sia desliat e sia layssat e la ma de lu sia excercitada.	Therefore when the dislocation has returned, then place on it the plaster which we have recommended and let him be left at rest for three days; and moreover bind it up and let him be left at rest with exercises of his arm.
Mays si le movement de lu es ostat e accideys en lu alcuna gravitat, lahoras leniys aquela am aygua cauda e am fricacio alcunas veguadas, entro que sia alleujat.	But if the motion of it is stopped and some gravity occurs thereupon, then treat it with warm water and gentle friction several times until it is alleviated.
Capitol .xxix.	Chapter XXIX
De la curacio de dislocacio dels ditz.	Of the treatment of dislocation of those [joints].
Alcunas veguadas so dislocatz les ditz a tota partida.	Sometimes these joints become dislocated all at once.
E quan es dislocat alcun dit de aquels al dos de la palma o al ventre de lu, lahoras sten le dit e impelleys la dislocacio de lu am les tieus pouses, entro que retorne.	And when any of these fingers is dislocated on the back or palm side of the hand, then stretch that finger and push the dislocation back with your thumbs until it returns.
E aprop sostenta le cap del dit, e suspen aquel deves la part a la qual es dislocat, e layssa aquel per dos dias.	And afterwards support the head of the finger and suspend it from the part where it was dislocated, leaving it thus for two days.
E aprop suspen aquel e exten aquel entro que dreyt sia engualhat en aquel sieu dia.	And later suspend that [finger] again and stretch it until it is completely straightened within that same day.
E quan sira noyt, lia aquel segon aquela narracio, e no cesses desliar aquel en le dia e exercitar am movement, e lia aquel en la noyt; e fay aquo per alcus dias entro que sia streyt.	And when night falls, bind that [finger] according to this description, and do not cease loosening it during the day and exercising it with movements, and bind it at night. Do this for several days until it is straight.
E fay semblant am aquo, si es dislocat al ventre de la ma, e lia aquel ad aquela partida e fay am aquo la tieua primiera operacio, entro que sia sanat.	And do likewise if it is dislocated on the palm of the hand, and bind it at that part and perform your first operation until it is healed.
E semblantment fay am aquo quan es dislocat a las autres partidas.	Similarly, do this in all other cases of dislocation.
Capitol .xxx.	**Chapter 30.**
De la curacio de dislocacio dels spondils del dos.	Of the treatment of dislocation of the spinal joints.
Quan accideys ad alcun dels spondils del dos o del col dislocacio complida, e so remaugutz motz spondils de lors locs, lahoras en aquela no es curacio, quar la mort se coyta al malaute.	When dislocation of one or more spinal joints occurs in the back or neck, and many vertebrae are displaced from their proper places, then there is no hope for cure at that time because death usually ensues.
E senhal de aquo es que la egestio del malaute es fora-eyssida ses voluntat, e no pot retenir aquela; e motas veguadas so mollificatz alcus membres de lu o doas cambas de lu o dos brasses de lu, o un de aquels; o es remaugut un spondil de son loc, quar motas veguadas es remaugut e motas veguadas es fayta la remocio de aquels a quatre partidas.	And the sign of this is that evacuation of the bowels occurs involuntarily and cannot be retained. Many times some limbs become paralyzed on one side or both sides, either one leg or both arms, or one arm. Sometimes one vertebra is displaced from its proper place because many times displacement occurs in four directions.
Donc aquela ja es remauguda a las partidas detras e es nompnada gelbozitat.	Therefore, it has already been displaced to the back and is called scoliosis (curvature of the spine).
Mays la curacio de lu es que lahoras consideras si la gelbozitat accidey de puerissia, quar lahoras en aquela no es curacio ni de aquela no es sanacio de tot.	But its treatment is as follows: first consider if scoliosis occurred in childhood because then there is no cure and it cannot be completely healed.
Mays en aquela que ve per cazement o per percussio o per semblant ad aquels, ja diyssero les Antics las manieras de curacio am sermo prolixs, del qual lo mays retorna am profieyt; mays yeu ja e abreujat de aquel del qual lo pauc escusa del trop de lu, per la mieua propinquitat a la entencio mieua exposicio, am la qual he aquo expausat et format ex instrument divers de aquel am le qual mostrero aquo e espausero aquel.	But those who come later with treatment by plaster or percussion or other similar methods have already discussed the ways of treatment in lengthy speeches. However, I will briefly discuss it as follows because it is appropriate to my intended purpose and I have already explained and demonstrated many instruments for this purpose.
E dic que en gelbosita que accideys de la partida denant en le pietz, no es engen ni sanacio de aquela; e semblantment en aquela que es fayta a dos latz.	I say that scoliosis which occurs on the anterior side of the spine cannot be corrected nor healed. Similarly, that which is made to both sides.
E de aquelas no es curada sino aquela que accideys en le dos propriament am aquo que yeu recomti.	And only those can be cured whose scoliosis occurs specifically in the posterior part as I will recount later.
E es que·l malaute sia extendut sobre la sua cara sobre pug engual prop de paret, e sia extendut dejos lu esturment molh per so que no sia lidit le pietz de lu.	And let the patient lie on their face with their head close to a wall. Let them be covered with soft pillows so that the spine does not get injured.
E aprop un fust dreyt sia pausat, ficat en la terra en la extremitat del pug entorn le cap de lu, e autra fust en aviro les pes de lu en l’autra extremitat del pueg.	And place a straight stick on the ground near the head of the patient and another stick under their feet at the other end.
E·l ministre tengua le fust, e no sia fermat en fossa; e autre ministre tengua l’autre segon aquela forma.	And let one assistant hold the stick near the head but not in a pit, and another assistant hold the other according to that form.
E aprop envolopa sobre le cap del malaute e dejos les titillic liamen leon ferm; e exten la extremitat del liamel al fust le qual es deves le cap de lu, e lia aquel en lu; e aprop strenh l’autre liament sobre las ancas de lu les denols de lu, e deves las cambas de lu; e aprop ajusta totz les liamentz e lia aquels en l’autre fust le qual es deves les pes de lu.	And place a cap on the patient's head and tie it firmly with soft cloth. Extend the end of one bandage to the stick placed above the patient's head, attach it there, and extend another bandage over the hips and knees of the patient towards both sides. Then adjust all the bandages and attach them to the other stick placed near the patient's feet.
E aprop le ministre cascu extenda le liament a la partida del fust, e no sian remaugutz les dos fustz e les liamentz dels sieus locs en les quals son ficatz, mays empero no so fermatz ayssi cum havem dit.	And then each assistant extends the bandages to their respective sticks. The two sticks and the bandages should not be removed from their places but should remain there without being too tightly fastened as we have said.
E le metge pause las suas palmas sobre le spondil am fortaleza entro que retorne, o que pause sobre aquela una taula, e aprop que ajuste sobre la taula les sieus pes entro que retorne.	And the doctor places his palms on the spine with firmness until it returns to its proper position. Or he may place one foot on that part and adjust himself there. Then he places his feet on the table so that he can return.
Mays si no retorna per aquesta forma, lahoras pren una taula de la qual la latitut o la longitut sia en aviro de tres brassas, e cava en la paret de la qual havem dit que es prop le malaute un loc en le qual intre la extremitat de la taula.	But if it does not return by this method, then take a table whose width or length is about three braccia. Then make a hole in the wall near the patient where the end of the table can fit into it.
E aprop pausa la maytat de la taula sobre le spondilh, e·l metge pause les sieus pes sobre l’autre extremitat, e estrenha be entro que le spondil sia coartat e que retorne al sieu loc.	And place the middle of the table on the spine. The doctor places his feet on the other end and presses firmly until the spine is corrected and returns to its proper position.
E si tu voles, obre am torn le qual es revolvut am la ma; e es que tu fiques en terra deves le cap del malaute en le derier del pug dos fustz, la longitut dels quals sia d’un bras, e deves le cap de lu en le derier del pug eyssament dos fustz; e sia la longitut que es entre quascun fust un palm, e ja es fayt en quascun fust trauc en le qual corr torn, e quascun sia mot fermat en terra per so que no sia maugut.	And if you wish, use a wrench to turn it back with your hand. Lie on the ground near the patient's head between two sticks whose length is one braccio each and place another stick of the same length under their head in the same way. Make sure that there is a palm's width between each stick and make a groove in each stick for the cord to pass through. Ensure that each stick is firmly fixed on the ground so that it does not move.
E sia mes un fust redon en le qual es le torn, e sia revolvut en les dos traucs dels dos fustz.	And place a round stick in which the wrench is inserted into both grooves of the two sticks.
E en la extremitat de lu es un trauc en le qual es format le fust, la longueza del qual es un palm am aquo que es revolvut; e en les dos autres fustz es semblant de aquel.	And on one end of it there is a hole in which the stick is formed. The length of this stick is one palm with a groove for turning. The other two sticks have similar holes.
E aprop strenh les liamentz que has streyt en le pietz del malaute en le trau le qual es deves le cap de lu, e les liamentz que has streyts en las coyssas de lu en le torn le qual es deves les pes de lu.	And then tighten the bandages that you have stretched over the spine of the patient on the stick near their head. And also tighten the bandages that you have stretched over their hips and knees onto the stick near their feet.
E aprop deves quascun torn e stia un ministre que torssa le torn am la sua ma, e le metge engualhe le spondil segon que havem dit.	And then on each stick place an assistant who will turn the wrench with their hand while the doctor presses the spine back into its proper position as we have said.
E aquesta es la forma del torn:	And this is how to use the wrench:
E aprop pus que le spondil es retornat, e le loc es engualhat, lahoras cove que pauses empastre exciccatiu am album de huou, e aprop estopa; e aprop pause sobre le empastre astela de taula de la qual la latitut sia de tres ditz o enviro aquels, e la longitut de lu sia quantitat que prengua le loc de la gelbositat, e sobre la partida del spondil sa.	And once the spine has been corrected and returned to its proper position, then apply a plaster consisting of chalk and album ground together with egg whites. Then place gauze on it and place the plaster on a table whose width is about three digits or somewhat more. The length should be equal to the size of the swelling and placed over the affected part of the spine.
E aprop sia liat am liament le qual havem dit, e uze le malaute de nutriment subtil entro que sia sanat.	And then wrap it with bandages as we have said and feed the patient a subtle diet until they are healed.
E si roman alcuna iminencia en le loc en la fi de la sanacio, lahoras cove que sian aministradas medicinas que moilifico e liniscan am aministracio de la taula per lonc temps, la qual havem recomtada; e ja es aministrada en aquel loc lamina de plom.	And if there is still some swelling at the end of the healing process, then apply medicines that soften and cleanse using the application of the table for a long time. We have already recommended this method, and it should be applied to that area with a lead plate.
E alcunas veguadas accideys imminencia en le derier dels spondils del dos, e es cujat per aquela dislocacio; e es aquel os le qual ja imineys per que no cove que sia fayta prosompcio a lu am aquesta medicina, quar fort leu fara a tu accidir mort.	And sometimes swelling occurs at the back of the lower spine due to that dislocation. That bone already threatens death and therefore no pressure should be applied to it with this medicine because it will cause great harm.
Capitol .xxxi.	Chapter XXI
De curacio de anca dislocada.	Of the treatment of a dislocated hip joint.
Sapias que la junctura del ancha e la junctura del muscle no endeve sino dislocacio tant solament, e no accideys ad aquelas aquo que accideys a las autras juncturas de petita remocio e concavitat.	Know that the joint of the hip and the joint of the thigh meet only by dislocation alone. This does not occur at other joints with small movements or concavities.
E la junctura de la ancha es dislocada segon quatre manieyras, quar es dislocada a las partidas dedintz, o a las partidas defora, o a las partidas denant, o a las partidas detras.	And the hip joint can become dislocated in four ways: either inward or outward at its front parts or backward at its rear parts.
E majorment es dislocada a las partidas dedintz, e pauc a las partidas denant o a las partidas detras.	It is most commonly dislocated inwardly, and less frequently anteriorly or posteriorly.
E senhal de la dislocacio de lu a las partidas de dintz es quar, quan tu ajustas la camba del malaute sana am la malaute, es pus longua e·l denolh es pus heminent que de la sana, e·l malaute no pot doblar le sieu pe deves le lenguonar, e es le loc que siec le lengonar apostemat de apostema caut, per so que·l cap de la coyssa ja es pervengut aqui.	The sign of hip dislocation inwardly is that when you compare the length of the healthy limb with the sick one, the sick one appears shorter and its thighbone sticks out more prominently than the healthy one. The patient cannot bend their leg or knee inward, and this area becomes inflamed as if there were a hot abscess. This indicates that the head of the femur has moved into this position.
E·l senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio es a las partidas defora, es que les accidentz de lu so contraris ad aquest accident.	The sign of dislocation occurring at its outer parts is that its symptoms are opposite to those mentioned previously.
E senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio a las partidas denant es quar expan la camba sieua segon compliment, mays empero no dobla aquela ses dolor que es en le denol, e si se perforsa ad anar e no pot sobre aquo a las partidas denant; e la urina de lu es retenguda e l’engonar de lu es apostemat, e deves la ambulacio de lu sobre le talo.	"The sign of one who has suffered a dislocation in front is when the chamber expands according to its nature, yet that part does not bend without pain; if one tries to walk, they cannot do so without discomfort. The urine is retained and the swelling is inflamed, and movement causes pain in the heel."
E senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio a las partidas detras es que no expande le denol, ni no puesca doblar aquel denant que doble le engonar, e la camba de lu es pus breva que l’autra, e l’engonar es mollificat, e·l cap de la coyssa es deves aquel loc.	"The sign of one who has suffered a dislocation in the back is that the knee does not straighten and cannot bend without pain; the chamber of it is shorter than the other one, the swelling is softened, and the head of the matter is turned towards that place."
Mays reduccio de las specias de aquesta dislocacio es que tu consideras, lahoras, si la dislocacio es vetusta et antiqua, que ja es anticada am le havent aquela aprop tu aministras reduccio de lu e roman segon la sua disposicio, lahoras no es en aquela curacio de tot; e adonc no cove que en aquela sia fayta prosompcio.	"But reduction of the species of this dislocation is that you should consider whether the dislocation is ancient and old, which has already become accustomed to having that approach. You then administer reduction according to its condition, but it does not enter into total cure; therefore no traction should be made in that case."
Mays en aquel del qual la dislocacio es recent, e es una de las quatre specias de dislocacio, lahoras te coyta ad aquo que volvas la junctura e extendas aquela a las partidas dedintz e a las partidas defora, e mau aquela a la dextra e sinistra, quar fort leu retorna e no indigeys de autra cura.	"But in one who has recently suffered a dislocation of any of the four species, you should quickly turn the joint back into place and extend it on both front and rear parts. Then move it to the right and left until it returns completely; then no other treatment is necessary."
Mays, si no retorna en aquesta manieyra, lahoras cove que tu prepares ministre fort e extendas la camba de lu de la partida pus dejos, o am las suas mas, o am liament lo qual es liat sobre la camba desus le denol; e autre ministre extenda la ma de aquel desus enayssi que meta las suas mas dejos les titillics de lu; e aprop strenha am liament leon sobre la razit de la coyssa, e tengua autre ministre ters le extremitat del liament.	"But if it does not return in this manner, then you should prepare a strong bandage and extend the chamber of it from the farthest part, or with its own muscles, or by attaching a bandage above the bone. Then another assistant should extend the arm of that person upwards so that their hands are placed behind their buttocks. And again stretch tightly with a bandage on the root of the matter, and have another assistant hold the extremity of the bandage."
E sia extencio de lu o de la partida dedintz a l’angonar a la partida de la furcula, o de la partida detras a la partida del dos.	"And stretch it either from its front part to its angle at the collarbone or from its rear part to its angle at the shoulder blade."
E sia la extencio de totz aquels en una veguada entro que·l malaute sia elevat am le sieu cos de terra e que romangua pendent.	"And all these stretches should be done in one session while the patient is lying on their back with their buttocks elevated and knees hanging down."
E aquesta specia de extencio es specia cominal a totas quatre.	"This species of extension applies generally to all four species [of dislocation]."
E donc si la dislocacio retorna am aquo que havem dit, sira bo; e sino, lahoras es necessari a tota specia aquo que dire de la propria curacio.	"And therefore if the dislocation returns with what we have said, it will be well. But if not, then it is necessary for each species to undergo its own specific treatment."
En la reduccio de lu propria, quan es dislocada, e la dislocacio es a las partidas dedintz, cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre le sieu latz sa; e aprop pausa les liamentz sobre la razit de la coyssa en aquel loc le qual entre le cap de la coyssa e·l loc que es dejos le langonar; e aprop exten le liament en sus de la part del angonar a la pus auta partida de la furcula.	"For reduction of its own kind, when it is dislocated from the front parts, the patient should be made to sit up on their left side. Then bind the bandages tightly over the root of the matter at that point between the head of the bone and the angle of the collarbone. And then extend the bandage upwards from the angle of the collarbone towards the upper part of the shoulder blade."
E aprop autre ministre fort prengua les brasses de lu, e amerme le loc gros de la coyssa malaute e extenda a las partidas deforo per extencio vehement, quar aquela retorna en le sieu loc.	"And then another strong assistant should take hold of both of his arms and press the thick part of the bone against it while stretching forcefully outward so that it returns to its proper place."
E aquesta specia es de pus leugiera curacio am la qual aquest membre es reduzit que las autres specias.	"And this species is that which requires the easiest reduction by which this member is returned, compared to the other species [of dislocation]."
Mays si es excusat sobre tu e no obezeys al entrament am aquesta specia de curacio de tot, lahoras cove que sian liatz les dos pes del malaute ensemps am liament fort, leugier, sobre amdos les talos e amdos les denols.	"But if it is not reduced by this species of treatment and does not obey the return, then you should lift both legs of the patient together with a light, loose bandage over both thighs and buttocks."
E sia la longitut de quascun de son par la quantitat de quatre ditz, e sia la camba malaute extenduda mays que l’autre per quantitat de dos ditz.	"And let the length of each be as much as four fingerbreadths, and let the bandage be extended further than the other by two fingerbreadths."
E aprop le malaute sia suspendut sobre le cap del fust, e que sia en la mayso; e sia la longitut de lu de la terra la quantitat de dos brasses.	"And then suspend the patient over the head of the bed, with their feet on the floor and their legs extended. The distance from the ground should be about two spans."
E aprop comanda a un jove fort que minuesca le cap de la coyssa, e sia suspendut am le malaute autre jove, e l’autre jove minuent la coysa am fortaleza empellesca, quar la junctura retorna al sieu loc am velocitat.	"And then command a strong youth to press down on the head of the bone and suspend himself together with the patient. And another youth should forcefully press down on the bone so that the joint returns quickly to its proper place."
Mays en la reducio propria, quan es dislocacio a la partida defora, cove que·l malaute jaga sobre pug segon que havem recomtat en le havent gelbozitat; e sia strenhut le liament sobre la camba malauta propriament e sobre le pietz de lu.	"But in the proper reduction when it is dislocated outward, the patient should lie on their back as we have recommended in cases of dislocation with swelling. And let the bandage be stretched over the dislocated part itself and over its lower edge."
E aprop dos fustz sian pausatz, la un als pes de lu, e l’autre al cap; e aprop sian pausatz fustz ajustatz al mieg del pueg ficat sobre·l qual draps humitz sian envolopatz, per so que·l malaute no sia dampnajat per que·l fust sia entre las coyssas de lu, per que deves la extencio a las partidas dejos no sia atirat.	"And then two posts should be placed, one under the foot and one under the head. And another post should be adjusted in the middle of the elbow with damp cloths wrapped around it so that the patient is not harmed by the post being between their bones, for fear that the extension towards the outer part might pull on it."
E aprop quascun ministre extenda a la sua part, e·l metge am la sua ma enguala la reduccio segon l’art.	"And then each assistant should extend to his part, and the physician with his hand should guide the reduction according to the art."
Donc, si obezeys a revercio, sira bo grandament; e sino, pausa sobre aquela diligentment e ayssi quo havem dit en gelbozitat per aquela engualment.	"So if it obeys by returning, it will be very good. And if not, pause over that diligently and so do as we have said in case of swelling for that guidance."
Mays cove que·l malaute jagua sobre les sieus latz sa quetament.	"But the patient should lie on their side quietly."
E quan la dislocacio es a las partidas denant, lahoras cove que la camba sia extenduda leugierament, e es segon aquesta meteyssa narracio sobre pueg; e le metge pause la palma de la sua ma dreyta sobre·l langonar malaute, e aprop coarte aquel am l’autra ma, e am aquela coartacio pausa aquel extendut a las partidas dejos a la partida del denol.	"But when the dislocation is at the inner part, then let the bandage be extended lightly. And this is how it is done on the elbow: and the physician places the palm of his right hand on the dislocated collarbone and then presses that with his other hand while extending it towards the outer part towards the shoulder blade."
E si la dislocacio es a las partidas detras, lahoras no cove que·l malaute sia extendut a las partidas dejos, e es elevat sobre la terra; habantz cove que sia pausat sobre causa dura, ayssi cum cove le eyssament si l’ancha de lu es dislocada a las partidas defora, segon aquo que havem dit del jasement de lu sobre dos anchas; e es sobre la sua cara e les liamentz sian extendutz, segon que havem dit, no ha guayre.	"But when the dislocation is at the back part, then it is not necessary for the patient to be extended towards the outer part, but rather they should be elevated on the ground. And it must be placed on a hard surface, just as in the case of an ankle dislocation outward, according to what we have said about the elevation of it onto two ankles; and this is done with their face downwards and the bandages extended as we have said."
E cove que sia aministrada compressio am taula sobre le loc al qual yeys la junctura.	"And compression should be administered with a board over the place where the joint goes."
Donc cum la reducio es complida segon que cove — e·l senhal de la reduccio de lu no es amaguat a tu, e es que tu extendas del malaute doas cambas, e quan tu vezes aquelas enguals e le malaute extrenh la sieua camba e expandeys aquela ses excusacio, lahoras sapias que·l membre segon que cove es retornat — e lahoras tu ajusta doas coyssas e pausa empastre e extrenh am benda ayssi que la ancha no sia mauguda en alcuna de las partidas; e adheresca le malaute a repaus per tres dias o per quatre.	"So when the reduction is complete, you will know that it has been done correctly if when you extend both bandages and the patient pulls on them and extends their arm without difficulty, then you will know that the member has been returned properly. And then you should adjust two splints and apply pressure firmly while extending with a bandage so that the ankle is not moved from either part; and let the patient remain at rest for three or four days."
E aprop deslia le liament e l’empastre, e compara la una camba am l’autra.	"And then untie the bandages and the pressure, and compare one splint with the other."
Lahoras, si vezas aquelas enguals en vustament, lahoras sapias que la dislocacio ja es fermada, e adonc layssa le malaute anar.	"Then if you find that those joints are firm, then you will know that the dislocation has been fixed, and at that point you should let the patient go."
E si vezas alcuna causa de mollificacio, lahoras tu retorna e emplastra aquel, e extrenh aquel segon la tua primiera strectura, e layssa aquel en tres dias.	"And if you find any sign of loosening, then return and splint it again, extend it according to your first traction, and let it remain for three days."
E aprop deslia aquel, e fay aquel tardar en ambulacio sobre quascu per alcus dias, entro que sia confortat.	"And then release that, and let the patient walk about on each foot alternately for several days until they are strengthened."
Capitol .xxxii.	Chapter XXXII
De curacio de dislocacio del denolh.	Of the treatment of dislocation of the shoulder blade.
Le denolh es dislocat segon tres manieyras, quar es dislocat a las partidas defora, e a las partidas dedintz, e a las partidas dejos mays a las partidas detras; e a las partidas denant no es dislocat.	The shoulder blade can be dislocated in three ways: outward, inward, and more often toward the outer side than towards the back part. It is not dislocated towards the front part."
E le senhal de dislocacio de lu es que comandes al malaute que aplique la sua camba am la coyssa; lahoras sapias que·l denol es dislocat.	The sign of dislocation of it is that when you command the patient to apply their arm with the elbow, then you will know that the shoulder blade is dislocated."
E la restauracio de totas las manieyras de lu es que fassas cezer le malaute dreyt, enayssi que ja extenda la sieua camba, si pot sobre aquo; adherir le tieu dos a la cara de lu, e pausa le pe de lu entre les tieus pes; e aprop fay adherir le denol de lu am las tuas palmas, e rete aquelas entre les tieus ditz sobre le denolh de lu am fortaleza, e autre ministre extenda le sieu pe entro que·l denol retorne a son loc.	And the restoration of all three kinds is that you make the patient sit upright so that they can extend their arm if possible; then press your two hands on its face and place the patient's foot between your feet. Then bring the shoulder blade back with both palms, holding it between your hands strongly until the other minister extends the patient's foot until the shoulder blade returns to its proper place."
E senhal de reddicio de lu es que la sua camba adharesca am la coyssa am levitat no-laboroza.	"It is a sign of recovery that their bed adheres to them without labor."
E aprop emplastra aquel e fay adhirir la camba am la coyssa, e aprop lia aquelas emsemps am una benda per tres dias o per quatre, e aprop deslia aquelas.	"And then, apply this plaster and make the bed adhere to them. Also, tie those wounds with a bandage for three or four days, and then untie them."
E no uze le malaute de ambulacio per alcus dias, entro que sia sanat e cofortat.	"The patient should not use their legs for some days until they are healed and strengthened."
Mays si la reduccio de lu a tu es excusada, lahoras aministra fort extencio am liamentz dels quals en la curacio de la hancha precedit narracio.	"However, if the reduction of this one is excused, you should then administer a strong extension with traction from those ligaments which were involved in the previous hip operation."
Capitol .xxxiii.	Chapter XXXIII.
De la curacio de la dislocacio del talo.	About the treatment of ankle dislocation.
Le talo alcunas veguadas es remaugut per petita remocio, e alcunas veguadas es dislocat segon compliment, e la dislocacio de lu es fayta o a las partidas dedintz o a las partidas deforo.	The ankle sometimes becomes displaced with slight motion and sometimes becomes dislocated upon completion; its dislocation occurs either inward or outward.
E le senhal de la dislocacio de lu es que vezes le talo imflat procedent a la partida a la qual es dislocat.	And the sign of ankle dislocation is that sometimes the ankle appears swollen at the site where it is dislocated.
Mays la curacio de la remocio de lu es de leugiera reddicio, e es que sia extendut am facilitat am las mas e sia engualhat entro que retorne.	"The cure for moving him is easy to accomplish: he should be gently extended with his hands and turned until he returns."
Mays en la curacio de lu quan es dislocat segon compliment, cove que fasses cezer le malaute dreyt, e tengua aquel un ministre fort e valent de la partida detras del dos de aquel en le mieg loc de lu.	"However, in the case of a dislocation treated according to all the rules, it is necessary that you keep the patient on their right side, and one assistant must be strong and skilled at placing his hand behind the patient's back in the middle of it."
E aprop te tu am la tieua ma dreyta le pe de la pus sobirana part, e am la tua ma sinistra de la part pus dejos del pe en le loc de la cavilha.	"And with your right hand grasp the upper part of the thigh near the hip, and with your left hand grasp the lower part of the thigh near the knee."
E aprop atira le pe a tu am la tua ma dreyta, e aprop am la sinistra per dos veguadas, e aprop exten am la sinistra; e empelleys le pietz del pe am la dreyta deves la camba ses trebalh.	"And then pull the thigh towards you with your right hand, and hold it there with your left hand for two or three times, and then extend it with your left hand; and press the head of the bone against the hip socket without shaking."
E fay aquo doas veguadas segon que havem comtat.	"And perform this procedure twice as we have described."
E aprop empelleys le pietz del pe a la camba la tersa veguada, e tu es a la cavilha.	"And then press the head of the bone into the hip socket on the third attempt, and you are at the ilium."
Donc si retorna en una veguada o en dos segon aquesta manieyra, e si vezes le pe engualhat, es bo; e sino, lahoras sobre lu itera la operacio, quar aquel retorna.	Therefore if this method is returned to once or twice again, and if the foot swells, that's good; otherwise, then repeat the operation, because that returns.
Mays si a tu es prohibida la reduccio de lu am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras fay jaser le malaute sobre le sieu dos sobre terra, e estrenh un paysel mot en terra fermat, e que caja entre las coyssas de lu, e tu ja has envolopat sobre lu drap per so que no ledesca le malaute.	But if you are forbidden from reducing the hernia with what we have mentioned, then make the patient lie on their side on the ground, and insert a small stone between their thighs, secured firmly to prevent slipping. Then wrap a cloth around them so that they do not move.
E aprop le ministre de lu tengua las suas coyssas, e aprop autre ministre extenda le pe am las suas mas o am liament que lie sobre le col del pe; e aprop extenda aquel quascun ministre contre extencio del sieu par, e le payssel sia extant entre las coyssas del malaute retinent aquel, per so que·l cos de lu no sia atirat a las partidas dejos deves la sua extencio.	And then the minister of the testicles should hold their scrotum, and another minister should extend the leg with its thigh or bandage that lies on the thigh; and each minister should stretch out their own side, and the stone should remain between the thighs of the sick person holding it, so that the body does not move towards its extension.
E aprop le metge enguala la dislocacio am las sieuas mas, e autre ministre tengua la coyssa sana a las partidas dejos, quar la dislocacio retorna am la facilitat.	And then the doctor reduces the dislocation with their hands, and another minister holds the healthy thigh on the outside to prevent displacement.
E donc cum retorna la dislocacio e es declarada a tu la sanetat de la reduccio de lu, lahoras pausa emplastre e extrenh aquela am liamentz fortment, e ligua le pe am liament a la camba.	And then when the dislocation returns and it is declared to you that the reduction has been successful, then apply plaster and secure it with bandages very tightly. Then tie the thigh with bandages at the knee.
E cove que temes o te guardes dels nervis les quals so detras sobre le talo, per que le liament sobre aquel no sia vehement e leda aquel fortment.	Be careful or guard yourself from the nerves which are behind the heel, for if you bind it tightly there it will cause pain and hurt them greatly.
E aprop layssa aquel per dos dias o per tres; e si le liament es mollificat, extrenh aquel.	And then leave him like that for two or three days; and if the bandage becomes softened, remove it.
E aprop deslia aquel en le ters dia o en le quart, e prohibeys le malaute de anament per xl dias.	And then on the third day or the fourth day, remove the splint from him, and forbid the patient to move for forty days.
Mays si es forsat de anar denant aquel spazi, no es fayta segurtat que la dislocacio no sia sobre lu dissolvuda e corrumpuda, e aprop aquo que no recipia curacio.	But if he is forced to walk during that time, it is not guaranteed that the dislocation will not be dissolved and corrupted again, and thus would not receive proper treatment.
E si accideys a lu apostema caut, lahoras cove que tu aministre en la cedacio de lu aquo en lo qual precedic la nostra narracio, en autre loc de curacio e de embrocacio, entro que sia remauguda.	But if an abscess forms from the wound, then you should apply the remedies that were mentioned earlier in this narrative regarding cure and embrocation until it is removed.
Capitol .xxxiiii.	Chapter XXXIV
De curacio de dislocacio dels ditz dels pes.	Of the treatment of dislocation of the said feet.
Cove que aquel qu’es dislocat sia engualhat am pauca extencio ses trebal; e aquo que no es dificil, abantz es leugier.	It is necessary that one who has suffered a dislocation should be reduced with little extension without struggle; and it should not be difficult to accomplish this, for the leg is lighter.
Mays si la dislocacio es en alcus nozes del dos del pe, lahoras cove que fassas cezer le malaute le sieu pe sobre loc engual de la terra o sobre taula, e sia estant ayssi cum si anava.	But if the dislocation is in some joints of the toes of the foot, then you should have the patient lie on their back on the ground or on a table, and hold their leg extended as if they were walking.
E aprop tu sta de pes, e pausa le tieu pe sobre aquo que imineys de las juncturas, e aprop calca aquel am le tieu pe am vertut entro que retorne, e que vejas aquel ja engualhat e no aparesca en le loc eminencia.	And then you stand on your feet, and place your hand beneath the protruding joints, and press down with your foot with force until it returns into its proper position, and make sure that it is properly reduced and does not protrude again.
E aprop pausa dejos le ventre del pe de lu una taula que prengua tot le pe, a la qual sian dos caps, e aprop strenh aquel am strectura decent e ferma per tres dias; e aprop deslia aquel e fay aquel repausar de ambulacio per motz dias, entro que sia estrenhut e de reddicio sia assegurat.	And then place the sole of the foot on a table that takes up all the leg, which has two ends. Then stretch it properly and firmly with bandages for three days. Then remove them and have him rest from walking for many days until he is healed and the reduction is secure.
Capitol .xxxv.	Chapter XXXV
De las specias de dislocacio que sian faytas am plagua o am fractura o am quascuna ensemps.	"Of dislocation injuries that occur with bruising or fracture or in combination."
Quan accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, e tu te perforssas en la curacio de aquela e en la restauracio de lu, motas veguadas succezeys la mort.	When some cause of those occurs, and you perform the cure of that and the restoration of it, many times death succeeds.
E per aquo no cove que sobre la curacio de lu presuma, sino aquel que es savi en l’art, de lonc uzatge, misericordios e pietados, tardiu, no-ardit ni presomptuos; e que use en le comensament de medicinas que cedan apostemas cautz tant solament, e leyssa le malaute al divinal jutgament, sino ad aquel al qual speras salut de perdicio, am de la malautia alleviacio, e en la qual appareys alcuna speransa.	"And therefore it is not necessary that one presume about its cure, but rather he who is wise in the art, experienced through long practice, merciful and compassionate, careful, not reckless or presumptuous; and let him begin with medicines that draw out only abscesses, and leave the patient to divine judgment, but also to him whom you hope for healing from destruction, with alleviation of the illness, and in which some hope appears."
E adonc esforsa te tantost far de lu la reduccio en le comensament de la causa, denant que endevengua apostema caut.	And therefore strive immediately to reduce it at the beginning of the cause, before an abscess forms.
E adonc si le membre retorna segon que volem, lahoras aministra regiment le qual ceda apostema caut e cura la plagua am aquo que conveneys a lu dels enguentz desiccatius.	And then if the limb returns as we wish, afterwards administer regimen which draws out abscess and heals the bruising with whatever is convenient to it of the dried remedies.
E si dislocacio es am fractura e accideys en le os satagias separadas, lahoras tu perforsa le stement de lor, e fay en aquo so que havem dit en las malautias simplas de aquo que es precedit en les locz de aquels.	And if dislocation occurs with fracture and the broken ends of the bone are displaced, then you perform the reduction of them, and do in this what we have said in the simple cases of that which is precedent in the places of those.
E guarda e esquiva segon la tua vertut aquel del intrament en las vias de temor segon que a tu es precedida la mia predicacio; quar aquo es milhor a tu deves le tieu Creator, e mays permanent a la tua gloria, e mays saludos al tieu cos verays aquels en le tieu temps.	And guard and avoid according to your ability that which enters through the paths of fear, as my prediction has preceded for you; because this is better for your Creator than you deserve, and more lasting for your glory, and more healthy for your true body in your time.
Ayssi fineysso las paraulas de Albucasim perfieytament de las quals Dieus ne sia benezeyt.	Thus endeth the words of Albucasis perfectly, may God bless them!
Amen.	Amen.
