After I had completed for you, my sons, this book, which is the final part of the science in medicine with its complement, and I had reached the end in it, through its explanations and declarations, it seemed to me that I should complete it for you with this treatise, which is a part of the operation, that is, surgery with manual skill.
Since the operation with manual skill was prostrate in our region and completely deprived of it at that time; so perhaps its science had perished, and its investigation was cut off. And there did not remain from it except small descriptions in ancient books, which were altered by hand. And errors and hesitations occurred, until its intentions were locked up and its utility was prolonged. It seemed to me that I should revive it with the arrangement of this treatise, according to the method of positions, declarations, and abbreviations. And that I should bring it together with the forms of cauterium and other instruments of work; so that it would be fitting from the declarations added, and from its proper preparation, which is necessary.
The reason why a good manual skill operator is not found in our time is: because the art of medicine is long and it is necessary for its author to be exercised beforehand in the science of anatomy, as Galen described, so that he may know the juices of the members, and their forms, and their connections, and separations, and have knowledge of bones, and nerves, and tendons, and their number, and their emergence, and of veins, pulsating and quiet, and of the outlets of these.
And because of that, Hippocrates said that a name with a name is much, and with work is little, and especially in the art of manual skill.
We have already spoken about this at the beginning of this book.
Since one who is not knowledgeable about what we said concerning anatomy will not be cautious, lest he already falls into error, by which people are harmed: just as I have seen many of those who boast about this science and claim to know it without knowledge and without experience.
What happened was that a foolish doctor cut open an abscessed scrofulous swelling on the neck of a woman, and he severed certain arteries in her neck; as a result, the woman's blood flowed out, until she died in his hands.
And another foolish doctor, who presumed to extract a stone from a man's bladder, which had been tormenting him for years, and the stone was large.
He approached him therefore, and extracted it with a fragment of the bladder.
For which reason the man died on the third day.
And I was already called in to extract it: and I saw from the size of the stone, and the condition of the sick man, that he would die.
And I saw another doctor, who was receiving a stipend from a certain Duke of our land for his medical services: and it happened to a black eunuch who was with him, that he suffered a fracture in his leg near the ankle; and the doctor, with his ignorance, treated the fracture above the wound with poultices, and tight bandages, and did not allow the wound to breathe.
Then he abandoned him according to his despair.
Afterwards he left him for several days, and instructed him not to loosen the bandage: and it remained thus until his leg became abscessed, and his foot as well, and he went to ruin.
I was therefore called in to him: and I approached to loosen the bandage: and calmness followed, and he was freed from his pains.
However, the corruption had already become established in the limb: and I could not restrain it.
Then the corruption ceased to spread through the limb, until he died.
And I saw another doctor, who pierced a cancerous abscess: and it became ulcerated after a few days, until the evil of his disease was magnified with his lord.
What is, because when there is a pure cancer from melancholic humor, then it is not suitable to be cauterized with iron at all, unless it is in a member that can tolerate it, so that the whole of it may be excised.
And because of that, O sons, it is necessary for you to know that the operation with the hand is divided into two divisions: namely, an operation to which health is associated, and an operation in which there is danger in many dispositions. And I have already warned in every place of this book, where an operation comes, which is accompanied by terror and fear.
Therefore it is necessary for you to beware of that and dismiss it, so that the stupid ones do not find a way to speak and to deceive.
Receive therefore the measurement with solicitude and protection, and your patients with facility and firmness, and may you walk in a better way, thanks to the favor of God, for salvation and laudable succession: and dismiss terrible illnesses of difficult healing: and lift up your spirits from that which makes you fear, so that hesitation does not creep into your faith and your comfort. For it is more remaining to your glory, and sublime in this world, and finally to your quantities.
For Galen has already said so in certain of his admonitions. Do not heal the bad illness: lest you be named a bad doctor.
Chapter One.
About section and perforation, phlebotomy and venesection, and wounds: and the extraction of arrowheads, and similar things: and all chaptered, arranged in forms of instruments.
The third chapter.
About restoration and dislocation, and the treatment of twisting, and similar things: a chapter arranged from head to foot, and the forms of instruments.
To God alone be glory.
The Surgical Book of Albucasis.
Part I.
About cauterization and burning: and with which complexions it is suitable, and at what time: and whether with iron or gold.
Chapter I.
But before I discuss the operation with it, it is necessary that I describe the quality of its cauterizations and burnings: and in what complexions they are exhibited.
I say therefore that the discourse on the quality of cauterization by burning and its harm is a profound, subtle, scientific, and hidden secret.
Many wise men have also spoken about it, and they have disagreed about it; and for me, a little of their discourses is enough, fearing prolixity.
I say therefore that cauterization is universally beneficial to every complexion, which is with matter and without matter; except for two complexions, which are hot complexions without matter and dry complexions without matter.
In hot and dry complexions with matter, they disagreed.
For some said that cauterization is beneficial in them.
And others said the opposite, namely that cauterization is not suitable for an illness which arises from heat and dryness; because the nature of fire is heat, and it is unsuitable to be cured by a hot and dry cauterization, with hot and dry.
And he who said the opposite of this said that through cauterization a cure is made in every hot and dry illness which occurs in the bodies of men; because when you compare the body of man and its humidities to the complexion of fire, you find the body of man to be cold.
And I certainly say this through his discourse: because it was already discovered by him through experiment, and he showed me that many times.
However, it is not suitable to proceed with that unless one has already been tested and exercised in the chapter on cauterization, and has recognized the diversity of human complexions, and the disposition of illnesses in themselves, and their causes, and the accidents that befall them, and the space of time for each.
But among the remaining complexions, there is no fear over these: and especially in illnesses that are cold and moist. For all doctors have agreed on these: and they did not disagree with Cauterius in their judgment about them.
And you should know, my sons, that the secret of curing through Cauterium with fire and its goodness is superior to Cauterium with combustible medicine: because fire is simple, whose action does not penetrate except to the member that is cauterized; and it does not harm another member connected to it, unless with a small injury.
On the other hand, the action of combustible medicine penetrates to that which is extended from the members; and perhaps it causes difficulty in healing the illness in the member, and perhaps it even worsens it.
Fire, however, because of its subtlety and goodness of its substance, does not do that, unless it is in excess.
However, I have made it known to you through experience, because of the length of service and study with art, and standing on the truth of things: and because of that, I excuse myself from the length of the discourse.
And you should know, my sons, that they disagree on the time in which it is suitable to perform cauterization, and they set a better time for spring.
And I say that cautery is suitable at all times; therefore, because the harm which occurs due to the time being submerged in the injury is attracted along with the cautery.
And especially if the cautery is due to pains from necessary painful affections, strong, urgent, which do not tolerate delay: therefore because it is feared that a greater evil may occur, than a small harm entering through the time.
And do not let it enter your minds, O sons, that they do not think, unless they are foolish and stupid doctors, namely that those affections which are healed by cautery are not always cured: and they place this consequence, and the thing is not as they think: therefore because cautery is not, unless in place of medicine, which alters the complexion and dries out the humidities which are the causes, whence pains occur.
However, cautery is superior to medicine due to the swiftness of its healing, and the virtue of its operation, and the vehemence of its mastery: and it is possible that the disease may return at some time according to the complexion of the infirm person, and the location of their disease, and its virtue: and what is prepared in their body from an aggregation of superfluities in it: and what reaches them in their acquisition from food, and similar things from causes, unless there is a disease in which cautery is administered. A subtle disease in a few members with superfluity and humidity, such as cautery of the tooth, due to pain, and similar things, it is possible indeed that the pain may not return in it.
But that happens in a few.
But truly, the common speech is wrong, that cautery is the last resort of medicine, is a correct speech: not to what they themselves intend in it: because they believe that there is no cure which can be conferred with medicine, nor with anything else after the occasion of cautery.
The truth is the opposite of that, and the intention, which is that cauterization is the last resort in medicine, is not so, unless when we administer methods of treatment in some disease, and they do not contribute to those medicines: then we administer cauterization at the end, and it helps: thus it follows that cauterization is the last resort in medicine, not according to the intention that the common people and many stupid doctors understand.
The ancients said that cauterization with gold is better than cauterization with iron: and they did not say this except because of the equality of gold and the subtlety of its substance: and they said that it does not create pus at the site of the cauterization. That is not absolutely true: because I have already tested it and found that it does not do so in certain bodies without others.
And cauterization with gold itself is good, and better than with iron, as they said.
However, when you ignite cauterization fire with gold, it is not declared to you, when it is ignited according to the quantity that you wish, because of the redness of the gold: and when it approaches the cold, and if you add ignition on top of it, it melts in the fire and turns into plates.
Therefore the artisan falls from that into occupation: and because of that, cauterization with iron is more familiar and closer to us, from correctness to operation.
And I have already arranged this Chapter on Cautery, according to chapters: and I have arranged them from head to foot, so that they may alleviate the one seeking what he wants from it. Concerning the method of cauterizing the Head at the crown of the commissure.
Head 2.
Here cauterization is beneficial for dominating humidity and coldness over the brain: which are two causes of swellings, and multitude of fluxes of humors from the head to the parts of the eyes and ears, and multitude of sleepiness, and pain of the teeth, and pain of the throat: and universally all diseases that occur from coldness, such as paralysis, and swellings, epilepsy, and apoplexy, and similar ones from diseases.
The method of cauterization is to warn the patient beforehand: to evacuate with soothing medicine that cleanses the head for three or four nights, according to what the strength of the patient demands, and their age, and their habit.
Then advise him to shave his head with a razor.
Then make him sit between your hands in a square shape, so that he has already placed his hands on his chest.
Then place the root of your palm on the root of his nose between his eyes. Wherever your middle finger has reached, mark that place with a cautery. Then apply the olive oil cautery, whose form this is. Then place it (the cautery) on the marked spot with the incision, descending gradually, and you turn it while your hand is contracting slowly.
Then lift your hand quickly, and look at the place.
If you see that a quantity of skull or a quantity of zeal has already been detected from the bone, then lift your hand.
And if not, repeat with the iron itself, or with another from the same if it is chilled: until you see the bones, which I told you about.
Then take something from salt, and dissolve it in water, and soak a dressing in it, and place it on the spot: and leave it for three days.
Then put a dressing soaked in butter on top of it, and leave it on the spot until the eschar (scab) of fire is destroyed. Then treat it with Tetrapharmacum ointment until it heals.
Now I have said, that as long as the wound remains open, it discharges pus: therefore it is better and more helpful.
And some of them have said that the skin should be cauterized up to the bone: and the cautery should be held until something of the density of the bone is felt.
Then scrape off what is adhering to the bone, then cleanse.
And others say that it is necessary to burn with a cautery until the end, until it makes an impression on the bone, so that the bone becomes like a shell: or an instrument which women use, inserting a small alphabet infusion; and they think that vapors are exhaled from this place, and the open wound is left for a long time.
Then it should be cleansed, until it becomes consolidated.
To me, however, these two types of cauterization do not seem to be suitable except for certain men according to the way of fear.
And to leave it alone is better with me, in accordance with his own health.
For the head is weakened by the dissolution of its natural continuity; as we have testified to in other members; and especially when the head of the infirm is weak by nature. And indeed the first species of Cauterization is more salutary and better with me, and I use it, operating thus for health.
Concerning the method of cauterizing the head in pain of the whole head.
Head 3.
When chronic pain occurs in the whole head, and it is prolonged in the weak, and they use hiera, and cochia, and purging of the head, and oils, and emplasters.
And especially if it has already been cauterized with one cautery, which we have described, and nothing among those things helps it: then consider.
For if the head of the weak person is strong by nature's creation, and it is not weak, and it finds a vehement cold: then cauterize with another cautery under that, a little.
Then cauterize it above every horn of his head with a cautery, so that the skin does not perforate, and a quantity is disclosed from the bone, as we have described.
And you should cauterize him with a cautery iron on the back of his head, in the place that is called "uas"; and it is the place where a vein is located; and lift your hand from this, and do not uncover the bone.
For the weak man finds relief from that severe pain, and it is different from the pain of the remaining cauteries on the entire head.
And I will say that this cautery is in its place; and it is necessary that it should be a cautery, with which the horns of the head are cauterized, and his occiput is more subtly cauterized than the middle of the head.
And this is its form.
On the method of cautery on the half-crown, both with dry medicine and with iron.
Head 4.
When pain and swelling occur on the part of the head, or the pain extends to the eye, and it is cleaned with cleansing medicines, and the remaining treatment is administered as I said in the divisions of diseases, and it does not help the entire thing; then cauterization in this case is according to two modes: either cauterization with sharp burning medicine, or with iron. The cautery with sharp burning medicine is, as if you take a single garlic tooth, and burn it, and cut off its extremities from both sides.
Then open the painful place at the time with a broad phlebotomy, until it becomes a thick spot under the skin, where the density is captured.
Insert it therefore under the skin, until it is hidden; then bind above it with a decent constricting poultice, and leave it for fifteen hours; then remove it, and extract the garlic, and apply an ointment for two or three days; afterwards put on a submerged cotton dressing in butter, until the place makes pus; then treat it with an ointment until it is healed.
And if you want to make that with certain burning medicines, which I wrote about in the twelfth treatise, on medicines that burn inwardly.
Cauterization indeed is with iron, and it is according to this method.
The branding iron, whose form is this.
And it is named a Claw; because the form of its head is like the form of a nail, in which there is a certain curvature, and in its middle there is a small prominence.
Then place it on the spot, and hold your hand firmly; and you turn the iron slowly with speed: and let the amount that is burned be according to the thickness of the skin, as its middle.
And raise your hand, so that the artery, which is below, is not burned, and a flow of blood occurs.
Then soak a cloth in salt water, and place it on the spot, and leave it for three days; then put the cloth with butter: afterwards treat with ointment until it is healed. And if you wish, cauterize this hemicrania with the second point of the scalpel's edge.
And beware of cutting into an artery in this hemicrania, not in the proper ancient way.
On the method of cauterizing in ancient hemicrania.
Chapter 5.
When you treat hemicrania, with what we said from previous treatment, and what we said in the divisions of illnesses, and the treatment does not help: and you see from the illness that it is not sufficient for him what we said from the first cauterization with medicine, or with cauterization with fire, then it is necessary to brand with a scalpel cauterium, until it whitens after applying signs on the spot of pain with a line, whose length is the middle of a finger, or almost that: and put your hand in its place, and hold it firmly until you cut into an artery, and pass through to the mouth. However, it is necessary for you to be cautious about the continuity of the jawbone, which moves during mastication, lest it should be injured by a blow or a nerve that moves it, whence a spasm occurs.
And this is above the custodian, and caution about the flow of blood in the artery, which has been severed.
For in the cutting of it there is fear, and especially for him who does not know what he is doing, and is not diligent, nor experienced: and he leaves the operation with it at first.
And I describe with reminiscence of the regulation of the flow of blood that occurs from the artery according to its own method, and in its place in this book.
What if you see from the weakness, that it does not suffice for him to apply this cautery, and you see the body of the infirm person tolerating the cautery in the middle of the head, as we have narrated, heal the wound, until he is restored to health.
And if you wish, administer the cautery, which we mentioned in the chapter on extracting the artery with a cautery having two points.
For cauterization is better than this and more beneficial. Concerning the method of cauterizing in the case of a golden abscess.
Chapter 6. When an abscess occurs on the golden [part of the body] due to cold, and it is treated with poultices, and other treatments that we mentioned in the division, and the pain does not subside, then apply the cautery: and it is that which is called a Point, whose form is this.
Then apply the points with it after its ignition around the entire circumference of the ear, as it revolves; or around both, if there is pain in both.
And extend yourself with the cautery from the root of the ear for a short time, after you have marked the places with ink; and let the quantity of the cautery be ten points on each ear, and similarly there.
Then treat the places, until they heal.
On the method of cautery in Torture.
Chapter 7.
Tortures that are treated with cautery are not except those species which arise from phlegm, according to what we said in the divisions of diseases. And it is necessary to add cautery to the species which arises from dryness and nerve spasm.
When you treat this species of torture with rubbings and head-cleansings and garglings, and your treatment does not help, then it is necessary to apply cautery to the weak part in three places: one at the root of the ear, and a second a little below its own time, and a third at the junction of the two lips.
And place your cautery on the opposite part of the weak area.
Since softening does not occur unless in the part that appears healthy.
And the form of cautery is to apply the cautery directly on the upper extremity of the ear, a little below the crown of the head, and another at the temple, whose length should be according to the length of the thumb.
And place your hand with the cautery until it burns a moderate quantity of the thickness of the skin.
And this is the form of the cautery, and it is a species from the knife, whose form was mentioned before: truly it is not more subtle than that which you see, and it is necessary for the knife to be somewhat above the excessive thickness. Then treat the places with what has preceded until they are healed.
On the method of cautery in ancient Apoplexy.
Chapter 8.
When ancient Apoplexy is aged and you treat it with what we have said, and your medicine does not help, and the patient does not have a fever, then cautery him with four cauteries on every crown of his head, and a cautery in the middle of his head, as we have said, and a cautery at the back of his head, according to what has preceded: and the method of cautery should be according to what has preceded.
They are also burned with a branding iron on the belly: and it is a most extreme treatment.
Then they are treated, along with what preceded.
Concerning the method of branding in obliquity.
Chapter 9.
It is fitting that they be given a drink first to the weak and great hysteria, and purifying pills for cleansing the brain.
Then scrape the entire head of the weak person, and apply to his occiput a plaster made from synapic, as described in the treatise on plasters: and apply it several times. This indeed is the method of branding: and do that second treatment in the same order as I mentioned there. If therefore they are healed through that, it is good.
If not: then make three branding irons on the back of their head, which descend from the upper part of the head to the lower part of the eye: and apply a thickness of a finger between each branding iron.
Then treat with branding irons, along with what preceded.
If however you add strength, and the patient is tolerant of that: then make a branding iron in the middle.
Which if you add strength: then brand it above the two horns.
Then treat him until he is healed: and let the branding iron be oiled according to the previously mentioned form.
Concerning the method of branding in paralysis, and softening.
Chapter 10.
It is fitting to proceed with cleansing the head along with hysteria, and with what we have said.
Then scrape the head of the weak person: afterwards brand it with a branding iron in the middle of the head, and with a branding iron above every horn of the head, and with a branding iron above its back, and three on the vertebrae of the neck.
If however you are weary of the softening of the body in many of those illnesses, and the patient is tolerant, and the illness is strong: then brand it with four branding irons on the vertebrae of the back, and finally with a branding iron, until the skin is thoroughly burned from its cut, and raise your hand.
Then treat it, until it heals: and thus the branding iron of Olivier.
On the method of branding in epilepsy.
Chapter 11.
Not all epileptics are branded, unless he whose epilepsy is from phlegm. It is necessary therefore to cleanse his brain first with yarrow, and with the rest of the treatment that we have spoken of in the division: when the patient is greatly weakened, or is tolerant of the acceptance of medicines.
If, however, he is a boy who does not tolerate medicines, then gargling and cleansing mouthwashes are administered to him, and brain-purifying mastichations, for many days beforehand with the benefit of good foods.
Then shave his head, afterwards brand him with one branding iron in the middle of his head, according to what has been previously mentioned in the method: and with another branding iron on the back of his head, and above all the horns of his head with a branding iron.
What if he was a strong patient and tolerant, then brand him with branding irons which I mentioned as having paralysis, and mollification of the body above the vertebrae of the neck and back: and let the branding iron of Olivier be according to the method that has been previously mentioned. If, however, he is a boy patient, then apply a subtle branding iron, according to this method.
On the method of branding in melancholy.
Chapter 12.
When the causes of melancholy are corrupted humidities and thick phlegm, then brand him with branding irons which I mentioned as having paralysis.
And if the cause of melancholy is an excessive flow downwards to melancholy, and the patient's body is moistened, then give him a drink that cleanses his brain, according to what has been previously mentioned in the division: then shave the patient's head, and afterwards make a well-made tortellum from linen, like a circle.
Then place it in the middle of the head, and let the weak person sitting squarely be held from every side.
Then present the bandage. And it is better with old butter or ancient oil.
And warm it over a fire with a tempered heat, which the finger can tolerate, when it is inserted into it.
Then evacuate it in the middle of his head in a circle, and let it stand until it cools down.
Do that for the weak person every week once, with the rest of his good regimen, until he is healed.
Or if you wish, cauterize him by making many small points, except for holding your hand with the cautery: indeed it should be fragrant.
For this type of cautery humidifies the brain with quality.
Then put on top a piece of cloth soaked in butter, or fat of a hen.
Concerning the method of cauterizing with water descending to the eye.
Chapter 13.
When the principle of water in the eye is declared to you through signs, which I mentioned in the division, then begin and cleanse the weak person's head with what purifies it.
And keep him away from all dampness, and make him sit in a bath, fasting for several days.
Then instruct him to shave his head, and cauterize himself in the middle of his own head. Then cauterize him on two temporal regions with two cauteries, if there is a downward flow of water in both eyes simultaneously; or on one side, if there is a downward flow of water in one eye; and cut away with the cautery all the veins and arteries that are beneath the skin; and let the cauteries be in length across the width of the temples; and beware of a flux of blood.
If you see anything of it, then cut away from him immediately with whatever medicine is possible; and I warn with wisdom, which is in the extraction of arteries, and their cutting away, and caution against a flux of blood.
And when it is cauterized on the vertebra, under two bones, with two ultimate caustics produced by two.
Concerning the method of cauterizing in ancient tears.
Head 13.
When the tears of the eyes are ancient and frequent: and they are upon the veins and arteries which are on the exterior of the manifest head, it is verified that it is from excessive cold and phlegmatic superfluities: then cauterize with a cauterion as I described in the descent of water in the reception, a cauterion in the middle of the head, and two cauterions above two temples, and two cauterions on the vertebra under two bones.
And if you need an additional treatment, then cauterize it on every side of the eye, above the extremity of the eyebrow with a small cauterion.
Concerning the method of cauterizing in a nose tumor.
Head 15.
When you treat it, with what we said previously in the division, and the treatment does not work: then prepare, and give in drink three nights of infirmum cochi: then shave its head, and cauterize it with a medium-sized cauterion, together with an oily cauterion.
Then cauterize it with a nail-shaped cauterion, two cauterions above the eyebrows under the hair slightly.
And beware of the artery, lest you wound it.
And this is the shape of the nail-shaped cauterion.
Concerning the method of cauterizing in the relaxation of the eyelid.
Head 16.
When the eyelid of the eye is relaxed from sickness or moisture, then cauterize the eyelid with one cauterion, together with this lunar-shaped cauterion.
And if you wish, cauterize it above two eyebrows slightly with two cauterions on every side: and they will be extended from the two temples: and let the length of every cauterion be according to the length of the eyebrow: and do not apply your hand with the cauterion excessively, but rather according to the quantity that is necessary for the third eyelid.
And this is the form of a cautery according to this method of lunar cautery.
On the method of cauterizing eyelids when ingrown hairs irritate the eye. Chapter 17.
The cautery in it is according to two methods: either a cautery with fire, or a cautery with combustible medicine.
In the cautery with fire, however, you should warn the patient beforehand, so that they may remove their own hair, if it is among those that disturb them, until they are prolonged and equalized. If however they irritate him at his own site: then bind his eyes with a cloth, so that they are not moved, until they are born.
When they are born and equalized, then place the head of the patient in your lap: afterwards mark on the eyelids of his eyes with encaustic, a mark that is according to the figure of the leaf of myrtle: and let the beginning of the mark be near the hairs.
Then place a cloth imbued with egg white: or in a mucilage of ground psyllium on the eye.
Then apply the fire cautery, whose form is this.
Then cautery on the figure that you marked gradually in many places, until the surface of the skin is burnt, which is like the shape of the leaf of myrtle, appearing entirely and properly.
And the sign of the success of your work is this: that you see the eyelid of the eye already contracted, and the hairs elevated at the point of the eye.
Lift your hand then: and leave it for three days.
Then place on it a cloth with butter, until the scar is eradicated.
Then treat it with an ointment, until it is healed.
If something returns from the hairs after that hour, and the eyelid becomes soft: then repeat the cautery on that place, as you did at first.
If, however, the hairs are in the lower part: then cauterize it, until it returns to its natural place: and equalizes so that the hairs do not prick the eye.
On the method of cauterizing with a burning medicine in the same case.
Chapter 18.
It is as if you should prescribe for the weak, so that they let go of the hairs, until they are prolonged and equalized.
Make a shape from a piece of paper in the form of a myrtle leaf.
Then take from soap known and from lime not soaked in water a weight of one ounce or nearly that; then rub those together with good compression, and make it with haste, so that it is not frozen.
Then spread from the mixture upon the paper which you made in the shape of a myrtle leaf, and put it upon the eyelid of one eye or of two.
And place under the eye a small cloth soaked in white egg; and let the head of the weak person be in your lap.
And put your index finger on the medicine, and press it gently for a short time.
And you move it as often as the weak person feels the biting of the medicine: because he finds its biting like fire.
Therefore, as long as he perseveres in this, which he finds biting, then remove the medicine, and move it with your finger.
When the biting sensation quiets, then remove the medicine, and wash the eye with water.
And consider then, if you see the eyelid being lifted, as it is lifted by contraction with fire, or with incision, it is good: and if not, then repeat over the same place from the medicine to where the medicine does not impress, and does not blacken, until your operation is equalized, and the eye is contracted.
Then put over it a small cloth with butter, until the skin of the burning is eradicated.
Then treat it with a diaphinic ointment, or another, until it heals.
And it is necessary for you during the operation to keep a final guard, lest something from the medicine falls into the eye.
If the eyelid becomes soft after a few days and something struggles to come out of the eye from the hairs, then you should apply the medicine to that place which has become soft from the eyelid itself, just as you did at first.
Then treat it, until it heals.
And this is the form of a myrtle leaf.
And know that the eyes of men differ in size and equality.
Therefore, according to that, let your consideration be this: and do not hide the way of righteousness from him who has a zeal for this art.
On the method of cauterizing in the tear duct fistula.
Chapter 19.
When you treat a fistula, with what we said in the divisions of diseases, and your treatment does not help, then it is necessary to cauterize it according to this method.
Instruct the patient to place their head on your lap, and hold it steady with their hands in such a way that it does not move or get agitated with their own head.
Then place a cotton pad soaked in egg white or a poultice of fleawort on their eye: then apply the cautery iron, whose shape is this.
It is a concave shape, like the form of a reed pen from one extremity, with which the cautery iron is made: and if it needs to penetrate to the other extremity, and if it needs to be held thus above.
However, this concave shape is better suited for your work.
Then place a cautery on it, which has been ignited with a flame.
And hold your hand there for a while at the cautery, next to the eye, so that your hand does not slip, or the patient is disturbed: and you will place the cautery on the fat of the eye, and corrupt it.
If then you apply at the beginning of your cautery up to the bone, it will be good.
And if not: then repeat the cautery once or twice, if it is necessary for that: and leave it for three days.
Then put a bandage with butter, and treat it with a drying ointment, until it heals. If it has passed forty days and it does not heal: then put on it a sharp corroding medicine, until the bone is exposed: and scrape it according to what is written in its chapter.
And there is another method of cautery for a fistula, which some of the first authorities have mentioned.
Direct yourself to the place of the fistula, and find it: then put into the same fissure a subtle cannula, which is called a subtle tube, whose form is this.
And pour into it a quantity of drachmae from melted lead, and hold your hand with a good cannula retention, and the patient should not move at all, so that it does not flow, or the melted lead reaches his eye.
And it is necessary to put on the patient's eye a bandage soaked in white egg, or in water.
For the melted lead burns the place of the fistula, and heals it with a marvelous healing.
If the fistula is healed, along with what we have said about cautery and treatment, it is good.
And if not, then it is necessary to administer the nasal passage, and reduce the fistula to the course of the nose, according to what is suitable for its own place.
On the method of cauterizing in labial fissures.
Chapter 20.
Many times there occur in the lip fissures which are called Pili, and especially in the lips of children.
When therefore you treat these fissures, as we have said in the division of diseases, and the treatment does not help, then you should apply a small cautery iron, according to this method.
And let it be concave according to the subtlety of the instrument.
Then treat it with a cerate, until it is healed.
On the method of cauterizing in oral fistulas.
Chapter 21.
When an abscess occurs at the root of the gums, or in the palate, or in the roots of the teeth: then it produces pus, and bursts: afterwards it becomes chronic, and the pus flows, and a fistula forms: then you treat it, and if the treatment does not help in that case, then it is necessary to apply a cautery iron according to its size, which can grasp the fistula.
Then insert the ignited cautery into the opening of the fistula, and hold your hand steady, until the ignited iron reaches the depth of it and its end: do that once or twice.
Then treat it afterwards, as we have said about the treatment until it is cured.
If therefore the abscess is cut off and healed, it will be good.
And if not, then it is necessary to lay bare the place and remove the corrupted bone according to what appears in its head.
On the method of cauterizing in gums and softening teeth.
Chapter 22.
When the gums become soft because of moisture and the teeth move, and you treat it with medicines and it does not help: then place the head of the patient in your lap.
Then apply the fire cauterization, whose form you will see afterwards, so that you place a candle over the tooth: and insert into it the ignited cautery hastily: and hold your hand there for a short time, until the patient feels the heat of the fire having already reached the root of the tooth.
And lift your hand away: then apply the cautery several times, according to what you see fit.
Then the patient should soak his mouth with salt water, and hold it for one hour: and spit it out.
For the tooth that has been moved is stabilized, and the gums that have been softened are tightened, and the corrupted moisture is dried up.
Chapter 23.
When toothache is due to coldness, either there is coldness in it or worm, and treatment with medicines does not help: then cautery on the spot is according to two methods: either cautery with butter, or cautery with fire.
The cautery method with butter is to take melted butter, and boil it in an iron spoon, or in a vessel.
Then take a cloth, and wrap it around the end of the affected tooth.
Then submerge it in the boiled butter: and place it quickly on the aching tooth, and hold it until it cools down: then repeat it several times, until the power of fire reaches the root of the tooth.
And if you wish, submerge a woolen thread or cloth in cold butter, and place it on the painful tooth: and place ignited iron on top of it, until the fire reaches the deep cavity of the tooth.
The cautery method with fire is to direct a copper or iron tube. And let there be something of thickness in its body, so that the sharpness of the fire does not reach the patient's mouth.
Then apply cautery, whose form is a flame; and put it on the tooth: and hold your hand, until the cautery becomes cold.
Do that several times, for the pain is relieved, either on that same day or another day.
And it is necessary to apply the impression of that cautery so that it fills the weak bone with good pus, and holds it for one hour; then extracts it.
And this is the form of the cautery.
Cauterize with whatever extremity you use, according to what is possible: and this is the form of a Cannula.
On the method of cauterying in Scrofula.
Chapter 23.
When Scrofula are from phlegm, and from cold humidities, and they do not obey digestion through medicines, and you want to digest them quickly: then apply a concave cautery flame, whose form is this.
It has two open extremities, so that the smoke exits from the cautery through the other extremity: and put it ignited on the abscess once, and a second time, if you need it, until it reaches the depth of the abscess.
If the abscess is small: then put the cautery according to the size of the abscess.
Then leave it for three days, and put a cotton dressing soaked in butter on top of it, until what the fire has burned is removed.
Then treat it with a toothpaste ointment, until the form of the cannula heals.
On the method of cauterying for throat ulcers and constricted breath.
Chapter 25.
When humidity settles on the pulmonary canal, and especially when it is with a cold temperament, then it is necessary to evacuate the weak part first with solvent medicines.
Then cauterize it in the nostril at the root of the gullet in a depressed place: and be careful, lest you penetrate too far with the cauterization into the gullet, nor on the skin, unless something of it.
Then cauterize it with another cautery at the joint of the neck in the last vertebra, ultimately: and let the cautery be according to the method that has gone before.
Then treat it with what has gone before, until it is healed.
On the method of cautering in cases of lung diseases and coughs.
Chapter 26.
When coughs and lung diseases are caused by cold humidities, and the patient is not feverish, nor consumptive, and the disease is not chronic: then cauterize it with two cauteries above the elbow in depressed, gentle, and empty places.
And with another cautery in the middle of the chest between the two breasts: and let the cautery be a hollow tube according to the shape that has gone before.
And if it is fitting to use your cautery by pricking with the cautery, which is called a Point, whose shape has gone before in the pricking of the pain of the ears: and let the points be from thirty points up to almost another.
Then treat it with what has gone before, until it is healed. And now let the cautery have three branches: according to this shape.
For it is alleviated with that cautering when you make it as if one of the three Cauteries.
On the method of cautering for Gout, and for dislocation of the shoulder.
Chapter 27.
When the head of the arm is dislocated due to humid causes, and it does not return to its place in the hour of its return from the dislocation, until it becomes accustomed to that return, then it is dislocated by a small movement, which happens as we have already testified, then it is necessary to reduce the dislocation at first.
Then the weak patient is placed on their back, or on their healthy side.
Then elevate the skin which is inside the thigh towards the top with the fingers of your left hand: and if the joint is dislocated towards the inside.
Then hold a cautery iron having two points. Its form is this.
Then cauterize the skin until it penetrates to the other side, and there will be a figure of cauterization with four cauteries.
And when the cauterization is done with a cautery having three points, there will be a figure of cauterization then with six cauteries; and they are points according to the subtlety of the tension.
And this is the form of the cautery having three points.
And when one is added in this way, there are eight cauteries.
Then put on the cautery iron porous fragments with salt.
Then make the weak part adhere to tranquility, so that the limb is not moved for a certain time, until it is comforted.
And if the dislocation is towards the top, and this rarely happens, then cauterize it above the shoulder with a cautery of nails, or by puncturing with many points.
For the joint is strengthened, and moisture is removed: and the weak patient is healed.
On the method of cauterizing the stomach.
Chapter 28.
When cold and many humidities occur in the stomach, so that they extract it from its complexions, and multiply catarrhs to it, and constant modes of cure do not help: then it is necessary for the weak patient to be placed on his back, and to extend his legs, and his hands.
Then cauterize with three cauteries, a cautery under the nipple of the breast in the quantity of one finger, with a nail-cautery, and two cauteries below from the two sides of the cautery of one, until there comes a triangular figure of cauteries.
And let them be extended between both so that they may not adhere together when they make pus. And let the depth of the cauterization be a quantity of two or three times the thickness of the skin.
And let the figure of the cauteries be according to this form without addition; and if you wish to cauterize with a large cautery in the middle of the stomach according to this form; and let the cautery that makes this cautery be one according to the figure of a circle, according to this form.
And the stomach is cauterized by pricking it with the point of this cautery; and it is, as you mark a point on the stomach according to the quantity that you wish with an encaustic; then cauterize it with the point of the cautery; then heal it with the treatment that precedes until it is healed.
Concerning the method of cauterizing a cold liver.
Chapter 29.
When it happens that the liver causes pain due to coldness and humidity, or due to thick flatulence, until it departs from its natural egress and becomes weak with the aforementioned symptoms, and is not helped by what we have said, then it is necessary for the weak patient to be placed on his back, and marked with an encaustic three cauteries according to this figure, and in the same quantity on the liver below the hypochondria, where the elbow joint reaches; and let there be a space between each cautery equal to the thickness of a finger; and let the cautery be equal to the length of the straight body; and do not press your hand too much with the cautery.
And let the quantity of it that is touched be from the thickness of the skin, a moderate quantity not added; and let the weak person stand on their feet.
But if they are not standing, then let them lie down, who has already extended their legs and raised their arms. This is the form of the cautery.
And it is certainly possible for you to cauterize these cauterizations with a cautery scalpel, when you have subtlety and prudence in the art.
And be careful, so that you do not proceed to the extreme in cauterization, and the hardness of the entire skin is burned, because the entire body is burned, and it reaches to the intestines: for the skin there is subtle, therefore know that.
On the method of cauterizing apostemes of the liver.
Chapter 30.
When an aposteme occurs, and you wish to know, if that aposteme is in the flesh of the liver or in its tunic: then if it is in the flesh of the liver, it induces a dull pain, and heaviness without acuteness: and if it is in the tunic of the liver, with pain there is acute vehemence: and you see already, because it has wearied out the doctors with its cure.
It is necessary therefore that the weak person rests on his pillow.
Then figure out the place of the aposteme with an enamel: then ignite a cautery iron that is similar to a star.
And this is its form.
And cauterize with that cautery iron one, until the entire skin is burned, and it reaches to the siphaç, until all the sanies are discharged: then take care of its cure with evacuations, until it is healed.
And it is not fitting that this species of cautery iron be used, unless one whose study in the art of medicine is prolonged: and through whose hand those diseases converge with experiment many times: then indeed he dares to undertake an operation of this kind.
But I do not intend to abandon it, for it is better with me.
On the method of cauterizing in Pleurisy.
Chapter 31.
The ancients said that a cautery iron with the roots of Aristolochia is applied to cold Pleurisy in this manner.
And it is, as you receive from the roots of dry long aristolochia, one longer root, which is found in it, and it should be like the thickness of a finger.
Then submerge it in oil: and set it on fire.
Then cauterize with one cautery at the point that is between the continuation of the furrow with the neck, and with two small cauteries under the guidance of small inclinations towards the part that is under the beard.
And with two cauteries also at the point that is between the fifth and sixth ribs sloping backwards slightly: and with one cautery in the middle of the chest, and another above the stomach.
And with three cauteries from the back: one at the point that is between the two shoulder blades: and with two cauteries on both sides of the chest, the lower cautery being between the two shoulder blades.
And it is not necessary to compress your hand with the cautery, but rather let it be on the manifest skin, giving off a smell. And already some of the ancients have said that there are those who use a cautery made from iron similar to a file: and they set it on fire, and insert it inside what is between the ribs, until they reach with it to the very aposteme, and the sanies flow out: as we described in the case of Epatis' aposteme.
But in this piercing with a cautery there is fear of either the weak patient dying immediately or a fistula occurring at the site, which has no healing.
On the method of cauterizing the Spleen, Chapter XXXII.
When you treat an illness of the spleen, with what we said about cures in the division of illnesses, and your treatment does not help, then the cautery is in it according to three methods, all of which are correct.
Of which one is to make three or four cauteries in a line along the length of the spleen, according to the figure of Epatis' cauteries, whose figure has gone before.
And let there be among all cautery a quantity of thickness of a finger, or a little more.
And let the method of cautery be that which we mentioned as being equal in the cautery of the liver.
And do not press your hand with the cautery, and let the patient lie relaxed on their back.
And another method of cauteration is: to hold the cautery with two fingers, as we mentioned in the chapter on dislocation of the shoulder; and elevate the skin which is on the direct spleen, where the bent elbow of the left arm arrives; and let your elevation be such that you elevate the skin according to the width of the body, so that the cauteries fall according to the length of the body.
Then introduce two ignited fingers deeply, until they penetrate the skin on the other side; then withdraw the cautery; thus four cauteries are made. And if you want to cauterize with another cautery having three fingers.
Then take care to apply the cautery after you have let it cool for many days; for it is more beneficial than all the others that preceded it in terms of treatment.
Concerning the method of cauterizing in Hydrophobia.
Chapter 33.
The cautery does not fall on the affected part in Hydrophobia, unless the skin is properly prepared.
When you treat a Hydrophobic patient with the methods of treatment which we mentioned in the division, and the treatment does not work, then it is necessary to cauterize him with four cauteries around the navel, and one on the stomach, and another on the liver, and one on the spleen, and two on the back between the vertebrae, and one directly on the chest, and another directly on the stomach; and let the quantity of the depth of the cautery be close to the thickness of the skin.
Then leave the opened cautery, so that it emits pus for a long time.
And it is not fitting for an infirm person to be treated with cauterization after the cure, because two intentions are required for him; and he will hasten towards healing with the aid of God.
Indeed, the form of the cauterized stomach is claw-like, according to what its former shape was; and that of the back, which is cauterized, is oily, according to what its former shape was.
On the method of cauterizing feet and legs. Chapter 34.
When they swell up with hydrops and are filled with citrine water: it is fitting to cauterize on the upper part of the foot at night, which is between the ankle-bone and the ring-finger; and lift your hand with the cauterium, and do not twist it; then lift your hand, and do not repeat it at all.
For the citrine water recedes, and the cauterium should be according to this form.
Then make two cauterizations on each leg, and let the cauterium be with the extremity of the knife's edge; and let the cauterium be according to the length of the leg, one below the knee, and another lower than it, around the middle of the leg; and above every hip, two cauterizations; and leave the cauterium open without treatment for a long time: so that some water recedes from it; then treat it with the remaining things which we have said.
On the method of cauterizing in cases of abdominal ulcers. Chapter 35.
When there is an ulcer of the stomach from cold and dampness, until it debilitates the retentive and digestive virtues, which are in the stomach and intestines; and it is treated with modes of cure, but not healed: and you see the infirm person tolerating cauterization of exuberant virtue; then cauterize him with a large cauterium on his stomach, according to what preceded in cauterizing the stomach with a circular cauterium, and four subtle cauterizations around the navel, with a subtle claw-like cauterium: and a cauterium above the hip, or two cauterizations.
And if you see excessive moistness and the patient tolerates that, then cauterize it with a cautery on the pubic area, and with a cautery on every limb: and perhaps you should add two small cauteries on the stomach near the navel.
It is a profitable treatment, whose benefit does not fail.
On the method of cauterizing hemorrhoids.
Chapter 36.
When there are many old hemorrhoids in the anus, or one, and they are from gross, cold, or corrupted humidities, and they are treated with what we said earlier in the division, but the treatment does not help: then cauterize with three cauteries on the lower vertebra of the back below the alumidation for a short time in a triangular shape, and with a cautery near the navel almost two fingers' breadth.
And if you think that his stomach is chilled, and his food is not digested, and you see his face to be affected, then cauterize him on the stomach with a large cautery, according to what came before: and with a cautery on his liver, and another on his spleen, with a cautery of the claw-shaped instrument: and leave the cautery open for some time: then treat him until he is healed.
On the method of cauterizing ulcers after their excision.
Chapter 37.
When you excise ulcers, then ignite a cautery that is similar to a fiery spark.
Then insert the ignited cautery into the excised ulcer: and hold your hand there until the cautery reaches the opening of the vein, from which the blood flows: do it once or twice. If therefore there are many ulcers, then cauterize each one with a cautery according to what we have narrated.
Then treat them with what is beneficial to them from ointments, until they are healed.
And if you cauterize him with a large cautery on the skull, it is more useful in his youth.
On the method of cauterizing a fistula in the anus.
Chapter 38.
When the sick person does not obey the treatment and operation that we have described in its own place, and is terrified by it, perhaps he will be healed with a cautery.
When therefore a fistula occurs to someone, and it becomes chronic, pus flows out of it, and corrupted moisture accumulates.
It is more dignified therefore that what is opportune is that he should try it with a subtle probe.
Then he should recognize the quantity of its depth with the probe.
Then he should apply a cautery, which is similar to a red-hot iron.
Then he should introduce the ignited iron itself into the fistula and the quantity where the nail went in. And he should repeat the cautery over it, until all the corrupted bodies are burned away, once, or twice, or three times, according to the quantity of your necessity.
And he should be cautious of burning the nerve, if it is there, or the large veins; or if the fistula leads to the bladder or to the intestine, then he should be cautious of all these places.
And he should not do that, unless the fistula is in a fleshy place; and he should consider, because it does not penetrate.
Then he should take care of the place until it is healed.
If, however, the place is sealed off, and the materials are cut off from it, and it remains thus for a long time; then he should know that it is now fully healed.
And if the materials do not cut off from it, then he should know that it is penetrating, or there is a corrupted opening deep within, or almost one of those: whose remembrance will come in its own place.
On the method of cauterizing kidneys.
Chapter 39.
When pain occurs in the kidneys due to cold or gross flatulence, and it is diminished because of that weak condition, then it is necessary to cauterize them above the pubic area, cauterizing each kidney with a cautery iron, whose preceding memory.
And perhaps we will cauterize him a second time in that same pubic area.
Because three lines come together.
Therefore they will be more useful in the healing process.
On the method of cauterizing the bladder.
Chapter 40. When weakness occurs in the bladder, and softening from cold and humidities, until it does not retain urine, then cauterize it on the lower part of the back above the bladder, where the hairs of the pubic area begin, and with a cautery iron on the right side, and another on the left side: and let the length of that cauterization be according to the size of the node of the thumb; and cauterize it with a lower dorsal cautery iron, or with two cautery irons if it is needed: and let it be according to what precedes the cautery iron of the clavicle.
On the method of cauterizing the womb. Chapter 41.
When cold and humidity occur in the womb, and it is prevented from conception because of that, and its menstruations are corrupted, and their provocation is delayed, and pain occurs to her upon their arrival, then it is necessary to cauterize with three cautery irons around the navel, as we said in the cauterization of the bladder, and with a cautery iron above the lower back, or with two cautery irons: and let the cautery iron be of the clavicle.
On the method of cauterizing the hip in a dislocation.
Chapter 42.
When the mucous humidities flow to the ankle of Anchae, and they become the cause of its exit from its place; and a sign of this is that one leg is prolonged over the other when compared to the normal: and the location of the dislocation is found in that empty space.
It is necessary therefore to cauterize the weak place over the ankle of Anchae with a similar circular cautery of its own; after you mark with an encaustic in the circumference of the ankle, as it revolves: and so that the very ankle falls in the middle of the circle.
And let the cautery be one whose form preceded in the cauteration of the stomach.
If this cautery is not present to you, then cauterize it with three cauteries, with a large olive-shaped cautery; and let the depth of the cautery be according to the quantity of the thickness of the entire skin.
Then treat it, until it is healed.
On the method of cautery for sciatica. Chapter 43.
When pain occurs in the ankle joint, and its causes are cold and humidity; and the weak place is treated with what we mentioned earlier, but the treatment does not help, and it worsens: then it is necessary to free the weak place from gross humors with foul-smelling pills, or with artificial pills, and similar things.
Then cauterize it.
And the method of cautery in this case is according to two methods: either cautery with adhering medicines, or cautery with fire.
Cautery with fire is according to many modes.
One of which is to cauterize over the ankle joint itself with three triangular cauteries, according to this shape.
And make for them a good or bad depth.
And let the space that is between all the cauteries be the quantity of the thickness of the finger, and let the cautery be olive-shaped.
When a cauterization is made in the middle above the anchor-shaped bone of the same head.
There are four cauterizations.
And if you want to cauterize with a circle, whose preceding form is in the cauterization of the dislocated anchor, one: so that it may be a circle containing the whole anchor.
And burn the thickness of the entire skin.
This is the method of cauterization in Sciatica, when the pain adheres to the anchor itself, and does not extend as far as the hip and leg.
If it extends as far as the hip and leg, then cauterize it with two cauterizations above the hip, above the place to which the illness reaches, where there is pain, and with your cauterization on the ankle four fingers towards the wooded part for a short time: and let the cauterization be gentle. And let the depth of the cauterization be according to the depth of the thickness of the skin.
What if the illness reaches where the pain extends almost to the toes of the foot, then cauterize it there where it reaches with a point-cauterization, three, or four, or more, if that is what it needs.
And if it reaches where the pain is under the knee towards the leg, then cauterize it there with a gentle single cauterization.
And take care in every cauterization of yours, so that you do not ultimately harm with the cauterization to the point of burning a nerve or a large artery, and attracting through it a great harmful evil or contraction.
And I have indeed already seen one and another, among those who were cauterized above the ankle, and ultimately harmed in the cauterization, and the leg became inflamed, until a tumor followed to the foot, and it was entirely perforated, and the entire foot was corrupted: then there occurred a loosening of the intestine, and death after that.
If there is pain in both parts simultaneously, cauterize each one according to this method.
And some wise men have spoken of a type of cauterization called "anchae", whose method is this cauterization.
Make a similar iron instrument, whose diameter is half a palm: and let it be at its orifice according to the thickness of a finger's knuckle, or a little less: and inside that instrument let there be a third instrument.
And let there be a space that is between the entire instrument by the size of a thumb's knuckle: and let the instruments be open at both parts: and let their height be like a knuckle, or two knuckles: and make for them a handle from iron, decently fitted to the instruments.
And this is its form.
Then it is heated in the fire until it glows red, and shoots out sparks: then let it be placed on a pad of "anchae" [a type of cauterizing agent] applied to the healthy side.
Cauterize him therefore with three round cauters at one time.
Then leave it for three days.
Afterwards apply a plaster with butter, and leave the wound open for many days.
Then treat it with an ointment until it heals.
Albucasis said, "We have used this type of cauterization little, on account of the terror of its appearance; and for this reason, we found few who would rely on it.
However, it is one of the good cauterizations for him who suffers from it, and finds a place for it.
The cauterization instrument is with medicinal applications, so that you make two iron instruments having a perforated armlet, in which descends the hinge of its door from copper or iron, with a length of a wall: whose height is two knuckles, or almost so.
And let there be a space that is between the two quantities of the thickness of the finger, and let it be open below and above: and let it contain itself according to this form.
Then place it on a soft pillow, with the injured side lying on the healthy side.
And press your hand strongly on the soft pillow.
Then apply between two circles made of hot water, which has been warmed with fire for a short time, and hold it for the quantity of an hour's timing: and let the injured person endure its biting and its burning, for he finds the biting as fire, until the biting subsides.
Then lift your hand with the instrument, and wipe away the hot water from the entire wound with sweet water: then leave it for three days.
And put butter on it, until the blackness of the burn is removed: and leave it for some days, and cleanse away the pus from it.
For it is the last stage in the treatment.
Then treat it with ointments, until it heals.
If the pain extends to the hip or leg: make it stable in what contains water, according to what you did in the wound equally.
And this is the method of hot water: and I have already written it in the treatise on medical corrections.
Take alkaline and unextinguished lime of both, one part each: grind both, and put them in a new pot, whose lower part is perforated with a small hole, according to the quantity that the radius can enter: and place under the base of the pot another treated pot: and pour over the alkaline and lime from sweet water, which submerges both by a finger's width: after which you press it down with your hand, using good compression: and leave the pot until the sharp water descends to the lower part of the treated pot.
Then gather all that water and pour it over a lime plaster; and strain it until it is renewed.
For it will be a strong solvent then, which is administered in many medical operations and in the cauterization of remaining limbs.
Because it produces the operation of fire itself.
And they are from medicines, with which they cautetrize anch, and also as thesis, and honey of nutmeg, and lime with soap, so that both may be mixed together.
And Galen indeed recounted that a certain man from ancient cures, by which the pain of anch and sciatic vein was cured: and he magnified its value greatly.
And he said that he did not need another cure, and that he was healed from one vein alone, until he recounted that perhaps he himself had entered the delayed bath, and came out of it already healthy. And it is, that it should be received from the green vegetation: and if the green is not found, take dry, fresh: and crush much with some fat, and apply to the anch, where there is pain, or leg, or in the hip: and bind, and leave for three hours, or for as long as the patient feels the soothing comfort of the application.
Then introduce him into a bath.
When therefore his body becomes relaxed, introduce it into a sunbeam.
For the pain recedes, and he is healed.
And know that it is not necessary to use any cautery with these medicines, unless after the evacuation of the body.
And Dioscorides, who said that the dung of goats, when it is cautered with the vein of the sciatic, helps him: and it becomes a cautery according to this method.
Take wool, and soak it in old oil, and apply it to the deep place, which is between the thumb of the foot and the ankle, and it is closer to the ankle.
Then take dry goat dung and set it on fire until it becomes a coal.
Then put it on a woolen cloth, and let it stand until it is extinguished.
Then repeat that.
Do not cease doing that until sensation returns to the affected part and the pain subsides.
And this method of cautery is called the Iron Cautery of Cowpox.
On the cauterization of back pain.
Chapter 44.
When pain occurs in the back from multiple causes, either from a fall, or a blow, or excessive evacuations, and similar things, from the infusion of cold and moist material: and indeed cauterization is not applicable, unless in this single case, which arises from the infusion of cold material.
It is necessary therefore, after the evacuation of the patient with foul-smelling pills and similar things, to make three lines across the width of the affected part on the back where there is pain, then to mark each line with five cauteries or more according to the amount that comes from the tolerance of the patient's strength: and let the cauterization be done with cautery points.
And if you wish, cauterize with three or four cauteries, using the middle claw-shaped cauterization, according to this method.
On the method of cauterizing in cases of gibbosity of the nape of the neck.
Chapter 45.
This disease often occurs in small infants.
And the sign of this disease in children is that a constriction occurs above it with difficulty in breathing upon elevation, and movement: and you find it in the last vertebra of the back and its nodes, which already begin to emerge above the remaining vertebrae.
When you see that, and you want to do it, then cauterize it with a circular cautery according to this method.
And let him take the cautery equally over every part of the spine; and if you want to cauterize around the spine with a cautery point, two or three lines, and let the points be close together.
Then treat the place until it is healed with what we have said.
And beware, lest you administer the cautery to a hump, which occurs in a spasm of a nerve.
On the method of cauterizing for gout and joint pains. Chapter 46.
When joint pains are caused by cold and humid influences that flow to any member of the body, then when pains occur in the feet, it is customary for doctors to call it gout specifically.
When therefore gout caused by cold is treated with the methods of treatment and the pains are not removed, then cautery removes them.
And it is that you should cauterize him after evacuation around the joint of the foot with many cauteries; and let the cautery be oily.
This is its form.
And if you need to make points on the surface of the foot, then make them with a cautery point.
What if the pains ascend as far as the knees or other joints, and it often happens that, then cauterize it over every knee with three cauteries, or four from every part, with the same cautery of Clavi. If however more are needed for you with this cautery, then cauterize it. And do not immerse your hand with the cautery, but rather let it be around the thickness of the skin only.
If however the pains ascend to the knees and back, then administer what we have said about cautery in its chapter.
What if the pains are only in the hands, then make points around the wrists, as two lines revolve.
If however it remains from pains in the fingers, then prick them, above every knot a pricked point, and above the palm of the hand.
If however pains ascend after days to the elbows or to the shoulders, then cauterize both from every part.
And do not evacuate the weakened place from good regime, from reception of medicines.
For if a good regime is made, and phlegm is evacuated, it will be healed with the help of God along with this cautery.
On the method of cautering for hernias.
Chapter 47.
When a hernia occurs in the groin, and the intestine descends, or the scrotum to the testicle, and it is a beginning nearby: then it is necessary that you should release the constriction of the weakened part on its own day.
And let it be treated with gentle remedies, so that the feces may descend from its own belly.
Then sit between your hands on its back: and order it to hold its breath, until it goes out, or the scrotum appears, or the intestine.
Then reduce it with your fingers, and mark with a hot iron under the hernia above the bone of the thigh, with a mark whose extremity is similar to the middle of a circle towards the upper body.
Then apply the cautery iron, which has this form, until it reaches the white part, and produces a small blister.
Then reduce the intestine or scrotum to its concavity.
Then the assistant should place his hand on the spot, so that the intestine does not come out: and you have now opened between the thighs of the weakened person, and placed a pillow under him, and one servant is above his thighs, and another above his chest who holds his hands.
Then place the cautery iron on that mark, your hand with the standing upright cautery iron straight.
And hold it, until you reach the bone: or go around with it to another place, if you have not succeeded with it at first until you reach the bone.
And wisely observe from the exit of the intestine at the time of your cauterization, lest you burn it, and it may happen through that to the weak or dying, or great evil.
And know that when you do not succeed with the cautery to the bone, your operation does not help.
And it is necessary that the cautery for infants be subtle, according to their measurement.
Then treat with the remaining ointments, until they are healed.
And let the weak person lie on their back for forty days, until the wound is sealed.
And it is necessary to put a nutrient of the same length of time as his cure, which will soothe his stomach: so that he may not vomit and expel the intestine through straining and evacuation.
Then when he wants to get up after forty days, then administer a well-made bandage, and hold it for another forty days.
For when he uses this regimen, he will be healed with a complete healing.
When Hernias occur in the rest of the abdomen, and are incipient, and it seems as if they should not be added to, then cauterize that Hernia with a round cautery according to its quantity: and let what is touched from then on be like a third of it.
Then treat it, with what we have said: and do not add to it.
And now some first authorities have said: that a Hernia should be cauterized with a triangular cautery, according to this form.
After it is marked with a cautery, and a line is applied which runs across the width of the upper part of the rupture, and another line below. And place your hand in the middle with a cautery having a clamp.
But the first cautery is easier and better. On the method of cautery in painful areas due to a fall or blow.
Chapter 48.
When pain occurs in certain limbs due to a fall or blow, and the pain persists for a long time and is not helped by medical treatment, then it is necessary to apply cautery with a pointed cautery.
And let the cautery be suited to each member according to its magnitude, and its own smallness, and its weakness, and its own virtue, and the location of the twist, and the pain resulting from it.
If therefore it is healed by the first cautery, that is good.
If not: then repeat over the same cautery.
Since it is customary with these pains that they shift from one member to the one that approaches it.
Therefore it is necessary to pursue them with a cautery until the weak part is healed.
On the method of applying cautery for Leprosy.
Chapter 49.
But leprosy patients are sometimes helped by a cautery with the greatest aid.
And especially the type of leprosy which occurs due to putrefaction of phlegm and melancholy; therefore one should carefully consider the power of applying cautery to it.
If therefore the leprosy is incurable, and you have treated it with what we said in the division, and it does not recede, nor remain stationary: and at times it spreads over the entire complexion of the patient; then apply cautery to him on the head with five cauteries: one in the middle of the head at the notch, and a second below that towards the forehead at the end of the hair, and two on both horns, and one behind on the nape of the neck.
And you should cauterize your hand thoroughly with a branding iron, until it makes a small impression on the skin, and the cortices are dislocated from it: so that the gross vapors may be expelled from it, and the branding iron is also applied above the spleen, according to what has preceded.
But if the leprosy has already spread over the patient and is manifestly apparent, then it is necessary to cauterize with those branding irons which we described in the head, and to apply the branding iron above the nose, and two branding irons on each cheek, and two on the vertebrae of the neck, and six on the vertebrae of the back, and one large one at the base of the tailbone and one above it, in the same place; and two on the shoulders: namely, one on each shoulder, and two on the knees: one on each knee, and two on the hips, and two on the elbows, and two on the tenderness of their chest: and to cauterize over every joint, from the joints of their fingers and toes; and to apply the branding iron above every heel of their feet, and to the soles of their feet.
And be careful not to touch with those branding irons the veins that are on the back of the heel, lest you burn them. And when it is cauterized with a branding iron above the breastbone, and elsewhere above the stomach, and elsewhere above the liver.
And know that the more you add to the branding iron, the greater the benefit will be, and the more it will help.
And know that the sick person does not find pain in the branding iron, as the healthy ones do: because their body is already numb.
And it is necessary that the branding irons be of a size and smallness according to the members and joints: according to what has preceded from the types of iron instruments.
Head 50.
When a stump of some member is treated with medicines and oils and plasters, and it does not heal, then one should cauterize the affected member with caustics, according to what the size of the member merits or its smallness.
And let your cautery be gentle, not penetrating too deeply into the skin's thickness.
Then treat it with an ointment until it heals.
And when cauterization is applied to a certain kind of numbness that occurs in the hand and foot, in the vertebral column of the back near the exit of the nerves, which move that member; and the numbness is removed.
But it does not presume to work on that, unless he who is skilled in the anatomy of members and the exit of nerves moving the body.
On the method of cauterizing in Ulcers.
Head 51.
When an ulcer is antiquated and nothing helps it through the ingenuity of medicine: then one should cauterize on it with a deep cautery, gently, according to the quantity of the skin's thickness, until the whiteness is removed and its color is changed.
Then treat it with flour of herbs, and lentils with rose oil, and leaves of arnoglossa, and pigeon's blood, and swallow's blood: each one should be a single part: mix all these together, and apply them to the cloth, and adhere to the place, until it heals.
On the method of cauterizing in Cancer.
Head 52.
When a cancer is beginning and one wishes to stop it: then one should cauterize it with a ring-shaped cautery around its circumference, as it turns back.
The wise men have said that it should be cauterized with the final cautery in the middle.
It does not seem to me that it will become an ulcer; because I fear that it will become inflamed: and I have already seen that several times. And it is better to cauterize around it with a circle, as we have said: or with many cauterizations. On the method of cauterizing in Abu al-Qasim.
Chapter 53.
When someone has an abscess and it is slow to mature, either because of excessive superfluous matter or because of the weakness of the patient, when they are decrepit and have little blood, or because of the time, and there is a need to hasten the maturation of the abscess, then one should cauterize around it with many small points, puncturing with multiple small cauterizations.
Then leave it alone.
For it will hasten the maturation itself.
If you want to make a perforation in it with a cautery, then ignite the cautery, whose shape is this.
And place it in the middle of the abscess, until it penetrates to the skin: and let the cautery be away from what follows, so that the flow of pus may be alleviated.
Then treat it until it is healed.
On the method of cauterizing a corroding evil. Chapter 54.
A corroding evil is nothing but a corruption spreading through the member, and it consumes it, just as fire devours dry wood.
If therefore you see a corroding evil in a place that can tolerate a cautery with fire, then ignite many cauteries, small and large nails, according to what is suitable for the place where the corrosion is.
Then cauterize it on every side until you eradicate the entire corruption, and nothing of it remains deeply. Then leave it for three days, and apply sulfur powder with oil to the cauterized places, until all scabs are eradicated and all corruption.
Then treat it with ointments that generate flesh.
If therefore you see that after three days a healthy flesh is born without corruption, it is good.
And if not, then apply cautery to the remaining corrupted area.
And corroding treatments are applied when needed with acute medicine.
That very thing grows in place of the cautery.
However, cautery with fire is a very swift remedy; and I have already said that its cauteration with acute medicine is in division; therefore take it there when you need it.
Concerning the method of cauterizing in cases of boils and abscesses. Chapter 55.
It often happens that this disease occurs on the soles of the feet: and it is a rough, filthy thing that hurts the foot. And indeed, there are two methods of cautery for these cases: cautery with fire and cautery with hot water.
As for the cautery with fire, it is like a hollow pointed instrument resembling a bird's feather, made from iron, according to the quantity that it contains, encompassing the boil on all sides; and let its edges be subtle.
Then place the ignited instrument on the boil. Then rotate the hand with the cautery around the boil, until the cautery reaches the depth of the boil; and leave it for three days, until it begins to discharge pus. Then apply a plaster made with forest moss, mixed with salt; and leave the plaster on it overnight. For it will be eradicated from its roots.
Then treat the area with an ointment that generates flesh, until it is healed.
If they are not converted, and often occur on the surface of the body, especially on the hands and feet; then administer to them cautery with hot water; and it is done by taking a cannula made from copper, or iron, or a bird's feather; and place it on the boil, or abscess.
Then pour into the canal a small amount of warm water: hold your hand back, and you will revolve it with the compression of your hand for a short time, so that the mark of the canal is imprinted on the root of the nail, and the warm water finds its way to the bottom, to the root of the nail: and the weak patient should expect for an hour above the mordication of the warm water.
Then let it go, for the nail is eradicated with its roots.
Do the same with each of them one after another, until you come to all those that are in the body.
Then treat them afterwards when they are eradicated, with that which generates flesh from ointments.
On the method of cauterizing in Tremors.
Chapter 56.
When a person suffers from Tremors due to cold in the nerve, or from quartan fever, or something else: then it is necessary to cauterize him with four cauteries, or five on the vertebrae of the back, and on each vertebra a cauterization, and on his chest a cauterization, and above his stomach a cauterization.
For the Tremor is quieted with an oily cauterization, and health is quickly restored from cold sickness. On the method of cauterizing by Albathir.
Chapter 57.
When there are formed on the body of Albathir foul things, that is, pustules, which come from corrupted gross materials.
It is necessary therefore at first when they appear, to cauterize above every pustule with a subtle cauterization of myrtle wood, whose end has been kindled with fire.
Or with the root of long aristolochia.
Or with a lentricular cauterization. And when they are cauterized to the point of menstruation, at the beginning of their expulsion in this way: and they do not increase: and the superfluous discharge is broken down, making them healthy from it.
However, it is necessary that this be done after evacuation with bloodletting.
About the method of cauterizing a bleeding artery in the hollow of the elbow.
Head 58. It often happens that there is a bleeding of the artery which was cut near the elbow, which occurs externally, or at the incision of an abscess, or by cauterization of a limb, and similar things; and it becomes difficult to stop it.
When it happens to someone in that way, then quickly put your hand over the orifice of the artery, and place your index finger on top of it: and press it strongly, until the blood is stopped under your finger, and nothing comes out of it. Then put small oil-based cauteries on the fire, and a large number of them: and blow on them, until they are strongly ignited.
Then take one of them, either small, or medium, or large, according to the elbow and place where the artery is disrupted, and apply the cautery to the vein, after which you quickly remove your finger: and hold the cautery until the bleeding stops.
If the bleeding is expelled when you lift your finger from the orifice of the artery, and you extinguish the cautery, then quickly take another cautery, from those that are prepared on the fire. Do not cease to do this with one after another until the bleeding stops.
And be careful, lest you burn the nerve that is there, and another evil malady occurs to the patient. And know that when blood flows from an artery, then it is not possible to stop it: especially when the artery is large, unless with one of four methods.
Or with a cautery, as we have said.
Or with extraction, when it has not been extracted. When it is extracted, its extremities are constricted and the blood is separated.
When it is extracted, its extremities are constricted and the blood is separated. Or it is tied with a strong thread of a ligature.
Or medicine of special property is applied to it, which is to separate the blood, and it is bound with a decent constriction of a poultice.
Whoever administers its amputation with a ligature and constriction with cloth, or application of burning things, and similar things, does not benefit it thoroughly, unless rarely.
If it happens to someone in that way, and there is no doctor present, nor medicine: then he should start with the application of the index finger on the opening of the vein, as we have narrated, and constriction, until the blood is stopped from the upper part of the wound, and above the artery.
And the finger should not be removed, but rather kept on it with very cold water of vehement cold, until the blood congeals, and coagulates, and is separated. And meanwhile, one should consider what is needed from cauterization or from medicine.
End of the First Part.
The Surgical Book of Albucasis, Part II. On Incision, Perforation, and Phlebotomy in wounds, and similar things.
We have discussed in the First Chapter all the diseases in which it is convenient to use a burning cautery and medicine, and their occasions, their causes, instruments, and forms of cauteries. And I have placed chapters from the head to the foot.
And I will proceed in this chapter by the same method, so that it may be alleviated above the seeker of his question. And before I begin that, it is necessary for you to learn, my sons, what is in this chapter, which is from the fear of that which is in the first chapter about cauterization.
And because of that, it is necessary to be cautious in this matter, since in the operations which are described in this chapter, very often a failure occurs with bleeding, whether it be an opening of a vein, or an incision over an abscess, or an opening of an exit wound, or a treatment of an injury, or an extraction of an arrow, or an incision over a stone, and similar things: from all of which there is associated trembling, and fear, and many of them die.
And I warn you, lest that which is hesitation should fall upon you, for when they fall to you in this art of healing men with methods of the sick.
For there is one who becomes angry with his own illness, and death is easy for him: because of the violence of that which he finds from his own infirmity and the length of his evil.
And illness is from fear, which signifies death.
And there is one who gives his own physician, and he says to you with it, hoping for health, and his illness is pernicious. Therefore it is not necessary to consent to him who comes to you from those whose method is such.
And let your caution be more vehement than your desire and your rapaciousness.
And do not presume upon anything from that, unless after certain knowledge, which verifies for you that thing to which a laudable success has come.
And be diligent in the treatment of all your sick ones, in prognosis and indication of that which is convenient for their salvation.
For in that lies the helper for you to acquire fame and glory, and memory and praise.
May God inspire you, O sons, with His intellect, and may He not take away from you direction and inspiration: for that is in His hand.
And I have arranged this chapter by distinguishing it into sections, according to what has preceded in the chapter on cauterization, from the head to the feet: so that you may be freed from the inquiry which you wish to make about it, and where you are in need.
On the treatment of water that accumulates on the heads of children.
Chapter I.
You know that this weakness often happens to children at birth: or when the midwife tightly grasps the child's head without gentleness.
And it also happens sometimes due to a hidden cause that is not known.
And I have not seen this illness in others than in children: and to all whom I saw among them, death hastened; therefore it was advisable for me to abandon the operation on them.
And I have seen among them a child whose head was full of water, and his head grew magnificent every day, until he could not sit up by himself, because of the greatness of his head: and the humidity increased until he died.
And this moisture indeed collects either between the skin and bone: or it collects under the bone above the dura mater.
And the operation on that, if there is moisture between the skin and bone, and the abscess is small, then it is necessary to make a single fissure in the middle of the head, in width: and let the length of the fissure be almost two nodes, until the moisture flows out.
And this is the method of incision.
If therefore the moisture has increased more, and the abscess is larger, then make two fissures, according to this method.
And if the moisture is under the bone, and its sign is that you see the sutures of the head open on every side: and the water is pressed out when you compress it with your hand towards the interior, and it does not hide from you: then it is necessary to make three fissures in the middle of the head, according to this method.
And after the incision, extract the entire humidity.
Then apply a poultice on top of it with wine and oil until the fifth day.
Then loosen the bandage, and care for the wound with tents and ointments.
And do not cease to bind the head with evenness.
And give the patient all dry food of little humidity, until the limb is comforted and healed.
And another method of incision is, that you should consider where the greatness of the abscess appears, and the collection of water.
For when it is more in the back of the head, or in the forehead, or on the right, or on the left.
Ascend therefore with the incision where you see the abscess and the collection of water, and cut that according to what is possible for you.
And observe, lest you cut an artery, and a flow of blood occurs, and the patient dies from that flow with evacuation of humidity.
Concerning the incision of arteries which are behind the ears.
Head 2.
When some flux occurs to the eyes, or to the chest, and it becomes chronic, and medical treatment does not help: then the ultimate remedy is in that, the incision of these two arteries.
It is necessary therefore when you wish to cut them, that the patient shaves his head.
Then rub the place with a rough cloth, so that the arteries appear.
Then the patient should bind his neck with any cloth of his own.
Then consider where the vein pulsates.
And the places of both are depressed places which are behind the ears; and they are rarely hidden, except in certain men.
Then mark with a branding iron on both sides; and cut each one with a sharp instrument, making the incision penetrating to the bone, and let it be made along the width of the head.
And if you wish, insert a spatula-like instrument under the artery, and cut it above with an incision.
And let the length of the incision be almost two fingers joined together.
For when a vein is cut, blood flows out in a pulsating flow, which leaps inward with frequent jumps.
If the artery does not appear to the senses, then it is necessary to measure from the golden (surface) a quantity of space of three fingers.
Then mark with a branding iron, and open up to the mouth.
And that which it is necessary to emit from the blood is six ounces, and perhaps more or less will be emitted from it. All of that according to the quantity which appears to you from the virtue of the weak person and the replenishment of their artery.
Then consider the ulcer.
Then if something remains at the mouth of the ulcer, then cut that out, so that a hot aposteme does not occur: then bind the ulcer with a linen bandage.
Then treat it with an ointment, until it is healed.
Of the extraction of arteries, which are in the temples.
Chapter 3.
When an old hemicrania affects a man, or acute catarrh due to acidic humidities, and heat in the temples, or an old sore, ulcerous, and similar things: and he is treated with the modes of medical cures, and it does not help: then we have experienced in these illnesses the extraction of arteries from the temples, or their cauterization, as we have narrated.
And the method of operating in their extraction is that the weak person should shave the hair that are on the temples, and direct himself to the apparent artery in the temple.
It itself is shown to you by its pulse, and is rarely hidden except in a few men, or due to the weakness of cold.
What if it is hidden from you, then the weak head presses its own cloth with whatever cloth it has; afterwards scrub the place with a rough cloth.
Or pour warm water over the place until it appears to you in clear manifestation. Then take a spatula, which I had previously formed. Then scrape off the skin with it easily, until you reach the artery.
Then insert a hook into it, and extract it upwards, until you have extracted it from the skin, and make it emerge from the tissues that are beneath it on all sides.
If the artery is subtle: then envelop it with the extremity of the hook.
Then cut from it a secondary part according to the quantity by which its extremities are elongated and contracted, and so that there is no flow of blood.
For if it is not cut, and if it is not separated, the blood does not ascend deeply. Then evacuate the blood with a sixth of an ounce, until there are three.
If the artery is large: then it is necessary to tie it off in two places with double thread, namely, with silk or with cord of Arabic fabric, so that putrefaction does not occur before consolidation of the wound, and a flow of blood happens.
Then cut away the excess, which is between the two ligatures.
Do that at that hour, or after another hour. And if you wish, cauterize it with a cautery up to the mouth, with a cautery of a knife edge: until its extremities are cut off, and it is stabilized in place of the same operation.
And it is a better work, unless the patient has a fever, or is of a hot constitution.
Since cautery is one of those things that help to end moistures.
Therefore, it is better treatment.
And it is necessary after the extraction of the arteries, that the place be filled with old cotton: and that small pillows made from lint be placed on top.
And after the treatment is completed with dry medicines, which cause flesh to grow, and with bandages, until it becomes healthy.
Because if during the operation a flow of blood occurs from the artery, then you should quickly move to stop it with a cautery, or fill the place with cerate: and bind your hand tightly, until the bleeding is stopped.
Because if none of these is available to you, then put your finger on the place, until the bleeding congeals.
And wrap the place with water and very cold compresses, until the inflammation subsides, and bind according to what is necessary.
And of what is lighter and easier in the extraction of the artery, it is to cauterize the vein with this cautery having two blades: and let the inflammation be similar to that of two-bladed almagdatem.
However, they are much less inflamed than two-bladed ones.
Since if they are sharp, like two-bladed ones, cold should be applied quickly: and they do not cut the flesh with swiftness.
Since therefore there is some roughness in them, heat of fire is retained in them, and the flesh is quickly cauterized: since this is better than any other work, and lighter, and easier.
And let there be a space that is the amount of roughness of a finger's width between two blades, after you have marked two places with ink: and place both ignited cauterizing irons strongly, until they reach the bone, and cut the vein in two places: so that what is between the extremities may be lengthened.
For they do not consolidate deeply with this cautery.
And this is the form of cautery.
On the treatment of chronic and acute tears flowing from the eyes.
Chapter 4.
When there are persistent tears and the flow of them is from the veins that are on the outside of the skull, and nothing seems to help with medical treatment or medicines, and you see the face of the patient already red and weak, and they feel a numbness in their forehead, like the numbness of ants, and their eyes are exhausted, humid, as if already corroded, with the corrosion of their eyelashes; and their eyelids are hot from the sharpness of the tears: then the ancients were in need of a cure for this operation, and they named it "Ense".
And it is, that you should prescribe to the patient to shave the hairs that are on their forehead.
Then make three equal distant incisions in the forehead along its length: and let the length of each incision be about two fingers, and one incision should be opposite the middle of the nose in the forehead, and the second should be along the direction of the movement of the eyebrows, and the third on the other side: and be careful not to cut the arteries that are on both sides: and extend your hand from the continuation of the two jaws, and let the width of the entire incision be three fingers joined together: and have a piece of prepared sponge or many dry cloths ready, with which you will dry the blood.
Then insert a cautery iron of two acute extremities, whose following shape is this.
From the incision that is on the temporal part, up to the second incision: and scrape out with it all the skin that is between the two incisions, together with the sifa, which is above the bone. Then do the same also from the middle incision up to the second incision.
Then extract this spatula-like instrument, and insert it into the primary incision again, another instrument called a sharp scalpel, having one side blunt, not sharp on the other side.
And this is its form.
And place its sharp side towards the flesh attached to the skin, and its blunt side towards the bone; and push it until it reaches the middle fissure: and cut with it all the vessels that descend from the head to the eyes; except for what is contained in the incision up to what appears from the skin.
Then do the same in the middle fissure up to another fissure.
And after a quantity of blood equal to what has flowed out has accumulated, press the locations with fragments of clotted blood. Then put a linen cloth into every fissure, soaked in old wine, and put over them small pads soaked in wine, oil, or vinegar.
And see to it that a hot abscess does not form.
And on the third day, loosen the bandage, and administer a gentle infusion with lukewarm water.
Then treat it with royal ointment, and the other remedies by which wounds are treated, until it is healed.
Concerning the treatment of sharp eye discharges and catarrhs from within the head to the eyes.
Chapter 5.
When sharp catarrhs occur, bitter, persistent; and you see the eyes of that person strained, small, and already their sight is weakened; and the eyelids are ulcerated, and hair falls out from them, and in the depths of the head there is a sharp, annoying pain, and a resulting sneezing fit: then take it from these symptoms, that those materials and catarrhs do not come unless from many veins.
And the better treatment for them is this.
And it is, that you should prescribe to scrape the patient's forehead with a razor.
Then cut into the fissure one in the middle of the forehead, or another somewhat across the width, and begin with the fissure at the left temple to the right temple: and let the incision be up to the bone: and stretch out your hand from the temples that move during mastication: until the bone is detected: and you will dry up all the blood with a sponge.
Then separate between the two lips of the fissure with a gauze of old cloth, or with a linen thread.
Then sprinkle on top with powders: and moisten the powders with wine and oil, so that a hot aposteme does not occur.
And when you dissolve that, and you see that a hot aposteme is already imminent: then it is necessary to rub the bone, until flesh begins to grow on it.
Then treat it with a drying regimen that promotes the growth of flesh: as if you take two parts of wheat flour and four parts of rose oil, and prepare an ointment from them, and administer it to promote the growth of flesh in these wounds.
Concerning the treatment of what falls into the Golden (wound). Chapter 6. Everything that falls into the Golden (wound) is of one of four species: either a mineral stone, or something similar to a stone, such as iron and glass; or it is from a plant, such as chickpea and beans; or it is a fluid thing, such as water, vinegar, and similar things; or it is an animal.
When therefore a stone falls into the Golden (wound), or a type of stone from those that do not adhere nor grow in the Golden, expose the Golden to the sun: if you see the stone, then distill into the Golden something from violet oil or sisanmine.
Then administer the extraction of it, and make it sneeze with condiments, and block the nostrils at the approach of sneezing, after you place around the ear a wrapping of cloth or wool, and stretch the Golden to the upper parts.
For many times indeed it is customary with this treatment.
If it does not come out, then administer the extraction of it with gestures, that is, with subtle manipulations: whose form is this.
If therefore it comes out with gestures, it is good.
And if not, then administer the extraction of it with a subtle curved hook of little duplication. If therefore it does not come out through that, then make a tube of copper, and insert the end of the tube into the ear opening, and block what is around the tube with soft wax mixed with oil, so that there may be no passage except through the tube: then extract with your strong attraction. For many times indeed it comes out with what we have narrated.
If it does not come out in this way: then take from helkalimbat, or from uisco, that is, prepared glue, with which birds are caught, a small amount: and place it on the end of the vein after you have applied a clean cloth positioned over it: then insert it into the ear opening with ease, after you have cleansed the ear from moisture.
If therefore it does not come out with all that we have narrated, then proceed to cutting, before a hot aposteme or spasm occurs.
And the method of cutting is, to make an incision in a weak spot at the beginning on the head: and extract from it blood according to the measure of its strength.
Then make the weak spot sit between your hands, and turn its ear towards above, and find a small cutting in the root of the ear at its fatty depression: and let the cutting be a lunar figure, until you reach the stone: then remove it with what is possible for you from the instruments.
Then sew up the cutting from that time on with speed, and care for it, until it heals.
What falls into the ear is from one of the grains that grow and become inflamed: then administer its extraction.
If it does not obey you at the outlet, then take a thin, subtle spatula, following this form.
And administer with it the cutting away of that type of grain that falls into the ear, and do not make that when you think it has already been moistened by the vapor of the ear, until you apply many vigorous strokes: then extract it with a hook, or with gentle gestures, or with suction, as we have said, for the extraction of those grains is eased.
In the water that flows into the ear, it is necessary to use a gentle irrigation with condis at first: and already the ear has been filled with some old cotton: and it lies upon the ear, in which there is water.
If it comes out through that, it is good.
And if not: then take many small stones, according to the length of the finger, thin, smooth, and warm them with fire for a short time, and gently insert one of them into the ear opening: and let it rest on its base from that side, and strike with another stone upon the stone that is in the ear.
Do not cease to do that with stone and stone, until all the water comes out.
And now the water comes out thus, that you take one from a small paper, or one reed, and insert one extremity into the ear: and apply the other extremity with fire, until it burns most of it.
Then take another reed, and do that many times, until all the water comes out: and extract it with a cannula according to what has been previously mentioned concerning the stone.
In the extraction of an animal that has entered into it, if it is small in body, such as a flea, and similar to it, cure it as I have said in the division.
But if it is a large bodily thing that appears to the senses, then administer its extraction with gestures and hooks: and its removal is easier for all those things that are held in gold.
In the extraction of a worm generated in gold, when you treat it with what we said in the division, and in the treatment of distillations, and your cure does not work: then it is necessary to look at the gold in the sun.
If therefore something appears there from the worms, then extract it with gestures or with subtle hooks.
If however something does not appear there, then take a cannula, whose form is strict below and wide above: and insert the subtle extremity into the gold according to the quantity that the weakened part can tolerate: then suck with a strong suction.
Do it many times, until all the worms come out.
If however they do not obey you to come out, then grease the circumference of the cannula with wax, as I said in the stone.
What if they do not come out with what we said: then administer the distillations which the ancient experts have already tried in the treatment of worms: and you will find it in the treatment of distillations.
And let your pouring be where you pour oils and medications into the gold with this instrument, whose form is depicted here.
As you see make it from silver or copper, below strict, where there is a small hole, wide above.
Let it be thus, that which is in the concavity of the cannula, let it be made from copper, decently crafted.
And if you wish, take a rod, and wrap a cotton thread around its extremity with a decent wrapping: then pour oil, or juice, or whatever you wish from these medications into the cannula: and let it be in the gold: then insert the rod with the cotton thread above, and press it with your hand's tempered compression, until the oil is impelled into the concavity of the audit, and the weakened part feels it inwardly: and what is poured into the gold should already be warmed up with fire for a short time: and beware lest there be something that distills in it, very cold indeed: for medications do not tolerate that.
On the treatment of an injury to the auricle.
Chapter 7.
When some infants are born from their mothers' wombs unopened.
And it has also happened to some people that a swelling occurs on the tragus of the ear from a wound or a congenital growth in it.
And this swelling sometimes occurs deep within the ear canal, which does not affect the vision; and sometimes it occurs at the outer end of the ear canal, and then affects the vision.
Therefore, that which occurs deep within the ear, and which does not affect the sight, is in many cases difficult to cure.
And in that which affects the vision, you should place the ear of the patient in a sunny spot and gaze at it; then if you see an apparent swelling, open it with a subtle spatula, whose shape is as follows: its extremity is where there is some small width, part of which is acute; and the rest of the spatula is gentle on both sides, so that it does not harm the ear.
If therefore the swelling is from a congenital growth in the ear canal, then hold it with a subtle hook, and cut into it with gentle violence, until the entire flesh is removed.
If the swelling is deep within the ear, then take a subtle rod, gentle and warm it with fire for a short time; then insert it into the ear canal.
If therefore you feel the swelling with it, which the patient finds with difficulty of hearing, try to open it gently; and beware, lest you wound the nerve of the ear.
Then put on the ear a dressing according to the size of the ear canal, which you have wrapped in Egyptian unguent; do this for several days, until you are certain about the healing of the wound.
Or take a dressing, and soak it in rose water, and sprinkle on top of it powdered zegi powder, and use it.
If you see that the golden ointment is about to suppurate, then it is necessary to extract the pus, and let it flow out with another poultice, which you have prepared with rose oil, until the warm aposteme is formed; then treat it until it heals.
But if a flow of blood occurs: then soak a sponge or cloth in cold water and place it on the golden ointment; and use the remaining treatment that stops the predicted flow of blood, as described in the treatise on distillations.
On the treatment of eyelids with Altheli.
Chapter 8. These are the Altheli that occur on the eyelids of the eye, when they are moist and become dry.
It is necessary therefore to hold them with a bandage: or with a hook, and to cut them off at their roots with a spatula.
Then apply powdered zegi to the affected area.
If blood flows from them, then cauterize them with a subtle lentiform cautery.
And it is better to cauterize them after the incision.
For they often return when something remains from their roots.
And when they are cauterized with fire, those roots are burned, and they do not return.
On the treatment of pustules on the eyelids of the eye.
Chapter 9.
It often happens that something occurs on the eyelids which is similar to a Crandino in its strength and hardness, and because of this it is called a Grando; and it is an aggregation of coarse moisture on the upper eyelid and lower eyelid.
The operation for them is therefore to consider then whether it is a Grando proceeding from the eyelid, which appears on the eyelid and moves to every part, and its treatment is easy.
So, find the suture above it along the width.
Then clear it from every side with ease, until you reach the cavity.
Then hang it with a hook, and cut it off.
If, however, the separation of it is not prepared for you, unless after you have pierced the eyelid with a moderate incision, then it will harm the weakened eye in some way.
If the wound is large: then gather it together with a suture: and care for it, until it heals.
And if it is small, no harm will come to you from it.
For the ointment restores it, and flesh grows over it.
And if the perforation leads deep into the interior of the ear towards the inner surface, then invert the eyelid, and hang the perforation with a hook: besides what you need for an incision, and press it from every side.
If the eyelid is lengthened by an incision, it will not harm it in any way.
Then wash the eye after the incision of the perforation with salty water: and care for the place with what grows flesh, until the weakened eye heals.
On the treatment of eyelids.
Chapter 10.
Axirnath is a thickening that forms on the upper eyelids: and it mostly occurs in children: and it weighs down their eyes, and they have rheum in the mornings, and cannot gaze at the light of the sun, because tears flow to them, and therefore they seem to lean forward over their faces always, and sleep with them, and their eyelids are humid beneath their eyebrows, which have already been affected by inflammation: and the appearance of Axirnath is evident in the eye, and when you press on the place with your fingers, you feel Axirnath between them.
And the method of operating is that the patient should place his head on your lap.
Then take a linen cloth and prepare the ligatures on it, and make from that ligature a circle according to the quantity that the patient's limb contains.
Then place it on top of it, and press with your fingers all around, so that the patient's limb is gathered in the middle of the circle.
Then find in the middle of that humidity a spot with a thin instrument incident to the fissures along the width, and let there not be a larger fissure than what is made in deep phlebotomy.
Or it is necessary to find the entire skin, until you reach the patient's limb in many different positions, for the patient's limb proceeds from the fissure according to the shape of a fragment of white pungent fat.
Therefore extract it with the cloth, which you have infiltrated between your fingers to the exterior; and you turn your hand to the right and left, until it disperses; and beware, lest you touch the fissure, so that you do not reach with a thin instrument to the eye and harm him.
If however the patient's limb does not appear to you at the beginning of the fissure, you should add a little to the fissure with ease, until the patient's limb proceeds.
Then extract it, as we have said.
Then soak the cloths in vinegar and water, and place them on the site, and tie it with bandages.
And there are those who rub salt, and put it in the concavity of the fissure, so that what remains from that humidity may liquefy.
Then treat it, until it heals.
If however a hot aposteme occurs at the site, then treat it with cooling plaster, until it heals.
On the methods of Ataxmir of the eye, that is, when the eyelid becomes soft, whence it happens that it becomes rough as it should not.
Head XI.
When hairs grow in the eyelids beyond their natural course under the natural hairs, and become entrenched: then they harm the eye, and cause various ailments to occur, such as constant tears, and softening of the eyelids, and a whiteness, until it becomes the cause of destruction of the eye.
And Ataxmir indeed cures the eye according to four modes. Or with cautery by fire.
Or with acute medicine, according to what has been mentioned in the chapter on cautery.
Or Ataxmir cures by incision and suture.
Or with tubes, according to what I will say.
It is necessary that you put the head of the patient on your lap.
Then convert the eyelid of the eye with your left hand.
If it is thus converted, it is good.
And if not: introduce a needle into it, where there is a thread from the lower part of the eyelid, and make the needle penetrate with the thread above, and let it be near the hairs themselves, that is, near the edge of the eyelid, where the hairs grow: and draw the thread upwards with the eyelid, and convert it with a straight line.
Then find on the inner part of the eyelid beneath the added hairs with a spatula incident from the larger lacrimal to the smaller lacrimal.
Then extract the thread, and place under the eyelid a small poultice made of cotton or cloth: then mark on the eyelid with ink, which should be like the shape of a myrtle leaf.
However, it is necessary that the figure be according to the size and elevation of the eyelid: because already it varies among men.
For there are some who need to have a large quantity of eyelid incised, according to the quantity that is softened by the eyelid. Then, when you find the spatula above two lines that you have marked, and cut along the larger lacrimal duct up to the smaller one, and let there be a single fissure near the natural eyelashes, just as is the thickness of the radius.
Then introduce a hook into one of the two angular skin flaps. Then scrape out the whole thing. Then bring together the two lips with a suture, using a needle and fine linen thread; and stop the bleeding, and make adhere what is superfluous from the threads above the eyebrows, with certain things that constrict, if you want to do it: and if not, don't worry.
Then leave the suture and threads in place until three days, or four: afterwards attend to it. And if you wish, leave the wound without a suture, and attend to it with that which dries and constricts.
For the eyelid is elevated at the sealing of the wound and its aggregation: but the future one will be better.
This method of healing was taught by the ancient Ataxmir.
However, there is solicitude over the weak, and it is from good operation, and there is no fear in it.
And another method is also in Ataxmir: and it is, as you mark on the eyelid a shape, which should be like the shape of a myrtle leaf, as we have narrated.
Then elevate the eyelid with three separate hooks, or aggregated, according to this shape that follows, then cut away what is superfluous with small forceps, according to this shape, with equality of incision.
If however it is not possible for you to hold the hook, and it does not equal that: then take a needle in which there is a thread, and insert it in the middle of the shape: and insert one thread near the larger lacrimal duct, and the second thread near the smaller lacrimal duct: and tie together the threads between your fingers with equality.
Then elevate your hand in elevation equal to it: and elevate the skin above that which is marked with a scar, as we have narrated.
Then bring together the two lips of the wound with a suture: and take care of it, until it heals.
If an abscess occurs at your incision, or your fissure: but that abscess with a poultice, and things similar to it, from soothing ointments.
And when it happens to the eyelids also, so that their hairs may converge.
On the treatment of Ataxmir with canes (or "with a scalpel").
And it is, that you should convert the eyelid, and dissect the fissure which is within, according to what I have narrated.
Then skillfully make two scalpels, or two subtle rods: whose length is according to the length of the eyelid, and their width is less than the width of a spatula: and you have already incised at the extremities on both sides where you hold the threads.
Then bring together both with subtlety above that which surpasses from the eyelid of the eye, and bind the two scalpels from both sides with a strong stricture, and leave it for some days. For the skin will be tightly mortified, and blacken, and putrefy, until it falls off by itself.
If it is delayed, then cut into it with forceps.
Then treat it, until it heals.
When it is consolidated, the eyelid is elevated: and the hairs do not prickle.
And this is the shape of the two scalpels, which you make according to this figure, and quantity in length and width.
On the elevation of pricking hairs in the eye with a needle.
Head 12.
The operation is to receive a subtle needle, and to insert into it a thread from fine silk, thin. Then you gather the extremities of it, and tie both knots with a subtle knot strongly; and let the length of the threads be one palm.
Then you put another subtle thread under it in a short space, and tie its extremities if you wish.
Then the patient should place his head on your lap, and it should be near a window so that the operation may be illuminated; for it is a subtle operation, or minute.
Then insert the needle with the thread into the root of the eyelash, and make it penetrate the eyelid firmly, until you extract it above the natural hair.
Then pull out the hair up to the thread: and insert into the thread that hair: if it is one, or two, or three, no more.
Then pull your hand with it, until the hair emerges with the thread in the eyelid with the natural hair.
But if the thread is pulled and the hair does not emerge with it: pull the thread downwards, with the filament that you composed in it, until the thread emerges from the superior orifice, and you see it with the vision of the eye: then indeed pull the thread, and the filament: and extract both, and close the eye: and keep it closed for two days, or three, until the hair adheres to its place, and grows above it as flesh.
If the hair is short, then either associate a long hair to it from the natural hairs, and elevate with it: or leave it, until it elongates after a space, and then elevate it.
On the treatment of a foreign body that happens in the upper eyelid.
Head 13.
When this happens to the eye, it is called a cataract.
And this cataract is either natural or accidental.
The accidental one occurs from the consolidation of a wound, or a incision, or a burn, and similar things.
And the method of operating on it is to make a consolidation, and to separate its lips, and to put between them a thread made of linen, and to tie it, until it heals.
And it is not suitable to use things that dry and constrict in its treatment, for if you do that, the cataract will return worse than it was. Instead, use things that soften, such as fenugreek; and anoint with water in which a little of the decoction of linseed has been mixed, and smear with a dissolving unguent, which has been liquefied with some oil; and envelop with a thread, and take care with it.
And the treasure of your treatment is that you strive with all ingenuity, so that it does not consolidate, according to the form it had at first.
And this operation which we have described is not anything but a certain rectification of the cataract, so that the place does not return to its original form. Concerning the treatment of cataract that occurs in the lower eyelid, and is a wrinkling or contraction upwards to the right and left.
Chapter 13.
This cataract that occurs below is truly called a cataract.
And it is natural, and it is accidental.
And the accidental one occurs from a wound, or a crack, or a burn, and similar things.
And the method of operating on it is to take a needle, in which there is a double thread, and you pierce the flesh, and make it penetrate from the left tear duct to the right tear duct, until the thread passes through both extremities of the flesh.
Then stretch the flesh upwards with a hook, and make an incision with a broad spatula.
If then the shape of the eyelid returns according to what is fitting, it is good.
And if not, take a rod, and place it in the fissure, and convert the eyelid with it: and find two fissures on the inner side of the eyelid, and let the extremities of the two fissures be from two angles of the incision, until they converge and form an angle: until when they combine, this shape will be formed, and it is a praiseworthy Greek letter.
Then remove that flesh according to its quantity, which is the sharp point below, from what follows the eyelid.
Then gather the separated parts together: sew them with a thread of wool.
Then treat them with what we have said, with softening medications and bandages, until they heal.
And if a cicatrix forms from the fissure and suture, or cautery: then it is necessary to find a flat fissure under the hairs of the eyelids, also according to what has preceded.
Then separate between the two lips with a bandage, according to what we have said.
And the summary of the discourse on the treatment of cicatrix, when it is above or below, is that it runs into that operation, according to what is prepared from the form of the cicatrix.
For it is itself many diversities in form: and the skilled craftsman prepares his ingenuity with whatever mode is possible for him, until he makes the figure return to its natural form, or near to it, and the same infirm person, according to what is convenient for him from the operation and instruments in many dispositions.
Concerning the adhesion of the eyelid to the conjunctiva or cornea.
Chapter 15.
When this consolidation occurs in many people, so that the upper eyelid is consolidated with the whiteness of the eye, and prevents it from its natural operations.
Therefore, you should introduce the extremity of the radius under the eyelid, and elevate it upwards: or extend it with a hook: then make an incision with a subtle spatula, which is not sharp, but rather obtuse; so that the patient does not become anxious during the operation, and the spatula is removed, and the eye is annoyed with its acuity: and let your incision be as if you are excavating that adhesion with ease, until when the eyelid returns to its natural form, and the entire adhesion is healed.
Then pour salty water into the eye, with water washing it: or distill into it a decoction made from zinc, dissolved in water.
Then separate the eyelid from the eye with a linen thread: and place on the eye a woolen cloth soaked in egg white: and after three days use a decoction, and with solidifying remedies, until it is healed.
On the Incision of the Nail-like Projection and the Prominence of the Tear-producing Flesh.
Chapter 16.
You should know that the nail-like projection is according to two methods. Or it is nerve-like: and it is similar to a hard, subtle callus.
Or it is not nerve-like, similar to a hardened white humidity: which when touched with iron, or attempted to be grasped with a hook, breaks off, and the hook does not stick into it.
And both species do not begin unless from the greater tear duct, until it grows gradually, until it covers the sight, and prevents the motion of the eye.
And the method of operating on its incision is: that the patient should place his head in your lap.
Then open its eyes and lift the eyelid with your hand.
Then collect the nail with a pair of forceps of little duplication, and extend it to the upper parts.
Then take a needle, and insert into it a horsehair or ox hair, or of a goat: and let the thread be strong, and double the end of the needle for a short while, and fix it in the middle of the nail: and penetrate it with the needle, and tie with the thread the nail, and extend it to the upper parts: and scrape with the needle the side of the nail that follows the pupil, as if you would serrate it with the needle up to its posterior.
Then cut the remainder at the root of the tear duct with a subtle spatula, or with small forceps: and leave the natural flesh of the tear duct, so that it does not happen from the incision that the flow of tears is continuous.
And when the nail is extended with a single forceps: or with a thread, as we have said.
Then it is scraped with a gentle spatula, which has this shape.
And beware, lest the spatula touches the corneal tunic, and a rupture occurs in it, and the pupil is perforated.
Then after the incision, introduce into the eye something salty and ground, or made from zinc, and leave it until another day.
Then treat it with what is necessary until it is healed. What if the nail is not nervy, and you cannot insert a needle into it, nor is it fastened with a hook, then this type of nail is often treated with medicines, and healed as I described in the division.
What if you wish to incise it, then open the eye of the sick person, and take a subtle, gentle, weak, and precise spatula, according to this shape.
And scrape the nail down from above with subtlety.
If you see that it is rarified and confringed, and an impression is made on it by the rasp, then distill it from hour to hour in the eye, whether it be from a fact of sinew or from a fact of redness or from trite salt: and apply an ointment to the eye until another day.
Then repeat the operation over it, until all of it is removed.
Unless there is a warm aposteme in your eye: then indeed leave it, and treat the aposteme, until it heals. Then repeat the operation over it with the rasp, until it heals.
However, the prominence of the tear-producing flesh, if it causes great harm in the eye, should be suspended with a hook, and an incision should be made from that part of it: and not the last incision, so that the flow of tears does not occur.
Then apply a collyrium to the tear-producing [area] with redness from sinew, or made from zinc, until it heals. On the incision of Alguardenic, and flesh born in the eye.
Chapter 17.
There is born sometimes in certain eyes of men a red flesh, composed or superimposed, until it covers the pupil, or approaches, or presses on the eyelids, and perhaps turns the eyelids outward: and it resembles a rose-like pustule.
And the operation for this is also to place the weak head on your lap.
Then open its eyes, and gather all that flesh with suitable hooks for that: and hold it with one forceps, or carry it.
Then cut the flesh first, until everything of it is finished with an incision.
And be careful not to harm the eye itself during the operation: and let your incision be such that you cut with it, or with a spatula, which we described in the incision of the nail: or with small forceps, with which you collect the pus, according to what will be its form after this chapter.
When your incision is complete and the entire gum is removed, then fill the eye with a powder made from rubbed crocus, or distill into it a reddish powder, and apply similar remedies that are corrosive medicines. And put over the eye a linen cloth soaked in albumen water, so that it may be secured from a hot aposteme.
If something remains from the gum and hot blood dominates you, and a hot aposteme threatens: then leave the eye alone and treat it with what soothes the aposteme.
Then repeat over it with the treatment, until it is healed.
And do similarly with the flesh that is added to the eye from this kind.
However, it is necessary that you avoid weakening the entire eye by natural or accidental causes, while operating with iron; and do not introduce your hand into any of these operations until you are aware that the member is tolerant of that operation.
On collecting discharge from the eye.
Chapter 18. Discharges are reddish veins that gather above the eye and hinder its natural function; and they weaken the eye over time.
It is necessary for you to consider first if the eye in which there is discharge is strong and has no other disease besides the discharge; then collect its discharge.
And it is that you should lean on a weak person so that he may put his head on your lap.
Then suspend those veins with one hook or two, according to your prudence: and let the hook be a subtle duplication, according to this form, or let there be two hooks graduated in one body, according to this form.
Then collect those veins with subtle forceps, and absorb the blood hour after hour, until you see those veins removed from the eye, and are resolved; and beware not to harm the eye with rough extractions.
And let your operation be at midday in the presence of the sun, and you should be firm in your operation, so that you do not cut unless it is those veins.
And when you have made an incision, then distill into the eye a green or red liquid: so that its sharpness may corrode what remains from the putridity.
If however it is not possible for you to collect all that at that hour, then apply a plaster to the eye with what soothes the pain of the eye: and leave it for several days, until the pain is soothed: and protect it from a warm apostema: then repeat the same process again, until it is healed.
And this is the form of a scalpel.
On the Reduction of a Fracture to the Nose.
Chapter 19.
The physician calls a fracture of the nose a fistula, which is treated with cauterization or with acute burning medicine, according to what has been previously mentioned in his account.
And if it does not heal, then there is no ingenuity in that: unless you make a furtive attempt above the apostema at its birthplace, and extract all the moisture which is in it and the pus, until the bone is uncovered.
When therefore the bone is uncovered, and you see in it corruption or blackness, then scrape it with an instrument whose form is this.
And it is called a rasp of the head.
Let it be made from iron, and let its head be round like a file, which is pointed with the point of a lime or the subtle point of an alembroth: and place it on the corrupted spot of the bone. Then turn it around between your fingers, and press your hand firmly for a while, until you know that the corruption has been scraped away: and do this several times.
Then turn it around between your fingers, and press your hand firmly for a while, until you know that the corruption has been scraped away: and do this several times. Then restore the place with medicines which are drying and styptic.
If therefore the place is consolidated, and flesh grows in it, and the flow of sanies is cut off: and it remains for forty days, and does not become inflamed, and does not suppurate, and no accident occurs in it: then know that it has already healed.
And if not, then there is no ingenuity in it, unless you reduce the fistula to the nostril opening, according to this method.
And it is, that you detach from the bone with a file or with an acute medicine: and when the bone is detached, then take the trephine according to this method, let it be iron, triangular: and its wood should be a pyramid extended to the extremity, as you see.
Then place that on the bone itself: and let it be near the tear duct: and stretch out your hand a little from the eye.
Then turn your hand with the trephine until it penetrates the bone, and feels that it is weak: through this, because it finds a way to exit from it, when it holds its hand over its nose.
Therefore then restore the place with styptic medicines that dry, as I have instructed you.
When therefore flesh grows, and the place hardens: then the matter that was poured out to the exterior returns to the nose: it is therefore lighter on the weak part.
Of the Reduction of the Prominence of the Eye. Chapter 20.
When the eye bulges out with its entirety, and no harm occurs in the vision, nor diminution: then it is necessary to soothe the weak part: then phlebotomize it: afterwards apply cupping glasses on the neck without scarifying, but with suction.
Then put on the eye an ointment that is made from acacia, and aloe, and balsam, and sarcocolle.
Then bind the eye above with a plaster containing many powders.
And the method of applying poultices is: to take many soft cloths, and to double each cloth over the four; then make many from them; afterwards place one on top of another according to the quantity that the eye requires; then bind them together with a hard bandage, strongly fastened.
And apply wet poultices with suction without scratching.
Then remove the wet poultices and loosen the eye during the day and night.
If, however, the ligament is again softened, then it is necessary to bind it strongly; afterwards remove the ligament after a day and night, as we have said.
If, therefore, you see that the eye has now returned to its own tunics, it is good; and if not, then apply again the plaster, and poultices, and bandages, and wet applications, until it is healed.
Concerning the Incision of the Eye's Tunics.
Chapter 21.
When a disruption occurs in the eye's tunics, then it bulges out and proceeds beyond the eyelids like an eyeball, and its shape is disfigured because of that, and vision is obstructed by it: then the operation for it is, according to what I will describe: and it is, that you should insert a needle in the root of the eye from the lower to the upper part.
Then insert another needle where there is a double thread on the lacrimal side, and make it penetrate; and withdraw the first needle according to its own arrangement.
Then cut the place of the double thread, and tie it with the eye's circumference like a circle; and bind it strongly.
Then extract the needle, and place on the eye a woolen cloth soaked in albumen of egg; and leave it, until the thread falls with the eye.
Then treat the eye with what comforts it, until the wound is healed.
And when a bandage is wrapped around the entire circumference with a circle of cloth, until it adds great prominence to the eye.
Then it should be pierced with a subtle spatula, which reaches to the depth of the eye, and the albucid discharge flows out, and the eye subsides, and enters at once; then bind it, until it is healed.
On the treatment of cataracts.
Chapter 22.
This disease which is called Alcomnati is not, however, a real tumor, but rather a turbid fluid that accumulates in the eye, similar to descending water, and it is not itself.
And the method of operating on it is to make the weakened part sit upon a prepared or directed seat.
Then take his head with your hands on both sides, and move it until you see the turbid fluid reach the lower parts of your eyes.
Then it is figured, and does not flow down, and the light is freed: and you will see that the weakened part is as it was seen: and if it does not flow downwards, know that it is water.
But if the descent of the turbid fluid is not prepared with what we have said, then make the weakened part sit between your hands. Then take a subtle spatula, and find with it the supracorneal panniculus at the point of continuation with the corneal tunic in the crown, until the turbid fluid goes out.
When it has gone out, then instill into the eye warm water in which you have mixed honey; or water in which you have already boiled fenugreek and honey; then treat with the remaining treatment, until it is healed.
On the treatment of water that has descended into the eye, or a cataract.
Chapter 23.
We have now described the types of water in the division, and what is suitable for piercing with a declaring and explaining sermon; then take that same thing according to health.
Then it is necessary to place the injured person sitting between your hands, opposite the light, near a window: and bind their healthy eye, and hold them strongly. Then, with your right hand, if the affected eye is the left one, or with your left hand, if the affected eye is the right one.
Then take with your right hand the clyster, if the affected eye is the left one; or with your left hand, if the affected eye is the right one.
Then place the end of the clyster near the crown through the thickness of the radius in the same whiteness of the eye's smaller tear-duct: then push the clyster with strength: and you turn it around with your hand, until it penetrates into the whiteness of the eye: and you feel that the clyster has now reached the empty space.
And it is necessary that the measure of the journey of the clyster be to the depth, the measure of the space which is from the pupil up to the end of the blackness: and this is the crown of the eye.
You will see them in the same pupil of the eye's vision, due to the clarity of the corneal membrane.
Then place the clyster up to the place where there is water.
Then press it downwards with one vein after another.
If then the water descends immediately, the injured person sees that above what was obstructing their sight immediately, and the clyster in their eye.
Then rest a little while.
If then the water descends, then put it down for a second, except that the clyster should come out.
When it is fixed, and does not rise: then withdraw the clyster with ease: and you turn your hand little by little. Then dissolve something in water from a clear crystal gem: and wash the inner eye with it.
Then place the entire poultice outside the eye, or a linen soaked in rose oil and albumen of an egg, and bind it with a healthy eye.
We, however, and those who are of our time, place upon him a ground cumin with the albumen of an egg.
What if the collyrium does not obey you when entering the eye on account of its hardness, because it is from a certain person whose eye is hard: then it is necessary to receive a spatula, which is called Alberid, whose shape is this.
Therefore, you should approach with it alone and not put your hand finally into the opening; and it is only so that you may make a way to the collyrium to the subtle place.
Then introduce the collyrium, according to what we have said.
And at the completion of your work, prepare for the infirm person a well-made dormitory with a dark chamber, in which they may sleep on their back: and prohibit them from all movements, and from coughing: and place their food, that which soothes their nature: and let them not move their head to the right or left at all.
And let the bandage remain according to its arrangement until the third day. Then release it in that dark chamber, and test its strength: and make it see things clearly.
Then reduce the bandage until the seventh day.
And it is not necessary to do that at the time of treatment, or immediately after the incision: rather, it is necessary to wait for that: because water rises quickly through a violent aspect.
If a hot abscess occurs: then it is necessary to release the eye before the seventh day: and apply what soothes the abscess until it is soothed: then absolutely free from its vision, and place on its face an oral applicator which regulates its vision under that day, while it remains in that dark chamber.
Then he should go out of the house gradually, and turn back to his own cases.
And he should know that a disciple is not excused from the sight of something many times: then indeed he will be aware of the operation.
And now indeed it reaches us from some of those who are of Alayrach, who said that a perforated fontanelle was made in Alayrach, which is stimulated by water.
But I did not see anyone in your land who has done that: nor have I read it in any of the ancient books: and it is possible that it may be new.
And these are forms of species from a fontanelle, so that they stand above those who ignore them.
Let them be made from their own material: and let the extremities of them be with the same subtlety of triangular shape, and acute extremities.
Forms of fontanelles.
Concerning the treatment of a congenital flesh growth in the nose.
Chapter 23.
Sometimes flesh growths are born in the nose, diverse and added, among which there is something that resembles a scorpion with many feet; and from them there is cancerous flesh, stony, of dark color; and from them there is soft flesh, not of dark color.
In this case, therefore, what is from these fleshes and is soft, not deceitful, nor cancerous, it is necessary to make the weak part sit between your hands opposite the ground, and open its nostrils, and insert a hook into those fleshes: then draw them outwards, and cut what you have comprehended from them with a subtle, acute instrument on one side, until you know that the whole flesh has now been removed.
If something remains from it whose removal is not possible: then scrape that with one of the subtle instruments with ease, until nothing remains from it.
If blood dominates you, or a warm aposteme forms: then apply to it what is necessary; or if it is from malignant apostemes, then prepare for cauterizing him, until the blood stops and all flesh is consumed.
Then there should be poured into the nose after the incision vinegar and water, or wine.
If the nose is opened and humidity proceeds from it up to the palate, then know that he is already healthy.
If humidity does not penetrate, according to what is necessary, then know that there is a born flesh within the upper nasal bones, which did not come forth with the incision of the instrument.
Then therefore it is necessary to introduce a linen thread with some thickness and many knots on it; and place between each knot the quantity of a finger or less; and the weak one should ingraft, so that he may put an extremity of the thread into his nose with a rod, or as much as possible after making it similar to a silver (instrument); and draw out its odor, until it reaches the cavity, and emerges above his throat.
And many indeed perform something similar to this, the boys of Atto in the schools; and it is an easy thing for him who wants.
Then place two extremities of the thread, one that emerges above the nose and another that remains in the nose.
Then minister to the serration of the flesh with knots which are on the thread. Do it until you know that the flesh is already bound with the knots of the thread.
Then extract the thread; and put into the nose after the abstraction of blood a linctus which you have imbibed in an Egyptian ointment: do it for three days or more, until the ointment corrodes all that remains from the flesh.
Then put into the nose at the end of the matter a tube of lead, for some days, until he is healed.
If you need a treatment that dries out, use that one.
To make a head-cleansing instrument, with which oils are distilled, and other medicines are administered through the nose, make it from silver or copper, so that it is similar to a small lamp, open like a shell, and its passage similarly.
And if you want to make a closed cannula, like a reed.
And the shell-shaped instrument to be made for head-cleansing should be full, uncovered: which has a handle at its end, with which you hold it, when you warm it with oil or what you want to extract from juices and fluid matters.
And this is the form of the instrument. On the treatment of a nose with a polyp.
Chapter 25.
A polyp often grows on the edge of the nose and increases and augments with time until its ugly appearance.
And because of this, it is necessary to remove it from the start of its appearance and eradicate it entirely.
Then apply to the place either a cautery or a burning medicine that stands in its stead.
If therefore the incision of it is delayed until it grows, then consider whether it is stony, hard, dark-colored, and has little sensation: then do not touch it with iron, for it is a cancerous aposteme.
For I have often seen those who cut into an aposteme and great evil befell them because of it, upon the one who had it.
And if the aposteme is of gentle touch, not dark-colored, and you see that incision is possible in its entirety, then evacuate the weak part, and cut into it without fear, without hesitation: and treat the place with what dries out and constricts, until it heals.
On the stitching of the nose, lip, and ear.
Chapter 26.
You should know that when a solution of continuity occurs in one of those cartilages, it contributes little to the operation, unless in certain men.
It is necessary, therefore, when something happens to anyone from that, that you should consider if it is a fresh wound with its own blood; and then gather the edges of the wound with a suture: afterwards take care of it, until it heals.
And if the lips of continuity are already separated, and each part has become healthy: then it is necessary to scrape away every part from its own apparent cut, until it bleeds.
Then gather the two lips with a suture, and bind them together, and sprinkle over it dragon's blood powder, and triple-refined olibanum; and place above the powdered emplastic a thin layer of diafinicon, and another of consolidative emplastics: and leave it bound for two days, or three.
Then loosen it, and change the medicine: and leave it, until the threads separate of themselves. Then take care of it with an ointment, until it heals.
The method of suturing is to gather the continuity solution, or with acupuncture needles, as we narrated in the suturing of the belly: or gather the solution with a thread, as I made you know.
Concerning the removal of lip knots.
Chapter 27. Many men indeed experience rough, hard growths like seeds of a herb inside their lips, and some of them are smaller, and others larger.
Therefore it is necessary to turn the lip upside down, and to place something over every knot of it, and to hold it with a hook, and to cut around it on all sides.
Then fill the place after the incision with warm egg, until blood separates.
Then it is washed with vinegar, and the place where the stitching was done is treated with it, until the wounds heal.
About the cutting of the skin grown over the gum.
Chapter 28. Flesh often grows over the gum, which the ancients call "abuluss".
Therefore, you should hang it with a hook; or hold it with forceps, and cut it at its root, and let the sanious fluid flow out, or blood.
Then put on the affected place powdered zeig (zedium), or other dry, powdered medicines.
But if that flesh returns after the treatment, for it often returns, then cut it a second time and cauterize it; for it will not return after cauterization.
About the filing of teeth with iron.
Chapter 29.
When they accumulate on the surface of teeth from the inner and outer parts, and between the rough, scurfy gums, and when they become black, and turn yellowish, and greenish, until corruption reaches the gum, and the teeth become foul through that.
Therefore, you should sit the weak person between your hands, and their head in your lap, and scrape the teeth with a file, on which you see the roughness, and a thing similar to sand; until nothing remains of them, and similarly do for blackness, and greenishness, and yellowness, and other things until they are cleaned.
If therefore what is in them from the beginning of filing is removed, it is good; and if not, then repeat the filing on them another day, a second, and a third, until finally the desired result is achieved.
And know that a tooth requires filings of diverse forms and many figures, according to what is prepared for your operation; therefore, the file with which a tooth is scraped from below is different from the file with which it is scraped between the teeth, according to other forms.
And these forms of rasps should be prepared for you, which you will see.
On the extraction of painful teeth.
Chapter 30.
It is necessary to cure a tooth of its pain with all ingenuity, and to be slow in its eradication.
For it is not fitting to supply its place when it is eradicated: because it is a sublime substance: unless when there is no excuse for its eradication, then it is necessary to eradicate the weakened tooth, so that it may be strengthened and confirmed as a painful tooth with you.
For often the pain of the weakened tooth deceives and seems to be in a healthy tooth, and it is eradicated: then the pain does not cease until the weakened tooth is eradicated.
We have already seen that from the operation of blood-letters.
When therefore the painful tooth itself is confirmed to you, then it is necessary to scarify around the tooth with a spatula-like instrument, in which there is some virtue, until the gum is loosened on every side: then move it with your fingers or with subtle forceps at first gradually, until you shake it.
Then place the large forceps in a good position on it, and hold the head of the weakened tooth between your knees: which you have already held well, so that it does not move: then pull the tooth straight out, so as not to break it.
If therefore it does not come out, then take one of those instruments and insert it under the tooth on every side with ease, and try to move it as you did at first.
If the tooth is perforated or corroded, then it is necessary to fill that hole with a piece of cloth: and bind it with a subtle root extremity, so that it does not break during the time of your constriction on it with forceps.
And it is necessary to act carefully with scarification around the gum on every side, much and often.
And preserve your strength, so that you do not break it, and a part of it remains, and returns above the weakened area from that greater evil which is its first pain.
And beware, lest you do that which ignorant bleeders do in their haste, and the boldness of theirs in eradicating it, beyond what they administer, as we have narrated.
For they often cause great infirmities to occur in men, whose difficulties are such that they break them, and all the roots of these remain, or some of them: or as they extract it with certain bones of the jaw: as we have testified many times. Then it is washed out after its eradication with wine, or with vinegar and salt. What if a flow of blood occurs from the places (for it often happens), then take something from zegi, and fill the place with it: and if not, cauterize it if it does not conduce to zegi.
The forms of subtle forceps which are moved densely at first, should be long in their extremities, short in the hand, thick, so that they do not duplicate when pressed with them on a tooth: they should be like the examples of thick manual ones, until when you squeeze with them, they do not slip, nor duplicate: short extremity, and they should be made of iron or forged from decently fashioned straight extremities: and in their extremities there should be teeth, some of which enter into others, and squeeze with a decent constriction, strongly.
And sometimes the extremities are made like the form of a bird's beak, which is called a ciconia, and they are strong in constriction.
Concerning the Eradication of Teeth, and the Extraction of Jawbone Fractures.
Chapter 31.
When something remains after the eradication of a tooth which is broken, then it is necessary to put a compress on the place with butter for one day or two days, until the location softens: then introduce into it an algast, or forceps: whose extremities are similar to a bird's beak, which is called a ciconia.
The form of this is a forceps.
Their extremities are made like files within, or like polished awls.
If it does not obey you at the exit with these forceps, then it is necessary to hollow out above the root, and to detach the whole flesh, and to introduce an instrument which is called a small Palanca, whose form is this.
Let the extremity be short, somewhat thick: and let it not be soaked, so that it does not break.
If the root emerges through that, it is good: and if not, it is necessary to help with these other instruments whose forms are these.
The form of the first triangular extremity, in which there is a certain thickness.
The form of the triangular extremity, subtle.
It is also helped with this instrument having two branches, whose form is this. And with other instruments and tools which preceded in the filing of teeth.
It is also a help with this instrument which is similar to a large hook, of this form, a triangular twisted extremity, in which there is some thickness, so that it does not break; and let it not be soaked.
And know that there are many instruments for teeth: and similarly the remaining instruments are not counted, and the skilled artisan, subtle in his art, finds by himself the instrument, according to what the operation and the very illnesses signify to him.
Since they are from painful things which are for those about which the ancient ones did not speak of an instrument, on account of the diversity of their species.
If, however, the bone is broken from the jaw, or from other bones of the mouth, or putrefies: then to thoroughly examine it in its place with that which is suitable for it from the instruments and forceps which I mentioned in extracting roots, and to help with gestures, whose form is this.
Here is the translation:
If, however, there is a small amount of decay in the bone, then scrape it away with its decay, and take care of it until it heals.
About the extraction of prominent teeth above others.
Chapter 32.
When prominent teeth do not follow their natural course, a foul appearance is formed through that shape; and especially when this happens to women and girls, namely those of a tender age.
For if a tooth is born behind another tooth and does not take its place, or it is possible to serrate it, nor to file it: then extract it: and if it is connected with another tooth, then cut it with that instrument whose shape is this.
It is similar to a small file, and is made from iron, with a very sharp point.
And let your cutting be thus, that you cut it over many days, and because of the hardness of the tooth, and so that another tooth is not disturbed.
If, however, it is prominent and exposed to its filing: then file it with a file made of iron, whose shape is this.
Let it be entirely made of iron, and its handle having small pointed points, like a file with which awls are made: with which the tooth is filed little by little over many days with ease, so that the tooth is not disturbed and falls out: then smooth it, finally scrape it with certain rasps.
If the tooth is one that breaks off a part and hurts the tongue: then it is necessary to file it also, until the roughness of that fracture is removed, and it is made smooth: and let it be flattened, so that it does not hurt the tongue or corrupt speech.
About the fastening of teeth with golden wires.
Chapter 33.
When the front teeth receive a concussion and shock from a blow or fall, and are unable to hold on to what they chew so that it does not fall out: and you have treated them with medicines that constrict, and the treatment did not help: then the idea is to fasten them with a golden wire: because silver turns green and decays after days; but gold never changes.
And let the middle thread be in subtlety and thickness according to the quantity that it takes between the teeth.
And the form of retention is thus, that you receive a thread and insert its double between two healthy teeth: then weave with both extremities of the thread between moving teeth, whether one or several, until you arrive with the web up to the healthy tooth on the other side.
Then repeat the weaving up to the part from which you began: and tighten your hand with subtlety and wisdom, until it is not removed outright: and let your constriction be where you tighten the thread, at the roots of the teeth, so that it does not come loose.
Then cut the superfluous extremities of the thread with scissors: and gather both, and convert them into a knot: and hide them between the healthy tooth and the moving tooth, so that they do not harm the tongue: then let it be tightened thus until it remains.
If however it becomes loose, or is cut, tie them with another thread, and establish it in this way for the entire time.
And this is the form of teeth, and the figure of retention of two healthy teeth, and two moving teeth, as you see.
And when it happens that a tooth or two return to their own places after a fall, and are retained as we have described, and remain: and this does not happen unless the craftsman is prudent, experienced, and skilled.
And when something is prepared from the bones of animals: and it is made into the form of a tooth, and placed in its position, where the tooth is strengthened and tied, as we have said: and it remains, and serves with it for a long time.
Concerning the cutting of the ligament that occurs under the tongue, and prevents speaking.
Chapter 34.
If there is something hard and knotted in it, and it comes from the consolidation of a wound, then push in that hook, and feel it along the width, until you cut through the ligament, and the knot is freed.
If a flow of blood occurs, then put powdered zu-gyg (zoug or zu-gyg is an unknown substance, but it seems to be a type of powder or dust) on the spot. If the blood flows copiously from you, then cauterize the spot with a gentle cautery, which is suitable for that: then take care of it with the rest of the treatment, until it heals. Concerning the extraction of a ranula that forms under the tongue.
Chapter 35.
When an abscess occurs under the tongue that resembles a small frog, hindering the tongue from its natural function: and perhaps it swells so much, until it fills the mouth.
If you see it is of a dark blue or black color, hard, and has no weak sensation: then do not touch it, for it is a cancer.
And if it declines to whiteness, in which there is moisture, then push into it a hook, and cut it with a subtle spatula, and free it from all parts.
If blood flows out during your operation, then put a compress of triturated zegi on it until the bleeding stops; afterwards return to your operation, until you extract it with its complement.
Then let it be cleansed with vinegar and salt; and take care to heal the remaining wound with a suitable treatment, until it is healthy.
On the treatment of two abscesses on the limbs of the anus.
Chapter 36.
And then you will either perforate it, or it will burst by itself.
And if it is of a white color, round, and its root is subtle: then it is fitting to cut into it.
And the operation on it is, that you should consider before your operation, if the abscess has quieted down, completely calm and warm, or has diminished somewhat: then therefore make the patient sit in a comfortable position before a window, and his head should be in your lap: and open his mouth, and receive carefully between your hands, and press his tongue downwards with an instrument, of which this is the shape. Let it be made from silver or copper, which should be as subtle as a knife.
When you press with it the tongue, and the abscess is shown to you, and your gaze falls upon it: then take a hook, and fix it in the tonsil, and extract it as much as possible towards the outside, except that you draw out something from the tissues.
Then cut into it with an instrument, whose shape is as follows.
It is assimilated to a biting forceps: indeed, the extremities of these are curved, so that the orifice of each one is directed at an acute angle; therefore, take care that it be made from iron, or ivory, imbued with.
If however this instrument is not available, then cut into it with a spatula, whose shape is as follows.
It is sharp on one side, not sharp on the other side.
And after you have cut into one vein, cut into the other according to the same type of incision.
Then after the incision, gargle the affected part with cold water, or with vinegar and water.
If, however, a flow of blood occurs, gargle with water in which the bark of granated trees has been boiled: or myrtle leaves and similar things from styptics, until the flow of blood is stopped: then take care of it, until it is healed.
And when other apostemes appear on the throat, apart from the two tonsils.
Cut therefore equally according to what I said about the incision of the two tonsils.
And I have indeed already treated a woman for an aposteme that was born in her throat, which was drawing her to darkness, little sense, which had almost closed her throat: and the woman was breathing with a narrow passage, and had already prohibited food and drink, and water: and she was already nearing death, if it had remained one day or two days.
And the aposteme had only risen so far that it had sent out two branches, until they issued forth through two nostrils.
I hastened therefore to seize one of them quickly, and fixed it with a hook.
Then I pulled it out, and a large portion was withdrawn from it.
Then I cut it off, where I grasped it from the nostril aperture.
Then I did to it what had proceeded from the other nostril.
Then I opened its mouth and pressed its tongue: and afterwards I fixed a hook in the apostema: then I cut off part of it, and only a little blood flowed from it: the throat of the woman was freed, and she began to drink water immediately, then took food.
I did not cease to cut from that apostema many times over a long period: and the apostema succeeded in the place of what I was cutting, until it was prolonged excessively and with it.
I therefore used ingenuity, and cauterized the apostema within the throat.
It stood still therefore from then on: then I walked away from that part, and did not know what God did with it afterwards.
On the Incision of a Wart on the Uvula.
Chapter 37.
When a catarh descends to the uvula and becomes an apostema, and it is long: then it is called perpendicular: and if it is thick and round on the lower part, then it is called a wart.
When it is treated with what we said in the division, and the treatment does not help: and you see that the hot apostema has quieted down from it, and it is subtle: then it is necessary to cut into it.
And what is gathered around it is round, and it has no length, and it is bloody, or dark purple, or black in color, and it has no sensation: then it is necessary to avoid cutting into it.
For there is fear of harming the patient.
Therefore it is necessary when you see it according to the method that I mentioned, concerning its whiteness and its length, to make the patient sit in front of a light source: and press his tongue with an instrument, whose description has preceded: then fix a hook in the uvula, and draw it downwards: and cut into it with one of the two instruments that I mentioned in the incision of the two tonsils.
And it is necessary that you do not cut except from that which is added above the natural terminus without addition.
For if you cut more than that, you will cause harm and speechlessness.
Then after the incision, use what we have described in the incision of the two almond-shaped (organs), and treat it, until it is healed.
If, however, the patient is frightened by the incision, then it is necessary to use artfulness in cauterizing it without fear and trembling.
And the method of cauterization in this case is not with sharp water, but rather, so that you place the patient's head on your lap.
Then press their tongue with the instrument we mentioned earlier.
Then take the water I told you about in the chapter on cauterization, and mix it with a non-extinguished lime, and make it neither too thick nor too subtle, and fill the concavity of this instrument, which is of this shape.
Let the extremities of it be where the medicine is placed, curved like the curve of a cochlear radius.
And place the instrument with the medicine on the same ulcer: and let the patient be lying on his side, so that saliva flows out of his mouth from the inner medicine, so that nothing descends from it into his throat, and harms him.
Then hold your hand with the medicine.
And you apply it first to the ulcer in the quantity of a mid-hour dose, until you see it already darkened and soothed by the biting of the medicine.
And if you wish to receive the pus, and wrap it around the extremity of the radius, and pour the pus with medicine, and insert the radius with the pus into a tube from above, until the pus adheres to the ulcer. Do that many times, until you achieve what you want regarding the cauterization of this ulcer.
Then dismiss her: for she will then take care of herself and will fall after three days, or four.
What if you intend to administer medicine, administer it thus: and after cauterization, wipe away the area around the wound with a cloth soaked in butter, and cleanse it with what is around it from the medicine; and cool it with cold water.
And let it be treated externally with poultices, and internally with gargles, until it is healed.
This therefore is a more wholesome method of treatment by incision and longer free from fear.
And when an ulcer is treated also with what is more subtle than cauterization and incision: it is treated indeed with fumigation, in this manner.
Take calendula, and hyssop, and origan, and rue, and ssea, and chamomile, and abrotan, and similar ones among the herbs: and gather all of them, or some of them in a pot, and submerge them with vinegar, and boil: and let the pot be well-coated with clay: and let there be a hole in the middle of the pot, above which an instrument concave according to this manner is placed.
Let it be made of silver or copper: and let the extremities be introduced, in which there is a pellet, into the mouth of the weak person, until the vapor ascends to the ulcer through a reed, until the ulcer is much obscured.
Then repeat it many times over it, until it takes care of itself.
And beware, lest you perform this treatment at the beginning of an apostemic disease.
For it is added in an aposteme: and it is not suitable to perform that unless at the decline of its warm aposteme.
If you do not have this instrument at hand, then take a reed, and place a layer of cortex on its extremity: so that the mouth of the weak person is not burned: because the cortex prevents the vapor from burning the mouth: and this is part of good treatment with health.
On the extraction of spines and bones from the throat.
Chapter 38.
Many times a bone sticks in the throat, or a fish bone, or something else.
It is necessary therefore to extract what appears above what has fallen, after you have pressed the tongue with an instrument towards the roof of the mouth, and it will be clear to you what is in the throat.
And what does not appear to you and is hidden in the throat, it is necessary to make a weak vomiting before food is digested in the stomach.
Perhaps indeed the attached thing will come out through vomiting.
Or swallow a weak piece of turnip, or the root of lettuce, or swallow a morsel of dry bread: or take a piece of dried marine sponge and tie it with a thread, then swallow it.
When it reaches the place where the spines or bone are, and is extracted, then it comes out. If therefore it does not come out with what we have said: then use an instrument made of lead in this shape.
Let it be thicker than a radius of a finger, and at its extremity let there be a curvature, which introduces itself into the throat with ease: and let it have its head elevated upwards.
And let it beware of touching its epiglottis, lest it should cause a cough, and the doctor pushes with his hand, either the bone or spine, or introduces it himself.
However, what the doctor introduces gently is better: because of his knowledge of the place of the attached thing: and he pushes from below, or pulls with his hand and instrument upwards, all that according to the quantity prepared for him, until it comes out.
On the extraction of leeches.
Chapter 39.
When a leech is treated with what I said earlier in the section on cures with medicines, and it does not work, then consider the throat of the weak patient in front of the sun, or towards the sun after you have pressed his tongue with an instrument as I described to you.
If therefore your vision falls upon the blood vessel, extract it with a small hook or with delicate fingers from below.
What if it is not possible with these: then take a concave cannula, and insert it into the throat of the injured person up to the throat: then insert the iron rod heated with fire into the concavity of the cannula.
Do that many times: and let the injured person abstain from water for a whole day.
Then let him take a full treatment of cold water, and open his mouth in it: and let him wash his mouth with it, and not swallow anything from it: and move the water one hour after another with his hand.
For the blood vessel falls out when it feels the water.
If it does not come out with what we have narrated, then fumigate the injured person with bug-losses, or with a bean-like instrument which I described in the fumigation of the ulcer.
Do that many times, until it falls out.
And the method of operation in fumigation is, that you take a pot, in which there are burning prunes with fire: and the pot is covered with a lid, in the middle of which there is an opening: and the extremity of the instrument is arranged in that opening.
Then apply the fumigation, and let the injured person put his mouth at the extremity of the cannula, and close his mouth, so that the fumigation does not escape, until he knows that the fumigation has already reached the blood vessel.
For the blood vessel will immediately fall out.
If it does not fall out, then repeat the fumigation many times.
And let the injured person endure hunger, and eat salty things, and garlic, and not drink water. It is necessary therefore that it falls out with this regimen.
And this is the form of the instrument with which a blood-sucking worm is extracted from the throat, when it falls upon it with force.
It is similar to forceps, as you see: except that it has this curvature which is introduced into the throat.
And its extremity is similar to the beak of a bird called a stork, in which there is roughness of a file: when it grasps something, it does not release it at all.
On the opening of abscesses, and their section, and treatment in general.
Chapter 40.
There are many species of abscesses, of many modes, according to what comes to mind about them, namely one, and one in this book: and they differ in their perforation and sectioning, which is from two modes.
Of which one is of the species of abscesses in itself, and that which it comprehends from humidity.
And the second mode is due to locations, in which it happens from the body.
Because an abscess occurring in the head is different from an abscess occurring in the anus: and an abscess occurring in a fleshy place is different from an abscess occurring in a joint: and each of them has its own judgment from the operation.
And among the abscesses there are those that should not be perforated unless after the maturation of the pus in them, and its completion: and among them there are those that should be perforated while they are raw, and do not mature according to their completion.
Like abscesses which are near the joints.
Because when an abscess occurs near a joint and prolongs its being until it putrefies what is around it, perhaps the ligaments or nerves of that joint may be corrupted: which is the cause of a prior contraction of that limb.
Or it is an abscess near a principal member: because if you delay the perforation of it until it matures, it will harm either that member or through that principal member.
It is near the anus, so perforate it when it is immature: and it is not fitting to make a perforation, lest an unripe apostema should putrefy, unless it is near the anus, so that it does not putrefy deeply, and it reaches to the interior of the intestine, and it becomes a fistula, or it becomes in its terminus which does not heal. It is fitting to know the time of perforation of the apostema, which has matured according to its complement: and it is at the sedation of pain, recession of fever, and diminution of redness, and pulsation, and acuteness of the head of the apostema: and the remaining signs. And it is fitting to make the perforation in the inferior place of the apostema, and of the more prominent elevation: and let the perforation be made in the length of the body, if the apostemata are in the parts of the hands and feet, and in the places of the muscles, and tendons, and nerves, and arteries, and finally in all equal places where there is no reflexion.
But in those that are reflected, let the perforation be made with the membrane according to that member.
When indeed the apostema is in fleshy places: then it is better to delay its perforation until its digestion is confirmed, just as we said according to its complement.
Because if you perforate it before that, the course of the virus is prolonged from it, and there are many filths and foulnesses, and perhaps its lips become hardened, and its depth.
And some apostemata are perforated according to the width of the body in case of necessity: or according to that member which needs it.
And it is fitting to administer a small perforation in small apostemata, and a large perforation in large apostemata: or many sections according to the similarity of the magnitude of the apostema.
And there are those among the apostemata, in which it is fitting to sew up the skin: and an incision should be made when it has already become like a pannus, and it has been made at the terminus, which has already died: just as that which happens in many cases, such as dubellae and buboes.
And of these are those which are cut with a section having three angles.
And of these is one, from which an incision is made as the figure of a myrtle leaf.
Like a groin abscess.
And of these are those in which a round incision is administered, and a lunar incision; and similar ones from these incisions.
That one indeed which has no head, like superficial lenient abscesses, it is necessary to perforate them with a superficial perforation, or only with a flat one.
And it is necessary, when the abscess is large and has already collected a great deal of pus, and you perforate it, that you do not press too hard and extract all the pus at that time; rather extract from the same part itself.
Then apply a poultice to the abscess until another day.
Then extract something from the pus again.
Do that many times according to the gradation, until it goes out: especially if the patient is weak in strength, or a pregnant woman, or a small child, or an old decrepit person: for the animal spirit is often resolved with the egression of sanies: and perhaps the weak person will die, and you do not perceive.
Therefore this chapter requires great caution.
And after your perforation, by which you perforate the abscesses, it is necessary to clean the wound: and consider.
If therefore the wound of the abscess is small, or it is a flat section, then administer a dressing made of linen, or an old cloth.
And if it is a large abscess, and there are many perforations with fissures, then it is necessary to introduce a dressing into every fissure, until they reach the adjoining skin.
And if you have cut away a part of the skin in the abscess, or concavely hollowed it out around it: then it is necessary to fill it with an old cloth, or as when a fabric is woven, or padded with a layer of linen without moisture: and bind it up until the third day.
Then apply it, and take care of that with what is suitable from the ointment, until it heals.
But if a flow of blood occurs during your operation, then administer cold water and vinegar, after it has been soaked in those rags; and apply it many times to the place of the flow of blood.
But if the flow of blood persists, then it is necessary to administer a regimen and treatment, and powders, which I described in many places of this our book, and from division.
But if it is in winter time, and the place of the apostema is of many nerves: then it is necessary to soak poultices with wine, and warm oil; and apply them to the places.
And if it is in summer, and the places are fleshy: then it is necessary to apply poultices soaked in water, and oil, or with wine and oil, and all that is cold.
Until when it will be the third day, as we said, then it is necessary to dissolve the apostema, and wipe it away, and administer in its treatment what is suitable for it, until it heals.
This is therefore what is necessary from the knowledge of treating apostema universally.
According to the path of distinction, I have already spoken about every apostema, and how it is a way to its treatment, chapter by chapter, individually.
Of the apostema that occur on the skin of the head.
Head 41.
There occur on the skin of the head small apostema, and they are from the species of Knots, which are contained in tunics, which are like sacs: as if they were hollowed out by a hen's beak.
And there are many species of them.
Some of them are fatty; and some contain moisture similar to slime; and some contain moisture similar to frost and pus; and those similar, and some are hard and stony.
And in the cutting of all and their extraction, there is no fear, as long as the artery does not make a contradictory incision at the site of the cut.
And the operation in their cutting is such that you should experience it with an instrument, whose form is presented afterwards, which is called Intromissum, until you know what it contains.
For if there is that which contains moisture, then dry it with a sectional incision along the length of the superficial section: according to this form.
And begin with the incision from line b to line g. When therefore the moisture is evacuated, then scrape out the cyst which contains that moisture, and do not allow anything to penetrate deeply from it.
For it often returns, if something remains from it. Then soak the wound in Egyptian unguent, if it is available: and if not, in water and salt: and fill with it a dressing, and leave it until another day.
For it corrodes what remains of the cyst. Then apply the Egyptian unguent to the wound a second and third time, and if you are uneasy about it, until you are confident that nothing remains of the cyst, then treat the wound with an ointment, until it is healed.
What if the aposteme contains a fatty node: then dry it according to this form, with an incision having the shape of a cross: and insert a hook between the two labia of the incision, and scrape it out from every part: and strive to extract the tunics that contain it.
If, however, the artery makes a contradictory incision for you, then do what I will tell you afterwards.
And similarly, act on the aposteme if it is stony, from the incision and the same treatment, according to what we have said. And the incision above the stony aposteme is easier: because it has little blood and moisture.
And sometimes there are certain abscesses that are on the head in certain men, with which there is no deep humidity.
Or make a perforation of them always from the lower part of them, so that the flow of sanies may be directed towards the lower parts.
Then treat them with what is suitable for them according to their treatment.
Of the section of Scrofulous swellings on the neck.
Chapter 42.
These abscesses often occur on the neck, and under the arm-pits, and in the groin areas: and sometimes they occur in other parts of the body.
And above those which occur on the neck, there are one and many: and they are produced by a humour: and every Scrofula arising from them is under its own tunic, just as it is in knots and abscesses of the head, as we have narrated.
And there are many kinds of these Scrofulous swellings.
And among them there are stony ones: and among them there are those that contain humidity: and among them there are malignant ones, which do not respond to treatment.
Therefore, in those that you find to be of good disposition on palpation, whose manifest colour is close to the colour of the skin, and moves towards every part, and is not attached to the nerves of the neck, nor to the glands, nor to the arteries, nor is it deep: it is necessary to separate it by a superficial section from the upper part to the lower part of the body in a line, b. to a line, g., and to excise it from every part: and extend the two lips of the skin with a hook, or with many hooks, if you need it, just as we said in the case of abscesses on the head, and extract it gradually.
And it is above the caution, so that a vein or nerve is not injured.
And let the instrument be not sharp-pointed, so that it does not add to your hand with an incision, or disturb the weak part, and cut what is not necessary.
If you have cut a vein, or an artery, or it prevents you from operating, then apply to the wound some crushed garlic, or certain powders that staunch blood, and bind the wound, and leave it until the acute pain subsides, and the wound softens: or it begins to suppurate.
For blood is staunched by the tunic of Redi, therefore return to your operation, until you complete it.
Then treat it.
If the entire Strophula is cut, then it is necessary to bring together the two lips of the wound: and adjust them immediately, after you see that there remains no excess.
If you see that there remains an excess because of the size of the Strophula, then it is necessary to proceed to cut its root, and extract it: and administer the suture as we have said.
And what contains moisture from the Strophuli, pierce it with a superficial piercing: so that you see the place of its maturity: and put the piercing below the following part of the body, as we have said.
Then administer a linctus with ointment, and similar things, so that it corrodes what remains from the corruption, until you see the wound is now clean: then treat it with a generating ointment of flesh, until it heals.
About the section of the epiglottis affected by an abscess that occurs within the throat.
Chapter 43.
The ancients spoke of this section of the epiglottis, and I have not seen anyone in our land who has performed it: and this is the writing of their speech.
However, in those having a severe cough, it is necessary to avoid the section of the epiglottis: since no benefit is made through that: because all the veins and lungs are weak.
In those indeed who have a hot abscess in the mouth, or throat, or tonsils, when there is no disease in the canal, it is necessary to use the section of the epiglottis, to flee from the destruction which is made by suffocation. Therefore it is necessary when we want to do that, to cut the epiglottis under three or four circular folds of the epiglottis, making a small section in width, in what is between two circles in quantity, so that the section is in the sifa, not in the cartilage: and this place is suitable for the section, because it is deprived of flesh, and the vessels of blood are far away from it.
If the doctor is timid, then it is necessary to stretch the skin of the throat with a hook.
Then he should probe the skin until he reaches the canal: he should avoid the blood vessels, if he sees anything from them.
Then he should cut the sifa which we have described: and it is marked above the section of the canal by the phlegm that comes out of it, with what is disrupted, and the separation of the voice.
And leave the wound open for a certain period of time.
When therefore the hour arrives at which the prefabrication is feared, bring together the two lips of the wound's skin, and sew it up itself without cartilage.
Then administer medications that promote the growth of flesh, until it is healed.
Said Albucasis.
The sum of this sermon which we have narrated is not an exposition, unless when they see that some of these apostemes had already putrefied in the throat of the infirm: and the infirm was elevated above death, and wished to intercept his breath; they wanted to dissect the Epiglottis, so that the infirm might breathe over the place of the wound with a certain respiration, and be saved from death: and for this reason they ordered to leave the wound open, until the evil of the disease was consumed, and it was an evil of three days, and almost itself; then therefore they ordered to sew up the wound, and to cure it, until it was healed.
And that which I saw through myself is, that a certain maid grasped a knife, and sent it into her throat, and struck with it a part of the pulmonary canal.
And I was called to her cure, and I found her groaning, as is the groaning of the dead.
I examined therefore the wound, and I found blood which had flowed out from the small wound.
I was confused therefore, because she had not severed a vein, nor an artery: and air was escaping from the wound.
I treated it therefore, and sewed up the wound, and cured it, until it was healthy: and nothing happened to the maid, except hoarseness in her voice: and she returned after days to a better disposition of hers.
Therefore I say: that in the incision of the Epiglottis there is no fear.
On the surgical incision of the hernia in the throat.
Chapter 44.
This abscess is called a hernia of the throat, it is a large abscess, according to the color of the body, and it is common in women.
And it is according to two modes: either it is natural or it is accidental. In the natural one, certainly there is no ingenuity.
The accidental one is indeed according to two modes: of which one is similar to fatty knots.
And the other mode is similar to an abscess that occurs from the thickening of the artery.
And there is fear in it, and it is not fitting to make a incision into it with an iron instrument, unless it is small; and you should test it, and examine it with a probe.
If you find it similar to a fatty knot, and it is not swollen with any veins: then cut it off, just as knots are cut off: and extract it with what it contains from the sac, if it is in a sac: and if not, then probe the entire area.
Then treat the area with what is necessary for healing, until it is healthy.
On the surgical incision of various kinds of knots.
Chapter 45. There are many kinds of knots, and I have already described all their kinds in the division: and it is necessary to relate here the difference between a Knot and an Exitus, since there is a doubt that causes confusion. I say therefore, that since an Exitus is characterized by heat, and fever, and vehement pains, until the boiling of the surplus is suppressed, and the putrefaction is completed: then indeed the fever and heat cease.
But with a Knot, there is no heat, nor fever, nor pains, and it contains those sacs of sifachin, which are their own proper sacs, and they are according to the color of the body: and they are taken in like a seed, and become like a bubble, and they are greater and lesser.
And there are two kinds according to whether they are fat or contain moisture.
And the colors of moisture are many, according as I said in the division. It is necessary, therefore, when you come to the cure of a Node, that you should try it and examine it first with an instrument which is called Intruded, according as its form will be described in the chapter which is after this.
And the method of examining abscesses and all nodes is that you should take this instrument and insert it into a moist place which you find in the abscess: and you should slowly rotate your fingers with it until you know that the instrument has already penetrated the skin.
Then you should finally put your hand according to the measurement of the size of the abscess.
Then extract the Intruded instrument, and consider that which comes out in its track.
If therefore a flowing moisture comes out, whatever the color may be: then dry it with a superficial incision, according as I said about the remaining abscesses.
And if a moisture does not come out in the track of the Intruded instrument, then know that it is fat: therefore dry over it with an incision having the form of a cross, according to this form, as I taught you: and suspend it with hooks, and excoriate the skin from every part with ease: and keep it still if you can over it, so that you may extract the healthy tissue with the Node.
If however the stillness is disrupted during the operation, and it is not possible to extract the healthy tissue, for this often happens, then extract it fragment by fragment, until nothing remains of it.
For if a little or much of it remains, the Node returns according to its fullness.
If it defeats you and a little of it remains: then fill the wound at its completion with certain corrosive powders: and bind the wound, and put above it what sits as a warm abscess, and treat it with remaining cures, until it is healed.
If therefore there is a large knot, then sew up its two lips, and cure it with that which makes flesh. If however there is a pulsating vein opposite you, or not pulsating: then prepare, and fill the place of the wound with a triple dressing, and leave it tightly bound for two days, or three, until the wound putrefies, and the ebullition of blood ceases: then return to cut open what remains of the Node.
Concerning the forms of instruments for cutting and piercing.
Chapter 46.
These are the forms of Instruments for Introduction, and they are of three kinds.
For there is a large one among them, and there is a medium one among them, and there is a small one among them.
They are made from iron, with a square, quadrated extremity, so that they may firmly enter into the abscess.
And these are the forms of Probing Instruments, and yes, that is, piercing ones: and one of them is called a needle, that is, a perforator: and they are of three kinds.
For there is a large one among them, and a medium one, and a small one.
They are suitable for investigating through these abscesses, and ulcers, and fistulas, and buboes from that which is among them, from the bones.
And others are made round, smooth, slender, like large needles to which handles are attached, namely from citrine, or from copper, or iron, or silver. And the better ones among them are those that are made from citrine.
And they are made from black lead, which are suitable for probing fistulas, the concavities of which are reflections, so that they may reflect with their own gentleness along with those reflections.
And they are again of three kinds. Since there are long ones among them, medium ones, and short ones, according to the quantity of the amplitude of the fistula and its constriction. The forms of wounds, and they are of many species. Because some of them are simple, namely those with a single curvature, and they are of three species, as you see, Large, Medium, and Small.
And some of them are jagged wounds, and they are of three species.
And some of them are wounds having two curvatures, and they are of three species; and some of them are wounds having three curvatures, and they are of three species; and all these are necessary in their place.
And these are the forms of scalpels, with which they cut and scrape away nodes and abscesses; and they are of three species: because some of them is large, medium, and small.
Their extremities with which the section is made are sharp, other extremities are not sharp; and they are not placed thus, unless so that there may be relief in scraping away nodes with fear of incision into the vein or nerve; and so that the weak part may be healed through them, and may find tranquility for a while from the inflammation it finds at the scraping away of an abscess.
These are forceps, and they are of three species.
They are made of copper, and they are similar to a file, with which an abscess is opened; and on the broad extremity there is a hidden pointed spatula: and it runs inward and outward when desired, as you see.
The forms of spatulas that are hidden between the fingers at the perforation of an abscess; and they do not perceive them as weak; and they are of three species, large, medium, and small.
The forms of bleeders with which the flow of blood is stopped; and they are of three species, large, medium, and small.
They are made of copper or brass, round, slightly longer, as you see; and they should be to subtlety.
And it is necessary that these species of blood-letting be great and small with you, so that you may quickly draw out the blood through them in case of necessity, and then when no medicine is present to help you.
However, you should not use them in blood-letting at every location on the body, and you should only use them at fleshy places: such as the veins of the legs, and hips, and the veins of the arms, and breasts, and abdomen, and groin, and similar fleshy places.
And when they are made from these small instruments similar to those of the fisticulers, according to their own shape: with which blood is drawn out when it flows from the place of phlebotomy, or at the incision of a vein, or artery: and when they are made round according to this shape.
Concerning the treatment of men's breasts which resemble those of women.
Chapter 47.
Sometimes the breasts of certain men become swollen at the time of deep sleep (that is, when they begin to be polluted in their dreams) until they resemble those of women; and they remain disgusting and loathsome.
Whoever therefore abhors that, it is necessary to make an incision above the breasts in a lunar shape, according to this form from line to line, b. to line, g. Then scrape out all the fatty tissue.
Then fill in with a medicinal poultice of flesh incrustation.
Then bring together the two lips of the wound with a suture, and treat it, until it is healed.
But if the breast declines to the lower parts and becomes soft due to its size, as happens with women: then it is necessary to make two sections on either side in a lunar shape, each of which is connected with the other at their edges, so that one line contains the smaller, according to this form from line to line, b. to line, g. Then scrape out the skin that is between the two lips, and remove the fatty tissue, and apply what we have said about sutures and poultices, which is necessary for healing, until it is healed.
If you do not make a complete incision of what needs to be cut, because of the patient's anxiety or because of the flow of blood, then it is necessary to fill in the wound with a corrosive unguent and leave it, until it corrodes away what remains from the pus.
Then treat it, until it heals.
Concerning the perforation of a posternel, which occurs under the nipple.
Chapter 48. These posternels that occur under the nipple are of the species of hard Strophuli, which contain cysts, and among them are those that contain moisture.
Those therefore that are among them which contain moisture, it is necessary to section them in a lunar fashion, according to this form, from line b to line g, so that everything that is in the posternel may be evacuated from the blood, then fill it with old cotton, and leave it until another day.
Then the cotton is removed, and it is treated with a suitable ointment for that, until it heals.
If the posternel was of the species of nodular Strophuli, then split it open above, as we have said in the section on Strophuli, equally.
If, however, the wound extends to this point so that it emits pus, then apply a cautery to it, according to what we have said in the preceding matter.
Concerning the section of the posternel that occurs due to the Artery and Vein.
Chapter 49.
When the Artery is ruptured and the skin that is above it is consolidated, then often an apostem (abscess) occurs there; and similarly it happens with the Veins as well, so that an abscess and inflammation occur in them.
And the signs by which it is recognized that the abscess and inflammation are due to the Artery and Vein are: because when an abscess is due to an artery, it is long, aggregated deep in the body; and when you press on the abscess with your fingers, you feel as if there is a stridor.
And that which is because of the Veins, is round in the manifest body.
And the section above this abscess is an error, and especially that which is under the armpits, and in the groin, and in the neck, and in many places of the body: and it is a great wound indeed.
It is necessary therefore that his treatment should be undertaken with iron, and what is from them is also in the extremities or in the head, it is necessary that he should be treated.
Above therefore what is from them is from the inflammation of the arterial orifice, find in a gentle section in length.
Then open the section with hooks, afterwards the artery: and free it from its coats, until it is exposed.
Then introduce the needle under it, and make it penetrate until it reaches the other side, and tie the artery with a double thread in two places, according to what I taught you in the extraction of the two arteries that are in the temples.
Then prick the place which is between the two ligaments with a spatula, until all the blood that is in it flows out, and the abscess is dissolved.
Then administer a treatment that generates pus, until the ligaments fall off: afterwards treat it with suitable ointments, until it heals.
What if there is an abscess because of the section of a Vein, then it is necessary that you hold with your hand what you can from the abscess with the skin.
Then introduce a needle under the place which you held with your hand, and make it penetrate: and let there be a double thread in it, until you extract it from the other side.
Then tie with the same abscess a good ligature: according to what I said to you about the ligature of the vein, from two parts with two extremities of the thread. If however the time comes that the thread is extracted, then introduce another needle with another thread under the entire abscess at the incision of the instrument: press, and tie your threads in four places.
Then, dissect the aposteme in its middle, until when it goes out what is in it; then, incise the superficies of the skin, and dismiss what is bound to it from that.
Then, put on top of it a poultice which you have submerged in wine, and oil.
Then, administer treatment, which is done with bandages and ointments, until it heals.
Concerning the aposteme that occurs due to twisting of the tendons.
Chapter 50.
Just as an aposteme occurs in the Artery and Vein, similarly an aposteme occurs in the Nerves; which occurs from percussion, or occurs from excessive labor, and similar things; and it happens most often to them in the places of joints, or ankle, and in every place where the joints are moved; and it is a grave aposteme. Its color is similar to that of the rest of the body, and it is in many dispositions without pain; and when it is constricted with violence, it feels in it a weakness similar to numbness.
And it is not an aggregated aposteme deep in the body, but rather it is under the skin, and it moves to every part, and does not proceed to the front, nor forward, nor backward to the rear.
Therefore, since it is in the joints, it is not necessary that it be touched with an iron.
Perhaps a contraction occurs.
In that case, since it is in the head or in the forehead, make an incision with a spatula.
If therefore it is a small aposteme, then hold it with forceps, and cut it off at the root.
And if it is large, then suspend it with a hook, and excavate it; then lift it out, and bring the wound together with a suture; and treat it, until it heals.
Concerning the excision of an aposteme that occurs in the belly.
Chapter 51. It happens to certain men that many times there are growths in their intestines and in other parts of their bodies, which are called Fungalia, because of their similarity to mushrooms.
Whose root is subtle, and their head is large, and their lips are turned inward.
And it is small among them: and it is among them what is greatly esteemed.
And I have seen a man, and in his belly there were two growths, which were more similar to mushrooms than anything else: there was no difference between them, white, with small roots, and their lips turned inward, and they were covered over, and moisture flowed out of them always.
I therefore cut into them, and I found that one weighed almost 10 ounces and the other almost 8 ounces. And the operation of cutting into them is, as you consider then, if the patient is humid, and the color of the growth is white, humid, with a subtle root: then cut into it with a broad spatula, and let your cauterium be present in the fire.
For often a lot of blood is expelled during the dissection of it: therefore, if you are overcome by the bleeding, then cauterize it.
If you see the patient is pale and timid after the incision with iron, then take a thread made from lead, well-fashioned, and tie it around the vessel: this is the method I mentioned, and leave it for two days.
Then add to the stricture of lead.
Do not cease to tie the lead, as often as it is impressed on the growth, until it is cut off, and it falls away by itself without effort.
If, however, the growth is large-rooted, then there is something to fear and be anxious about in its incision: especially because it is in the belly.
Truly, it is possible to cut into half of it.
Then cauterize him, so that he does not relapse.
Then treat him, until the wound heals.
And beware lest you suppose that a hard, fusiform, painless, foul-smelling tumor is anything but a cancerous aposteme; for I have seen it with the memory of Cancer after this.
On the treatment of prominent umbilical hernias.
Chapter 52.
Umbilical hernias occur from many causes.
Or they arise from cracks in the siphac, which is above the navel; and there emerges from it a gut or intestine, according to what happens in other ruptures.
Or they arise from blood that flows from the Vein, or from the Artery, according to what has been mentioned before.
Or they arise from a constricted flatulence in it.
If, however, it is due to a crack in the siphac and an emergence of thronging: then it has a color similar to that of the body, and it is smooth, without pain; and it appears to be in different locations.
And if it is due to an emergence of the intestine, then its location is with what we have described, of a more severe diversity.
When you press it with your fingers, it is hidden; then it returns, and perhaps there is a noise with it; and it is greatly magnified upon entering the bath, and a severe labor.
If, indeed, it is due to moisture, it is smooth; then it does not hide when you press on it with your hand, nor does it contract, nor does it increase.
What if it is due to blood, then with these signs it appears as an aposteme inclining towards blackness from the wound.
If, however, it is due to a born flesh: then it is a grave, thick, hard, and fixed aposteme, according to one quantity.
If it is due to flatulence, then his touch is gentle. And the operation on it is, as you should consider then, if the prominence of the navel is due to blood of the Artery, or Vein, or flatulence: then it is necessary to refrain from its treatment.
For there is fear and anxiety, as I instructed you in the chapter where I mentioned that abscesses are due to the artery and vein.
Since the prominence of the navel is due to the intestine or a swelling: then it is necessary to prescribe for the patient, so that he may hold his breath, and stand upright, extended.
Then apply signs with an cauterizing iron around the entire circumference of the navel.
Afterwards, instruct him to take a deep breath between your hands on his back.
Then surround with a broad spatula around the circumference of the navel over the place you signed with the cauterizing iron.
Afterwards, extend the middle of the abscess upwards with a large hook.
Then bind it around strongly with a thread, or with a firm silk cordage: and let the knot of the ligament be hidden.
Then open the middle of the abscess extended above the ligament.
If you have found it already caught by the ligament: then extract what is hidden, and insert your index finger into it, and push the intestine towards the interior of the belly: and if you find a swelling, then take it with the hook, and cut away its excess.
If, however, the artery or vein is contrary to you: then surround it greatly.
Then return to your operation.
And take two needles, and insert into them two strong threads: and insert two needles around the circumference which you made around the abscess in the shape of a cross, which you make penetrate.
Then, the aposteme is strangled in four places above the wound; and if you wish, remove the wound, and abandon the place, until the rotten flesh extends and falls off by itself; or cut it open when it becomes subtle and rots.
Then, treat it with what is suitable from ointments, until it heals.
What if the swelling of the navel is from fatty flesh in it, or from moisture; then it is necessary to concave the aposteme, as we have said.
And extract blood, or moisture, which you find in it.
Then, treat it with what solidifies the place.
On the treatment of CANCER. Chapter 53.
For I myself was not able to heal anyone from it; nor did I see another before me who had ventured to tackle it.
And the operation on it, when it is located as we said, is to cut around it, and to release the weak part from black bile several times.
Then, bleed it if you find it with a manifest fullness.
Then, prepare the weak part with preparation, in which it will be located with the operation.
Then, apply to the Cancer unguents that are suitable for it.
Here is the translation:
If however you make a contrary flow of thick blood from the incision of the artery or vein, then cauterize the vein until the blood is stopped.
Then treat it with the remaining treatment, until it heals.
On the treatment of Dropsy.
Chapter 54.
We will now discuss the division of the species of Dropsy, and how water accumulates, and the signs of each species, and its treatment with medicines.
And those that are treated with iron are not but a single species of ascites; and it does not approach with iron the species of tympanitis; nor the deeply hidden species of hypochondria; for that is mortal.
When you have already treated this species of Dropsy, tympanitis, with medicines, and your medication has not been of use, then consider.
For if the patient has already been weakened by debility, or has another infirmity besides Dropsy, such as if he is troubled with coughing, or looseness of the stomach, and similar things; then beware of medicating him with iron: for that is a source of fear.
If however you see a patient overflowing with vitality, and there is no other illness besides Dropsy alone; and he is not a child, nor an old man: then the method of operation for him is, that you place the patient standing between your hands, and afterwards press his belly with your hand, impelling water towards the lower part of the chest.
Then take a pointed instrument, according to this form.
It is of two acute parts, long, with an acute extremity, like a Spatula.
However, there should be something of moderation in it, so that you do not penetrate too far with it during the operation, and harm him.
Then consider.
For if the generation of Dropsy is from the part of the intestines, then it is necessary to extend with an incision from the navel a measure of three fingers, downwards in a straight line above the chest.
If the cause of hydropsy is due to weakness of the liver: then let your left-hand section be three fingers' breadth from the navel.
And if the cause of it is due to the spleen, then let the section be on the right side: and it is not fitting that there should also be a section above where the patient lies, so that excessive fluxes do not flow to that weak place.
Then pierce with an instrument through the entire skin.
Then insert into that section, and lift your hand with a spatula between the skin, and scrape, as if you were excavating it: and let the amount that is excavated be the amount of a fingernail, or about that.
Then scrape until the spatula reaches the empty place: and it is the place of water.
Then extract it, and insert into the opening an instrument, whose shape is this.
And it is similar to a cannula: made from silver, or copper, or gold, smooth, polished: which has a small opening at its lower part, and on its sides are three openings, two on one side and one on the other side: and its extremity is incised, according to the manner of incising a reed, as you see: at its upper extremity there is a ring.
For when the instrument reaches the water, then it immediately descends onto the instrument, thus evacuating from the water at that hour a moderate quantity.
Because if you evacuate from it more than is fitting, perhaps the patient will die soon due to the resolution of his vital spirit: or a syncope approaching death will happen to him.
But evacuate from it according to the quantity of its virtue, and according to what is signified to you by the dispositions of the patient from the goodness of his pulse, and from his goodness.
Then extract the instrument, and retain the water.
What is, because it is immediately retained due to the skin that retains an opening which is above the wound; about which I will narrate, so that you may perforate it in accordance with that method.
Then, take the other instrument, if you see that the patient can tolerate that; and also extract a small quantity from the water. Do that for some days without fear, and guard yourself against error: until nothing remains of the water except a little.
But if the time is favorable for the patient, and you let out a great deal of water: then treat it with burying in hot sand, and sweating much in the bath and sun, and wait upon the wound: and treat it with drying medicines, until it is healed: and cauterize above the stomach, and liver, and spleen, after the extraction of water: according to what I narrated previously.
Concerning the treatment of infants who are born with unperforated urinary passages.
Chapter 55. When an infant emerges from its mother's womb, and the head of its penis is not perforated, or the opening is narrow, or it is not in its proper place.
It is therefore necessary to provide help with a perforation immediately after birth with a very fine spatula, according to this method.
Then put a small leaden rod into the opening, and tie it: and hold it for three days, or four.
When therefore it wants to pass urine, it is removed, and the flow is established.
Then reduce it.
And if you do not put in the lead, it is now possible that the urine which flows into the place does not allow it to close.
That one, however, whose opening is narrow, is treated with lead, as we have said, for many days, until it is enlarged.
Those, however, in whom the opening is not in its proper place, are wounded.
What is, because it is born from those who are born with a natural opening at the end of the spinal cord: wherefore it cannot move to the front, unless it elevates its spine by hand to above. Nor is it his generation, therefore, because the seed cannot arrive at the womb according to rectitude: and there is a foul and loathsome disease.
And the method of operating on it is, that the weak part should be raised above its back.
Then extend the head of the spine with your left hand by a vigorous extension, and cut the head of the spinal cord from its proper place, with a sharp needle or an acute scalpel: just as it is an incision of a reed, or as you would carve something, so that the middle part comes to resemble the head of the spine: and so that the opening falls in the middle according to what is necessary.
And beware lest you have a flow of blood during your operation.
For it has often happened thus.
Therefore, oppose it with what stops the bleeding, and cure the wound, until it is healed.
Concerning the ulcers that occur on the spinal cord and head of the spine, and their corruption, blackening, and adhesions.
Chapter 56.
These ulcers often occur on the spine, and there is a foul prominence of rotten flesh.
And among them, some are malignant, and others are not malignant.
You should therefore suspend the non-malignant one with a subtle hook, and cut it off, until you cleanse it entirely.
Then put on top of it a covering of ointment made from Egyptian unguent. Then treat it afterwards with the DYaphinicon ointment, until it is healed.
But if the ulcer is malignant, of foul color, then it is necessary to apply cautery to it after its incision and removal.
If the albucasis is captured in the foreskin and is not circumcised, and part of the albucasis is within the foreskin and part of it outside: then you should remove the albucassis that is inside first, until it consolidates, then cure the outer one; for when you cure them simultaneously, the foreskin does not become secure unless it is brought forward.
And now also occur in the testicles, and blackening and corruption of the foreskin.
Therefore, it is necessary that you cut away all that has already become blackened and what wants to corrupt or is already corrupted.
Then apply a layer over it with honey that has been mixed with flour of toasted grains and powdered herbs.
Then treat it with the remaining treatment, until it is healed.
If a flow of blood occurs, then apply cautery with a lunar cautery, according to this method.
For cautery is helpful for two conditions at the same time, namely for a flow of blood and when a wound becomes corrupted.
If the head of the vein is corroded and everything is destroyed in an hour, then it is necessary to insert a small pipe made of lead into the affected part, so that the weakened area can be moistened over it.
In the adhesion of the foreskin to the head of the vein, and this adhesion does not occur unless in one whose foreskin is healthy and does not require circumcision over it; and when adhesion occurs due to a wound or aposteme: therefore it is necessary to excoriate it with a blunt Spatumili until the ligament is loosened and the head of the vein is freed from every part.
If it is difficult to discern these things exactly, then it is necessary to excoriate something from the head of the vein and from the foreskin.
This is because the foreskin, when it is subtle, perhaps will be quickly perforated due to its own subtlety.
Then separate using a thin linen cloth, which has already been soaked in cold water, so that they do not stick together again.
Then it should be touched with a stipic wine, until it is consolidated. On the purification of infants and the cure of their accidents resulting from error.
Chapter 57.
Circumcision is not a solution for continuity, just like other wounds: however, since it is from our operation, our will, and its use is especially in boys, it is necessary that we mark out in this operation a better method, and a lighter way leading to health.
I say therefore that the ancients did not mention circumcision in any of their books: because they did not use it in their laws, and it is only what we have acquired through experience.
Which is, because I have found that most artisans and phlebotomists use purification, circumcision with a razor, and with forceps: and they use applying adhesive, and binding with a thread, and incising with a nail.
And I have indeed already tried all those methods, and did not find a better purification than with forceps, and binding with a thread.
Because in purification with a razor, the skin often escapes.
Because the skin of the foreskin has two layers: therefore perhaps the outer skin is cut, and the inner layer remains: thus it is necessary to make an incision to cut the other, and future pain.
And with the purification that is done through adhesions, that is, digital, which surgeons use, they do not ensure an incision of the extremity of the virile member: because perhaps it may enter into its opening.
In purification with a nail, perhaps the iron may burst forth and corrupt your operation: and indeed the skin of the boy is brief by nature, and often they are born in such a way that they do not need purification: and I have already seen that.
The dissection with forceps and ligature with a thread has revealed a good experiment to me; since the forceps are proportionate to the incision, therefore, what is above is just like what is below.
When you press your hand, the two edges are proportionate and they meet according to one operation at one time; and a compression is made with a similar figure, containing the skin's vitality from every part, so that no error falls.
And the proper method of operation is to make an external examination, especially on a young patient, if he is one of those who understand for a short time, that you do not do anything unless you tie the thread in his own vein only: and you leave it until another day.
Then make him rejoice and be happy in every way possible to you, because of that which he receives with his own understanding.
Then insert your hand into his vein, and blow on the skin, and pull it upwards, until the head of the vein emerges.
Then cleanse it from what accumulates in it filthily.
Then tie the marked place with a double thread.
Afterwards, tie below it another secondary ligature for a short time. Then hold with your index finger, and thumb, the place of the lower ligature's good retention, and cut between the two ligatures.
Then elevate the skin quickly upwards, and extract the head of the vein.
Then let the blood flow slowly (for it is better), and put powder on top; and over the powder a cloth in which the yolk of an egg decocted in rose water has been spread, mixed with good fresh rose oil: and leave it on until another day; and take care of it with the remaining treatment, until it heals.
The form of a surgical scalpel is this.
There should be two extensions, and they should be inclined: the shaft of the scalpel should not protrude beyond them; and their length should be like that of two equal arm-lengths.
The error is when the scalpel falls during the incision: because perhaps it has escaped from the entire internal skin, or a part of it at the point of incision. Therefore, it is necessary to stretch it out at that time with your finger before the operation on the site, and to make an incision according to equality.
But if you cannot hold it with your finger, then extract it with a hook, and make an incision.
But if three days have passed and the swelling under the rod remains inflamed, then leave it until the warm apostem is settled, and excise it with ease, and make an incision according to what is prepared for you; and be cautious at the head of the rod.
For it will not harm him.
Therefore treat it with what consolidates the wound from powders, which we described in the treatise on powders; and if an incision is made from the skin above measure, and it evacuates to the upper parts, it will not harm him either.
Therefore treat it with what we have said, until it is healed.
Concerning the extraction of a urinary stone retained in the bladder.
Chapter 58.
The retention of urine in the bladder occurs due to an obstruction made from a stone, or congealed blood, or pus, or born flesh, and similar things from those which we mentioned concerning the methods of cure in the division.
And if the urine is not discharged, and you see that its retention is due to a stone, which is already in the neck of the bladder: then it is necessary for him to be bent over his knees.
Then his feet are placed on his back, and he stretches out his belly from the upper part of his back, and he tightens his weak breath as much as possible to him.
It is seized therefore with the neck of the bladder for the expulsion of the stone towards the rear: because the urine is freed.
Since if it is not dissolved with what we have said, and the matter is severe on the weak person: then it is necessary to administer the extraction of it with an instrument, which is called a syringe, whose form is this: it is made of silver, and is subtle, smooth, concave like a pen cannula, in subtlety of radius, long as a palm and a half: on which there is a subtle cannula at its head.
And the manner of exit of the urine through it is this, that you take a doubled thread, and tie at its extremity a wool or a knot, a good ligature: and you insert the extremity of the thread into the lower part of the Syringe: and cut with forceps if something overflows from the wool, but insert into the cannula with caution, as an injection.
Then anoint the syringe with oil, or with butter, and with almond oil: and make the weak person sit on a seat, and embrace the bladder, and his rod with humid oils, and olive oil, and warm water.
Then insert the syringe into the rod with ease, until it reaches the root of the rod.
Then double it above at the part of the navel. Then push the syringe into it, until it reaches the Bladder, and the weak person feels that it has already reached the empty space: and this does not happen according to this order, unless the passage, through which it goes, is where there is a twisting.
Then extend the thread with the wool little by little.
For the urine will follow the wool.
Then extract that and make the urine flow through the way of the urinary passage; and apply a syringe, and do not stop doing that until the swelling subsides, and you find the weak alleviation. About the quality of theclysterization of the swollen area with Clyster of Hydrangea.
Chapter 59.
It is stopped up, that is, closed.
And in it there are three openings, two on one side and one on the other side, as you see.
And the concave place, where there is that which propels it, should be according to the quantity that it needs without addition, until when something is drawn out with it, it attracts from the humidities: and when it is propelled, it expels afar: according to what the clyster of Hydrangea does, which projects naphta, that is, Greek fire in the praeparations of Mars.
When therefore you want to project humidities into the swollen area, insert the extremity of the clyster of Hydrangea into the humidity, and draw out with it what propels upwards, for the humidity is drawn into the concavity of the clyster. Then insert its extremity into the rod, according to what we have described in the syringe.
Then propel the humidity with what propels it, for the humidity immediately reaches the swollen area, so that the weak person feels it. The shape of a subtle clyster which clysterizes the swollen area.
Then insert a strong thread into those holes, as they revolve. Then gather the circle, as it is gathered also to a writing tablet; afterwards you put in it what you want from humidity, and oils, and waters.
Then bind it to the instrument: and do with it as you did with the vein from the expression with your hand, until the humidity reaches the vein.
On the Extraction of a Stone.
Chapter 60. Now we have spoken in the division of the species of Stone, and its treatment with medicines: and I have said the difference between the Stone generated in the kidneys, and in the veins, and the signs of all of it: and I have said the Stone on which the operation falls with hand and section: and it is a Stone generated in the vein properly: and that which is fixed in the rod: and I am narrating this with clear exposition and abbreviation.
I say therefore, that a Stone generated in the vein, happens most often to boys.
And among its signs is, that the urine flows out of the vein similar to water in its subtlety: and there appears in it a white sand, and it rubs weakly against its own rod, and struggles with it, and often hangs. Then it is elevated, and an anus is created with it in many of them.
And the healing of children is easy, because up to fourteen years old they are susceptible to it.
And it is difficult in the elderly.
In the young, however, it is moderate, because it is between that: and whose stone is larger, the treatment is easier; and if small, the care is reversed.
When we approach the cure, it is necessary first to cleanse the patient with a cluster, which removes all the feces that are in their intestines; for this prevents the descent of the stone during the operation. Then the patient is taken by the feet and shaken, and moved downwards: so that the stone descends to the bottom of the bladder or jumps down from a high place several times.
Then make him sit between your hands prepared, and his hands are under his hips, so that the entire bladder is inclined downwards.
Then press on him, and touch him externally.
If you feel the stone in the space, then be ready at once with the incision over it.
If it does not fall under your touch at all, then it is necessary to anoint the index finger with oil from your left hand, if the patient is a boy; or the middle finger if he is a young adult: and insert it into his anus, and press on the stone until it stands beneath your finger; and guide it slowly towards the neck of the bladder.
Then press on it with your finger, and push it towards the exterior against the place of the incision: and instruct one assistant to press the bladder with his hand, and instruct another assistant to stretch out the testicles with his right hand upwards: and with the other hand to remove the skin that is beneath the testicles in the part from the place where the incision is.
Then introduce the scalpel making an incision, whose form is this.
And find in it what is between the anus and testicles, and not in the middle, towards the left side of the loins: and let the section be above the stone, and your finger should be in the anus: and let the section be transverse, so that the external section is wide, and the internal one is strict, according to the quantity that it is possible for the stone to come out from there.
Perhaps indeed the finger, which is in the anus, compresses the stone at the section, and it comes out without difficulty.
And know that the stone which has angles and margins is why its exit is difficult because of that.
And it is smooth, similar to a gland, and rounded: and its exit becomes easy.
To those which have angles and margins, add in the groove.
What if it does not come out thus, then it is necessary to cleverly devise something over it: or to bind over it with a gesture of skill, whose extremity is like the Moon, which binds over the stone, and does not deviate from it: or to introduce beneath it an instrument of subtle curvature.
But if you cannot get above it, then enlarge the opening a little further.
What if something flows from the blood, cut it off with a thread.
If there is more than one stone, then push first the large one towards the mouth of the bladder.
Then make an incision above it.
Afterwards push the small one after that: and do similarly if there are more than two.
What if it is very large, then ignorance is to make a large section above it.
Since it happens to the weak one of two things, either that he dies, or that he suffers from continuous dripping of urine: therefore, because the place is not completely consolidated.
Here is the translation:
When you have completed the operation, then apply to the wound aloe and dragon's blood, and bind it with string, and put over it a cloth soaked in oil and wine, or rose oil, and cold water, so that a warm aposteme may form.
Then prop up the wounded person on their pillow, and do not loosen the bandage until the third day.
When you have loosened it, bathe the place with water and a great deal of oil.
Then treat it with dyaphinion ointment and royal ointment until it heals.
If, however, a warm aposteme forms on the wound and becomes putrid, and similar things happen, such as if blood congeals in the bladder, and urine is blocked from it, and it is recognized by the flow of blood with urine.
Insert your finger into the wound and extract the blood from it.
For if it remains, it causes corruption of the bladder and its putrefaction.
Then wash the wound with vinegar and water and salt, and apply all kinds of things that are suitable for its cure, until it heals.
And it is necessary during the whole time of treatment to bind two hip-bones together and to assemble the medicinal causes that are applied to the affected area.
If the stone is small and is in the middle of the vein, and it becomes fixed there, and the passage of urine is blocked: then treat it with what I have described before you reach the cutting.
For many times indeed one excuses oneself from the cutting through this treatment, now indeed I have tried that. And it is, to receive a perforator made from iron of Alferic, whose shape is triangular at the pointed end, acute, fixed in wood.
Then take a thread and tie it with the vein under the stone so that it does not return to the bladder.
Then introduce the piercing iron into the vein with ease, until it reaches the perforator to that stone; and revolve the perforator with your hand in that stone slowly; and you will complete its perforation, until you make it penetrate from the other side.
The urine is immediately freed.
Then press your hand on what remains of the stone from the outer part of the vein.
For it is broken off, and comes out with the urine, and the sick person is healed.
If, however, this treatment does not prepare itself for you, because of something that prevents it from that; then tie a thread beneath the stone, and another thread above the stone. Then cut above the stone on that vein between the two ligatures.
Then extract it.
Afterwards, loosen the ligature, and cleanse the congealed blood that forms in the wound.
And it is not necessary to tie a thread under the stone, unless so that it does not return to the bladder; and another ligature above, unless when the thread is loosened after the removal of the stone, the skin returns to its place, and the wound closes; and for this reason it is necessary for you to do that when you tie the thread above, to elevate the skin upwards, so that it returns to its complement, and the wound closes, as we have said.
Concerning the removal of a stone from women.
Chapter 61.
A stone is rarely generated in women.
But if it happens to one of them that a stone forms, then the treatment is difficult and is prohibited because of many reasons.
One of their characteristics is: since a woman is perhaps a virgin. And the second reason is that you do not find a woman who reveals herself to a physician when she is chaste, or among those having husbands.
The third is that you will not find a woman who knows this art well, especially in manual operations.
And the fourth is the remoteness of the location of the stone: because it requires a deep incision, and there is fear in that.
What if necessity leads to that, then it is necessary to take a female doctor, well-versed: and few are found.
If you indeed possess these things, then seek a chaste doctor, subtle and presenting a well-taught female obstetrician in the matter of women, or a woman who has acquired part of this art: make her present, and especially entrust it to her, so that she does all that you prescribe to her from the inquiry about the stone. Firstly, it is necessary to see if the woman is a virgin: then it is necessary that she inserts her finger into her anus and seeks the stone.
If she thus finds it, she grasps it under her finger, and then instruct the midwife to insert her finger into the womb of the infirm woman, and inquire about the stone, after placing her left hand on the bladder, and pressing it with a good compression. If she thus finds the stone, then it is necessary that she gradually moves it from the orifice of the bladder to the lower parts with the utmost strength of hers, until she reaches it at the root of the hip.
Then she should press upon it at the opposition of the middle of the womb at the root of the hip, from whichever part is prepared for her, and feels the stone in that part: and her finger does not move away from the stone, grasping under it: and let the incision be small at first.
Then she should insert a scalpel above that incision.
If she thus feels the stone, then she should add to the second incision a quantity proportional to what the stone emerges from it.
And know that there are many types of stones. For among them is small and large, smooth and rough, long and round with branching.
Know therefore its types, that it may be signified to you through this above what you have seen.
If therefore the blood overcomes you, then add to the place of the wound a triturated powder, and hold it for one hour, until the blood is staunched.
What if the flow of blood overcomes you, and you know that the expulsion of blood is from the artery which was cut: then put a powder on the place, and bind it with suitable tight bandages: and do not move it: and leave the stone, and do not extract it.
Perhaps the weak woman may die.
Then treat the wound.
When therefore the sharpness of the blood has settled down after days, and the place has become putrid, then return to your operation, until the stone comes out.
About the surgical treatment of a hernia in watery places.
Chapter 62.
A watery hernia is not, unless it is an aggregation of humidity in the white layer, which is under the skin of the testicle containing a egg: and it is called a sifac. And when it is in its own proper membrane, which nature has prepared for it in the part of the egg, until it is put forth: which is another egg, and it is the skin of the testicle between the white sifac, as we said: and this does not happen unless rarely.
And the generation of this watery hernia is from the weakness that occurs in the testicles: therefore this matter flows out to them.
And when it happens from a blow upon the testicles.
And this moisture is having many colors. Either its color is inclined towards citrus, or it is red and bloody, or it is filthy and black, or it is watery and white, and it is that which is in addition.
For if it is in a white skin which we mentioned, then the abscess is round in length for a short time, just like an egg figure; and the testicle does not appear, because the moisture surrounds it on all sides.
And if the moisture is in its own proper membrane, then the abscess is round with an egg-like part, and because of this, a man thinks it is another egg.
And if the moisture is between the skin of the testicles and the white skin, then it falls under the sense.
When therefore you wish to recognize the color of the moisture, then experience the color of the moisture in the abscess with a square introgression, whose form has preceded.
According to that which appears in the investigation of the introgression, judge about what is between itself.
When therefore we come to the treatment with iron, then it is necessary to warn the patient, so that they may be phlebotomized if possible, and you see their body full of it.
Then he should lean back on his back on a high mattress a little, and put many cloths under him.
Then sit you on his left, and instruct the minister to sit on his right, who should stretch out his arm to one of the two sides of the skin of the testicles, and towards the belly's side.
Then take a broad spatula, and dissect the skin of the testicles from the middle along the length, up to near the perineum; and make an incision according to the straightness of the lines that divide the skin of the testicles, until you reach the white skin encompassing it; and excavate it and observe, or be cautious about this, so that you may dissect it: and your dissection should be where you dissect it, from the part that is suspended with an egg more; and subtly investigate with the dissection according to the quantity that is possible for you.
Then make a perforation full of water with a wide opening, and extract all the water. Then separate between the two labia of the section with hooks, and extend the sifa up to the superior, and do not touch the skin covering the testicles: and incise the sifa as far as possible for you to incise it, either in its entirety or partially, especially on its subtle sides.
For if you do not make a thorough examination, there will be no security in the incision, lest water returns.
But if a fluid proceeds from its skin outside during the time of your operation: then when you have completed the section of the sifa, reduce it.
Then bring together the two labia of the skin of the testicles with a suture.
Then treat it as you would other wounds, until it heals.
If you find a corrupted fluid from the blackness of something else, then it is necessary to tie up the vessels that are the suspension, fearing a flow of blood.
Then cut off the testicle with its suspension, and extract the fluid: afterwards treat it as I have said.
If water has accumulated in two parts, then know that there are two branches: therefore cut off the other part equally according to what you did in the other.
And if it is equal to you, so that there is one operation, then do it: then stop the bleeding.
And insert a woolen thread soaked in oil, or in rose oil: and put before it a woolen thread which you have soaked in wine and oil, and spread it over the two testicles, and wonder at the belly: and put above double cloths, and they are poultices: and bind them above with a ligature, which has six knots according to this form.
Then two cloths are applied, and they are moistened, and filled with woolen threads, according to this likeness: and they are made into extremities which are pressed out of a pot, or humid wool: and they are gathered together with a bandage in the lumbar region of the arms: and one extremity receives above the anus up to the back, and the second receives towards the part of the chest: and two extremities above the two hips below, and two other extremities above the two groin areas, and the entire bandage is gathered together in the lumbar region of the arms.
And when you treat these ramex artificially with a cautery at the site of the incision with an iron; and it is, as if you were to receive a subtle cautery knife, and cut with it into the skin of the testicles: and it is ignited, according to what we have narrated; until when you discover a white album containing water: then take the cautery, according to this method.
The Greek letters are assimilated.
Then pierce with it that album, and it is ignited, until all the moisture escapes.
Then stretch out the album with hooks, and scrape it with a subtle, ignited cautery, and cut into it as much as possible for you, until you eradicate all of it.
And beware lest it touches the fire.
And know that this operation is more beneficial, and farther from a flow of blood, and better than an operation with incision.
If however it causes a contradiction to you at the time of incision, or at the time of cautery, or apostema warm, or flow of blood, or something else: then it is necessary that you should cure what causes the contradiction to you from that with a treatment that is suitable for it, according to what has been previously stated.
If however the patient is faint-hearted and does not expect to survive this operation, because of its dreadfulness: then administer the piercing according to what I narrate about it: and it is.
When it is certified to you through what we have said about the signs, that the ramex is watery: then it is necessary that you should make the patient sit on an elevated seat.
Then pierce the apostema in its lower part with a broad spatula: and place the piercing according to the length of the body, and let the opening be wide, until all the water flows out.
Then put it on a soft place, and bind it, and leave it to flow out the remaining water: then treat it, until the wound is healed.
If however there is an obstruction to the flow of water at the time when it perforates it, and it does not happen except for this reason, because the white membrane creates an obstruction in the orifice of the wound, and prevents the exit of water: then it is necessary that you introduce a feather into the wound, or an instrument with which the watery fluid is extracted, whose form has been previously described: or add to the operation on the wound for a short time.
And know that the water returns and accumulates after six months, or around that time.
When it therefore accumulates, then it should be pierced in the same manner, and the patient will pass through his days of weakness.
On the treatment of fleshy wounds.
Chapter 63.
Know that in the incision above this wound, it is due to a prevailing fear of causing harm in many dispositions.
Therefore, it seems to me that its neglect is more beneficial for its healing.
And I am mindful of the operation on it, and the type of abscess.
I say therefore that many abscesses occur in the bodies, from which lumps are composed: and this happens due to many causes, namely. Or from an acute excess of sharp or sour humor that is poured out into the lumps.
Or from a blow.
And the color of the abscess is according to the color of the body, and no pain is found in it: and it is a grave abscess.
And perhaps it is a stony abscess, whose color is dark, and there is no sensation in it.
And sometimes it occurs from the knotting of the arteries, and their swelling: as I have already mentioned its description: or from the swelling of the veins.
Which therefore occurs from the swelling of the arteries, is recognized by the arrangement of the abscess, when you press it with your fingers.
And it is not advisable to touch him hastily.
That which arises from the inflammation of veins is not dispersed by anything through compression with the fingers. And now it is possible that a section be made over this type, and over the remaining flesh: and it is, as if you were to cut the skin of the testicles.
Then extend the egg upwards, and extract it with a white sifak: and free the suspensory from the veins, and tie the veins: and cut the suspensory after you have freed it from every part of the egg.
If therefore the egg is consolidated with those naturally born flesh, then it is necessary to draw out the egg, and cut it. And if there is adhesion between something from the sipak or in what is between the veins: then it is necessary to free the whole adhesion, and cut it with a round incision.
If, however, there is a nativity of flesh in the place of adhesion which is behind: then it is necessary to cut the whole of it, and extract the egg, as we have said. When therefore the operation is complete, then fill the wound with a wool pad infused in rose oil and wine: afterwards treat it with the remaining treatment, until it heals.
On the treatment of fistulae, which are with veins.
Chapter 63.
Ulcers are a hidden aposteme, wrapped in some wrapping, like a Botryos, with softening of the testicles: and it becomes difficult due to weak movement and exercise, and walking.
And in the treatment of this illness is from fear, because of that which preceded, namely reminiscence.
It is true, we must describe the operation in it according to what the first ones did. I say therefore, that it is necessary to make the weak person sit on a raised seat.
Then make an incision with a broad, sharp scalpel in a transverse section directly on the veins, until they are exposed.
Then strip away from every part, as we instructed you in the extraction of arteries that are in the temples.
Then cut them off in the middle section straight along the length of the body, and extract what is gathered from the foul, corrupt humors.
Then treat the wound with the treatment of other wounds, in which it is desired to generate healthy flesh, so that the vessels that nourish one testicle may fall.
It is not an evil through that.
But if the vitellus affects all the vessels, then it is necessary to extract the testicle with its vessels: so that it may not be deprived of nourishment, because of the incision, and it may not wither away, or become dry, and there may not be a remedy with them.
Of the treatment of an intestinal hernia. Chapter 65.
Therefore, the intestines descend from that rupture to one of the testicles.
And this rupture is either from the siphac or from its extension.
And these two types occur from multiple causes: either from a blow, or a fall, or a shout, or the lifting of a heavy object, and similar things.
And the sign is when it is from an extension of a sifach (fistula).
It is what happens gradually over a long period of time, and does not happen suddenly: and it is an equal abscess opposite the deep (part); therefore, because the fistula compresses the intestine.
And the sign of it is when it is from a section of the fistula, because it causes sudden severe pain from the beginning: and it is a diverse abscess, appearing under the skin nearby; and that is on account of the exit of the intestine, and its course to the exterior fistula.
And when it goes out with the intestine a mixture: and this is called Intestinal Ramex, and Zirbia: and when it happens with flatulence.
And when feces flows into the intestine and is retained there: and it is with that a grave danger to the patient: because it causes a foul pain, and especially when it is pressed.
And in the treatment of this type of illness with iron, there is fear: because it is necessary to beware of accidents in it.
And the method of operation is, to press on the patient, so that he reduces his intestine with his own hand to its inner concavity, if it has returned to its proper place.
Then it should be supported above the neck with your hands: and elevate his legs.
Then stretch out the skin that follows the skin to the upper parts, and separate the entire skin of the testicles along its length.
Then fix two hooks of the section in the curved lips, according to what you need to open the section with them: and let the section be according to the quantity that is possible, so that an egg may exit from it.
Then scrape away the sipach, and what is under the skin of the testicles, until when the white fistula is detected, hard on every side: then insert your index finger into what follows the testicle, in what is between the sipach and the album, which is under the skin of the egg, and between the fistula, according to what adheres to the posterior part of the egg.
Then, with your right hand, you should reach inside to the inner cut of the testicles; and with this, stretch the sifach album upwards with your left hand; and lift the ovum with the sifach towards the part being sectioned; and order the assistant to stretch it upwards; and you should release the adhesion that is behind, which is a complete solution.
And feel with your fingers to ensure that there is nothing from the intestine wrapped around the sifach album in a hard lump.
But if you find something from it, then push it down towards the lower abdomen.
Then take a needle, on which is a thick thread, made into a licinium from ten threads; and insert it beneath the last sifach, that is, the tunica, which is under the cut of the testicles that follows the section; then cut the ends that emerge from the thread, until there are four threads.
Then arrange some of them above others in a figure that is in the shape of a cross; and tie them with the sifach, which we mentioned earlier, because it is under the cut of the testicles with a strong ligament, so that nothing from the vessels that nourish them can pass to them or give them something: lest there be an outbreak of hot apostema.
And place the second ligament outside the first ligament, at a distance of less than two fingers from it.
And after these two ligaments, release from the sifach, which is under the cut of the testicles, a quantity the size of a finger; and cut the remaining whole part according to its roundness, and remove the ovum from it.
Then sever the lower part of the cut of the testicles from which blood and serum flow, as we described in the previous passage.
Then apply a woolen pad soaked in oil and place it on the wound; and apply the ligament that we described.
And when the album of sifach is cauterized, which we mentioned earlier, it is afterwards tense from the flow of blood after the incision.
For it often happens that way.
And let go of the ligament until it falls by itself.
If, however, its fall is delayed, then it is fomented with warm water; and place on it what we mentioned earlier, until it falls.
Then treat the wound with the remaining treatment of wounds, until it is cured.
Concerning the gas-producing hernia.
Chapter 66.
In this hernia, I have not seen anyone who has dared to attempt its cure with an iron instrument.
And the first ones indeed said that it happens just as we narrated concerning hernias that are with a vein.
That is, to bind the vessels after the section above them with facility below: then cut in the middle, and treat afterwards with what opens it, until the vessels fall; and treat the wound, according to what we said, until it is healed.
Concerning the rupture that occurs in the groin.
Chapter 67.
When a rupture occurs in the groin, as we said, and a place bulges out, but nothing from the intestines descends to the testicles: and if it does descend, it is little, and returns at all hours: truly if it is prolonged with that time, a fissure is added in the sifach, until the intestines descend into the sifach.
And it happens from the extension of the sifach, which is in the groin, as we said.
That is, because the sifach is extended: then it becomes soft, and the place becomes inflamed, and bulges out.
And its treatment is with cauterization, as the preceding narrative has gone before.
And when it is treated with an iron instrument, according to this method: and it is, as if the weak one lies on his back between your hands.
Then dissect the place of the ruptured and swollen aposteme, cutting across the width, according to the quantity of three fingers.
Then strip away the Alsifak and those things which are under the skin, until when the Sifach is detected white, which is under the skin that follows it.
Then take a scalpel, and place it upon the swollen spot of the Sifach, and press it deeply into the belly.
Then two swollen spots on the extremity of the radius from the Sifach, and connect one of them with the other by a suture: then extract the extremity of the radius.
And do not cut into the Alsifak at all, nor stretch a vein, nor anything else, as I have made you aware of in the treatment of the intestinal obstruction. Then heal that wound with a cure.
When you have made the incision, cleanse it, and restore the wound, until it becomes consolidated.
For the swelling is reduced, and no prominence of the Rupture is added.
And cauterization is better in this place: because it is closer to health.
On the softening of the skin of the testicles.
Chapter 68.
The skin of the testicles is often softened in certain men, because the flesh that is between them is softened, and their appearance becomes foul.
Therefore it is necessary for the one who is asked to cure him, to make the weak part lie on his back, and to incise the entire skin that has been softened above the natural skin. Then bring together the two lips with a suture: and if you wish, first above the excess of the softened skin three or four sutures, and make a firm suture.
Then treat the remaining wounds with a cure, until they are healed, and the threads fall out.
About Castration.
Chapter 69.
You know that Castration is forbidden by our law and because of this it would be permitted to me not to mention it in my book, and there is no need to recall it unless for two reasons.
One of which is that it should be known by the medical scientist when he is asked about it, and so that he may know the treatment of one to whom it happens.
And the other method is that we often need to castrate certain animals for our own benefits through it, such as goats, gazelles, and cats, and similar ones from among the animals.
I say therefore that Castration is done according to two methods. Or by attrition.
Or by fissure and section.
In that one which is done by attrition, the method of operation is this: we make the animal sit in hot water until its testicles soften and relax and hang down; then we massage them with our hand until they dissolve and do not appear to the touch.
In castration by fissure and section, it is necessary to hold the animal, and to press the skin of its testicles with your left hand.
And this method of castration is better than the one done by attrition: because attrition perhaps leaves something behind in the testicles, wherefore the animal desires coitus.
Then treat the wound, until it heals.
About the treatment of Hermaphrodites of two methods.
Chapter 70.
The Hermaphrodite is treated from men according to two methods.
One of them is the vein that appears in it, following a space, or in the cut of the testicles, in what is between the two testicles, having a figure like that of a woman's vulva, in which there are hairs; and sometimes urine flows out from what is in the cut of the testicles.
In women, however, there is one type, and it is the vulva of a woman above the pubic bone, just like the small testicles of a man, projecting outward: of which one is like the priapus of a man, and two are like the two testicles.
And the treatment of these three types, two from men and one type from women, is: because it is necessary to cut away the extra flesh until the impression of them disappears.
Then care for the remaining wounds with the usual treatment.
In the second type of men, from which urine flows out, which is in the cut of the testicles, there is no operation, nor is there any treatment for it at all.
On the incision of the tightness, and of the protruding flesh in the vulvas of women.
Chapter 71.
Perhaps the tightness is added above the natural thing, until it becomes foul and its appearance is disgusting: and sometimes it grows so much in certain women that it expands like in men, and reaches all the way to copulation.
It is necessary therefore to hold back the excess of the tightness with the hand, or with a hook, and to cut: and not to cut too deeply in the incision, especially at the root: so that there may not be a flow of blood.
Then take care to treat the wound with the usual treatment, until it heals.
But the flesh that grows is the flesh that is born in the orifice of the womb, until it fills it: and perhaps it protrudes outward like a tail: and because of this some people first call it a tail-like disease.
It is therefore necessary that we cut into it just as we cut into a tenderness, and treat it, until it heals.
Concerning the treatment of a varicose vein of a woman's vulva that is not perforated.
Chapter 72.
A varicose vein is when it is a woman's vulva that is not perforated, or if it is a small opening.
And it is either natural or accidental.
The accidental one is from an illness that precedes it, and indeed it becomes either from added flesh born naturally, or from subtle siphach, or from thickness; and it occurs either in the depths of the womb, or on its sides, or on its upper part, or lower part; and it prevents from intercourse and conception, and childbirth, and perhaps prevents menstruation.
And the recognition of it is made through the obstetrician's observation, if the obstruction is apparently nearby.
If, however, it is not apparent, then you examine it with your fingers, or with a probe.
If, however, the obstruction is from subtle siphach, and it is near the two labia: then you probe, and break it apart.
And it is, that you place on the two labial paps.
Then put your indices of both hands together, and let the woman sit with her back bent forward, spreading her legs.
Then stretch out the two labia with force, until the subtle siphach is broken apart and the obstruction is opened.
Then take a thread, and soak it in oil, and put it on the spot: and let the woman sit on it every day, so that the place is not consolidated again otherwise.
If, however, the siphach is thick and dense: then it is necessary to cut it with a broad spatula-like instrument similar to a myrtle leaf.
If, however, the obstruction is from naturally born flesh, then suspend it with hooks, and cut into it: and have with you medicines that calm the flow of blood without causing biting, such as acacia, and dragon's blood, and thus combined with egg white.
Then administer a wide cannula of lead, so that the wound may not close too quickly, and hold it in place for several days. Then apply a dressing made of dry linen, and afterwards proceed with the remaining treatment until healing occurs.
And when there is a birth of abnormal fleshy growths in the womb: it is therefore necessary to incise them in this manner, provided that it is not a cancerous aposteme, for if it is cancerous and located in the womb, it should not be opposed with iron at all.
On the treatment of hemorrhoids, Athelil, and red swellings on the vulva of women.
Chapter 73.
Hemorrhoids are indeed the openings of the veins, so that much blood flows out from them constantly.
Since hemorrhoids are ancient, they become habitual: and I have already spoken about the division of their types, and their signs; and I shall say here which ones receive treatment, and which do not.
I say therefore that hemorrhoids which are in the opening of the womb and do not appear to the senses: then there is no treatment for them with iron.
But those which are in the opening of the womb and upon which the sense falls, are those that can be treated.
It is therefore necessary to introduce the woman into a cold house.
Then extend Athelil with forceps, or with a rough cloth, and cut them out from their roots.
Then powder them with a powder made from the blood of one of the powdered ingredients without biting, such as acacia, and dragon's blood, and thus, and similar things.
Then apply her feet to the wall for one hour.
Afterwards, put her in cold water.
If the flow of blood persists: then make her sit in a decoction of sumach, and cortex of pomegranates, and gallic, and similar things.
Then take barley meal and mix it with honey and vinegar, and make a plaster with it on his back.
If then the blood is cut off with it, it is good; and if not, make adhere to the back of the ribs and breasts, without scarification.
Then take a woolen cloth, and soak it in the juice of tartarite, or the juice of arnoglossa, or the juice of the leaves of agraula, that is, of aglanter, wine of Pontus, and make it adhere to the place.
When then the aposteme (abscess) quiets down, then treat the place with ointments until it is healed.
The Albarth ulcer is similar to the heads of alhaasse and has a rough appearance.
It is necessary therefore that you cut what appears from it, according to what I said equally in the lil; and treat it until it is healed.
Concerning the perforation of the uterus which occurs in the womb.
Chapter 83.
There occur in the womb many species of abscesses, such as cancer, and stony abscess, and ulcers, and putrid matter, and corrupt humors, that is, herpes, aestiomemus, and fistulas, and hemorrhoids, and ragadiae, and thelil, and hot abscess.
And I have already said all these diseases and their species, and their signs, and their cures in the division: it is necessary that I speak of hot abscess in this treatise, which occurs in the womb, when it comes from abscesses that gather pus, and you should know how its opening is done with an iron instrument.
It is necessary therefore that you consider.
Then if the pain of the abscess in its inception is acute with percussion and flame and fever: and you see it red: if sense falls upon it, then do not hasten with its perforation: and treat it with what helps above maturation, until when the sharpness of the accident quiets down.
Then it is necessary to have the woman sit on a seat with two armrests, and recline or lean back on her back, and bring her feet together at the lower part of her belly: and let her hips be expanded, and place her arms under her knees, and tie them with a suitable ligature for that purpose.
Then the midwife should sit on the right side, and administer the instrument by which the opening of the womb is revealed.
Whose form comes into those things that are behind.
And it is necessary when you wish to administer this instrument, that you penetrate with the rod to the deep part of the womb of the woman: so that what enters from the instrument is not more than the depth of the womb, and harms the weak woman.
If the instrument is more than the depth, then it is necessary to place small pads on the covering of the deep womb: so that the entrance of the whole instrument into the deep womb is prevented: and it is necessary to place a turning point, which runs on the instrument, from the upper side: and to hold the instrument, and to revolve the minister's turning point, until the deep womb is opened.
When therefore the exit appears, and is touched by hand, and it is gentle and soft: then it is necessary to cut it at its head with a broad spatula.
When therefore the blood is evacuated, then it is necessary to place a clean linen cloth submerged in rose oil or green oil, in which there is some stipingency: and place the linen, and extract the section from the deep womb.
And place it outside on the womb, and on the perineum a clean woolen cloth submerged in water, in which there are boiled mallows.
Then it should be treated after two days with an ointment that is suitable for that, until it heals.
And when the womb and vulva are washed, so that it is cleansed with water and honey: then with water in which the root of lily or Aristolochia Longa has been boiled: then return to the ointment.
If a hidden wound is within the matrix, then it is necessary to probe it with an iron instrument during treatment, or to take care of it with what we have mentioned in the division.
The teachings on obstetrics, how they [doctors] treat embryos that are alive, born against their natural form.
Chapter 70.
It is necessary for the obstetrician to recognize first the natural form of the fetus.
The sign of this is that when you see a woman pressing down below, and she desires to smell the air, and is relieved above what is on her regarding the fetus, and hastens the exit of the embryo: then know that this fetus is according to its natural form, and its exit is upon its head, and the afterbirth with it: or suspended, or hanging from the navel. When you see these signs, then it is necessary to press her womb, so that the embryo may come down quickly.
But one that is beyond this fetus is unnatural, to be condemned.
Because sometimes the fetus comes out feet first, and its body comes out before its head, and one foot or one hand: or its head and one hand come out: or its belly comes out: and perhaps it turns upon its neck, and similar things from unnatural forms.
It is necessary for the obstetrician to be prudent and subtle in all these things, and to beware of error and deception: and I am showing every form from them, and how it is ingenious in that, and is signified by that, and stands upon it.
When the fetus comes out headfirst in its natural exit, and it is difficult for the woman, and the birth is hard for her, and you see that her strength is already debilitated: then make her sit on a seat, or let the women hold her: and apply warm vapors to her womb with a decoction of fenugreek, and with humid oils.
Then the midwife inserts a small spatula between her fingers and feels with it, and touches the second finger of hers, until she feels what is there from the moisture; and she presses on the woman's womb, until the fetus descends.
But if it does not descend, then it is necessary that the woman be anointed with a clyster of fenugreek mucilage, mixed with sesame oil.
Then advise her to compress herself after the clyster, and make her sneeze with a concoction, and hold her nose and mouth for one hour.
For the fetus will come out immediately.
If two hands of the fetus appear first, then it is necessary to reduce them with gentle facilitation little by little.
But if it does not obey at the entrance, then put the woman on a chair, and elevate her feet upwards; then strike the chair against the ground; and let the woman hold herself, so that she may not fall at the concussion.
If therefore the hands do not come out, and the fetus dies: then cut them, and extract the remaining part of the fetus; and bind her hand with a cloth, and extract it with equality: for it will itself come out.
The exit of the embryo on its feet.
When the fetus comes out onto its feet, then it is necessary to push them upwards; afterwards, turn the fetus little by little; subsequently, adjust it.
Then take one of its feet and extend it little by little.
When they come out as far as the hips, then advise her to compress herself, and make her sneeze with a concoction; for it will come out, if God wills.
And if it does not come out with what we have described, then reduce the fetus little by little, until you place it according to its natural figure.
For it will itself come out then with an easy delivery.
If it is prohibited with the entire thing that we have narrated: then take from the mucilage of the altaea plant, and oil of sisaminum, and dissolved gum: and pound everything thoroughly in a mortar with good pounding. Then smear it on the wound of a woman's vulva, and apply it beneath her belly.
Then have her sit in warm water until she feels hypochondria.
When you see that the lower parts of hers are already warmed up, then make her a supplication of myrrh; and apply it.
When she holds the supplication for one hour, then have her sit on a seat.
Then make her sneeze; and press her mouth and nose shut; and press the lower part of the belly with easy compression.
For the fetus will come out immediately.
The exit of the fetus on its knees and hands.
When it comes out according to this method, then one should gently introduce their hands little by little.
Then the woman should be raised above her neck, and her feet should hang down below: and she herself should sit on a bed, and clasp her hands.
Then press gently above her belly.
Then extract what is beneath her feet from the pillows, until it is prepared in the lower part.
If the fetus does not come out, then take her feet and move them with a vigorous motion.
Then press what is above the hypochondrium gently, until the fetus ascends to the upper parts.
Then introduce their hands and adjust the fetus gently: and instruct the woman to press, until the fetus comes out.
The exit of the fetus, hanging widthwise from the hands.
It is gently introduced into the reduction by her hands.
If she cannot reduce it, then raise the woman, and make her walk.
If he is unable to walk, then make him lie on a bed and strike his hips with a vigorous concussion.
Then administer the liniment you prepared from poultices.
If he receives that treatment, then make him sit on a seat.
Then study the reduction of the hand, and adapt the fetid flesh according to its natural shape: and make the woman massage it, and instruct her, that she should press until it comes out.
The fetus exits over its neck, with hands stretched out, and its face is towards the mother's back.
It is necessary that the midwife holds the fetus' hand, then turns it gradually, and adapts it with ease.
When it is adapted, then put on its belly what we have prepared from oil and poultices.
Then instruct her to move it gradually.
When you have done that, then make her sit on a seat, and instruct her to lean towards the right side.
Then instruct her to press: and make her massage with condition.
The prepared fetus exits onto the side.
When it descends to the maternal orifice according to this method with the afterbirth, then separate the afterbirth with your finger, until it is evacuated from the moisture.
If it is suspended over the face of the fetus and its neck, then cut it away from the navel: so that it is not retained, and does not die.
Then push the fetus towards the interior, until you place it according to what is fitting: and instruct the woman to press herself several times: for it will indeed come out with a gentle exit.
The birth of twins, or many fetuses.
You know that twins are often born: and sometimes three, and four.
However, that external thing is rare and rarely happens.
There are five things beyond nature, and they do not penetrate deeply; and they contain them, although they are multiplied, a secondary one; and they are separated by a suture, distinguishing between them the ligament in each of their navels.
And when they emerge as a fetus emerges by natural exit, easily; and they emerge by unnatural exit, as we have narrated. If some of them are difficult at the parturition, and they reach what we said from unnatural figures, then treat them as we have narrated; and let there be a subtle and skilled hand, and let it do what it does with facility and tardiness, and let it be ingenious according to every figure with that which is prepared for him from the leading genius for health.
When one is formed in the womb, and two, and three, and four, and five, and six, and seven, and more than ten: and it has been verified by me that a woman aborting has ejected seven, and another fifteen, all fully formed.
Which was done with the measurement of the glorious wise one.
This therefore is entirely necessary for it to be in the science of Obstetrics. Perhaps indeed it will reach that similar thing: therefore, let him oppose it with what is necessary.
On the extraction of a dead fetus.
When you treat a dead fetus with what I said in the division from medication, and it does not emerge, and you are forced to use manual operation, then it is necessary to consider.
If the woman is of sane virtue and not with any of the accidents from which loss is feared regarding her, then it is necessary for the woman to be placed on a bed, on her back, and her head is inclined downwards, and her thighs are elevated: and an assistant should hold her from both sides or bind her to the bed, so that her body does not move about during the extraction of the fetus.
Then moisten the womb of the mother with humid oils of flaxseed and linseed, and of fenugreek. Then the midwife should anoint her own hand with these oils and flaxseed paste; then she should insert it into the womb with ease.
Then she should feel for the place where the umbilical cord is attached to the fetus, and find a suitable location for that.
Consider therefore then, if the fetus is prepared to descend headfirst: then fix the umbilical cord on its eyes, or on its neck, or in its mouth, or on its palate, or under its beard, or on its armpit, or on the adjacent places of its ribs, and under its hip joints.
But if the descent is feet first, then on its pubic bone, and its middle ribs.
And it is necessary to hold the umbilical cord with the right hand; and place its curvature between the fingers of the left hand; and insert it with ease, and fix the umbilical cord in one of those places we mentioned, until it reaches the empty space.
Then it should be extended with equal extension, and not be straightened only in one direction, but rather moved to every part, so that its outcome is alleviated: just as it is done with a tooth during its extraction.
And it is necessary in this, that the extension be softened.
If a part of it is retained within, then the midwife should anoint certain fingers with oil and insert them from that side, so that she may revolve what is retained.
If a part of the fetus emerges, then the umbilical cords should be transferred to another place which is higher: do this until the entire fetus emerges.
If therefore the hand protrudes before the others and it is not possible to reduce it because of its stiffness, then it is necessary to wrap a cloth around it.
Then extract it thus when it protrudes entirely, either by cutting into the joint of the sole or in the elbow; and so it is necessary to do in the other hand and in both feet.
If however the head of the fetus is large, or stiffness occurs to it at birth, or there is water accumulated in its head: then it is necessary to introduce a spatula with spiny edges between the fingers and to find the head with it, and to extract the water: or to dissect it with an instrument called Almisdac, whose form is mentioned along with the forms of other instruments in the chapter that comes after this.
Likewise, if the fetus is of a large-headed nature, then it is necessary to cut off the cartilage; or extract it with a misdach, as we have said.
Then grasp the bones with forceps.
If the head protrudes and is stiff at the shoulder-blade, then it is found, until the moisture that is in the chest is poured out.
If however it does not become entangled and does not obstruct the birth, then cut the head a little at a time, according to what is possible for you.
If the lower part of the womb is inflamed, or there is dropsy in it, then it is necessary to perforate it, until the fluid flows out from it.
If indeed the fetus is on its feet, then its extraction is easy, and its direction to the mouth of the womb is light.
If however it is stuck at the womb or chest, then it is necessary to extract it with a cloth that you wrapped around your hand; and explore the womb or chest until what is in them flows out.
If however the remaining limbs are delivered and the head returns, then the midwife should insert her left hand. If the maternal os is open, then he inserts his hand deeply into the maternal os, and feels with his fingers around the head, and draws it out with his fingers to the maternal os: then he inserts one hook or two hooks, and draws it out with them.
What if the maternal os is constricted, because of a warm aposteme that has happened to it? Then it is not fitting to exert oneself upon it, but rather one should then administer an effusion of humid things, greasy: and apply a poultice: and sit in waters that mollify and humidify.
What if the fetus is lying on its side, then it is possible to straighten it: then one should administer what we said about a living fetus.
What if it is not possible, then the fetus should be dismembered piecemeal and extracted.
And it is necessary that you do not leave anything of the secondine inside at all.
When you have completed your operation, then administer what we said about warm apostemes that occur in the matrices.
What if a flow of blood occurs, then one should sit in astringent waters and administer the remaining treatment.
And I have seen a woman, in whose womb a dead fetus was: then she was pregnant with another on top of it, afterwards another fetus also died.
Then a long time afterwards, an aposteme developed on her navel, and it became swollen, until it opened up: and it began to discharge pus.
I was called therefore to her cure, and I treated her for a long time: but the wound did not consolidate.
I applied therefore upon it certain strong attractant poultices: and it emerged from its place, the os (pelvic bone).
Then several days passed, and another os emerged.
I was astonished therefore, since there is no os in the womb.
I thought about it, therefore, because they were from the bones of a dead fetus.
I investigated further and extracted many bones, while the woman was in better positions for herself; and already she had suffered thus for a long time, and a small amount of pus came out from the place.
And I did not firmly establish this external thing, unless there is knowledge in it, and assistance for that which the medical artisan administers with his hand from the healing.
On the forms of necessary instruments for extracting a fetus.
Chapter 77.
Here is described the form of a Stricter, which is equal to books, which have two equal vertigos at the two extremities of the two wooden pieces.
However, this Vertigo ought to be more subtle than the Stricter; and so that it may be, either made from ebony or made from boxwood.
And the width of all the wood is about two fingers; and the edge of each of them is about one finger, and their length is a palm and a half; and in the middle of the two wooden pieces are two additions of the same kind of wood, which are already fixed on both, whose length is a half-palm and a little more; and the width of each is about two fingers, or a little more.
And these two additions are inserted into the maternal passage, so that they open with them when you turn the two Vertigos.
The form of a Vertigo which opens the womb.
Another form similar to that, more subtle and lighter.
Let it be made from ebony wood or boxwood, according to the similarity of forceps.
However, at the extremity of it there are two additions, as you see here above; and the length of each addition from them is about a palm; and the width of each is two fingers.
When therefore you are about to lay bare the womb with it, then make the woman sit on a couch, hanging her legs, with what is between her thighs open.
Then introduce these two connected additions into the womb; and you, holding the end of the instrument below, between her hips.
Then open your hand with the instrument, just as you do with forceps, equally according to the quantity that you wish to open the mouth of the womb, until the obstetrician does what she wants.
The shape of a turning other than which the ancients said is the shape of a pushing force by which the fetus is pushed out.
The shape of Almisdac, where the small head is restrained. The shape of a ring having one spine.
The shape of a ring having two spines.
The shape of forceps which have saw-teeth, by which the head of the fetus is restrained.
The shape of a spatula-like instrument having two extremities for cutting off the head.
The shape of two broad spatula-like instruments.
All these instruments are exercised, and the more their types are multiplied, and they are prepared by the craftsman, it is easier for their operation, and more esteemed by men, because of their quality.
Do not therefore despise any of these instruments, as long as it is prepared by you.
For the necessity of them is inexcusable.
Concerning the extraction of the Afterbirth.
Head 78.
When the secondine is retained at the site of the wound, then it is necessary to treat the weakened area, so that it retains its own breath.
Then make her sternutate with condiments; and bind your hand over her face, and her nostrils.
If it exits through this, it is good.
If not: then take a pot, and perforate in the covering hole: and put in it herbs that open up the womb's passages, such as calamint, rue, and anise, and chamomile, and sesham, and lignified cassia, and centaury: take all these herbs, or some of them, and submerge them with water, and put them over the fire.
Then put a poultice of papyrus over the hole of the pot, and insert another extremity into the womb's passage: and hold it there until the vapour reaches the concavity of the womb.
Then make her sternutate, as we said before.
For the secondine will exit with ease.
If however it remains after this treatment, and does not exit: then instruct the Obstetrician to immerse their hand in oil of sissamine or mulberry. Then introduce it into the womb, and seek out the secondine with it.
When it finds it, then take hold of it, and gently pull it out little by little.
If however it is attached deeply in the womb, then introduce the hand, as we have described, until when it finds the secondine, and pulls it out little by little according to rectitude, so that the womb does not collapse during violent attraction: indeed it is necessary, that it be turned with ease to the right and left sides: then add to the quantity of attraction.
It will obey then, and be preserved, and will be freed from adhesion.
If the maternal wound is constricted, as we have already narrated: treat it with sternutating and medicate it with an ointment made from herbs.
If it does not come out with all that we have narrated, then beware lest you fatigue yourself over it in the repetition of extraction.
It is necessary that what comes out from the maternal wound be tied to the hip of the woman.
Then cleanse it with a cluster of Tetrapharmacum ointment.
For it will putrefy after days and dissolve, and come out.
However, when it putrefies, a bad smell rises from it to the stomach and head, and injures that weak person.
Therefore, it is necessary that suitable fumigations be administered for that.
Some of the ancients, however, have experienced the fumigation of watercress and dried figs.
The shape of the instrument with which a woman is fumigated at the retention of the secondine and menses.
Let it be made from a small copper vessel or from lead: and let a wide mouth be placed over the fire: and let the fumigation be put over the woman's thighs: hold it there until that fumigation is consumed: and do another likewise.
Concerning the cure of an unperforated anus.
Chapter 79.
Many boys are born, and their anuses are not perforated, whom the subtle siphac has already oppressed.
Therefore, it is necessary that the midwife should perforate that anus with her finger: and if not, she should perforate it with a sharp spatula: and let her beware of the surrounding area, lest she touch it.
Then put on top of it a woolen cloth soaked in wine and oil.
Then treat it with ointments until it is healed.
If, however, it is what is blocked, then put a pipe of lead in the nostril for many days, and it will be digested when the boy wants to expel.
And now there occurs a blockage of the nose also from the consolidation of a wound, or an abscess.
It is necessary therefore that the consolidation be cut through, then treated with what we mentioned earlier regarding the treatment and lead. Concerning the treatment of fistulas which occur in the lower part.
Chapter 80.
Fistulas which occur in the lower parts are a swelling and a hardness which occur near the anus outside: or in a space of one part: and it is one fistula, or several.
When, therefore, that swelling becomes old, it opens up, and a watery fluid, white and clear, or subtle pus flows out from it.
And sometimes they are penetrating fistulas from these.
And they are fistulas from these when they penetrate into a space up to the bladder, and up to the passage of the penis.
And they are penetrating ones up to the joining of the hip, and up to the node of the tailbone.
From that which is recognized as a penetrating fistula up to the anus, and also from the non-penetrating one, it is, that you insert your index finger into the anus: and you insert a subtle probe into the fistula through air or iron: when there is no twisting.
If there is twisting in it, then insert into it a subtle probe made of lead, or a small iron rod from the rods of the horse, until you feel the probe, or the small rod on your finger.
If you do not feel it deeply, nor does anything proceed from the nostril during evacuation, nor flatulence, nor worms as I said: then know that it is not penetrating: therefore proceed to treatment.
And when a fistula is penetrating up to the bladder or to the urethra, then its indication is the outflow of urine from it, and its prohibition from this so that the place may be consolidated with medicines.
If it is penetrating up to the joint of the hip, or to the socket of the hip: then its sign is that it reaches the tendons up to that place, if there is no twisting up to the socket; and the discovery of pain in the surrounding area, and that pus always flows out from it; and that medicine is not effective for it, nor is it consolidated with an ointment.
And in all these penetrating fistulas there is no complete cure: and the treatment of them is toil and vanity for him, from foolish doctors, upon whom it is formed. In that one which does not penetrate and is not old, healing is hoped for with a poultice: according to what I tell you, and I have already tried it: and it is so that the patient lies between your hands on his back; and lift his legs up above his hips, and his hips are inclined towards his belly.
Then a probe of lead or copper is introduced, if there is twisting in the fistula, until you know where it reaches the tendons.
If however the patient feels it around his anus, then it is necessary that you insert your index finger into his anus.
If therefore you feel with your finger the tendons having already penetrated through the detected passage, beyond what you feel between your finger and the anus itself, or flesh: then therefore you know for certain that it is penetrating: so do not labor over it, since there is no healing for it, as we have said.
They have said, however, that it is healed in certain men by flesh, and from the medication for which they hope for a remedy, it is to apply a subtle cautery according to the width of the fistula, as mentioned before, and to insert the ignited thing into the fistula, until it reaches around the anus.
Then you should repeat this twice or three times, so that you may know because those added filter-like fleshy growths which are similar to the quill feathers of a bird are already burned away.
Then treat it with bandages soaked in butter, until those burned flesh grows out; then treat it with salves that generate and consolidate flesh.
If it is thus healed, it is good.
And if not, then it will never be healed with another treatment.
And if it comes out as a point, and has not penetrated to your finger, which is in the anus, and there is a thick, fleshy or membranous layer between it and the point, or sieve-like structure: and you see a fistula in that which follows the surface of the skin, then you should cut the skin from the beginning of the fistula, and you would separate by cutting with the point that is in the fistula, until the separation reaches where the point ends, and the point is freed and falls out.
Then cleanse those filter-like fleshy growths which are similar to the quill feathers of a bird, so that nothing remains of them.
But if blood overflows and breaks out between you and your operation, separating those fleshy growths: then it is better to do what is done, and for the sake of swift healing, to cauterize it with fire, or with sharp medicine.
For the cauterization with fire gathers good habits, burning away those added fleshy growths, and stopping the flow of blood, and drying out the moisture.
Then treat it with bandages soaked in butter, or triturated onions, until the place discharges pus, and those burned fleshy growths come out with the pus.
Then treat the wound with consolidating salves that generate hard flesh: and there are medicines in which there are astringents and drying.
For when you restore, then already it is healed; and not at that time an iteration. If, however, the fistula has already reached to the deep part of the anus, and is prolonged from the abundance of the body: then insert your finger into the anus, and examine with it.
If, therefore, you feel a tenderness, and between you and it there is a thin layer of sifac or flesh, and it is near to penetrating: then there is no operation on that, unless according to the way of trust and hope.
What is, because it is administered in one of the three modes: either you cauterize it, as we said: or you section it, until you achieve its concavity, so that it may be possible for you to insert a licence and a cure from nearby.
And do not proceed far with the section, lest you hurt the surrounding tissue of the anus, and cause an unfavorable outcome of evacuation without control. Then treat it with what we said. Perhaps it will heal: or you will prolong the thin layer, and cleanse it after you have sectioned it up to near the anus, as we said, or with a tent or with another acute extremity instrument.
Then cleanse those filtered flesh wounds that are in the section, until where you can with careful examination.
Then strive for the restoration of the whole wound with the section, and the upper orifice where it is consolidated: and a open fistula will remain in the interior part of the anus, and it will be easier on the weak patient.
And sometimes the fistula follows this method: and it is when you insert a probe into the fistula: and it is on the side of the anus near the surface of the body with skin and margin of the anus: then take the probe of the perforated extremity, which is like a needle, that is, preparing the leather, according to this form.
And insert into it a twisted thread made of five threads, and wrap it around.
Then introduce a thread with a probe into the fistula, until it reaches the concavity of it.
If therefore it is penetrating to the margin of the anus inward nearby, then extract the thread from that orifice: so that you introduce your finger into the anus and pull out the end of the thread, and join the two ends together: and tie both tightly, and leave it for one day or two days: and as much as the thread is embedded in the flesh, tie it well, until those fleshes which are between the two ends of the thread are united and fall away: then cure the wound, until it consolidates and heals.
For it is not fitting for you to do that on account of the ligament, lest you injure it.
Then do with it as we have said, until it heals.
You should make a spatula for the spiny fistula, whose curvature is acute indeed, and the other part is not acute, so that it does not injure what is not necessary, as you see.
Concerning the suturing of hemorrhoids, from which blood flows out after their incision: and the treatment of fissures.
Chapter 81.
Hemorrhoids are according to two modes.
Or they are inside the anus, like little bladders of carbon or pomegranates: or as if they were grains of a vine.
And among them are small ones and large ones: and blood flows out from them always, and it is one, and there are many.
And they are outside the anus, and in its extremities.
However, those that are outside the anus are according to a great deal of little humidity, from which flows watery fluid, or a little blood in a steady flow: and they are according to the color of the body.
And the treatment of that which is inside the anus is to clean it thoroughly so that it may stick together: and it should be pressed out until the anus comes out and the thread appears on the thigh.
Therefore, you should hang them with hooks or hold them with your fingernail.
Then cut them off at their roots.
But if they are not held back by the hooks, because of their moisture and softness: then seize them with a rough cloth, or with a double-layered linen bandage, and extract them with your fingers.
Then cut them off, and sprinkle some warm powders over them after the incision, so that they may take the place of a cautery.
Or cauterize them according to what was previously described in the chapter on cauterization.
Then treat them with the remaining treatment, until they are healed.
If the anus does not obey the exit, then inject a small injection of medicine into the rectum, so that it may be cleansed with what is in the anus, and obey the exit quickly, when the patient presses out.
But if the threads are external to the anus, then their treatment is easy and simple: and it is as if you were to seize them with your fingernail, or seize them with a hook, and cut them off.
Then treat them with what we have said, until they are healed.
And those who fear the incision with iron, then it is necessary to administer their suture in this manner.
Take a twisted thread and insert it into the point.
Then draw out the thread to the top, and make it penetrate with the point on the other side of its root: and twist the two ends of the thread at the bottom of the point, and let them be wide apart: and tighten the thread with a strong constriction.
Then knot the thread, and draw out the point.
Do this with all the instruments and leave one of them out, so that it does not stick to itself, in order that it may be free from excessive blood flow.
Then put a bandage infused with rose oil or cerate over the wound, and place it on the wound: and apply pressure to the weak part, so that it may rest.
Then leave it until it falls off.
When the instruments fall out, treat them with ointments and the remaining treatment, until they are healed.
On the treatment of fissures.
For they often occur due to dryness of the stool and constriction of nature.
When they become chronic and medicine is of no avail in them: then it is necessary to apply rough sponges with punctures, or with your own ointment, until they become humid, and the superior crust which prevents their consolidation is removed.
Then treat them, until they are consolidated according to what is fitting.
If they do not consolidate: then treat them again with a more vigorous rubbing than before, until they bleed much and are cleansed, and then treat them until they are healed.
On the treatment of inverted piles, and not of inverted ones: and of dry hemorrhoids, and of wounds like ulcers.
Then treat it: and if you want, cauterize it according to what was previously mentioned in its chapter.
One of them is a small elevated prominence on the surface of the body, rough, filtering, rounded above.
And they occur many times on the hands of children.
And its treatment is to stretch out the prominence, and to cut it: or to tie it with a silk thread: or with a pill, until it falls off.
And if you wish, cauterize it according to what has been mentioned before with fire, or with acute medicine: and now the inverted prominences are eradicated, and not the inverted ones with the instrument that I will describe. A formica is also a small elevated filtering prominence, thick, on the surface of the body, penetrating deeply: and when it finds it, cold is felt in it, similar to the sting of a formica, and it becomes painful throughout the whole body: and most of them occur on the hands.
And its treatment is to take a tube from the feather of a goose or a strong vulture's feather: and place that tube on the formica, until it contains a circle of the tube with its parts.
Then revolve your hand with the tube, until you extract what is around the formica: and place it deep into the flesh, and eradicate the formica from its root. And if you wish, do it with a tube of copper or iron, according to this method.
Let the upper part of the tube be at the limit of the surrounding skin, drawing upwards the involution, so that it is alleviated above the finger, grasping its apprehension and its own revulsion.
And if you wish, cauterize the formica according to what has been mentioned before in the chapter on cauterization of Athelil.
Concerning the forms of instruments that are administered for clusterings in ailments of the anus, and of ventral solutions, and colic.
Chapter 83.
When a probe is made from silver, or from gold alloy, or from fused copper, or from steel.
And when they are made small and large from these instruments, according to those on which they are administered.
Therefore, what is administered in the treatment of young children should be small: and for those whose veins are weak or painful, thus their probes.
Large probes.
Small probes.
The shaft of it, that is, the upper head where the ligature is tied, should be large according to this method: and there should be a distinction so that the ligature is tied as you see, and the lower end which is inserted into the anus, should be smooth, that is, not open, gentle, indeed, drawing towards subtlety: and on one side of it there should be two openings, and on the other side an opening.
And the width of the openings should be according to the thickness of the roots, and the thicker the smaller, and there should be a ligature in which medicines are placed from the urine of an animal: or from paper made from the skin of a small animal, which is according to the shape of a small asafoetida: whose root is one palm.
When therefore a ligature is placed on it, it should be tied at the head of the probe between two distinct constrictions with a strong binding.
Then probe with it.
And this is the form of the circle, as it is depicted here, and of the openings. The quality of probing with it, however, is: that you should fill the ligature, or inject a medicine, which is warmed according to the quantity of the tolerance of the sick person: and take care that it not be too hot or too cold.
Then the weak patient is placed on their back, and their legs are elevated above them: and a soft cloth, that is, a layer of fabric on which people lie, or a linen bandage.
Then anoint the extremity with cluster oil, or with albuge oil, or with foam-like mucilage of fenugreek, or something similar.
Then introduce it into the anus with ease.
Then the attendant should receive it with his two hands at the same time, and squeeze it out with vehemence, until everything that is in the cluster passes into the intestine. Then remove the cluster, and raise the patient's legs against the wall. What if the medicine thinks it is going to exit, then hold it back as much as possible.
And if he sleeps with it all night, it will be more useful in the treatment.
If however the clusters are injected into the diseased intestines of the belly, and hasten the exit of them: then repeat the cluster, until he is healed.
What if there are hemorrhoids in the anus, or painful apostemes, then let the cluster be subtle and gentle, mild, from the clusters with which children are treated.
And let this be the form of the subtle cluster above, on account of the constricted skin.
On the treatment of head wounds without fracture of bone.
Head 83.
Now I have spoken in the division on the treatment of wounds that was suitable for the book, and I shall describe here their treatment with manual operations, and with medicines according to their complement.
I say therefore, that wounds are diversified according to the manner in which they are inflicted, and according to the place where the wound falls.
Therefore the wounds that are inflicted many times are like the blows of a stone: or the cut of a sword, or an axe, or the percussion with a lance, or wood, or arrow: and similar to those from many things.
Wounds that are inflicted according to the location of the body are, for example, a wound that falls on the head, or neck, or chest, or belly, or liver: and similar ones from these members.
And I am describing the treatments of certain wounds, so that I may put forth a method and rule for the remaining wounds.
And I begin with simple head wounds, because the recollection of composite wounds comes at the beginning of the third chapter.
I say therefore.
When there is a simple wound on the head, and it is not a fracture of the bone: consider then if it is from a blow of a stone, or something similar, and has only bruised the skin: and it is a great wound, and often an aposteme forms in the following days, hot and inflamed: then hurry, and perform phlebotomy on the head at once: and do not delay it: and draw out from the blood according to the quantity of its strength: if there were no prohibition against phlebotomy, especially if the blood which flows out from the wound is little.
And let the phlebotomy be on the contrary part of the wounded area.
And let the weak person beware of replenishment, and wine, and coarse foods.
If something prohibits moderation, then it will be diminished from food, and not approach flesh, nor wine.
And put on the wound if an aposteme forms, a cotton cloth infused with rose oil alone, or with wine in which there is stippticity.
If you have been free from the hot aposteme, then put on the wound, if it is recent with its own blood, and has not changed the air, a powder which I will describe soon: and if it has already changed the air, then put on it some ointments, until it is healed.
If the wound is large, or it is from a deep incision, and similar: and its lips do not come together through small points, then bring them together with a suture, according to what I will relate about the wounds of the belly regarding their suture.
If the wound is already open to the bone, and it hangs, and there is no retention of it, except in a small suspension: then cut into it.
Then treat the wound with medicines, and restore to it hard flesh in place of skin, and prescribe to the weak person that they take nourishing foods in which there is richness, such as are heads of cattle, and cooked wheat, until it be as a pulse: and similar things.
If you find putrefaction in the skin, and it does not adhere to the bone: then cut out the entire putrid thing, and throw it away: then treat what remains.
If however in these wounds there is an artery, or a vein from which blood flows: and it does not stop through medicines, then make an incision above the artery.
If therefore you find it not cut, then dry it with a haemostatic, or tie it off.
If necessity demands it when it does not conduce to what we have said, then cauterize it, until the blood is stopped.
The method of powdered incarnative.
Take one part of olibanum, and two parts of dragon's blood, and three parts of unextinguished lime: grind everything together thoroughly, and sift it: and fill the wound with it, and constrict it with a good bandage, until it adheres well to it, and coagulates with the blood.
Then tie it above with threads and leave it, and do not disturb it while it remains, so that it does not become inflamed.
For it is not eradicated by medicine, until it is healed.
Then treat the remaining wounds with treatment, until they are healed.
Of Wounds of the Neck.
Chapter 85.
If a wound occurs on the neck, then there is no difference between it and head wounds in terms of treatment, when it is simple.
If the nerve of the neck has been cut, or an artery: then if it is a nerve, there is no ingenuity in it, unless treatment is given to it with what causes vehement constriction, such as zeniar, and zeqi, and similar things.
Because they harm the nerves and constrict them.
And do not apply anything cold to the wound at all: because the substance of the nerves is cold, and its continuation is with the brain, which is the most sublime of the membranes: and let it be that which is treated with mild medicines, such as lota chalk mixed with sweet water, infused several times with oil, or with rose oil, and tutthia, when it is washed also with sweet water: and the remaining mineral stones, in this manner, and humid ointments.
If the wound is large, then administer a suture; or cauterize its lips with powders.
Then treat it, until it heals.
If the wound is deep, or if a sinus has formed on its lower part, where pus has already accumulated, then pierce it at the most depressed place.
What if an artery has been cut in the wound and its blood flow has followed; then separate, or cut it off, and bind it; or cauterize it, if necessity requires it.
If the vertebrae of the throat have been injured, or entirely, and the windpipes are intact; then bring together the lips of the skin with a suture above the cane of the throat, and do not touch the throat, but rather equalize it, and reduce it to its natural shape.
Then bind it with a suitable stricture, and leave it for several days.
Then treat it with ointments that have a stimulating and drying effect, until it heals.
If the wound has already made an impression on the bone, then investigate it; then if there are fragments of bone in it, extract them all, or as many as you can; and what is not prepared, leave that, until the wound putrefies, and its discharge and exit are separated.
What if the wound is fresh, then powder it with the powder that I described.
If a bone is seen in the wound and it becomes a fistula, then treat it with what is mentioned in its chapter.
Chapter 86.
If therefore bad air comes out of the wound, when the patient breathes out weakly from it, then know that the wound is mortal.
If it has not reached great depth and is fresh with its own blood, then do not apply a poultice to it at the first hour, nor bind it tightly, so that the blood is not retained in its depth and returns to the heart, and kills the patient. Instead, apply an attractive ointment to it and soothe it for two days.
If you do not have an ointment at hand, then apply a soft cloth to the mouth of the wound, so that it sucks out what flows out from the humidities. And let the patient sleep on the wound, so that what accumulates in it runs clear.
If already three days or more have passed since the wound, and no spasm has befallen the patient, nor evil tremor of the heart, nor constriction in the breathing, and you see that all the other dispositions of his are good: then know that the wound is healthy.
Then treat it with bandages and the rest of the treatment, until it is healed.
If indeed the healing of it is excavated, and it has now always opened up, then know that a Fistula has been made.
Then treat it from its head.
And if the wound is from a thrusting incision, or a knife, and is simple on the surface of the chest or back: then treat it with what has preceded from suture, if it is large: or with powder, if it is small.
If, however, it has already made an impression on the bone, and a fragment has broken off from it: then investigate the wound, and prepare to extract that fragment, if they are separated.
If, however, they are not separated, then leave them, until the wound putrefies, for extraction of them is detrimental.
The judgment concerning the rest of the accidental wounds in other members is the same as we have said.
About wounds of the abdomen and the exit of the intestines, and their exits.
Chapter 87.
The disruptions that occur in the abdomen are great, moderate, and small.
From the great ones, it happens when the intestine protrudes out, or a portion of the intestines.
Therefore, their introduction and their suture is more vehement and more difficult.
And a small disruption also becomes difficult in another manner.
It follows, therefore, that their reduction is more difficult, if you do not promptly return them to their place immediately during the introduction: because it swells, opens, and enlarges; therefore, their entry becomes difficult.
On account of this, therefore, a moderate disruption is better: because when it does not make the reduction of the intestine difficult, as it is dissimilar in these two species.
You know that the suture of the abdomen is according to four modes.
Two common sutures are suitable for the suture of the abdomen and for the suture of other wounds of the body; and two other special sutures are proper for communicating with remaining wounds.
However, they are more proper with the suture of the abdomen; and I will tell you each one with explanation and declaration. I say therefore, that when the wound is small and something protrudes from it out of the intestine, and it is difficult to reduce it; then it is on account of one of two modes.
Or because of the smallness of the disruption, as we said; or because there is inflammation in the intestine due to the coldness of the air.
When therefore it is thus, then it is necessary to warm it, so that you apply a sponge or a humid cloth in lukewarm water alone.
Or you boil in water squinancy, and cypress, and spike, and embroces with it the intestine, until the inflammation is resolved.
When it makes that wine in which there is astringency: and it is better than water alone in resolving inflammation.
Since you see the inflammation is already resolved, then moisten the intestine with water in which has been decocted either marshmallow or mallow.
For through that, its entrance is alleviated with minimal effort.
If, however, its return is excavated after this treatment, then find a small opening in the disruption, with an instrument which cuts into hemorrhoids.
And the first treatment is better when it is prepared, than cutting: and there is no need to cut after necessity and failure of the instrument.
There is one part of it which is twisted, sharp, and another part not sharp, and the extremity should not be with the subtlety of a spatula, but rather more obtuse; and that is what resembles a reed, as you see.
Since the wound is enlarged and enters into the intestine, then it is necessary that its reduction be according to its natural form in its own proper place, if possible, because it is better.
When the disruption is large in the lower part of the belly: then it is necessary to make the weak person lie on their back, and place their knees higher than their head.
And if it is in the upper part of the belly, then place his head and chest higher than his lower parts.
And similarly, if there is a disruption in one of the two parts of the belly, then place your intention and your consideration always in this, that the part where the wound is should be higher than the other part.
And thus it is necessary to administer it in great wounds and in medium-sized wounds.
In small wounds, place it according to what is prepared for you.
Then make sure that the pious minister is present between your hands, who holds the entire disruption with his hand, and brings together its lips.
Then, he should remove from it what follows the suture, something after something, and this is the common method of a single suture.
And it is so that you should receive the needle, or the number of needles secondly according to the quantity of the width of the wound.
Then, let the measure of the disruption from the extremity be the quantity of the ring finger, that is, of the physician; and fix a needle beyond what you introduce into it, a thread in two extremities of the skin, with two extremities of the suture which is beneath the skin from the inside, until you make it penetrate from the other side, and you have now joined two extremities of the skin, and two extremities of the suture: and there are four orders.
Then, tie with a double thread around the circumference of the needle several times on both sides simultaneously, until the two lips of the wound are joined together in a decent aggregation.
Then, let the thickness of the finger also be measured, and fix another needle in them; afterwards, tie it with a thread, just as you did with the first needle.
Do not cease to do that with what you need from the needles, until you complete the constricting of the entire wound.
And let the needles be medium between thickness and subtlety: because subtle needles indeed quickly pierce the flesh; and thick ones are difficult to introduce into the skin: on account of this it is necessary that they be medium in subtlety and thickness.
And it is not necessary that the needles be fixed in two extremities of the skin close together much: so that the flesh is not quickly pierced, and the wound is not opened before its consolidation, and they are not elongated also with the suture, so that the wound is not prevented from consolidation.
Then, cut the extremity of the needle, so that they do not hurt the weak part during their sleep; and put small pads made of cloth on all sides, which hold the extremities of the needle: and let them be, until you know that the wound is already consolidated.
And indeed this type of suture with a needle is more convenient in small wounds.
Because one or two stitches are sufficient for their closure, or around them.
The second common suture is when you gather four extremities: two skin extremities and two subcutaneous extremities in one vein, with a needle in which there is an equal thread wrapped in subtlety and thickness.
Then when you penetrate with the needle these four extremities, withdraw the needle from the part where you inserted it, so that the thread returns to the superior part of the wound: as if it were a suture, like the suture of cloth which is stitched together, and place between the entire suture a quantity of thickness equal to the width of the little finger.
Men know this suture.
And with this suture I treated a wound that had occurred to a man in his belly, who had been wounded by a knife, and there was a major disruption of the wound the size of one palm, and about two palms of intestine had come out from the middle of the intestines, and there was a disruption in the middle of the abdomen.
I restored it after the intestine had stood outside the wound for 23 hours.
The wound was consolidated in the space of about 15 days: and I treated it, and he was healed: and he lived many years after that, enjoying his own faculties.
And the physicians had judged that he would not be healed.
And it was a miracle that I did not treat it with an ointment.
For I was in a place where neither ointment nor any medicines were found.
I therefore applied an old cloth over the wound twice a day, and I continually washed it with honey water until it was healed.
But I will describe two special types of suture according to the narrative of my speech.
And it is, as you begin with a sharp suture: and you insert a needle from the outer to the inner part.
When therefore the needle penetrates into the skin, and into the inner part of the body according to the length and width of the whole body: release the extremity of the suture on the side where you inserted the needle, and make it penetrate from the inner part to the outer part in another extremity of the opposite side.
When therefore you have made it penetrate, then make it penetrate according to this in the same extremity from the outer part to the inner: and release the extremity of the suture, which is on this side, and make the needle penetrate into another extremity from the inner part to the outer: and make it penetrate with your penetration, by which you make it penetrate into the extremity of the suture, which is in that part, until it penetrates into the whole itself.
Then begin also from the same side, and sew it together with the extremity that is on the other side of the suture, and extract the needle from the skin where it penetrated.
Then reduce it into that skin, and sew the extremity of the suture, which is on the other side, with this extremity of the opposite side: and extract it from the skin which is on its part, and make it one, and another: and make it one after the seam, until you have completed the whole thing according to that example.
And the summary of this suture is that you should sew the skin like a pelliparior, who sews skins: so that you make one seam from one part of the extremity of the skin: and so that you release it from another part, until you complete.
The second type of proper suture, which Galen described.
This sermon of his is narrated, that you should sew it according to the similarity, by which some physicians sew them, so that they aggregate every part to its suitable natural congruence: and apply the extremity of the suture to its other extremity, and the opposing extremity to its other opposing extremity.
And that is secondary because I will narrate it to you.
It is necessary to place the scalpel on the extremity of the member near to you from the outer part, and make it penetrate to the inner part alone: and let the two extremities of the skin be sewn together.
Then turn around the scalpel, and make it penetrate from the outer part to the inner part in both extremities of the skin, namely on both sides.
Then turn around both, and also make them penetrate both from the inner part to the outer part, in two extremities of the member, which are on the opposite lateral side.
And this method of sewing is better than the common easy sewing, and it is a sewing that precedes remembrance.
This is therefore also the discourse of Galen.
And some people said.
The wound is restored with a suture and two cups.
That is, to introduce into them a single thread: and begin with the introduction of the needle, from what is at hand, and make it penetrate up to the other side, according to the suture of those who sew leathers equally.
And know that when there is a disruption in the middle of the wound, then its suture is more difficult than those of other places of the wound.
The judgment of the medicine for wounds is the judgment of other wounds.
That is, because when you treat a fresh wound with its own blood, before it changes into air: and you reduce the inflammation, and soothe it, and adapt it: then put on top an incarnative powder.
But if the air has already changed the wound: then put on top of it certain ointments that are present to you, until they make pus: and the threads fall out, and the skin is consoled, and the member is restored.
Then treat it as it is the treatment of other wounds, until it is healed.
If you do not have medicines present, then apply to it at once, from which it begins to emit pus, an old custom: and change it twice a day, as I have directed you, until it heals.
If, however, the wound communicates with principal members in the lesion, then it is necessary to immerse a soft linen cloth in oil of tempered warmth, or in rose oil: and apply it to the surrounding areas which are between the groin and under the arm-pits.
If you feel pain, or pricking, or putrefaction in your intestines (for it often happens thus), then clysterize it with a tepid wine, black and sharp: especially if the putrefaction has already reached the intestine, and a penetrating evacuation has been made up to its concavity.
And know that what is from the gross intestine is of easier healing: and what is from the subtle ones is of more difficult healing.
The intestine which is called the Jejunum, does not receive healing from a wound that occurs in it at all: and this is because of its multitude, which is from the veins, and their greatness, and because of the subtlety of its body, and the proximity of its natural nerves.
If, however, what proceeds from the wound is a flux, and you follow it freshly: reduce it according to your reduction, by which you reduce the intestines equally.
If, indeed, the space has passed for it, and it has already been made green or black: then it is necessary to tie it with a thread above the place that has been stained by it, so that there may not be an efflux of blood.
For in the flux, indeed, there are veins and arteries.
Then cut what is beyond that ligament, and apply two hanging extremities of a thread from the lower part of the wound outside it: so that the attraction of it may be alleviated above you, and the extraction of it may be made at the time of the flux, and the emission of pus from the wound.
The remembering of a wound that occurred in the intestine.
When disruption occurs in the intestine and it is small, then it is possible that it can be restored in certain individuals; for I have seen a man who was wounded in his belly by a lance's thrust, and the wound was on the right side of the stomach, and an old wound had become fistula, and pus came out from it, and there was flatulence.
I therefore applied a treatment until I was not confused about his healing: nor did I cease to carefully attend to him until he was healed and the affected area was consolidated.
After I saw the affected area was already consolidated, I feared for the weak patient, lest something bad should happen to him regarding his weakened stomach; and nothing bad happened to him from that weakness.
And he remained in his better physical condition, eating and drinking, and evacuating, and he took a bath, and he exercised in his usual routines.
And now some experimenters have said that when a wound occurs in the intestine and it is small, then it is necessary to bind it up according to this method.
And it is so that you should receive the forms of large-headed poultices.
Then bring together the two lips of the wound, and place a poultice, one of those that have an open mouth over the two lips of the wound.
When it thus takes hold on them, and closes its mouth, cut off its head, for it adheres and does not come loose.
Then place another poultice near the first one, and do not cease to apply it with a poultice following a poultice according to the quantity of the entire wound.
Then reduce it, and close up the wound.
For those heads remain attached in the intestine until the intestine is digested, and it heals, and no harm is done to the weak patient through this method. And it is possible to tie off the intestine as well with a subtle thread: which is taken from the gut of an animal, and is attached to it after being inserted into the point.
And it is, that you take the extremity of this thread from the intestine, and much of its flesh is removed.
Then tie the extremity of the thread with a subtle flaxen cord that is wrapped around.
Then insert that thread into the point, and sew the intestine to it.
Then reduce it into a place of rupture. And this method of suture with caterpillars and intestine is not relied upon except as a way of trust and hope.
You know that it is a great and large wound, especially if it is in one of the slender intestines: then there is no ingenuity except subtlety, nor is its healing complete.
On the treatment of Ulcers and Fistulas.
Chapter 88.
You know that every wound or aposteme, when it grows old and chronic, and becomes an ulcer, and does not consolidate, and always discharges pus, and is not separated: then it is universally called a Fistula in whatever member it may be, and we call it Zuchemen.
And indeed a Fistula is a hardened, white, filtering nodulation, according to the truth; when there is no pain, in which case it is called by some people Risati, that is, a wing.
And it is at times humid, which discharges pus.
And perhaps the humidity is separated at certain times.
And sometimes this humidity is abundant, and it is slight; and it is coarse, and it is subtle.
And I have already mentioned in the division, then when I said wounds, that every ulcer that does not heal, nor is flesh born in it, is not that except on account of one of the nine new causes.
There are four reasons why a wound does not heal: either because of the scarcity of blood in the body, or because of its bad quality; or because there is hard, rough flesh between it and the surrounding skin, preventing the growth of new flesh; or because it is full of much filth and corruption; or because the ulcer itself is putrid and the material that is applied to it is of poor quality; or because medicine is inconvenient for its cure; or because a pestilential decay occurs in the region, or through the peculiarity of the region, as happens in Caesaraugusta: where digestion of diseases becomes difficult, and healing of abscesses is slow by nature; or because there is one bone, or the number of bones.
And I have already shown all these causes and signs of them, and their cures with medicines in the division; and it is necessary here that I should make you know the cure for Fistulas and Ulcers, which is done by an operation with the hand.
Know therefore, that a Fistula occurs in all parts of the body.
For among them are Fistulas that reach the large veins and arteries, or nerves, or skin; or to the intestines, or to the bladder, or to some of the ribs; or to some of the dorsal vertebrae, or to some of the composite joints: such as the hands and feet: and among them are those that approach the proximity of the main limb, and similar things.
Therefore, those among these Fistulas that are according to this mode, are from diseases difficult to heal, and do not receive a cure, and the occupation with them is labor and ignorance.
Because if it is from a Fistula whose depth does not reach those places that I mentioned: and you hope, and trust in its cure, and wish to penetrate to the knowledge of it, then take a probe made of copper or iron, if the Fistula tends according to straightness, and explore it with the same.
If there is a twisting in the fistula, then probe it with a lead thread.
Because the lead, with its own softness, adapts to the body and curves around the twisting.
What if the fistula has many openings, it is not possible for you to mark it out with a thread.
Therefore, inject through one of its openings, or through its own openings.
For the moisture that you inject, it flows back out through other openings, and flows out from them.
Then, you should carefully inquire into the manner in which it is possible for you to know: whether there is a bone, or a nerve, and if the fistula is concave and distant, or near; or if it is a fistula with many openings, and stands over the whole area, with the greatest strength of yours; with your questioning, by which you question the weak point, and in the invention of pain upon compression with your hand over the place, and similar signs and causes of accidental apostemes.
When you stand over all those true stations, then proceed to the cure with confidence; and it is, as you consider then, if the fistula appears near, or in a safe place far from a joint, or nerve, or artery, or vein, or one of the places which I told you: then sever the fistula according to what has been premised from my narrative, and remove what is in it through filtration, and corrupt flesh, which grows in its opening from the flesh, or fat, and similar things: and cure it, until it is healed.
If the fistula is of great depth and is according to straightness, then it is necessary to cut it as deeply as possible.
Then cleanse it of all its corrupted flesh.
Then administer wrapped-on liniments in acute medicines; and insert them up to the concavity of the fistula which you comprehended with the iron: do it several times, until the acute medicine corrodes all that remains in the concavity of the fistula from the corruption.
Then restore it with ointments that generate healthy flesh, until it is healed.
If it does not heal through that, then cauterize it according to what we have narrated.
If the cause of the fistula is bone, and it is certified to you in that: then investigate it, and dissect it according to what I have narrated to you: if nothing prohibits you from a vein, or nerve, or principal member, as we have said.
If then a bone is detected by you, and there is in it some decay, and blackness: then scrape it, until the entire corruption is removed.
Then treat it with that which brings flesh to it, until it is healed.
What if it does not heal, and discharges pus as it was doing: then know that you did not achieve the complete eradication of the corruption.
Then detect it again a second time, and make an exquisite examination of its reason, and purification of it with your utmost strength.
Then restore it.
If then it is healed, it is good: and if not, then know that the corruption is in a remote depth of the body, which you have not reached.
There is no ingenuity for you in this, except to leave it to nature.
What if the corrupted bone is small, and it is possible for you, extract it with subtle forceps that are suitable for that.
If there are many bones, then make an exquisite extraction of all of them, and do not leave anything of them with your strength.
If however something resists you from the moistures, and there is no fear of incision among them, or error: then incise those moistures and flesh, if they are there, and free the bones.
If however there is no preparation for you to remove the bones at this hour, then place on the wound what will putrefy it: and leave it, until it putrefies what is around those bones from the flesh and moistures.
And take care that the wound is not consolidated.
And let the section be constricted as you have cut it out in your operation.
Put on top of it, if you wish, a cotton pad soaked in sulphur and oil; or a cotton pad soaked in Egyptian ointment, or some other green ointment.
For when those parts putrefy, that is to say become moist, and the bones are separated from them, their removal and their attraction are alleviated.
But if there is one large bone, such as the thigh bone or hip bone, and similar to those, and a large part has become corrupted from it, then scrape that very bone with the last scraping, until that blackness and corruption are removed.
Then restore the wound.
But if what is corrupted in it is a large part, and the corruption has already reached the marrow of the bone, then it is necessary to saw it, and cut it entirely up to the place where the corruption reaches; then care for it until it is consolidated. And I relate to you the case of a man who had it on his thigh, so that you may put this example and aid upon your operation.
There was a young man of about thirty years old, who had pain in his thigh, from a cause that was moved within his body, that is, from the interior, until the matter reached the thigh, and it became an abscess with a large swelling: and there was no external cause for him.
It was extended therefore over a long time with error of the doctors, until the abscess opened, and many matters concurred with it.
And his treatment was put off until the thigh became fistulous, and many openings were made in it: which all emitted pus and bodily fluids.
Many doctors therefore treated him for almost two years, and there was no one skilled in the art of healing among them, until I was called, and I saw his thigh, and the matters that were flowing out from those openings in a great flow: also the whole body of the man was already exhausted, and his color was yellowish.
I will insert a probe into one of the nostrils, and it reaches the passage to the bone.
Then I explored all the orifices, and I found them to reach into the hollow of the thigh through all parts of the leg. I probed further, and I cut into one of those orifices, until I detected a part of the bone: and I found it corrupted; which was already corroded, and blackened, and putrid, and perforated, until it had penetrated to the marrow.
I sawed away what was detected by me, and I prepared it from the corrupted bone.
And I removed, so that there would be nothing in the bone except that corruption, which I cut away and sawed off.
And I had now eradicated it.
Then I applied a restoration of the wound with consolidating medicines over a long period of time.
And it did not consolidate.
Then I attempted its restoration.
And it was not restored.
Then I restored it with medicines, and it consolidated quickly, and healed: and this iteration was not necessary in its operation, and section, except because of the disposition of debility and infirmity, and the paucity of its tolerance, and my fear concerning death: for it happened to him at all hours from an excess of bad evacuation syncopes.
He was therefore completely healed: and flesh grew in the place of the hard bone, and a good disposition was made in his body, and his strength returned: and he was converted into his own dispositions: and he did not experience any opposition in his walking, with no harm at all.
If the protruding bone in the body is already fractured, then it is necessary to treat it in this way: take a bandage and tie it around the extremity of the protruding bone; and attach something that extends it upwards; and apply another bandage made from thick wool on top of the first one. Then tie it above the flesh that is on top of the bone; and extend its extremity so that you draw the flesh downwards; and you should detect the flesh above the place where you want to make an incision, so that the incision does not harm the flesh.
Put a splint or a plate underneath the bone below, because when you do that, it is not prevented from cutting into the rotten flesh.
And it is necessary that the incision be above the rotten place for a short time, so that the rottenness of the bone does not collect; and it does not appear in its appearance to the sense, and it directs itself towards the incision instead of another. If the bone is rotten and does not protrude, but rather continues with its part; and the rottenness is in the middle of it, or in a part of it: then remove the flesh from all parts entirely.
Then put a splint underneath.
Afterwards, make an incision from the first part, where the rottenness is, until the incision continues from the other part; and let the incision be according to the length of the rottenness for a short time, as we have said.
If the rottenness is in the joint, cut into the rotten joint itself, and make an incision in the bone where it continues from the other part.
If indeed the rottenness is in the connection of two joints, then there is no ingenuity in it except scraping away.
If indeed the rottenness is in the comb of the hand or in the comb of the foot, then the matter in it is very difficult indeed.
It is necessary, therefore, to investigate the rottenness as it appears to you.
And you should anoint it, and dress it according to whatever possible arrangement is for you, and with whatever skill is rightly directed towards you: when it does not cause opposition from the Vein or Nerve.
And you should know that incisions and saws for cutting through these bones are many, according to the position of the bones, and their preparation, and their thickness, and their subtlety, and their size, and their smallness, and their hardness, and their rarity.
Therefore it is necessary that you prepare an instrument of every species suitable for that operation.
And you should know that these operations depend on the type of instrument which you need, when you have a prolonged study with it.
And knowledge of the methods of this art is a testimony to the methods of health; for then you will already have discovered through yourself what is suitable for it from instruments for every disability.
The shape of a saw.
The shape of another saw.
The shape of a different saw.
The shape of another different saw.
This shape of the saw depicted is not correctly made. Let its upper curve be sharpened from iron, and its handle be of boxwood, and let it be made with a pyramidal shape correctly.
The shape of a razor for joints.
Let the head of this razor be according to the shape of a star-shaped key: and its points be according to the shape of Elischef's needle-points.
And it is not suitable unless the joints' heads are rubbed with it when they become corrupt, or the bone is large and great.
The shape of a larger razor.
The form of the medium razor.
The form of the broad razor.
The form of the razor in which there is a concavity.
The form of another subtle razor.
The form of the razor of the curved extremity.
The form of the small razor, subtle in its tendons.
The form of the razor with which bones are divided.
The form also of the large razor.
This is similar to a file, and the extremity is like a saw: it is exhibited in many places for the filing of bones.
The form of the razor that is suitable for filing what has been perforated from bones.
Its extremity is triangular, and it is a pointed extremity.
It comes from India.
And similarly it is necessary that all things which we have mentioned be made from razors, and incisors, and saws.
On the incision of extremities, and the sawing of bones.
Chapter 89.
The extremities putrefy, either from an external cause or an internal one.
When therefore you have applied medicinal treatment to that corruption and it does not help, and you see the corruption spreading to a member which cannot be repaired: then it is necessary to cut off that member up to where the corruption has reached, so that the weak person may be freed from death or from the greater evil of loss of a member.
And the sign of this is that the member turns black, until it becomes gangrenous: because fire has consumed it, or it has rotted after turning black: until the rottenness is cut away up to where the healthy part of the member follows, and spreads into the whole body.
Therefore it is necessary to cut away with an incision, and similarly if the cause of the corruption is from the bite of certain poisonous animals: such as a sea scorpion, and a viper, and a snake, and similar things.
If therefore there is a corruption or bruise on the tip of the finger, then cut into the finger, and do not leave space for the corrupted part to spread, so that it may be cut up to the remaining hand.
And similarly if it happens on the hand, then cut into it from the root of the veins, and do not leave space for the corrupted part to spread, until it reaches the forearm.
And if it has invaded that, then cut into the arm at the elbow joint in its own articulation. If however the corruption has passed beyond and you see it surrounding the elbow: then in that case there is death of the patient.
And to administer beyond that from the treatment, is a matter of great skill.
And similarly do with the foot, when corruption has invaded a toe, then cut into it at one of its joints; and if it reaches the arch of the foot, then cut off the whole foot.
If however it ascends to the knee, then cut into the leg at the joint of the knee.
What if the corruption has already passed beyond the knee, then there is no ingenuity in it, except to abandon and leave the patient to death.
And the method of cutting a limb or sawing it off is to tighten a ligature below, which you wish to cut: and tighten another ligature above the place.
And the assistant extends one ligature downwards to the lower parts: and the assistant extends another ligature upwards to the upper parts.
And you separate the flesh that is between the two ligatures, with a broad spatula, until the entire flesh is uncovered.
Then it should be cut, or sawed through.
And it is fitting to put a linen cloth from all parts, and not touch the saw to the healthy place; and let the patient's wound be added with a warm poultice.
If however a flow of blood occurs internally while you are operating, then cauterize the place quickly; or put some powdered substances that stop the bleeding on top of it.
Then return to your treatment, until it is complete.
Then bind the wounded member with a suitable bandage, and take care of it, until it heals.
And I will tell you what happened to a man with his foot, which is the same thing that I am telling you.
What happened was that a blackening occurred on his foot, with a burning that resembled fire combustion: and the corruption first occurred on his toe, until it affected the entire foot.
Therefore the man was freed from himself, after he saw that the corruption was falling upon his limb with its virulence, which he found from the pain and burning: and it happened to him at the joint, and he was healed.
And after a long time had passed for him, that same corruption happened to him again on the index finger of his hand. He therefore came to me, and I tried to remove that excess with what I applied on his hand from medicines after purifying his body: and the excess did not recede, and began to spread to another finger: until the corruption began in his hand.
He therefore asked me to cut into his hand: and I did not want that, hoping for a recoil of that excess from myself: and I also feared death itself during the cutting of his hand.
For the man's strength was against the case.
After he therefore despaired of me, he returned to his homeland: and he came back to me about it, because he was freed, and his entire hand was cut open: and he was healed.
And I did not relate this story, unless it would be helpful for that which falls under the category of this illness: and as a signification by which it may be signified, and according to what may be done.
On the treatment of wounds, and the quality of cleansing with medicines.
Chapter 90.
When an abscess forms on certain fleshy members and the space of the abscess becomes prolonged until it collects pus: then it bursts or perforates and what is in it comes out, and a vacant space remains as if it were a vessel: and the skin that is over it is like a pannus that has already been thinned: and it does not come to an end in its corruption, nor does it impress on the bone, nor on the nerve, nor on the ligament: it deserves to be named Sinus: and it is not named Fistula. However, if its space is prolonged until corruption is imprinted on one of these members, then it is named Fistula or zuken.
And its treatment is to cut away the entire skin as it revolves: and especially when it has been thinned out and made like a pannus: and you should be confident because it does not adhere to the place on account of its own corruption.
But if you think that the skin adheres and the final corruption does not follow from it as a consequence: and if there is thickness of flesh in the skin, then treat it with suppositories: and it is, so that you may consider it a Sinus.
Then if it is large and the pus that is emitted from it has a foul odor: then inject it with an Egyptian medicine, which is made of vinegar, oil, and zinc, taking equal parts, mixed together in a vase: and they are decocted over fire until the medicine becomes red-hot: and it penetrates into the thickness of the honey.
Then take from it what is necessary for you: and dissolve it with water and honey, and inject it into the Sinus: and close its orifice, and leave the medicine in it for a duration of two hours.
Then extract it with expression: do this daily, until the Sinus is cleansed and the foul odor is removed.
And when you enema with water of ashes, when this medicine is not present to you: and it is, that you take the ash of burnt wood or the ash of holm oak: and you cast upon the water.
Then strain it, and enema with it, until you are confident that the sinus is now cleaned out.
What if the patient is not tolerating the Egyptian medicine, nor the water of ashes, then enema him with water and honey, which has already been mixed with something from crushed zuinar.
Or enema him with honey and wine mixed together, since it is a property of honey to clean and cleanse; and the wine makes the sinus adhere, especially when there is an excess of dryness and roughness in the wine.
When you do that several times, and are confident that the corruption of the sinus is now removed: then enema him with what causes flesh to grow in it.
And it is, that you take from the emplaster dyafinicon; and dissolve it with rose oil and stringent wine: or enema him with certain medicines and other ointments, whose properties I wrote about in the treatise on ointments.
What if the orifice of the sinus is constricted, in which case the cannula for enema does not fit: then dilate it with an iron instrument for a short time; or put in the same licinium wrapped in Egyptian ointment, or in basilicon ointment, until it is dilated.
And similarly if the orifice is also wide, then bring together its lips with a suture: and let out from it an amount by which it can be entered with an enema without addition.
And similarly if the orifice from which pus flows is elevated to the upper parts: then dry it in a depressed place that is in it, so that the pus flows out of it downwards: for when pus is confined in the depth of the sinus, it prevents flesh from being generated in it.
What if it is not possible for you to cut the sinus around its lower part according to your wish? Then try, so that you prepare the limb with a preparation by which it flows out easily, as it is prepared for you.
Try, so that nothing of the pus is retained in it at all; and take consolidating medicines which are applied to the wound, suitable for what you wish.
And spread them out on a linen cloth.
And let the cloth be of such a quantity that it makes contact with the entire sinus.
Then cut with forceps directly into the opening of the sinus's hole, rather larger than the opening of the sinus itself.
Then spread out a gentle ointment on another cloth, according to the size of the hole; and place it over the wound at a distance from the opening of the sinus, so that the pus may flow out of it: and do not remove the large cloth, unless after several days or one week.
That one which is over the opening of the sinus is the one that you remove every hour, so that what accumulates in it from pus may flow out; and so you may know whether what flows out of it is a lot or a little, or digested or undigested.
And when you do this repeatedly, consider the site of the sinus itself, whether the master of it feels pain in it, or if there is no pain in it, and whether there is an abscess in it, or if there is not an abscess in it.
When therefore your medication is extended in this way, and you see the material that flows out over the opening of the sinus, then know that the sinus has already adhered, or is close to adhering: then therefore dissolve it in the morning, or on the third day: and when you dissolve the wound, then change the cloth for another, and renew the ointment. But if a subtle, watery discharge flows out of the sinus after a long time, then do not despair of its adhering, for its healing is approaching, since there are people who slow down the generation of flesh in their wounds, and among them are those who act contrary to that.
If, however, a pus that does not digest exits from the wound after many days, then you should know that the wound does not adhere.
If therefore the adhesion of the wound is delayed and its healing process is prolonged, then you should add medicinal drying treatments, which truly skilled physicians do, so that the medicines are in their substantial humidity and virtue, dry as is the dyaphinion ointment when an excess of additions from zegi is added to it.
And from the most ultimate treatment that is done, it is to receive the dyaphinion ointment and dissolve it with rose oil, and then return it to the old equal wine in its substantial form.
Then mix it with that, and use it thusly.
And now make it similar to this action, when you do not have the dyaphinion ointment present, or when you decoct it, until it thickens, and use it.
Or take myrrh, and aloe, and galbanum: grind all of it, and powder it over the honey while it is over the flame.
Then spread it over the linen cloth, and apply it to the wound: and mix with the honey that you decocted, until it thickens: and powder over it the spices, and put on the linen cloth, and apply it.
And when it is administered with aristolochia longa, and roots of heavenly lily, and it is lily: and flour of herb, and centaury.
Use them as simples, or aggregated, grind them, and sieve them: and powder over the honey that I narrated, and use it.
What if the wound's healing process is prolonged and it does not heal with this treatment: then you should know that there is corruption deep within it: or now it makes an impression in the bones, or in the hard remaining parts, or in the ligaments: then treat it with fistula treatments, according to what has been prescribed. About the treatment of gout and worn-out nails, and the cutting of the additional finger, and the severing.
Chapter 91.
A panaritium is an abscess that grows under the nail of the thumb of the hand or foot, and perhaps it grows on the other fingers.
When therefore its matter is prolonged and neglected in its treatment, and it becomes an abscess with a hot apostema, or it suppurates and discharges pus until it corrodes the root of the nail; and perhaps it corrupts the whole of it, and perhaps the corruption reaches to the bone, until there is a foul smell from it; and the extremity of the finger becomes thick, and its color becomes dark.
When therefore you treat it, with what we said previously in the division, and your treatment does not help: then it is necessary to cut away with an iron all the excess that remains above the nail.
Then cauterize the wound afterwards.
For cauterization is a very helpful remedy indeed.
If indeed the bone is healthy, and the nail is also healthy, and the additional empty nails now press on the flesh inside, and begin to sting it, and hurt it: then it is necessary to place a subtle Radius under the angle of the nail that stings the flesh, and push it upwards: and cut away the flesh with ease, and put on what remains of the flesh from burning remedies, corrosive, until everything is removed.
Then treat it with ointments, until it is healed.
If however the corruption has already spread into the bone, then it is necessary to cut away that bone, and extract it: for it will never be healed as long as the corrupted bone remains.
If you see corrosion and corruption advancing into the finger, then cut it off at one of the joints, according to what has been previously mentioned about its removal.
Then treat it, until it is healed.
But if an attack of inflammation or contusion occurs, and there is excessive pain in it, then it is necessary to bleed the patient at the beginning with a phlebotomy.
Then dry the nail with a sharp, transverse incision from above downwards.
And be careful, lest the incision reaches the flesh that is under the nail, for you will cause to happen through that a vehement pain to the patient, and it will be a cause of inflammation added to the location.
Then treat the place with what soothes the pains.
A supernumerary finger which is born on some people's hands is entirely fleshy: and perhaps there are bones in some of them, and perhaps there is a nail in it: and some of them are born at the root of the joint, or its birth is in certain nodes of the finger.
Therefore, one that is born at certain nodes of the finger does not move: and one that is born at the joint of the finger perhaps moves.
Therefore, one that consists of flesh from these, its section is easy.
Which is to cut it off at its root with a broad scalpel.
But one whose birth is at the root of the joint, its treatment is difficult.
Therefore, refrain from cutting it.
In one that is born on the finger at the last node, then it is necessary to cut the flesh first with a rounded incision up to the bone.
Then saw the bone with one of those suitable saws for that purpose.
Then treat it, until it is healed.
But the consolidation that occurs to an additional finger, often occurs either from the birth of a man, that is, born with it, or from the consolidation of a wound, or burning by fire, and similar things.
It is necessary, therefore, to cut that consolidation, so that the fingers return to their natural shape.
Then place between them a layer of linen or cloth soaked in rose oil, so that they do not consolidate too quickly and separate from each other; or place between them a thin sheet of lead, until the location is consolidated as it should be.
And similarly, if a consolidation occurs on some fingers with the palm, then cut that consolidation, according to what is prepared and suits the shape of the limb.
On the Incision of Veins.
Chapter 92.
Veins are twisted, thick, full of superfluous melancholic fluids that occur in many parts of the body; and their most frequent event is in the legs, especially in the legs of those who walk and labour and carry weights.
It is necessary, therefore, to administer a strong evacuation of the body from black bile by frequently repeated evacuations with a strong excitement.
Then perform a bloodletting on the patient in the basilica vein.
The treatment of these indeed with iron is according to two methods.
One of them is that they are cauterized and black blood is extracted.
And the other method is that the vein is opened and everything is extracted.
The section of it indeed is according to this method.
Bathe the leg first with hot water many times, until the thick, filthy blood is dissolved.
Then bind the weak leg from the upper part of its hip to the lower part of the knee with a bandage.
Then cut the vein in one place, or two, or three sections widely apart.
Then dry the nail with a bandage as far down as possible, until it draws out from the blood as much as you think is sufficient, and as much as the strength of the weak part can tolerate.
Then bind it with a ligature: and instruct him to abstain from foods that generate black bile; and to repeat the evacuation and bloodletting, when the veins are full, and not to harm the weak part.
The evacuation of it is according to this method.
Scrape the affected area, if there are many hairs in it.
Then put him into a bath: or immerse his limb in warm water, until it becomes red and the veins overflow: or exercise strong exertion, if he does not have access to a bath, until the member becomes hot.
Then dry the skin along the direction of the vein's section by its length: or at the end of it near the knee, or in its lower part near the heel.
Then open the skin with hooks, and clear the vein from every side, until it becomes visible to the sense: and at its appearance, you will see it turn from redness to blackness.
When therefore it emerges from the skin, you will see it white as if it were a cord.
Then insert the scalpel beneath it, until when it is lifted and emerges from the skin: suspend it with a blunt hook, gently.
Then dry another section near that section by three fingers' width.
Then clear the skin from the upper part of the vein, until it becomes visible.
Then lift it with a scalpel as you did before, and suspend it with another hook, as you did at first.
Then dry another section, or multiple sections, if it is necessary for that.
Then lift, and incise the same at the last section near the heel.
Then extract it to the section which is above it.
And do that, until you extract it from the superior section, or any other sections, until when it is totally removed: then incise it.
If it does not obey you to extract and elevate, then insert a strong double thread, and tie it, and extract it; or insert under the radius; and revolve your hand to every part, until it is removed.
And be careful, lest it be cut.
For if it is cut, it will be difficult for you to elevate it strongly, and it will become inflamed above the weak spot from that injury.
When you have removed it entirely: then put on the wounded place a submerged linen cloth soaked in wine and rose oil, or oil; and take care of it, until it is healed.
If the vein is contracted, having a twisting to its parts, and it is not as we said according to straightness: then it is necessary to find it above its entire twisting part, and the place of its involution.
Then suspend it with hooks, until you elevate it entirely: and beware at your section above it lest you cut a vein, or wound; for it will be difficult to elevate or extract it.
Therefore preserve your prudence.
The method of treating a wounded vein so that it heals.
The method of hooks for removing.
It is not curved like the other hooks, nor is it of acute extremity, so as not to wound a vein: and it is of coarse flexibility, gentle: for if it were subtle, it would cut the vein with its subtlety; indeed, its superfluous coarseness is suitable, as we said.
On the extraction of a vein of the leg. Chapter 93.
These veins are generated in the thighs in hot and dry lands, such as those of Alizegi, and the land of the Arabs, and in hot and dry lands with little moisture, that is to say, in which neither grass nor trees are born.
And perhaps they are generated in other places of the body besides the thighs.
And the generation of it is from putrefaction that occurs beneath the skin, just as it happens within the bodies of snakes and worms, ascari, and worms generated between the skin and flesh.
And a sign of the inception of this vein is that which occurs in the thigh as an intense inflammation.
Then the place is ulcerated.
Then a vein begins to emerge from that place of ulceration, as if it were the root of a plant or an animal.
When therefore the extremity of it appears from it, then it is necessary to apply a poultice made with a piece of lead, whose weight is one drachm and a half, up to two drachms, and to bind it suspended from the thigh.
Whenever therefore something emerges from it to the outside, apply that to the lead and bind it.
If it is prolonged much, then cut off a part of it, and apply a poultice to the remainder.
And do not cut it at the root until everything has emerged from it.
For if you cut it, it is constricted, and it grows into the flesh; and it causes an abscess to occur, and putrefaction in the place, and a bad ulcer.
Therefore it is necessary to treat it gently and extract it gradually, until it emerges from its very end, and nothing of it remains in the body; and this vein emerges in some people as long as five palms and ten.
And now it has reached me, because I have seen a case where it emerged from twenty palms.
If, however, you make an incision during the time of your medication, then introduce a rod into its opening and perforate it with a long rod, together with the body, until everything that is in it from the material is evacuated: and administer putrefaction of the place with medicines for some days. Then treat the same apostema with treatment.
And indeed this vein has many branches, especially when it appears at the junction of the foot, or in the foot itself: and many orifices are connected to it, and a branch emerges from every orifice.
Treat it therefore, as we have said in the division, and with what has been previously mentioned.
Concerning the excision of worms generated beneath the skin, and it is called Bouine disease.
Head 93.
This disease is named Bouine disease in a certain land among us: because it often happens to oxen, and there is a small worm, which is born between the skin and flesh.
And it wanders throughout the whole body, ascending and descending: and it shows itself to the sense during its walking from limb to limb, until it bursts out wherever it bursts out on the skin, and emerges.
And its generation is from the putridity of certain humors.
As worms and snakes happen, that is, earthworms, and ascarids in the belly.
And they are feared because of their evil nature.
Because when it wanders in the body and rises to the head, and reaches a place: then perhaps it appears in it, and emerges, and destroys the eye: and this happens many times.
Since it is necessary to cure him, and to extract it, then this does not happen unless through its walking and the appearance of his sense.
It is necessary therefore, to constrict what is above it with a strong ligature, and what is beneath it with a binding.
Then dry over it, and extract him.
What if it is deep in the flesh and you do not find it: then put a cauterizing iron on the spot with fire until it dies.
And the greater fear is its corruption, which corrupts the eye, as we have said. If you see that it has already arrived at the head near the eye, then tie beneath it a good strong bandage over the eyebrow.
Then dry over it, and extract him.
And it is fitting that the weak person should use a cleansing of his body with medications dissolving evil putrid humors.
And let him beware of foods generating putrefaction.
On the surgical treatment of illness Nakir.
Chapter 95.
This illness is called Nakir in our land, and it is a pain that occurs in certain members; then it is transferred from member to member.
And I have seen it myself, according to what I relate to you.
I was called to a sick woman in certain villages.
And she showed me her arm, and I saw a small swelling in the vein of the arm.
And after I stayed for one hour, I saw a swelling increasing with a fluid, as if it were an ascending worm, going up to her shoulder more quickly than could be; so that it was like living silver, when it ran from place to place.
Then the pain receded from that place, and settled in her shoulder.
Then I sat for an hour, and it flowed into the rest of the body, until it reached another arm.
Then she told me that it was revolving throughout her whole body, according to what I had seen.
I was amazed therefore at the swiftness of its transfer from member to member.
And I certainly did not see this eye affliction before in my eyes in this manner.
However, I have seen many who transfer the pain from limb to limb, and I did not see it in their eyes, as I saw it in a woman.
And I do not think that it is anything else, but because the woman was one of those who are exhausted by dryness of the body and depletion of veins; hence it appears to the senses that the windiness is transferred.
And it is necessary, so that they do not appear according to this reasoning in those who are delicate and have humid bodies, with hidden veins.
When therefore you want to cure it, and the patient feels that pain: then if it appears to your eye as we said, then press upon it swiftly, and above it quickly; and dry above it until that constricted windiness goes out: and cauterize the place.
If you do not see it with your eyes: then treat it with bodily exercise, and with what expels windiness, and purify them with foul-smelling pills, and pills made from serapinum, and similar things.
On the Extraction of Arrowheads.
Chapter 46. Arrowheads are distinguished according to their own kinds and according to the places from which they fall out of the body.
Their diversity is such that some have large points, and small ones; and are concave, and rough.
And there are those that have three angles.
And there are those that have tongues.
And there are those that have little stars.
Those indeed which are according to the limbs from which they fall, are according to two modes.
Or indeed they are from principal concave members, such as the brain, and heart, and liver, and lung, and kidneys, and intestines, and bladder, and similar ones.
When therefore a wound falls on one of the limbs, and death's signs appear to you, which I will describe to you afterwards, then it is necessary to delay the extraction of that arrow from them, for death follows him in whom it is, in many dispositions.
And when these bad signs do not appear to you, and the arrow is not hidden deep within the limb, then extract it, and cure the wound.
From the signs of the brain when an arrow falls on it and penetrates the bone, and the siphac which is above the brain is: because there occur from that wound hemorrhages, and blindness, and dizziness, and redness in the eyes, and swelling, and redness of the tongue, and spasms, and confusion of intellect, and vomiting of bile.
And perhaps blood flows out from the nostrils or ears.
And perhaps speech is cut off and the voice is destroyed.
And there issues from the place of the wound a white humidity similar to pus.
And there comes out from it something like a watery dissolution of flesh.
If therefore these signs appear to you, then desist from cure, and extract the arrow if it does not come out.
The signs of an arrow when it falls on the heart are: that it is near the left nipple; and one feels as if it were fixed in a hard thing, not in a soft thing.
And perhaps the arrow makes a motion similar to the pulse's motion; and black blood flows out from the wound.
And there follows that numbness of the extremities, and cold sweat, and fainting.
Know therefore, that death is near without a doubt.
And the sign of an arrow when it wounds the lung is the emission of frothy blood from the wound; and the parts that follow the neck become swollen, and the color of the invalid changes.
And the large spirit expires, high: and it seeks the attraction of cold air.
If the arrow falls on the flesh that is on the chest, then it is near the small ribs; and there is great anxiety with intense pain, with a sigh; and all the members of the shoulder are moved.
And if the arrow falls on the stomach, then perhaps something undigested will emerge from the wound along with food.
And if the arrow falls on the belly and is fixed in it: something filthy emerges from the wound, either feces or a fragment of intestine which is now disrupted.
There is therefore no hope for its cure, nor in the extraction of the arrow.
If the arrow falls on the bladder and urine emerges: and something proceeds from it to the outside, and the pain is more severe over the weak spot: then know that it is mortal.
The remaining limbs, such as the face, and neck, and throat, and shoulder blade, and upper arm bone, and dorsal vertebrae, and forked part of the collar bone, and hip, and leg, and similar ones are preserved according to many dispositions: when the arrow does not find an artery or nerve: and it is not a poisonous arrow.
And I tell you what I saw about the nature of these arrows, so that you may understand it through that regarding your cure.
Because an arrow fell on the tear-producing eye of that man, at the root of his nose.
I therefore extracted it from the other side, under the fat of his ear: and he was healed, and no harm came to his eye.
And I extracted another arrow from a Jew, which had fallen into the fat of his eye under the lower eyelid: and the arrow was already hidden, and I did not reach it except for its small extremity, with which it adhered to his wooden stick: and it was a large arrow from the arrows of the Turkish bow, with smooth iron, in which there are no notches.
The Jew was therefore healthy, and no evil accident occurred in his eye. And I extracted an arrowhead from the throat of a Christian.
And it was an Arabian arrow, and it belonged to him who had golden earrings.
I sewed up over the same area between two guideways: and already it was submerged in his throat.
I was subtle with it, until I extracted it: and the Christian was healed.
And I extracted an arrowhead from a man whose belly had been struck by it: and we thought that he would die from it.
After thirty days had passed for him, and nothing of his conditions had changed, I sewed up over the arrowhead: and I applied my ingenuity to it, and extracted it: and he was healed, and no evil accident occurred to him.
And I saw a man whose back had been struck by an arrow, and the wound was consolidated over it.
After seven years had passed, the arrowhead came out at the root of his hip.
And I saw a woman who had been struck by an arrow in her belly, and the wound was consolidated over it, and the arrowhead remained inside: and nothing of her conditions changed, and the woman did not find any harm in any of her natural functions.
And I saw another man who had been struck by an arrow in his face: and the wound was consolidated, and it remained, causing him no great pain: and there were many similar cases to these.
And I extracted an arrowhead from a man of the king's retinue, which had struck him in the middle of his nose, and had already declined to the right side for a while: and the whole arrowhead was hidden.
I was therefore called to his treatment after the accident of the arrow up to three days.
I found that the wound of the arrow was tightly constricted.
I examined her with a subtle probe, and I did not feel it; and indeed she herself pointed out the painful spot and the ache under her right armpit.
I expected therefore that the wound was from an arrowhead.
I applied a plaster to the place with an attractive and digestive plaster, trusting that it would bring out the spot and show me the sign of the arrow, so I could cut around it; but nothing happened at the affected spot, indicating that the arrowhead had not touched the place.
I treated it diligently with a plaster for many days, but nothing happened and the wound consolidated in the meantime; and he remained weak from the extraction of that spot for several days, until he felt the arrowhead on a certain day inside his nose.
And he told me about it.
I then applied a sharp, corroding medicine to the wound for many days, until it opened up; and when I probed it, I felt the subtle tip of the arrowhead that was stuck in the wood.
Then I added to the opening of the wound through that sharp medicine, until the tip of the arrowhead appeared visibly to us; and it took me about four months with him to complete the treatment.
Then after the wound had grown larger, and it was possible for me to insert forceps into it, and move them around, but they did not obey for its removal: then I did not cease from cleverly thinking and contriving over it with various contrivances, until I managed to remove it on a certain day with skillfully made forceps, according to the shape of their tips described at the end of the chapter, so that I extracted it.
Then I restored the wound.
And indeed the physicians judge that the cartilage of the nose is not restored.
I then restored it, and the wound was consolidated, and he was completely healed with integral health; nor did anything harm him at all.
And I will teach you the method of extracting an arrowhead: so that you may apply a rule and indication on what I did not mention.
Because the parts of this art and their distinctions are not understood with narration: nor does the book comprehend it, and the skilled artisan compares a little with much: and with what is present, about what is absent: and he discovers a new operation, and a new instrument through the descent into extraordinary things of this art when they occur.
I say therefore, that arrowheads do not come out from the limbs in which they are fixed, unless according to two methods. Or by attraction from the place into which it entered.
Or by counter-pressure of another part.
And that which comes out from where it entered, or is a proceeding arrowhead in the fleshy place: and it is attracted, and comes out.
What if it does not obey at the exit from the hour in which it falls: then it is necessary that you let it alone for some days, until the flesh that is around it putrefies: and its attraction is alleviated, and its egress.
And similarly if it is fixed in a bone, and does not obey you at the exit, then leave it alone for some days as well: and try it with attraction and motion every day, until it comes out.
What if it does not obey you at the exit after days, then it is necessary that you perforate around the arrowhead in the bone on every side with a subtle drill, until the arrowheads are loosened.
Then attract it, and extract it.
If the arrowhead is fixed in a bone of the head, and has already passed into one ventricle of the brain, and certain accidents that I mentioned appear from the weakness: then refrain from attracting the arrowhead, and leave it alone, until its condition becomes equalized after days.
For if the arrowhead penetrates to the sifaç, then the death is not prolonged for him.
And if the arrowhead is not fixed, unless it only lodges in a bony part of the body and does not penetrate up to the sifaç; and he remains weak for several days, and none of those accidents befall him: then his ingenuity is in attracting the arrowhead and extracting it.
If, however, it is fixed strongly, and does not obey you in attracting it: then administer the trephine around the arrowhead, as I narrated to you; afterwards treat the place, until it heals.
If, however, the arrowhead is already hidden in a place of the body, and it is concealed and hidden from sensation: then probe for it with a tent.
If, however, you feel it, then attract it with certain instruments that are suitable for its attraction.
If, however, you cannot reach it, because of the constriction of the wound, and because of the length of the arrowhead in the depth; and there is no bone, nor nerve, nor vein: then enlarge upon it, until the wound is amplified, and it becomes possible to extract the arrow.
Since there are anchors by which it is held, then liberate the fixed flesh from them on every side, with all the ingenuity you can, and strive, if you cannot overcome the evasion of the flesh in the fracture of the anchors, and their contortion, until it is freed.
And you, when you administer the extraction of the arrowhead, in whatever place it is, then use the contortion of your hand, with forceps on all parts, until you make it come out: and be subtle with utmost subtlety, so that the arrowhead does not break, and its attraction becomes difficult for you, and even its extraction.
Since if you cannot overcome it at one hour, then leave it for several days, until what is around it becomes putrid.
Then you should approach it: for if the outer skin is injured, and if it causes a counter-flux of blood to you, then administer what we have said about treatment in its chapter: and preserve your strength from cutting into the vein, or nerve, or cord.
And administer skill in every way that is possible for you to ease the tension of the bowstring: and let it be with facility, and tranquility, or slowness, and firmness, as I have narrated to you.
And it is necessary, that you do as you draw the bowstring, so that it may be weak according to its shape, according to what it was at the time of the case of the bowstring itself.
Because it is more beneficial.
If however it is not possible for you, then administer what is possible for you from the figures.
The bowstring which emerges from the opposite part of the other, or already proceeds from it to the exterior: or it makes a swelling of the extremities of the bowstring through sensation from the superior part of the adjacent skin, and you see it prominent: therefore cut above it, and let the section be according to the quantity that the forceps grasp in it.
Then draw it out: for it itself becomes easy to remove.
If it is retained in the bone, then twist your hand according to the roundness, until the bowstring impresses on the bone, and it itself becomes larger: then draw it out.
And if not: leave it for some days: then approach it again, until it emerges.
What if the wood of the bowstring is in it, then push it out with that.
If however the wood has fallen out, and you want to administer an impulse: then introduce into it a concave instrument, so that its concavity enters into the tail of the bowstring: then push it out with the same.
If the arrow-head is concave, then push it out with an instrument inserted into it.
For the arrow-head is extracted through that.
What if the arrow-head is poisoned, then it is necessary to excavate the entire concave flesh where the poison is: if it is possible for you.
Then treat it with what is suitable for that.
What if the arrow-head is lodged in the chest, or in the belly, or in the bladder, or in the side: and it is close to what you touch with your finger, and it is possible for you to dissect above it: then dissect, and be careful about the incision of the vein, or nerve, and extract it.
Then sew up the wound, if you see fit, and treat it, until it heals.
And this is the method of forceps, with which arrow-heads are extracted.
There are extremities similar to a bird's beak, which are made like scissors: when they grasp onto the arrow-head, they do not release it.
And they are made into many species, large, small, and medium, according to the quantity of the arrow-head's size, and its smallness, and the width of the wound, and its constrictions.
The form of a concave pusher.
And the form of a straight pusher.
This is a straight extremity like a rod, so that its point is extracted into the concave arrow-head, and it is pushed with it.
This extremity of the concave pusher is concave like a bird's feather: so that the point of the arrow-head is extracted into it and its thrust.
Of the bloodletting of Veins.
Chapter 147. The veins to be bloodletted, whose course is customary in the body, are thirty.
From which there are sixteen in the head: two pulsatile veins, which are behind the ears, called two Herbae; and two arteries, which are apparent in the two temples; and two veins which are in the two lacrimal ducts of the two eyes, which are called Aspicientes; and a vein prepared in the middle of the forehead; and a vein which is at the extremity of the nose.
And two Jugular veins, which are in the neck.
And two veins which are in the upper lip of the mouth.
And two veins which are in the lower lip.
And these are the veins which are called Algecherich.
And two veins which are under the tongue.
The veins that are cut for bloodletting in the arms are five veins in each arm.
One of them is the Cephalic vein, and it is from the Sylvester side; and the common people call it the vein of the head.
And the Dark One.
And it is the Middle vein, and it is composed of the branch of the Basilic vein and the branch of the Cephalic vein; and the common people call it the vein of the body.
And the Basilic vein, and it is placed on the domestic side; and it is also called Titillicaris.
And the common people call it the vein of the belly.
And the Vein of the Arm, and it is placed above the bend; and it is the one that is cut for bloodletting, and it is the one that appears above the thumb with a clear manifestation.
And the Salvatella; and it is a vein which is between the ring finger and the little finger; and it has two branches.
And in the leg and in the foot there are three veins.
One of them is the vein that is under the curve of the thumb on the Sylvester side.
And the second is the Saphena: and its place is at the heel on the inner side.
And the vein Nesse: and its place is at the heel on the outer side.
And in the other leg there are three similar veins.
Concerning the bleeding of two veins behind the Ears.
The bleeding of two veins which are behind the Ears is a remedy for ancient catarrhs, and hemicrania, and saharfat, and evil old head sores.
And the quality of the bleeding is according to what I narrate.
And it is done by scraping the head of the sick person: and rubbing their occiput in the place of the two veins with a rough cloth, using good friction.
Then the sick person should bind their neck with a cord, until the two veins appear.
And the places of them are behind the Ears in two depressed areas of the head.
Therefore, feel for them with your finger, and where you sense the pulse of them beneath your finger, mark it there with a branding iron.
Then take a lancet, and it is the one that is called an Incider.
Then insert it under the vein in the skin, until the lancet reaches the opening of the vein.
Then lift your hand with the vein and skin upwards, and make an incision in the vein with a cutting incision.
And let the length of the incision be the quantity of two joined fingers, or around that; and make it flow out of blood as much as you wish.
Then bind it with soft cloths, and leave it, until it heals.
And now the cutting of the veins and their cauterization has preceded at the beginning of this book.
Concerning the bleeding of two Arteries in the temples.
Here is the translation: And the quality of bleeding them is according to what I relate to you.
The string of the ailing neck is greatly affected, until two visible veins appear in a manifest sensation: and their pulse is demonstrated under your finger.
Then, indeed, the signs are with a branding iron.
Then, elevate the skin from above the vein upwards with your index finger, and insert the lancet obliquely beneath, and elevate the vein upwards.
And cut into it, as you did in the two other veins: and make the blood flow out according to the quantity of your necessity. Then, release the constriction of the ailing part, and put your finger on the vein for an hour.
Afterwards, put a bandage over it and poultices, and bind it strongly above with a constriction: and leave it, until it heals.
And now the description of those has preceded, and their incision, and their extraction at the beginning of the book.
Concerning the bloodletting of the forehead vein after the bloodletting of the cephalic vein.
The benefit of bloodletting the forehead vein is after the bloodletting of the cephalic vein, for old facial weaknesses: and for hemigraine, and redness: and foul ulcers.
And the quality of this bloodletting is according to what I relate to you.
The ailing neck is constricted with a ligature, until the vein appears.
Then, take the instrument which is called a Fossorium (lancet).
Its form is this.
Put the sharp point which is on the head of the Fossorium (lancet) above the vein, and strike it with a plectrum, or with some other instrument in its manner: and let the blood flow out according to the quantity that you wish.
Then dissolve the perforation of the wound and stitch it, until it is healed.
And when it opens with a broad scalpel.
However, it is not suitable that the scalpel should be of a sharp extremity, like other scalpels, but rather of a broad extremity.
And the scalpels are divided according to the transverse cutting: because the bone is near: and perhaps the scalpel will be broken when it is subtle.
Of the venous scalping in two lacrimal veins.
The treatment of the two veins which are in the two lacrimal veins of the two eyes is for an eye affected by itchiness and redness: and a dirty condition in the eye, and facial weaknesses.
And the quality of the scalping of them is such that it stitches the wounded neck with a thread.
Then the scalpel is thus: and you should stand above its head.
And let the scalping be done transversely along a short length, with a small scalpel, broad and somewhat flat, for there is no flesh in that place.
If the scalpel is of a subtle extremity, perhaps it will be broken.
Then make flow out from the blood as much as is necessary for you.
And put a bandage over them, and stitch them up at night for one day, and dissolve them.
Of the venous scalping of the Nose.
The venous scalping of the Nose is beneficial for acute fever and violent headache, and facial weaknesses, such as half-headache and redness which occurs on the face: especially when it is chronic.
And the quality of its scalping is that it stitches the wounded neck.
Then hold the nose with your left hand, and take a subtle and long scalpel: and fix it in the middle of the nostril itself, between that which separates the nose according to its straightness.
Since the vein does not appear to the sense there, and because the blood begins to flow suddenly.
And it is fitting that you should ultimately bleed your arm with a phlebotomy scalpel for a time; and you should make the blood flow according to your need.
Then bind it with a bandage at night alone.
For it is restored quickly indeed.
On the Phlebotomy of Veins, by Guidegi.
Indeed, Guidegi's phlebotomy is a remedy for constriction of the breath, and for leprous interception, and for melancholic ailments, and for evil ulcers, and corrosive sores, that is, herpes and other such things.
And the quality of that phlebotomy is such that it constricts the weak vein under both arteries in its neck with a bandage: and let the craftsman stand over the head of the weak person, and the weak person should sit on a seat.
Then open the vein to the full length of the phlebotomy scalpel for a time.
Then extract from the blood a moderate quantity, or according to that which you see as necessary for that purpose.
Then do likewise regarding the other vein.
Afterwards, loosen the bandage, and constrict the two veins with a moderate stricture: so that the weak person is not suffocated.
And let it stand until morning.
For the wound will heal.
On the Phlebotomy of Veins, by Algeberich.
Algeberich's phlebotomy of veins is a remedy: because it helps against inflammation of the mouth, and corruption of the gums: and evil ulcers: and cracks of the lips, and evil ulcers, even those that are in the nose, and around it.
And the quality of that phlebotomy is such that you make the weak person sit in front of you: and constrict their neck with a cord.
Then turn back the lip, and look at the two veins: one of which is on the right side of the lip, and the second is on its left; and their demonstration is through the dark bluish color.
And that is true: because in the vicinity of those are small black veins.
Make an incision on both sides, making a cut into each. If you are in doubt and do not know which of them is, then make an incision on the larger one, and it will be more clearly manifest.
And do similarly for the two veins that are in the upper lip, and it is mostly customary to do so with them; and make an incision on the two veins that are in the lower lip.
Concerning the bloodletting of the Vein under the tongue, following the Cephalic bloodletting.
The benefit of the two Veins that are under the tongue in bloodletting is this: because the Cephalic bloodletting is for the purification of the things that are in the throat, and the cleansing of the ulcers, and the cleansing of the mouth.
And the quality of performing bloodletting on them is such that the patient should sit between your hands in front of the sun, and elevate his tongue, and look under the tongue on one side for one vein, and on the other side for another vein: and their color will decline towards blackness.
Therefore, perform bloodletting on both: and take care, lest you move your last hand while performing bloodletting on them.
For underneath them are arteries, and perhaps a flow of blood may occur from those arteries.
Concerning the three Veins in the elbow.
The three Veins that are bloodletted in the elbow are those on which customary bloodletting is practiced in all people.
And the bloodletting of them is done according to two methods.
Either by pricking with a Myrtle-shaped lancet: or by draining to subtlety with an olive-shaped instrument: or by cutting with a scalpel-shaped lancet, and it is called Alnesil.
And this is its shape.
Thus Alnesil is, which is suitable for incision.
And from them are broad and subtle species according to the width of the veins and their structure. The shape of the Myrtle-shaped lancet is broad, as you see.
And it is suitable for opening concave veins, full ones, proceeding ones, apparent ones, thick ones, and those that contain thick, turbulent blood.
And this lancet is of smaller width and more subtle at the extremity.
And it is suitable for bloodletting of subtle veins that contain thin, clear yellow blood.
On the bloodletting of Basilica.
Basilica, however, which is one of these three veins for bloodletting, is a benefit. Because it extracts blood from the diseases that are beneath the throat and neck, since it follows the chest and stomach; and it is suitable for the bloodletter with this bloodletting, so that he may be cautious, and it is above fear because beneath it is an artery.
If therefore he makes a mistake, and adds to the puncture of the bloodletter, he will cut that artery, and there will be a flow of blood.
Wherefore it is necessary not to bloodlet with a pricking lancet; rather, it should be cutting with an Alnesil.
Which if it does not appear in a clear and manifest appearance of Basilica, then it is necessary to transfer it elsewhere, and you will change it for another, or you will seek some other branch of it; or instead of the bloodletter, the rope of the arm.
For that is clear, and you will cut it with an Alnesil-shaped lancet, as we have said.
If however you wish to perform phlebotomy on that same person, then it is necessary before constricting the arm, so that you may touch the place, until you recognize the place of the pulse.
Then mark the place with a cautery, afterwards constrict the arm, and cut the vein at a curved section with a phlebotomy knife of Al-Nezal, as we have described.
And take care that the percussion does not fall through the space to the place of the artery.
And when you see that, as you constrict the ligament, an inflammation occurs in the place which you marked with a cautery, then that inflation is an arterial inflation: therefore beware of it.
What if you see the blood at the phlebotomy to be salty, like a child's urine, and it is subtle, red blood: then know that it is from an arterial blood.
Then therefore press, and put your finger on the same long space, afterwards raise your finger.
If therefore the blood is cut off (for it is often cut off), then constrict the arm, and release it: and beware lest the patient be weakened by its motion: and let it be above his fear.
And do not move it for some days, until it is healed.
If however the blood is not cut off, and it overcomes you: and there is no remedy present for you at that moment, then incise the artery, if it appears to you.
For the extremities are constricted, and the blood is cut off.
Or take a small linen cloth, and bind it: take one half, and constrict it over the place of the vein's constriction, with a ligature and soft padding until another day.
Then if the blood is cut off, it is good.
And if not: then treat it with the method that preceded, remembering the place of the dust of the cut off blood flow: and the cutting off of his blood is not difficult in many dispositions, because of the small wound location, and the possibility of a ligature from the arm.
On the bloodletting of the veins of the forehead.
The veins of the forehead bloodletting is beneficial, because it draws blood from the upper part of the head and lower body; therefore, since it is composed of the basilic branch and the cephalic branch, as we have said.
And it is fitting for the bloodletter to open it, so that it may be above the terror from its bloodletting, for beneath it is a nerve.
If therefore the bloodletter adds to the puncture of the bloodletting, and finds the nerve, there occurs in it numbness, and healing becomes difficult, and perhaps it does not heal completely.
And this nerve often appears to the senses.
If however it is hidden in certain men, and is subtle, and does not show itself: then it is necessary that you place your bloodletting where you bloodlet, a section with the Alnesil, and divide the nerve with your strength.
What if the vein is between two nerves, then find the vein in its length.
On the cephalic vein.
The bloodletting of the cephalic vein is beneficial, because it attracts blood from the head, and relieves the weaknesses of the eyes.
And it is necessary in this vein particularly, if you wish, to bloodlet it pricking with an olive-shaped bloodletter, or with a myrtle-shaped one: because it is the most healthful of all veins, since there is no artery beneath it, nor nerve. However it is fitting for you to bloodlet with caution, so that you divide the head of the vein only, and seek a smoother place: and it does not harm if it is not found with the first percussion, so that it may be repeated over it several times with bloodletting. However perhaps there occurs an abscess in certain men when it is not bloodletted at the first percussion, but that abscess does not harm them in any way.
On the usefulness of bloodletting and the precautions to be observed in it.
However, the quality of bloodletting and its accidental effects resulting from it, which require careful consideration in its correct performance.
Firstly, it is essential to know that bloodletting should not be administered unless for the conservation of health, its preservation, and caution against the onset of diseases.
And that bloodletting should be performed on one of the three veins that are located in the elbow, namely the Cephalic, the Fusca, and the Basilic.
And that bloodletting should be performed at the beginning of spring, on an empty stomach, and in the summer; and in autumn and winter after digestion, when signs of repletion appear.
And let bloodletting be performed on the first day, or on the third day, after three hours have passed since dawn.
However, bloodletting that is administered for diseases does not have a fixed hour: but rather when convenience and necessity demand it, whether at night, or day, and in every hour, and at all times.
And it is not suitable for children to be bloodletted until they reach fourteen years of age.
Nor should pregnant women be bloodletted, unless from the fourth month up to the seventh.
Nor should old people be bloodletted who have already passed sixty years of age.
When someone wishes to be bloodletted for any reason: it is necessary to cleanse their intestines beforehand with a gentle clyster, if there is much retained feces in them, so that the veins do not draw out putrid and noxious superfluities from the intestines during bloodletting, which harm the principal members.
Nor should those who are tired or nauseous be bloodletted, nor those who are intoxicated from drinking, until they are freed from that condition.
Neither weak with dropsy.
And beware of phlebotomy repeated after a bout of passion, and vomiting, and flux of the stomach, and excessive coitus, and labor, and exercise, and wakefulness, and fasting, and all that which dissolves the virtues from the bodily or animal corpus.
Then consider the subtlety of the humors beforehand, if the blood is thick with food and drink, and medicines: if it is possible for him.
Then let him take a bath, if nothing prohibits it: or let him be exercised by some exercise, so that the blood may be subtly thinned.
And let phlebotomy be applied to his chest, around the third day, as we have said: and take care, so that his chest may be evacuated of all bad animal accidents on that day: such as anxiety, and anger, and fear: and from all bodily accidents, such as labor, and pain, and overexertion, and similar things.
And let him have present things with which he is familiar through the use of aromatics, and perfumes, and trips and similar things to those in accordance with the quantity of possibility.
Then let the phlebotomist sit on a pillow, which is higher than the pillow of the one being phlebotomized: afterwards let him draw out his arm, and rub it with his hand two or three times.
Then let him tie the ligature with a cord, and wrap it twice.
And let the stricture be moderate, because when the stricture is unequal, or excessive in the stricture, then it prohibits the flow of blood: or in relaxation, then also it prohibits the flow of blood.
Then after the stricture it is necessary to rub the hands of the one being phlebotomized simultaneously, until the veins become inflated and declare themselves to the senses.
Then the surgeon removes the bloodletting instrument with a little oil, properly and skillfully.
Then he places his index finger of his left hand on the vein under the location where he wants to perform the bloodletting, gently: so that the vein does not flee and is compressed by the percussion.
Since the vein is like a fleeing chord during bloodletting: and it is one of those that is full of windiness: and when you place the bloodletting instrument on it, it contracts under the instrument, and the surgeon is deceived, and the instrument does not open the vein: and if it opens it, it is constricted: therefore for this reason it is necessary to steady the instrument, and one should be solicitous in all these matters.
Then he puts down the bloodletting instrument.
And if not, then try that stroke again at another place nearby with gentle pressure, or above it with quickness: if the spot is not missed.
What if the spot is missed, or the patient becomes weak, then leave him for a day, or two days: and do not tighten the bandage.
Perhaps indeed it will attract a warm poultice.
Nor should he take a bath.
Then repeat the bloodletting, if necessary.
What if the opening is small, or the blood flows subtly: and sometimes so that the quantity of blood does not flow out as desired: then try the instrument again in the same opening according to the straightness, and add a little to the operation.
And do it quickly, before the spot is missed, for a missed spot is frequent in many people during a small operation.
If you see that it has already been missed, then do not try again at all, for nothing is exempt with regard to you. And put upon it something from the dregs of oil: because it alleviates the flow of blood.
And it is better in this place than the oil itself, and than other oils.
And similarly administer the dregs of oil in all your bloodletting, where the bloodletters prohibit the flow of blood: and they make that tyrical treatment, and sagzeneca, when it is applied from one of them to the affected area.
For the blood is subtly refined and resolved when it is thick.
When a large apostemation occurs at the site of bloodletting, which often happens, especially to one who has not been bled except at that time, or has a small opening of the vein, then apply and place on the area a sponge infused with hot water and salt for a short while: and bind it for an hour: because it is dissolved.
And it is necessary to do that after the blood has flowed out of the vein itself, with a complementary treatment, or from another vein.
And indeed, apostemations and swellings often occur at the site of bloodletting of the basilic vein.
Put your hand therefore upon it, then if you find softness at the site of your compression, then that swelling is bad.
Take heed therefore, to apply to it something from what we have mentioned.
For perhaps the blood flows out of the artery.
But make an application to it with that which has astringency, so that the site may be dried.
Then treat it with the remaining treatment, until it is healed.
And it is necessary to extract from every man, in proportion to the quantity of his own blood, according to the amount of his vital strength.
And what appears from the wine-like color above the blood.
For if the blood is black, then let it flow out until it becomes red; and similarly if you see it thick, then let it flow out until it becomes subtle; and similarly if it is acute, until its acuteness is relieved.
And it is necessary for him who is full, strong, and needs the extraction of blood once, that the phlebotomy of the veins be amplified, and the phlebotomist be skilled; and in him who is weak, let it be the opposite of this.
And it is necessary to extract it from the veins, and that the opening be narrow; and what is better administered in the phlebotomy of the veins is a crosswise section, not a puncture.
And this mode of phlebotomy is safe from the flow of blood, and from incision of a nerve; and it is more praiseworthy and more salutary than phlebotomy by width and length.
And he who is accustomed to faint upon approaching phlebotomy, it is necessary that he eats beforehand a moderate bread infused in water of granated muzi: or dates, if he is overheated; and extracts from the blood in three veins, or four.
And if he is of an infrigidated complexion, then let him take beforehand bread infused in syrup of mia, or in syrup of honey aromatized with spices, or in syrup aromatized with fragrant odor.
What if syncope occurs upon phlebotomy, and the cause of its abundant blood flow is multiple: then it is necessary that he takes in a drink water of flesh, and subtle fragrant syrup; and let him be treated with aromaticity with galangal, and his chest be lined with these; and let him use the remaining things which we mentioned in the division on syncope from evacuation.
Whoever wants to evacuate his arm and release his blood a second time: it is necessary for him whose phlebotomy is due to excessive evacuation, and his strength is weak, so that he releases the blood gradually according to his strength over continuous days.
Whoever wants to evacuate his arm and release his blood a second time, and his body is strong: then he should do it seven hours later, or nine hours after his first phlebotomy.
Whoever wants to attract blood from his body to the opposite part to which it declines: it is necessary that he be evacuated on the second day, or on the third.
In whom there is already much heated blood in his body, and it becomes sharp, and causes a fever to occur: it is necessary that the blood flow out of him at once, and a large quantity be extracted from him; and the opening should be widened until syncopation occurs. After you have observed all the conditions of phlebotomy, and you have placed your hand on his pulse at the course of the blood, so that death does not occur in place of syncopation.
For it often happens thus, when the phlebotomist is ignorant and falls into negligence.
And it is not necessary when you want to release the arm and release the blood a second time, since the opening of the vein is already closed, and the exit of the blood becomes difficult, so that you press on it with vehemence, and the curvature is extended more quickly.
For that is a great evil, indeed abandon it, until it can be phlebotomized a second time.
Or remove with an acute phlebotomy what has been coagulated from the blood in the opening of the vein, and apply to it something salty dissolved in water.
And apply to it something from tyriaca alfaroch or sagzenea, and apply a gentle compression, until the blood flows out.
If indeed an abscess has formed a vein, then leave it alone and do not touch it, until the abscess settles.
What if necessity provokes to release the blood a second time, and there is no excuse, then either perform phlebotomy at that spot, or on another arm in another vein.
The veins of the arm are phlebotomized at the place of the Forked and Basilic veins, when they cannot be found, and are hidden, because it is composed from them.
And the quality of that phlebotomy is such that a weak hand is immersed in hot water, until it becomes red and the veins appear manifestly.
Then let it be bound above it with a ligature of moderate constriction.
Then perform the second phlebotomy transversely, gradually, not latitudinally, nor along the length; and let the opening be wide, and let your phlebotomy be such that you phlebotomize above the joint of the hand somewhat.
And indeed the flow of blood is mostly promoted by immersion in hot water during winter time.
And the phlebotomy of this vein is more beneficial than all the veins, because there is no pulsation beneath that vein, nor a nerve.
The phlebotomy of the Salvatella vein on the right hand is beneficial for liver diseases.
And the quality of that phlebotomy is such that you bind the hand with a ligature, or your own hand, after you have immersed it in hot water, until the vein becomes inflated and demonstrates its sensation strongly.
Then, he makes an incision across the vein.
And if you cut it completely, it will not harm him at all.
And be careful, lest you ultimately harm your hand with the scalpel.
For beneath it are the exposed nerve fibers of the fingers, stripped of flesh.
Then put your hand into warm water, and let the blood flow from it.
For if you do not soak it in warm water, the blood will clot in the opening of the vein, and be prevented from flowing.
When you have extracted the necessary amount of blood, then apply oil and salt to the vein: so that it does not close too quickly.
And similarly, it is necessary to do with every constricted branch.
The treatment of his phlebotomy from the left hand is this: because it is conducive to diseases of the spleen; and similarly do in his phlebotomy as you did in the second one equally.
The treatment of the saphena phlebotomy is for diseases that are in the lower part of the body, such as diseases of the womb, and retention of menstruation, and weaknesses of the kidneys, and old ulcers of the hips and thighs, and similar afflictions.
And the quality of his phlebotomy is that he should immerse his weak foot in warm water: and make friction upon it, until the veins overflow: and bind above the joint of the foot with a bandage.
And indeed the vein is located at the heel, appearing opposite the big toe: and many branches radiate from it on the surface of the foot.
Then make an incision on his larger vein, or at the heel in its confluence: because it is better and more healthy.
For if you make an incision on the surface of the foot, then beware of the nerves that are beneath it on the surface of the foot.
And place your phlebotomy there where you make incisions transversely, as if you were going to cut into it; and let the phlebotomist be skilled.
If the flow of blood is prohibited, then put his foot in warm water, and let the blood flow into it until it is evacuated.
What if the phlebotomist errs in the first instance, then let him repeat with phlebotomy above, for the place is sound, and you do not take evil from it when you cut into a vein, as we have said.
And similarly with the saphenous vein of the other foot equally.
The location of the sciatic veins, as we have said, is at the heel on the lateral side of the forest.
And the benefit of his phlebotomy is to alleviate pain in the hip, when it is because of hot blood.
And the quality of his phlebotomy is that the weak patient should enter the bath, and be fastened: and let the leg be tied from the side of the hip up to the heel with a four-finger-long thin thread; for it does not appear otherwise except because of that.
When it appears, then make the phlebotomy according to whatever ingenuity is possible for you, or according to the transverse method: and it is better, either to cut into it with an incision, or to section it.
For the location of it is more healthy, and it itself is hidden very deeply in many men.
What if you do not find it, and it does not appear to the sense at all: then make an incision on some branch of it, and it is that which appears on the back of the foot, and near the little ear: and cut into a vein, and let flow from the blood as much quantity as you wish.
Then loosen the binding, and put a piece of leather over the place of the phlebotomy, and tie the place.
For a wound, indeed, it is healed.
Concerning the blowing, and the quality of its use.
Chapter 48.
Ventoses are made from horns, and from copper, and from glass.
And the blowing is done in two ways indeed.
With scarification and bloodletting; and the other is blowing without scarification. And this blowing that is without scarification is in two ways.
Or it is with fire.
Or it is without fire.
And the blowings that are administered with scarification and bloodletting are fourteen places of the body.
Of which one is the blowing of Alnocrati, and it is at the back of the head; and Alkehel, and it is in the middle of the neck; and the blowings of Alhagdahim, and they are two layers of the neck from both sides together; and the blowings of the mind, and it is under the jawbone in the lower jaw; and the blowings of the two spatulas; and the blowings of Alachosos above the end of the tail; and the blowings of the two thighs, and they are in the middle of the two arms; and the blowings of the two legs; and the blowings of the two hips.
And indeed the blowing does not extract blood from you through small scattered veins in the flesh, and because of that, virtue does not flow out from them, just as it is the case with phlebotomy.
Nor is it necessary to administer blowing, whether with fire or without fire, in any disease that occurs due to fullness, until the whole body is evacuated.
Because if necessity provokes blowing due to illness or because of habit, we administer it at every hour, at the beginning of the month, at its end, and in the middle of it, and at whatever time it may be.
What is it, because it is from humans who, when the blood in them multiplies, then it needs to be extracted through venesection, finds a heaviness in its head and swooning.
And there are those who find fullness and redness in their face, head, and neck.
And there are those who find itchiness in their face, and forehead, and darkness, and dullness in their eyes.
And there are those who scratch the place of their venesection. And there are those whose laughter is multiplied.
And there are those who find a taste of blood in their mouth: or their tongue becomes blistered, and they spit out blood.
And there are those whose sleep is multiplied.
And there are those who see in their sleep blood and redness, and wounds, and sores, and things that are similar to them. When therefore we see something of those, and it is specifically in the middle third of the month: we order then that venesection be done, after they have passed two days or three hours. The benefit of venesection on the neck is that it reduces heaviness in the head and what flows out to the eyes.
