After I had completed for you, my sons, this book which is the final part of the science of medicine with its complement, and I had reached the end in it, from its expositions and declarations, it seemed good to me to complete it for you with this Treatise which is a part of the operation, that is, surgery with the hand.
Since the operation with the hand was neglected in our region and time, and was completely forgotten; so that perhaps the knowledge of it perished, and its investigation was cut off; and there did not remain any of it except for small descriptions in ancient books, which were altered by hands: and error and hesitation occurred among them, until their intentions were closed and its power was elongated. It seemed good to me to revitalize it with the arrangement of this Treatise, according to the method of positioning, declaration, and abbreviation; and to bring it together with the forms of cauterium and other instruments of operation: so that it would be done through added declarations, and through proper preparation of what is necessary.
The reason why a good craftsman with his hand is not found in our time is: because the art of medicine is long and it is necessary for its author to be exercised beforehand in the science of anatomy, as Galen described, so that he may know the juices of the members, and their forms, and their connections, and separations, and have knowledge of the bones, and nerves, and ligaments, and their number, and their egressions, and of the pulsating veins, and quiet ones, and the exit places of these.
And because of that, Hippocrates said that a name with a name is much, and with a work is little, and especially in the art of the hand.
We have already spoken about it in the introduction of this book.
Since one who is not knowledgeable about what we said about anatomy will not be cautious, and already falls into error, whereby humans are harmed: just as I have seen many of those who boast about this science without knowledge and without experience.
What happened was that a certain foolish doctor cut into a scrofulous apostem on the neck of a woman, and he severed some arteries in her neck; as a result, the woman's blood flowed out, until she fell dead at his feet.
And I saw another doctor who attempted to extract a stone from a man's bladder, which had been causing him pain for a long time, and the stone was large. He approached him therefore, and extracted it with a fragment of the bladder. As a result, the man died on the third day.
And I was indeed already called in to extract it: and I saw from the size of the stone and the condition of the sick man that he would die.
And I saw another doctor who received a stipend from a certain Duke of our land because of his medical skills: and it happened to a black eunuch who was in the Duke's service, that he suffered a fracture in his leg near the ankle; and the doctor, with his ignorance, tightened the fracture above the wound with poultices, and bandaged it strongly, and did not allow the wound to breathe.
Then he abandoned him according to his despair. Afterwards, he left him for several days and ordered him not to loosen the bandage; and it remained thus until his leg became infected and his foot, and it led to ruin.
I was called in therefore to him: and I proceeded to loosen the bandage: and calmness followed, and he was freed from his pains.
But truly, the corruption had already taken hold in the limb: and I could not restrain it.
So therefore the corruption ceased to spread through the limb, until he died.
And I saw another doctor who pierced a malignant ulcer: and it became infected after days, until the evil of his condition was manifest to him and his lord.
What is, is that when it is a pure cancer from melancholic humor, then it is not suitable to be touched with iron at all, unless it is in a member that can tolerate it, so that the whole of it may be cut away.
And because of that, O sons, it is necessary for you to know that the operation with the hand is divided into two divisions: namely, an operation associated with salvation, and an operation in which there is danger in many dispositions.
And I have already excitedly pointed out in every place of this book, where an operation comes up, which is accompanied by terror and fear.
Therefore it is necessary for you to beware of that, and to dismiss it: so that you may not find a stupid way to speak about it, and to shame.
Take therefore the measure with solicitude and protection, and clothe your infirmities with facility and firmness, and walk in a better way leading to gratitude of God for salvation and laudable succession: and dismiss terrible difficulties of sanation: and lift your souls from that which makes you fear, so that hesitation may not creep over you in your faith and comfort.
For it is more remaining to your glory, and more sublime in this world, and finally to your quantities.
For Galen indeed has already said in certain of his admonitions. Do not heal the bad disease: lest you be named a bad doctor.
Now, however, I have divided this Treatise into three Chapters.
First Chapter.
On Cauterization with fire and Cauterization with acute medicine, chaptered and ordered from head to feet, and the forms of instruments, and the tools of Cauterization: and all that is necessary in the operation.
Second Chapter.
On incision and perforation, bloodletting and venesection, and wounds: and the extraction of arrowheads, and similar things: and all chaptered, ordered in forms of instruments.
The third chapter.
About restoration and dislocation, and the treatment of twisting, and similar things to that: a chapter, arranged from head to feet, and the forms of instruments.
But before I recall the operation with it, it is necessary that I describe the quality of its cauterizations and burnings: and in what complexions they are exhibited.
I say therefore, that the discourse on the quality of cauterization and its burning is a profound and subtle science, a hidden and occult secret.
Many wise men have also spoken about it, and they have disagreed about it; and for me, a little of their discourses is enough, fearing prolixity.
I say therefore, that cauterization is universally beneficial to every complexion, which is with matter and without matter, except for two complexions, which are the hot complexion without matter and the dry complexion without matter.
But in the hot and dry complexions with matter, they disagreed. For some said that cauterization is beneficial in them. And others said the opposite, namely that cauterization is not suitable for the ailment which arises from heat and dryness: because the nature of fire is heat: and it is unsuitable to be healed from a hot and dry ailment with something hot and dry.
And he who spoke against him said: that through cauterization there is a remedy for every hot and dry ailment that occurs in the bodies of men: because when you compare the body of man and its humidity to the complexion of fire, you find the body of man to be cold.
And I certainly say this through his discourse: because from experimentation he has already revealed to me that same thing many times.
However, it is not suitable to proceed with that unless one has already been tested and exercised in the last chapter of Cauterii's exercise, and has recognized the diversity of human complexions, and the disposition of illnesses within themselves, and their causes, and their accidents, and the space of time of those things.
From the remaining complexions, there is no fear concerning you: and especially in cold and moist illnesses. For all physicians have agreed on these things: and they did not disagree with Cauterius in their judgment concerning them.
And you should know, son, that the secret of healing through Cauterium with fire and its goodness is superior to Cauterium with medicine combining to burn: because fire is simple, whose action does not reach, unless to the member that is cauterized: and it does not harm another member connected to it, except by a small injury.
On the other hand, the action of medicine combining to burn reaches to that which is extended from the members: and perhaps it causes difficulty in healing an illness in a member, and perhaps it kills.
Fire, however, because of its subtlety and the goodness of its substance, does not do that, unless it is in excess.
Now that has been known to us through experience, because of the length of service and study with art, and standing upon the truth of things: and because of that I excuse myself from the length of the sermon.
And if it were not so, because it is not permitted in this book of mine, I would bring to you the hidden secret in fire, and the quality of its operation in bodies for expelling their own illnesses, which drives out diseases through philosophical demonstration, which would be clear to your minds.
And you should know, son, that they themselves disagree on the time in which it is convenient to perform cauterization, and they set a better time for spring.
And I say that cauterization is suitable at all times; therefore, because the noxious thing which happens on account of the time is submerged in the inflammation, which is attracted with the cauterization. And especially if cauterization is due to pains from necessary painful things, strong, urgent, which do not tolerate delay: therefore because it is feared that a greater evil may occur, which is more than the small harm that enters on account of time.
And let not that fall into your minds, O sons, that which they do not expect, unless it is the common and foolish doctors, namely that those diseases which are healed by cauterization are not always cured: and they put that consequence, and the thing is not as they think: therefore because cauterization is not, unless in place of medicine, which alters the temperament, and dries out the humidities which are the causes, whence pains occur.
However, cauterization exceeds medicine by the speed of its healing, and the virtue of its operation, and the vehemence of its mastery: and it is possible that the disease may return at some time according to the temperament of the infirm person, and the location of their disease, and its virtue: and what is prepared in their body from the aggregation of superfluous things in it: and what reaches them in their acquisition from foods and similar things, unless there is a disease, in which cauterization is administered.
A subtle disease in a few members, with superfluity and humidity, such as cauterization of the tooth, on account of pain, and similar things, it is possible indeed, that the pain may not return to it. But it happens in a few cases.
But indeed the common speech is wrong, that cauterization is the last resort of medicine, it is a correct speech: not according to what they intend in that: because they believe that there is no cure which can be conferred with medicine, nor with another after the occasion of cauterization.
The thing is contrary to that intention, and the purpose, which is that cautery is the last resort of medicine, is not so, unless when we have administered modes of curation in some disease and they do not concur with those medicines: then we administer cautery at the end, and it is effective: therefore it falls out that cautery is the last resort of medicine, not according to the intention which the common people and many foolish doctors understand.
The ancients said that cautery with gold is better than cautery with iron: and they did not say this except because of the equality of gold and the subtlety of its substance: and they said that it does not produce pus at the site of the cautery. That is not absolutely true: because I have already tested it and found that it does not do so in certain bodies without others.
And cautery with gold itself is good, and better than with iron, as they said. However, when you ignite gold cautery in the fire, it is not declared to you, when it is ignited according to the quantity that you wish, because of the reddishness of the gold: and when it approaches the cold, and if you add ignition on top of it, it liquefies in the fire and turns into layers.
Therefore the craftsman falls away from that into occupation: and because of that, cautery with iron is more expedient and closer to us in terms of correctness for the operation.
And I have indeed already arranged this Chapter on Cautery according to chapters: and I have arranged those from head to feet, so that they may be of use to anyone seeking what they want from it.
Head 2.
Here cautery is beneficial for dominating humidity and coldness on the brain: which are two causes of swelling, and a multitude of fluxes of humors from the head to the parts of the eyes and ears, and a multitude of sleep, and toothache, and throat pain: and universally all diseases that occur from coldness, such as paralysis, and swelling, epilepsy, and apoplexy, and similar ones from diseases.
The method of cauterization is to prescribe for the weak: that he should be evacuated with a cleansing medicine on three or four nights, according to what the virtue of the weak person requires, and their age, and their habit.
Then instruct him to shave his head with a razor. Then have him sit between your hands in a square shape, so that he has already placed his hands on his chest.
Then place the root of your palm on the root of his nose between his eyes. Wherever your middle finger reaches, mark that place with a cautery.
Then apply the olive oil cautery: this is its form.
Then place it (the cautery) on the marked spot with the incision, by descent, where your hand is slowly constricted, and you turn it around. Then quickly lift your hand, and inspect the place.
If you see that it has already been detached from the bone of the head or the quantity of zeuharbi, then lift your hand. And if not, repeat with the iron itself, or with another from the same if it is frozen: until you see the bones, which I have told you.
Then take something from salt, and dissolve it in water, and soak the cotton in it, and place it on the spot: and leave it for three days.
Then place on top of it a cotton soaked in butter, and leave it on the spot until the eschar (scab) is destroyed by fire. Then treat it with the four-drug ointment, until it heals.
Now I have said, that as long as the wound remains open, it emits pus: therefore it is better and more useful.
And some of them have said that the skin should be cauterized up to the bone: and the cautery should be held until something of the density of the bone is touched.
Then scrape away what is adhering to the bone, then cleanse.
And others say that it is necessary to use a cautery to the utmost, until it makes an impression on the bone, so that the bone falls away, just as if it were carved: or with an instrument which women use in embroidering small letters; and they think that vapors are released from this place, and the wound is left open for a long time.
Then it should be cleansed, until it becomes consolidated.
But to me, these two types of cautery do not seem useful at all, except in certain men, according to the way of fear.
And to leave it alone is better, in my opinion, with regard to his own health.
For the head is debilitated by the solution of its natural continuity: as we have testified to in other members: and especially when the head of the weak person is naturally feeble: and indeed the first species of Cautery is safer and better, in my opinion, and I approve of it: therefore operate with it for health.
Head 3.
When a chronic pain occurs throughout the whole head: and it is prolonged in the weak person, and he uses hieric, and cochials, and head-purging, and oils, and emplasters. And especially if it has already been cauterized with one cautery, which we have described, and nothing among those things is of benefit to him: then consider. For if the head of the weak person is strong by natural creation, and it is not feeble, and it finds a violent cold: then cauterize with another cautery under that a little. Then cauterize it above every horn of his head with a cautery, so that the skin does not perforate, and a quantity is disclosed from the bone, as we have described. And you should cauterize him with one cautery on the back of his head, in the place called "vas", and it is the place where a vein is located. For the weak patient finds relief from that severe pain, and it differs from the pain of other head cauteries.
And I will say that this cautery is in its place, and it is necessary that it be a cautery with which the horns of the head are cauterized, and his back of the head is more subtly cauterized than the middle of the head.
Head 4.
When pain and swelling occur on the part of the head, or when the pain extends to the eye, and it is evacuated with cleansing remedies for the head, and the remaining treatment is administered, which I mentioned in the divisions of diseases, and that does not help at all: then cautery on it is according to two methods: either cautery with a sharp burning medicine, or with iron.
The cautery with a sharp burning medicine is that you take one garlic tooth, and scrape it, and remove the extremities from both sides. Then divide the painful area at the time of bleeding with a broad phlebotomy, until a place is made under the skin, where the density is captured.
So introduce it then under the skin, until it is hidden; then bind above it with a decent constriction poultice, and leave it for fifteen hours; then remove it, and extract the garlic, and leave it for two days or three. Afterwards, put on top of it a submersed cotum in butter, until the place makes pus; then treat it with ointment until it is healed.
And if you want to do that with certain burning medicines, which I wrote about in the twelfth treatise, on burning medicines.
But cauterization of it is with iron, and it is according to this method. Fire cauterization, whose form this is.
And it is named Clavulus; because the form of its head is like the form of a nail, in which there is a certain curvature, and in its middle there is a small prominence.
Then place it on the spot, and hold your hand firm; and you rotate the iron slowly with velocity: and let the quantity that is burned be from the thickness of the skin, as its middle. And lift your hand, so that the artery, which is underneath, is not burned, and a flow of blood occurs.
Then soak a cloth in salt water, and place it on the spot, and leave it for three days; then place the cloth with butter: afterwards treat with ointment until it heals.
And if you wish, cauterize this hemicania with the second cauterization of the razor's edge. And beware of cutting into the artery in this hemicania, not in the usual way.
On the method of cauterizing in ancient hemicania.
When you treat hemicania, with what we said from previous cures, and what we said in the divisions of illnesses, and the cure does not work: and you see from the illness that it is not sufficient for what we said from the first cauterization with medicine, or with cauterization with fire, then it is necessary to ignite the razor-like cauterium, until it becomes white after placing a sign on the spot of pain with a line, whose length is the middle of the finger, or almost so: and put your hand in place of one, and hold it firmly until you reach the artery, and pass through to the mouth.
However, it is necessary for you to beware of the continuation of the jawbone, which moves during mastication, lest the lateral or neural nerve that moves it be injured, whence a spasm may occur.
And this is above the cut, and beware of the flow of blood from the artery, which has been severed. For in the cutting of it there is fear, and especially for one who does not know what he is doing, and is not diligent, nor experienced: and he leaves the operation with that at the beginning.
And I will describe with remembrance of the regulation of the flow of blood that occurs from the artery according to its own method, and in its place in this book.
What if you see from the weakness, that this cauterization does not suffice for him, and you see the body of the sick person tolerating the cauterization in the middle of the head, as we have narrated, heal the wound, until it is healthy.
And if you wish, administer the cauterization that we have mentioned in the chapter on the extraction of the artery with a cauterizer having two cauteries. For cauterization is better and more beneficial.
On the method of cauterizing in the case of a gold-colored (or golden) ulcer.
When a golden ulcer occurs from cold, and it is treated with solutives, and the remaining cures which we mentioned in the division, and the pain does not disappear, then apply the cauterization: and it is that which is called a Punctum, whose shape is this.
Then apply the punctures with it after its ignition all around the circle of the ear, as it revolves: or around both circles, if there is pain simultaneously in both. And extend yourself with the cauterizer from the root of the ear for a short time, after you have marked the places with an encaustic: and let the quantity of the cauterization be ten punctures on each ear, and as it is.
Then treat the places that are ailing.
On the method of cauterizing in the torture.
Chapter 7.
A torture that is treated with cauterization is not except for those species which occur from phlegm, according to what we have said in the divisions of diseases.
And there is a need for cauterization of the species that occurs from desiccation and spasm of the nerve.
When you treat this species of torture with hiera, and caputpurgation, and gargarism, and your treatment does not help, then it is necessary to cauterize the affected part with three cauteries: one at the root of the ear, and a second a little below its own timpore, and a third at the junction of the two lips.
And apply your cauterization to the opposite part of the affected area. Since softening does not occur unless on a part that appears healthy.
And the form of cauterization is, to apply the cautery directly to the upper extremity of the ear under the crown of the head a little; and another on the timpore, whose length should be according to the length of the thumb. And place your hand with the cautery until a moderate amount of thickness of the skin is burned away.
And this is the form of the cautery, and it is a type from the scalpel, whose form has been described above: truly it is not more subtle than that, as you see; and it is necessary for the scalpel to be somewhat rough on the surface.
Then treat the places with what has preceded, until they are healed.
On the method of cauterizing in ancient Apoplexy.
When Apoplexy is chronic and you treat it with what we have said, and your medication does not help, and the patient does not have a fever, then cauterize him with four cauteries on all the horns of his head, and a cautery in the middle of his head, as we have said, and a cautery at the back of his head, according to what has preceded: and the method of the cautery should be according to what has preceded.
They also cauterize with a branding iron on the stomach bone, and it is almost the last resort.
Then they are cured, as if what had preceded did not exist.
Chapter 9.
It is fitting that they should be given a drink first to the greatly infirm hysteria patients, and purging pills that cleanse the brain.
Then scrape the whole head of the patient, and apply to his occiput a plaster made from synapic descriptions in the treatise on plasters; and apply it several times.
This indeed is the method of branding; and do that second thing in order, which I mentioned there.
If therefore they are healed through that, it is good. If not: then make for him three brandings on the back of his head, which should descend from the upper part of the head to the lower part of the eye; and apply a thickness of a finger between each branding.
Then heal the branding, as if what had preceded did not exist.
If however there is an additional use, and the patient is tolerant of that: then make for him a branding in the middle. Which if there is an additional use: then brand him on the two horns.
Then heal him, until he is cured: and let the branding be repeated according to the method which was previously mentioned.
Concerning the method of branding in paralysis and softening.
Chapter 10.
It is fitting to proceed with cleansing the head along with hysteria, and with what we have mentioned.
Then scrape the head of the patient; afterwards brand him with a branding iron in the middle of the head, and with a branding iron on each horn of the head, and with a branding iron on his back, and three on the vertebrae of the neck.
If however you find the patient in a state of softening of the body with many illnesses and he is weakened by tolerating them, and the illness is strong: then cauterize him with four cauteries on the vertebrae of the back, and finally with a cautery until it burns most of his skin, and lift your hand. Then treat him, until he is healed: and thus you will make the cautery of Olive oil.
On the method of cauterizing in Epilepsy.
One should not cauterize an epileptic, unless he is one whose epilepsy is from phlegm.
It is necessary therefore to cleanse his brain first with yawning, and with the rest of the treatment that we mentioned earlier: when he is greatly weakened or is tolerant of the reception of medicines.
If however he is a boy who does not tolerate medicines, then give him gargles and cleansing mastications of the brain, for many days beforehand with improvement of his food.
Then shave his head, afterwards cauterize him with one cautery on the middle of his head, according to what was previously mentioned in the method: and with another cautery on the back of his head, and on all the horn-like projections of his head with a cautery. What if he was strongly weakened and tolerant, then cauterize him with the cauteries that I mentioned as having a paralyzed part, and softening of the body on the vertebrae of the neck and back: and let the Olive oil cautery be according to the method that preceded.
If however he is a weakened boy, then apply a subtle cautery, according to this method.
On the method of cauterizing in Melancholy.
When the causes of melancholy are corrupted humors and thick phlegm, then cauterize him with the cauteries that I mentioned as having a paralyzed part.
And if the cause of melancholy is an excessive flow to the brain, and it is a humid body that is weakened, then give him in drink what purifies his brain, according to what was mentioned earlier in the division: next, shave the head of the weakened person, and afterwards make a compress made from linen, just like a circle.
Then put it in the middle of the head: and let the weakened person sitting squarely hold it on all sides.
Then apply the plaster. And it is better to use old butter or ancient oil. And warm it over a tempered fire, a heat that the finger can bear, when it is inserted into it. Then evacuate it in the middle of his head in a circle, and leave it until it cools down.
Do that to the weakened person every week once, along with the rest of his good regime, until he is healed.
Or if you wish, cauterize him by making many small points, except what you hold in your hand with the cautery: namely, let it be fragrant.
For this type of cautery humidifies the brain with its quality.
Then put on top a cloth soaked in butter, or the fat of a hen.
On the method of cautery in descending water to the eye.
Chapter 13.
When the principle of water in the eye is declared to you through signs, which I mentioned earlier in the division, then begin and give drink to the weakened person, with what purifies his head.
And keep him away from all humidities, and make him sit in a bath, on fasting days for some time.
Then instruct him to shave his head, and cauterize himself in the middle of his own head. Then cauterize him on two temples with two cauteries, if there is a descent of water in both eyes at the same time: or from one side, if there is a descent of water in one eye: and cut away with the cautery all the veins and arteries that are under the skin: and let the cauteries be long in width on the temples: and beware of a flux of blood.
If you see something coming out of it, then cut it off immediately with whatever medicine is possible; and I commend the wisdom that is in the extraction of arteries, and in the cutting off of them, and in caution against a flow of blood.
And when it is cauterized on the vertebra, under two bones, with two ultimate cauters produced by the two bones.
Concerning the method of cauterizing in old wounds of the Lacrimal.
When the tears of the eyes are old and frequent, and they are above the veins and arteries which are manifestly on the outside of the head, it is believed that it is due to superfluous cold and phlegmatic humors; then cauterize with a cauter that I described in the chapter on descending waters, with a cauter in the middle of the head, and with two cauters above the temples, and with two cauters on the vertebra under two bones. And if you need additional treatment, then cauterize it on every side of the eye, above the end of the eyebrow with a small cauter.
Concerning the method of cauterizing in the fetid Nose.
When you treat it with what we said earlier in the division, and the treatment does not help; then prepare a potion of three nights for the weak-bodied ones; afterwards shave their head, and cauterize it with a medium-sized cauter, together with an oily cauter. Then cauterize it with a hammer-shaped cauter, with two cauters above the eyebrows under the hair a little.
And be cautious of the artery, lest you wound it.
And this is the shape of the hammer-shaped cauter.
Concerning the method of cauterizing in the softening of the Eyelid.
When the eyelid of the eye becomes soft from sickness or moisture, then cauterize the eyelid with one cauter, together with this lunar-shaped cauter.
And if you wish, cauterize it above the two eyebrows slightly with two cauteries on every part; and they will be elongated from the two temples; and let the length of the entire cauterization be according to the length of the eyebrow; and do not extend your hand with the cauterization, but rather according to the quantity that is sufficient for the third eyelid.
On the method of cauterizing the eyelids when hairs are inserted, pricking painfully the eye.
The cauterization is in it according to two methods: either cauterization with fire, or cauterization with a burning medication.
In cauterization with fire, however, beware of the weak one beforehand, so that he may let go his hairs, if they are among those who cleanse them, until they grow long and become equal. If, however, they prick him at the corner of his eye: then bind his eyes with a cloth, so that they are not moved, until they heal.
When therefore they have healed and become equal, then place the head of the weak one on your lap: next, mark above the eyelids of his eyes with encaustic, a mark that is according to the shape of the myrtle leaf: and let the beginning of the mark be near the hairs.
Then place a cotton soaked in white egg; or in a mixture of psyllium on the eye.
Then make a fire-cautery, whose form is this.
Then cauterize above the shape that you marked gradually in many places, until the surface of the skin is burned, which is like the shape of the myrtle leaf, appearing entirely proper.
And the sign of the healthiness of your work is: that if you see the eyelid of the eye now contracted, and hairs lifted up at the point of the eye.
Raise your hand then, and leave it thus for three days.
Then put a cotton dressing with butter on it, until the scab is eradicated. Then treat it with an ointment, until it heals.
If something returns from the pills after an hour, and the eyelid becomes softer: then apply a cautery to that place, just as you did at first.
If the pills are on the lower eyelid: then cauterize it, until it returns to its natural place: and adjust it so that the hairs do not prick the eye.
It is necessary to prescribe for the patient that they let the hairs grow, until they are long and adjusted. Make a shape from a piece of paper in the form of a myrtle leaf.
Then take from a known soap, and from a lime which has not absorbed moisture, one ounce or nearly that amount: then mix them together with good friction, and do it quickly, so that it does not cool down. Then spread from the mixture upon the paper which you made in the shape of a myrtle leaf, and place it upon one eyelid or two. And place under the eye a cotton soaked in white egg; and let the patient's head be on your lap.
And put your index finger on the medicine, and press it for a short time. And you move it as often as the patient feels the biting of the medicine: because he finds its biting like fire.
While therefore it perseveres, that is, the patient finds the biting, then leave the medicine, and move it with your finger. When therefore the biting subsides, then remove the medicine, and wash the eye with water.
And consider then, if you see the eyelid being elevated, just as it is elevated with a contraction or with an incision, it is good: and if not, then apply medicine on top of it to the place where the medicine does not penetrate, and is not rejected, until your operation is equalized, and the eye is constricted.
Then put on top of it a poultice with butter, until the skin's burning heat is eradicated. Then treat it with a diaphenic ointment, or another, until it is healed.
And it is necessary for you to take care during the operation, so that you keep the last dressing, lest something from the medicine falls into the eye.
Since if the eyelid becomes soft after a few days, and something fights from the hair in the eye, then apply medicine to that place which becomes soft from the eyelid itself, just as you did at first. Then treat it, until it is healed.
And this is the form of a myrtle leaf.
And know that the eyes of men differ in size and smallness. Therefore your consideration should be according to that: and do not hide the way of rectitude from him who has a zeal for this art.
On the method of cauterizing in a tear duct fistula.
When you treat a fistula, with what we said in the divisions of diseases, and your treatment does not succeed: then it is necessary to cauterize it according to this method.
Instruct the patient to place their head on your lap, and let your assistant hold their head with their hands in such a way that it is not moved or agitated with their own head.
Then put a poultice infused with egg white or a mucilage of fleabane on their eye: then apply the cauterizing iron, whose form is this.
Here is the translation:
However, this concavity is better suited for your work.
Then express the fistula, if it is open, and extract the sanies from it, and cleanse it. And if it is not open, then open it, and extract its pus.
Then put a cauterium on it, which should be ignited strongly.
And hold your hand there for a short time near the cauterium, away from the eye, so that your hand does not stray or disturb the weakened person: and you should place the cauterium on the fat of the eye, and corrupt it.
If you thus penetrate to the beginning of your cauterization up to the bone, it will be well. And if not: then repeat the cauterization once or twice, if it is necessary for that: and leave it for three days.
Then put a dressing on with butter, and treat it with a cleansing ointment, until it heals.
If it should surpass forty days and does not heal: then put a sharp corrosive medicine on it, until the bone is exposed: and scrape it according to what is written in its chapter.
And there is another method of cauterizing a fistula, which some first authorities have spoken about. Direct yourself to the place of the fistula, and find it: then put a subtle cannula into the fissure, that is, a subtle canal, whose form is this. And pour into it a quantity of drachma from liquefied lead, and hold your hand with good cannula retention, and do not move the weakened person at all, so that it does not flow or penetrate to the eye with the liquefied lead.
And it is necessary to put on the eye of the weakened person a dressing infused with egg white, or in water.
For the lead indeed burns the place of the fistula, and heals it with a marvelous healing.
That which heals a fistula, together with what we have said concerning cauterization and treatment, is good. And if not, then it is necessary to administer the nasal passage and to reduce the fistula to its own proper course, according to what will come into its own place.
On the method of cauterizing in labial fissures.
Many times there occur in the labial fissures, which are called Pili, and especially in the lips of children.
When therefore you treat these fissures, with what we have said in the division of diseases, and treatment does not help, then apply a small cautery iron, according to this method.
And let it be concave according to the subtlety of the cautery iron.
Then place the ignited iron quickly in those fissures, until it reaches the deep part of the fissures.
Then treat it with a poultice, until it heals.
On the method of cauterizing in oral fistulas.
When an abscess occurs at the root of the gums, or in the palate, or at the roots of the teeth: then it produces pus and bursts forth; afterwards it becomes chronic and flows with pus, and a fistula forms: then you treat it, and if treatment does not help in this case, then it is necessary to apply a cautery iron according to its size, which will encompass the fistula. Then insert the ignited iron into the opening of the fistula, and hold your hand there until the ignited iron reaches the deep part of it and its end; do this once or twice.
Then treat it afterwards, with what we have said about treatment, until it is cured.
If therefore the unhealthy part is cut off and heals, it will be good. And if not, then it is necessary to uncover the place and remove the corrupted bone according to what appears on its surface.
On the method of cauterizing in Gums and softening teeth.
When the gums are softened due to moisture and the teeth move, and you have treated it with medicines and it does not improve, then put the head of the invalid on your lap.
Then prepare a cautery of fire, whose form will be described later, so that you place a small tube over the tooth; and insert the ignited cautery quickly; and hold your hand there for a short time, until the patient feels the heat of the fire having penetrated to the root of the tooth.
And lift your hand; then repeat the cautery several times, according to what is needed.
Then the patient should fill his mouth with salt water and hold it for one hour; and then spit it out.
For the loose tooth is stabilized, and the softened gum is tightened, and the corrupted moisture is dried up.
On the method of cauterizing for pain in the teeth.
When toothache is due to coldness, or there is coldness in it, or worms, and treatment with medicines does not help, then cauterization on it is according to two methods: either cauterization with butter, or cauterization with fire.
The cauterization with butter is done thus: you take clarified butter, and boil it in a copper or iron spoon. Then take the cloth, and wrap it around the extremity of the tooth. Then submerge it in the boiled butter; and place it quickly on the aching tooth, and hold it until it cools down; then repeat it several times, until the strength of the fire reaches the root of the tooth.
And if you wish, submerge the lance, or a piece of butter in cold water, and place it on the aching tooth; and place fiery iron on top of it, until the fire penetrates to the depth of the tooth's concavity.
However, cauterization with fire is, so that you may direct it through a copper tube, or an iron tube. And let there be something of thickness in his body, so that the keenness of the fire does not penetrate to the weak mouth.
Then make a fiery cauterization, whose form will be thus; and place it on the tooth; and hold your hand, until the cauterization is cooled.
Do that several times, for pain is relieved, either on the same day, or another day.
And it is necessary to apply pressure with that cauterization, so that the weak mouth is filled with good butter, and hold it for one hour; then spit it out.
And this is the form of the Cautery.
Cauterize with whatever extremity you wish, according to what is possible; and this is the form of the Tube.
Concerning the method of cauterizing in Scabs.
When Scabs are from phlegm, and from cold humidities, and do not obey digestion through medicines, and you wish to hasten their digestion: then make a fiery cauterization, whose form is this.
Have two open extremities, so that smoke may exit from the cauterization through the other extremity: and place it ignited on the aposteme once, and a second time, if it is necessary, until it penetrates to the depth of the aposteme.
If the aposteme is small: then place the cauterization according to the size of the aposteme.
Then leave it for three days, and place on it a piece of cloth soaked in butter, until what the fire has burned is removed.
Then treat it with a toothpaste, until the form of a cannula is healthy.
You should cauterize in a circular motion on the ulcer, and constrict the anus.
When humidity settles above the pulmonary canal, and especially when it is with a cold complexion, then it is necessary that the weak person be evacuated first with dissolved medicines.
Then cauterize it in the nocturnal region at the root of the throat in a depressed place: and take care, lest you penetrate too deeply with the cautery to the throat, nor in the skin, unless some part of it.
Then cauterize it with another cautery at the junction of the neck in its last vertebra, and let the cautery be a small nail according to the method that has gone before.
Then treat it with what has gone before, until it is healthy.
You should cauterize in a way of relieving the difficulties of the Lungs, and Cough.
When Cough and difficulty of the Lungs are from cold humidities, and the weak person does not have fever, nor phthisis, and the difficulty is old: then cauterize it with two cauteries above the furcula in depressed, gentle, and empty places. And with another cautery in the middle of the chest between the two breasts: and let the cautery be a cannula according to the form that has gone before.
And if you wish to cauterize with a point, puncturing with the cautery, which is called a Point, whose form has gone before in the punctuation of ear pain: and let the points be from thirty points almost to others.
Then treat it with what has gone before, until it is healthy.
And now let the cautery have three branches: according to this form. Because it is alleviated with that cautery, when you make one of three Cauteries with it.
Chapter 27.
When the head of the arm bone is dislocated due to humid causes and does not return to its place in the hour of its reduction from the dislocation, unless it becomes accustomed to its return, then it is dislocated by a small movement, which happens as we have already testified, therefore it is necessary to reduce the dislocation at first. Then the weak (patient) should be placed on his back or on his healthy side. Then elevate the skin which is on the inside of the shoulder joint upwards with the fingers of your left hand: and if the joint is dislocated inwards.
Then hold a cautery iron having two points. Its form is this.
Then cauterize the skin until it penetrates to the other side, and there will be a figure of cauterization with four cauteries.
And when the cauterization is done with a cautery having three points, there will be a figure of cauterization then of six cauteries: and they are points according to the subtlety of the tension.
And this is the form of the cautery having three points.
And when one is added in this way, there are eight cauteries.
Then place porous pomegranate seeds burnt with salt on the cautery. Then have the patient adhere to stillness, so that the limb is not moved for some time, until it becomes comfortable.
And if the dislocation is upwards, and this rarely happens, then cauterize it on the humerus with a cautery of multiple points, or with many punctures.
For the joint is strengthened, and moisture is removed: and the patient is healed.
About the method of cauterizing the Stomach.
When there is cold and much humidity in the stomach, so that they extract it from its composition, and multiply the fluxes to it, and frequent methods of treatment do not help: then it is necessary for the patient to lie on his back, and stretch out his legs, and his hands. Then cauterize with three cauteries, a cautery under the nipple of the chest in the amount of one finger, and two cauteries below from the two sides of one cautery, until a triangular shape of the cauteries is formed. And stretch out between both, so that they do not touch each other, when they make pus.
And let the depth of the cautery be a quantity of two thirds of the thickness of the skin.
And let the figure of the cauteries be according to this form without addition: and if you wish to cauterize with a large cautery in the middle of the stomach according to this form: and let the cautery that makes this cautery be one according to the figure of a circle according to this form.
And the stomach is cauterized by pricking it with points that are terrified by this cautery: and it is, as you mark on the stomach a point according to the quantity that you wish with encaustro: then cauterize it with the cautery of the point: then cure it with the treatment that preceded until it is healed.
Concerning the method of cauterizing a cold liver.
When there is pain in the liver from cold and humidity, or from thick flatulence, so that it departs from its natural composition and excessive superfluity, and the patient is treated with what we have said, and does not benefit from it: then it is necessary for the patient to lie on his couch, and be marked with encaustro three cauteries according to this figure, and in the same quantity below the liver from the hypochondries, where the elbow of a man reaches: and let there be space between each cautery according to the thickness of a finger: and let the cautery be according to the length of the straight body: and do not press your hand too much with the cautery.
And let the amount of it that is affected by the thickness of the skin be moderate, not added to its middle; and let it stand weakly on its feet.
If it is not standing, then let it be lying down, which has already stretched out its legs and lifted up its arms.
This is the form of a cautery.
And it is certainly possible for you to cauterize with this cautery and a knife cautery, when there is subtlety and prudence in the art.
And beware, lest you proceed too far in the cauterization, and the thickness of the entire skin is affected, because the entire body is affected, and it reaches the internal organs: for the skin there is subtle, so know that.
On the method of cauterizing apostemes of the liver.
When there is an ulceration, and you wish to know if the aposteme is in the flesh of the liver or in its membrane: then if it is in the flesh of the liver, it induces a dull pain and heaviness without sharpness: and if it is in the membrane of the liver, it is accompanied by sharp and intense pain: and you see already that it has wearied out the physicians with its treatment.
It is necessary therefore that the weak person rests on his pillow. Then apply a figure to the place of the aposteme with an enamel: then ignite a cautery that is similar to a radius. And this is its form. And cauterize with that one cautery until the entire skin is burned, and it reaches the siphac, until all the sanies are evacuated: then take care to cure the ulcerations, until it is healed.
And it is not fitting that this type of cautery be used, unless one's study in the art of medicine is prolonged: and through whose hand these diseases converge with experience many times: then indeed he dares to undertake an operation of this kind.
And I do not want to abandon it, for in my opinion it is better.
On the method of cauterizing in the Lungs.
The ancients have said that a cautery with the roots of Aristolochia is to be applied to a cold pleurisy in this manner. And it is, that you should take from the dry roots of Aristolochia a root, one longer, which is found in them, and it should be as thick as a finger. Then submerge it in oil, and set it on fire. Then cauterize with one cautery at the point which is between the junction of the shoulder-blade and the neck, and with two small cauteries under the guiding ridges on the lower part, which is beneath the beard.
And with two cauteries also at the point which is between the fifth and sixth ribs sloping backward, and with one cautery in the middle of the chest, and another above the stomach. And with three cauteries on the back: one at the point which is between the two shoulder-blades, and with two cauteries on the two sides of the chest, the lower cautery being between the two shoulder-blades.
And it is not necessary to press your hand with the cautery, but rather let it be on the open skin, emitting a fragrance.
And already some of the ancients have said that there are those who use a cautery made from iron like a file: and they set it on fire, and insert it between the ribs, until they reach with it to the aposteme itself, and the sanies flow out: as we described in the case of Epatis' aposteme.
But in this perforation with a cautery, there is fear that either the weak patient will die immediately, or a fistula will occur in that place, which has no cure.
On the method of cauterizing the Spleen Chapter 32.
When you treat an illness of the spleen, with what we have said about the treatment of illnesses in the division on illnesses, and your treatment does not succeed, then cauterization is secondary according to three methods, all of which are correct.
One of them is that you make three or four linear cauterizations along the length of the spleen according to the figure of the cauteries of the liver, whose figure precedes.
And let there be between every cauterization an amount of thickness equal to a finger's width, or a little more.
And let the method of cauterization be the one we mentioned in the cauterization of the liver, equally.
And do not press your hand with the cauterization; and let the patient lie down on his back, relaxed.
And another method of cauterization is: to have a cautery iron with two olive-shaped ends, which we mentioned in the chapter on dislocation of the shoulder; and elevate the skin that is directly over the spleen, where the patient's left elbow reaches; and let your elevation be such that you elevate the skin according to the width of the body, so that the cauterizations fall along the length of the body.
Then introduce the two olive-shaped heated ends, until they penetrate the skin on the other side; then withdraw the cautery iron: thus four cauterizations are made.
And if you want to cauterize with a cautery iron having three olive-shaped ends.
Then take care to apply the cautery iron after you have released it, to allow pus to flow out for many days; for it is more beneficial than all the other things that have preceded in the treatment.
Concerning the method of cauterizing in cases of dropsy.
A cautery iron does not fall on a case of dropsy, unless the asclites are properly prepared.
When you treat a case of dropsy with the methods of treatment that we mentioned in the division, and your treatment does not succeed, then it is necessary to cauterize him with four cauteries around the navel, and one cautery above the stomach, and another above the liver, and one above the spleen, and two behind the back between the vertebrae, and one directly on the chest, and another directly on the stomach: and let the depth of the cautery be close to the thickness of the skin.
Then apply a open cautery, so that it may emit pus for a long time.
And do not evacuate the weak patient from the treatment after the cautery with it, because it is necessary that two intentions are added to him; and he will be restored to health with the help of God.
The form of the cautery with which the belly is cauterized should be circular: according to the form it precedes; and that with which the back is cauterized should be olive-shaped according to the form it precedes.
Concerning the method of cauterizing the feet and legs.
When they are affected with hydrops and filled with citrine water: it is necessary to cauterize on the upper part of the foot at night, which is between the ankle-bone and the ring-finger; and lift your hand with the cautery, and do not twist it; then lift your hand, and do not repeat it at all.
For the citrine water flows back, and the cautery should be according to this form.
Then make two cauteries on each leg, and let the cautery be with the extremity of the knife-like cautery; and let the cautery be according to the length of the leg, one below the knee, and another lower than it, around the middle of the leg; and above each hip two cauteries; and apply an open cautery without treatment for a long time: so that some water may flow out from it; then treat it with the remaining things which we have said.
Concerning the method of cauterizing in cases of abdominal abscesses.
Chapter 35.
When there is an abscess of the belly due to cold and humidity, until it debilitates the retentive and digestive virtues, which are in the stomach and intestines; and it is treated with modes of treatment, but not healed; and you see a weak patient tolerant of a cautery of overflowing virtue, then cauterize him with a large cautery on his belly, according to what precedes in cauterizing the stomach with a circular cautery, and four subtle cauteries around the navel, with a subtle clave-like cautery; and a cautery above the abdomen above the groin, or with two cauteries.
And if you see excessive moistness and the patient tolerates it badly, then cauterize it with a cautery on the pubic region, and cauterize every limb; and perhaps apply two small cauteries to the stomach near the navel.
It is indeed a profitable treatment, whose benefit does not fail.
On the method of cauterizing hemorrhoids.
Chapter 36.
When there are many old hemorrhoids in the anus, or one, and they are from gross, cold, or corrupted humidities, and are treated with what we said in the division, but the treatment does not help: then cauterize with three cauteries on the lower vertebra of the back under the anklebone for a short time triangularly, and cauterize under the navel almost two fingers' breadth.
And if you think that his stomach is chilled, and his food is not digested, and you see his face to be affected, then cauterize him on the stomach with a large cautery, according to what has been said before: and cauterize on his liver, and another on his spleen, with a cautery of the vein: and leave the cautery open for some time: then treat him until he is healed.
Chapter 37.
When you excise an ulcer, then apply a cautery that is similar to a rod. Then introduce the ignited cautery into the excised ulcer: and with your last hand, until the cautery reaches the opening of the vein, from which the blood flows: do it once or twice.
If therefore there are many ulcers, then cauterize each one with a cautery according to what we have narrated. Then treat them with what is beneficial to them from ointments, until they are healed.
And if you cauterize him with a large cautery on the shoulder blade, it is more useful in the healing process.
On the method of cauterizing a fistula in the anus.
Chapter 38.
When the patient does not obey the treatment and operation that we have described in its proper place, and is terrified by it, perhaps he may be healed with a cautery.
When therefore a fistula occurs to someone, and it becomes chronic, pus flows out of it, and the corrupted moisture is drained. It is more worthy therefore that which ought to be done, so that you may probe it with a subtle probe. Then recognize the quantity of its depth with the probe.
Then apply a cautery, which is similar to a red-hot iron. Then introduce the ignited cautery itself into the fistula and the quantity where the nail went in.
And repeat over it the cautery, until all the corrupted bodies are burned away, once, or twice, or three times, according to the quantity of your necessary treatment.
And beware of adhesion to the nerve, if it is there, or large veins; or if the fistula reaches to the bladder body, or to the intestinal body, then beware of all these places.
And do not do that, unless the fistula is in a fleshy place; and think that it does not penetrate.
Then care for the place until it is healed.
If, however, the place is sealed off, and the materials are cut off from it, and it remains thus for a long time: then know that it is now fully healed.
And if the materials do not cut off from it, then know that it is penetrating, or there is a corrupted opening deep within it, or something similar to those things: whose reminder will come in its own place.
On the method of cauterizing Kidneys.
When pain occurs in the kidneys due to cold or gross flatulence, and it is diminished because of that weakened condition, then it is necessary to apply cautery on the loins over the kidneys, with a cautery iron over each kidney, whose previous mention should be recalled.
And perhaps we should cauterize him again a second time in that same loin. Because three lines are drawn. Therefore they will be more effective in the treatment.
On the method of cauterizing the bladder.
When weakness occurs in the bladder due to cold and humidity, so that the weak person does not retain urine, then cauterize it in the lower part of the back above the bladder, where the hairs of the pubic area begin, and with a cautery iron on the right side of the back, and another on the left side: and let the length of that cautery mark be according to the size of the knuckle of the thumb; and cauterize it with a lower dorsal cautery iron, or with two cautery irons if it is necessary: and let it be according to what was previously mentioned about the clavicular cautery.
On the method of cauterizing the womb.
When cold and humidity occur in the womb, and it is prevented from conceiving through that, and its menses are corrupted, and their provocation is delayed, and pain occurs to her at the time of their arrival, then it is necessary to cauterize with three cauteries around the navel, as we said in the cauterization of the bladder, and with a cautery iron on the lower back, or with two cauteries: and let the clavicular cautery be applied.
On the method of cauterizing a dislocated limb.
When moisture is poured out onto the mucous membrane of the limb, and they are the cause of its exit from its place: and the sign of this is that one leg is longer than the other when compared to each other; and the location of the dislocation is found empty.
It is necessary therefore that you cauterize the weak area above the anchae with a similar circle of cautery to its own anchor; after you have marked it out with encaustic in the circumference of the anchae, as it revolves: and so that the very anchae falls in the middle of the circle.
What if this cautery is not present to you, then cauterize it with three cauteries, with a large olive-shaped cautery: and let the depth of the cautery be according to the quantity of the thickness of the entire skin.
Then treat it, until it is healed.
Concerning the method of cautering for sciatica.
When pain occurs in the anchae and its causes are cold and humidity: and the weak area is treated with what we mentioned earlier, but the treatment does not help and it worsens: then it is necessary to free the weak area from gross humors with foul-smelling pills or with artificial pills, and similar things. Then cauterize it.
And the method of cautery in this is according to two modes: either cautery with medicines that adhere, or cautery with fire.
Cautery with fire is according to many modes.
One of which is to cauterize above the anchae itself with three triangular cauteries, according to this shape. And make them a good or bad depth. And let the space that is between all the cauteries be of the quantity of the thickness of a finger: and let the cautery be olive-shaped.
When, however, the cautery is made in the middle above the head of the anchae itself. Because there are four cauteries.
And if you wish to cauterize with a circle, whose shape precedes in the cauteration of the dislocation of the anchae, one: so that it is a circle containing the entire anchae.
And burn the thickness of the whole skin.
This is the method of cautery for sciatica, when the pain adheres to the hip itself and does not extend as far as the thigh.
If it extends as far as the hip and thigh, then cauterize it with two cauteries on the hip, above the place where the pain has settled, in which there is pain, and apply your cautery four finger-widths towards the Sylvan part for a short time: and let the cautery be gentle.
And let the depth of the cautery be according to the depth of the thickness of the skin.
What if the pain settles where it extends almost to the toes of the foot, then cauterize it there where it settles with a point cautery, three, or four, or more, if it needs it.
And if the pain settles beneath the knee towards the thigh, then cauterize it there with a single gentle cautery.
And beware in all your cauteries that you do not ultimately burn with the cautery to the point of destroying a nerve or a large artery, and attract through it above the afflicted bad and harmful contraction.
And indeed I have already seen one or another among those who have cauterized above the thigh and ultimately destroyed it in the cautery, and the thigh became inflamed, until a tumor followed to the foot, and the whole foot was perforated and corrupted: then there occurred a loosening of the intestine, and death afterwards.
What if the pain is in both parts at the same time, cauterize each according to this method.
And certain wise men have said that in the cautery of the hip, whose mode is this cautery. Make a similar iron instrument whose diameter is half a palm: and let it be at its orifice according to the thickness of the core of the finger, or a little less: and within that instrument let there be a third instrument.
And let there be a space that is between the entire forearm by the quantity of the node of the thumb; and let the bones be open from two parts; and let their height be like a node, or two nodes; and make for them a handle from iron, fitted to the bones with precision.
Then it is heated in the fire until it becomes red-hot and shoots out sparks; then it should be placed on a pillow or cushion, resting on the healthy side. Cauterize him therefore with three rounded cauteries at once in one vein.
Then leave it alone for three days. Afterwards, apply a plaster with butter; and leave the wound open for many days. Then treat it with an ointment until it heals.
Albucasis said, "We have used this type of cautery, the son of, only a little, because of the terror of its appearance; and therefore, we found few who would dare to rely on it.
However, it is one of the good cauteries for those who endure it, and finds a place with it.
The cautery, however, is with medicinally attracting properties, so that you make two bones having a perforated armlet, in which descends the hinge of its gate from copper or iron, with a length equal to the wall: whose height should be two nodes, or as if they were themselves.
And let there be a space that is between the quantities of the thickness of the finger, and let them be open above and below; and let it be what contains itself together, according to this form.
Then place it on a pillow or cushion, resting on the healthy side. And press your hand firmly on the pillow or cushion. Then pour between two circles of hot water, which has been warmed with fire for a short time, and hold it for the quantity of an hour's duration: and let the patient tolerate its biting sensation and his own burning, for he finds the biting sensation as if from fire, until the biting subsides.
Then cleanse your hand with a instrument and wash off the warm water from the entire arm along with sweet water; then wait for three days.
And put butter on it, until the blackness of the burn is removed; and wait for a few days, and clean out the pus from it. For it is the last stage in the healing process.
Then treat it with ointments, until it heals.
If the pain extends to the hip or leg, make him a bath of water in which he can sit, just as you did for the arm, equally.
And this is the method of warm water; and I have already written about it in the treatise on medical rectifications. Take alkaline and non-extinguished lime, one part of each; grind both, and put them in a new pot, the lower part of which has a small hole perforated according to the quantity that will receive the radius; and place another pot underneath, empty and clean: and pour over the alkaline and lime sweet water, which submerges both by a finger's width: after which you compress it with your hand, using good pressure: and leave the pot until the sharp water descends to the lower part of the clean pot.
Then collect all that water, and pour it over another lime; and strain, until it is renewed.
For it will then be very strong and sharp, which is administered in many medical operations, and in the cauterization of remaining limbs. Because it performs the operation of fire itself.
And they are among the medicines, with which arms are cauterized, also like thesis, and honey of ana cardium, and chalk with soap, so that both may be thoroughly mixed.
And Galen indeed related that a certain man from ancient times was cured of his sciatica pain and arm pain; and he magnified its effectiveness as very strong. And he said that there is no need for another treatment, and that he was healed from one ulcer, since he had returned, because perhaps he himself had even delayed taking a bath, and he got out of it already healed.
And it is, that a green plaster should be applied from galena: and if there is no green, let it be dried, fresh; and let it be ground into many small particles with some fat, and placed on the affected area, where there is pain, or in the leg, or in the hip: and let it be tied, and left for three hours, or for as long as the patient feels relief from the burning of the inflammation. Then introduce him to a bath.
When therefore his body becomes porous, introduce him to the sun. For the pain recedes, and he is healed.
And know that it is not fitting to use any cautery with these medicines, unless after the evacuation of the body.
And Dioscorides, who said that the dung of goats, when with it a sciatic vein is cauterized, helps him; and a cautery is made according to this method. Let a piece of wool be dried, and soaked in old oil, and placed on the deep spot, which is between the thumb of the foot and the ankle, and is closer to the ankle.
Then take dry goat dung, and set it on fire, until it becomes a charcoal.
Then place it on the wool, and leave it, until it is extinguished. Then repeat that. Do not cease to do that, until the sensation reaches from the middle of the ankle, and the pain subsides.
And this method of cautery is called Cautery of Goat's Dung.
On the cauterization of pain in the back.
When pain occurs in the back from many causes, either from a fall, or a blow, or an excessive evacuation, and similar things, from the infusion of cold and humid matter: and indeed cautery does not fail, unless in this one species alone, which is made from the infusion of cold matter.
Therefore, after evacuating the patient with foul suppurations and similar things, so that three lines are made along the width of the affected area, where the pain is, on the back, afterwards marking with a cautery on each line five burn points, or more according to the quantity that comes from the tolerance of the patient's virtue; and let the cauterization be done with cauterized points.
And if you wish, cauterize with three cauterizations or four, with a medial cautery of the spine, according to this form.
On the method of cauterizing on the curvature of gibbosity.
This affliction often happens to small children.
And the sign of its curvature in children is that it happens to them with a constriction in the breathing at the time of elevation, and movement; and you find it in the last vertebra of the back and its nodes, which are already beginning to curve over the remaining vertebrae.
When you see that and want to do it, then cauterize it with a cautery that is a circle according to this form.
And let the cautery take hold equally over every part of the vertebrae; and if you want to cauterize around the vertebrae with a point-cautery two lines, or three; and let the points be close together.
Then treat the place until it is healed with what we have said.
And beware, lest you administer the cautery on the gibbosity, which becomes a spasm of the nerve.
On the method of cauterizing for Gout and joint pains.
When the joint pains are from cold humidities that flow to whatever member of the body, then when the pains occur in the feet, it is customary for doctors to call that Gout properly.
Since therefore a cold gout is treated with modes of treatment and pains do not recede, then burning away removes them.
And it is, that he should be burned with many burns around the joints of the foot after evacuation, and let the burning be with olive oil.
And if you notice points on the surface of the foot, then make them with a burning point. What if pains ascend to the knees or remaining joints, and it often happens that, then burn them above every knee with three burns, or four from every part, with the same burning iron of Clauili.
If however more are needed for you with this burning iron, then burn it. And do not immerse your hand with the burning iron, but rather let it be around the thickness of the skin only.
If however pains ascend to the knees and back: then administer what we said about burning iron in its chapter.
What if pains are only in the hands, then make points around the joints of the fingers, as two lines revolve.
If however there remains pain in the fingers, then make points on them, above every node a point, and above the palm of the hand.
If however pains ascend after days to the elbows or to the shoulders, then burn both from every part.
And do not evacuate the weak from good regimen, from reception of medicines. For if a good regimen is made, and the phlegm is evacuated, it will be healed with the help of God through this burning iron.
On the method of burning in Hernias.
When a hernia occurs in the groin, and the intestine descends, or a cyst to the testicle, and it is beginning to approach nearby: then it is necessary to advise the weak to dismiss congestion on its own day. And let it be touched gently, so that pus may descend from his belly.
Then sit between your hands on his back: and order him to hold his breath, until it goes out, or a bubbling noise appears, or the intestine.
Then reduce it with your fingers, and mark it with a hot iron under the rupture over the bone of the chest, with a mark whose extremity is similar to the middle of a circle at the upper part of the body.
Then apply a cautery, whose shape is this, until it produces white (matter), and throws out small particles. Then reduce the intestine, or the bubbling noise to its concavity. Then the assistant should place his hand on the spot, so that the intestine does not protrude: and you have now opened between the thighs of the patient, and placed a cushion under him, and one servant is above his thighs, and another above his chest who holds the hands.
Then apply the cautery to that spot, with your hand standing upright straight with the cautery. And hold it, until you join the bone: or try with it another time, if you have not succeeded with it at first until reaching the bone.
And wisely observe from the exit of the intestine at the time of your cautery, lest you burn it, and it happens to the patient through that, or death, or great evil.
And know that when you do not succeed with the cautery in reaching the bone, your operation is of no use.
And it is necessary that the cautery be subtle and fine, according to their measurement.
Then take care with the remaining ointments, until he is healed.
And let the patient lie on his back for forty days, until the wound is sealed.
And it is necessary to put his nourishment in proportion to the length of time of his cure, which soothes his belly: so that the intestine does not protrude during effort and straining.
Then when you wish to operate after forty days, then administer a ligature made in the center, and hold it for forty more days.
And he should be relieved from labor, and replenished with food and drink, and avoided from vehement voices.
For when he uses this regimen, then he will be healed with a complete healing.
And I will describe the treatment of hernias with an incision in its chapter.
When however hernias occur in the rest of the belly, and are beginning, and it seems as if they do not increase, then cauterize that hernia with a round cautery according to its quantity: and let that which is touched from then on be like a third of it. Then treat him, as we have said: and it will not increase.
And already some of the first ones have said: that the hernia should be cauterized with a triangular cautery, according to this form.
After it is marked with an encaustic, and a line is placed which is across the width on the upper side of the hernia, and another line below. And place your hand in the middle with a cautery in the shape of a nail.
But the first cautery is easier and better.
Concerning the method of cauterizing in pains due to a fall or blow.
Chapter 48.
When pain occurs in certain members from a fall or blow, and the pain persists for a long time, and is not helped by medical treatment: then it is necessary to cauterize with a puncturing cautery.
And let the cautery be of each member a cautery according to its magnitude, and its own smallness, and weakness, and its own virtue, and the location of the twisting, and pain from it.
If therefore he is healed by the first cautery, it is good. If not, then apply a cautery to it.
Since it is customary to transfer these pains from the member to that which approaches it. Therefore, it is necessary to treat them with a cautery until the injured part is healed.
On the method of cauterizing in Leprosy.
But leprosy patients are sometimes helped by a cautery with the greatest benefit. And especially the type of leprosy that occurs due to the putrefaction of phlegm and melancholy; therefore, one should carefully consider the use of cauterization for it.
If the leprosy is incurable and you have treated it with what we mentioned in the division, and it does not recede, nor does it stand still; and meanwhile the disease comprehends a corruption over the entire complexion of the patient: then cauterize him on the head with five cauteries: one on the crown of the head, and a second below it towards the forehead at the end of the hair, and two on both horns, and one behind on the nucha of the neck.
And finally, apply your hand with the cautery for a short time, until it makes a small impression on the mouth, and the cortices are dislocated from it: so that the exhalation of gross vapors is alleviated from it, and cauterize also with the cautery over the spleen, according to what has been mentioned beforehand.
But if the leprosy has already spread over the patient and appears manifestly, then it is necessary to cauterize with these cauteries, which we mentioned on the head, and with a cautery on the extremity of the nose, and with two cauteries on both jaws, and with two cauteries on the vertebrae of the neck, and six on the vertebrae of the back, and one large one on the lumbar region near the end of the spine, and one above it, in that same place: and with two on the thighs; namely, one on each thigh, and with two on the knees, one on each knee, and with two on the elbows, and with two on the wrists, and with two on the tenderness of his chest: and cauterize him on every joint, from the joints of his fingers and toes, and cauterize on every heel of his feet, and on the palms of his hands.
And be careful not to cut the nerves that are above the heel bone, so as not to injure them.
And when you cauterize with a caustic on the bone of the pubes, and another on the bone of the stomach, and another on the liver.
And know that the more you add caustic, it is a greater harm, and less beneficial.
And know that the weak person does not find pain in the caustic, as the healthy ones do: therefore, because his body is already numb.
And it is necessary that the caustics be of a size, and smallness, according to the members and joints: according to what precedes from the types of iron instruments.
Then treat the caustic with a powder made from the herb with honey, and other treatments, until it is healed.
On the method of cauterizing on the stupefaction.
When a member is numb and is treated with medicines, and oils, and plasters, and is not healed, then cauterize the numb member with caustics, according to what the size of the member deserves, or its smallness.
And let your caustic penetrate to a moderate depth into the skin's thickness. Then treat it with an ointment, until it is healed.
And when cauterization is done for a certain numbness that occurs in the hand and foot, in the vertebrae of the back near the exit of the nerves that move that member: and the numbness is removed.
However, it does not succeed except for one who is knowledgeable in the anatomy of members and the exit of moving nerves of the body.
Chapter 51.
When an ulcer is ancient and does not benefit from any ingenuity of medicine: then cauterize over it with a deep caustic, according to the quantity of skin thickness, until the whiteness is removed, and its color is changed.
Then treat it with the meal of the herb, and gentle with rose oil, and leaves of arnoglossa, and blood of pigeon, and blood of hyrundine: let each be a single part: mix all these together, and apply them to a cloth, and adhere to the place until it heals.
On the method of cauterizing in cancer.
When cancer is beginning and you want to stop it: then cauterize it with a circular cautery around its circumference, as it revolves.
The wise men have said that it should be cauterized with the last cautery in the middle.
But it does not seem so to me, for I fear that it would ulcerate; and I have already seen that many times.
And it is better to cauterize around its circumference with a circle, as we said; or with multiple cauterizations.
On the method of cauterizing in Anchylosis.
When someone has Anchylosis and it is delayed in maturation, either because of excessive superfluous matter causing it, or because of the weakness of old age, when there is a scarcity of blood, or because of the time, and you want to hasten its maturation, then cauterize around its circumference with many small points of multiple cauteries. Then leave it alone. For it will hasten its maturation itself.
If you want to make a perforation in it with a cautery, then ignite the cautery, whose shape is this.
And place it in the middle of the Anchylosis, until it penetrates the skin: and let the cautery be from that which follows, so that the flow of pure humors may be alleviated.
Then treat it until it heals.
On the method of cauterizing in corroding ulcer.
Head 54.
Gangrene is not except a corruption in a walking limb, and it consumes the same: just as fire devours dry wood.
If therefore you see gangrene in a place that can tolerate cautery with fire, then apply multiple small and large cauteries with fire, according to what is convenient for the place where the gangrene is.
Then cauterize it from every side until you eradicate the entire corruption, and none of it remains deeply.
Then leave it for three days, and put on the cauterized place sulfur rubbed with oil, until all scabs are eradicated, and all corruption.
Then treat it with ointments that generate flesh.
If therefore you see that after three days healthy flesh is born, in which there is no corruption, it is good.
And if not: then repeat the cautery on what remains of the corrupted places.
And gangrene is treated occasionally with sharp medicine. That very thing [gangrene] surges up at the place of the cautery.
However, cautery with fire is a very swift remedy; and I have already said that cautery of it [gangrene] with sharp medicine is in the division; therefore take it there when you need it.
On the method of cautery for wounds and abscesses.
Head 55.
It often happens that this disease occurs in the lower parts of the feet: and it is a thick, filthy discharge that hurts the foot.
And indeed, cautery for them is according to two methods: cautery with fire, and cautery with hot water.
As for the cautery with fire, it is like a hollow cauterizing iron similar to a bird's feather, which is made from iron, according to the quantity that holds the nail on every side; and let its edge be subtle.
Then put it ignited upon the nail. Then revolve the hand with a cautery in a circle around the nail, until the cautery reaches the depth of the nail: and leave it there for three days, until it begins to emit pus. Then apply a poultice made with bad willow twigs, mixed with salt: and leave the poultice on it overnight. It itself will be eradicated from its roots.
Then treat the place with a salve that generates flesh, until it heals.
What if they are not converted, and often occur on the surface of the body, especially on the hands and feet: then administer to them a cautery with hot water: and it is, that you should receive a tube made from copper, or iron, or from a vulture's quill: and put it upon the nail, or the joint. Then pour into the tube a small amount of hot water: hold your hand, and you revolve it with pressure from your hand for a short time, so that the mark of the tube is impressed on the root of the nail, and the hot water finds its way to the depth, to the root of the nail: and wait for a short while above the biting of the hot water for one hour.
Then leave it, for the nail is eradicated with its roots.
Do thus with each one after another, until you come to all those that are on the body because of them.
Then treat them afterwards when they are eradicated, with that which generates flesh from ointments.
Concerning the method of cauterizing in cases of trembling.
When trembling occurs to someone from cold in the nerve, or from quartan fever, or from something else: then it is necessary to cauterize him with four cauteries, or five on the vertebrae of his back, and between each vertebra a cautery, and on his chest a cautery, and above his stomach a cautery.
For tremors are quieted with a warm cautery, and a healthy recovery is hastened from a cold disease.
On the method of cauterizing by Albathir.
Chapter 57.
When foul things are expelled from the body by Albathir's method, that is, pustules, which are caused by rotten and corrupted materials.
It is necessary, therefore, first of all, when they appear, to cauterize on the whole head with a subtle cautery made of myrtle wood, whose extremity has been set on fire. Or with the root of long aristolochia. Or with a lenticular cautery.
And when they are cauterized to the point of their own expulsion, at the beginning of their expulsion in this way: and they do not increase: and the excess is dispersed, making them healthy, and they are healed from them.
However, it is necessary that it be done after evacuation with bloodletting.
On the method of cauterizing in the flow of blood from an artery in a vein.
It often happens that there is a flow of blood from an artery, which has been cut near the vein, which occurs externally, or at the incision of an abscess, or a cautery of a limb, and similar things: and it becomes difficult to stop it.
When it happens to someone in this way, then hasten with your hand to the orifice of the artery, and place your index finger on it: and press it firmly, until the blood is stopped under your finger, and nothing comes out from it.
Then place small olivary cauteries on the fire, and many more in great number: and blow on them until they are well-ignited.
Then take one of them, or a small one, or a large one, according to the vein and place where the artery is disrupted, and apply the cautery to that vein, after which you quickly remove your finger: and hold the cautery until the blood is stopped.
What if it is expelled with elevated fingers from the orifice of the artery, and you extinguish the cautery, then take another cautery, one that has been prepared in the fire.
Therefore, do not stop doing it with one after the other, until the blood is staunched.
And beware, lest you burn the nerve that is there, and another malicious disease is added to the injured place.
And know that when blood flows from the artery, then it is not possible to staunch it, especially when the artery is large, unless with one of four methods. Or with a cautery, as we have said. Or with extraction, when it is not extracted. For when it is extracted, the extremities of the artery contract, and the blood is staunched. Or it may be tied with a strong ligature thread. Or medications of special property are applied to it, which staunch the blood, and are bound with a decent poultice constricting tightly.
Whoever administers the staunching of it with a ligature, and constriction with a cloth, or application of burning things, and similar things, does not benefit him thoroughly, unless rarely.
If it happens to someone in that way, and there is no present doctor, nor medicine: then let him begin with the application of his index finger on the orifice of the vein itself, as we have narrated, and constriction of it strongly, until the blood is stopped from the upper part of the wound, and above the artery. And the finger is not removed, but rather it remains on it with very cold water of extreme cold, until the blood congeals, and thickens, and is staunched.
And meanwhile, let him consider in that, what he needs from a cautery, or from medicine.
On Incision, Perforation, and Bloodletting for Wounds, and Similar Things.
I will discuss in the First Chapter all the kinds of illnesses for which it is suitable to use fire cautery and burning medicine, and their applications, their causes, and their instruments, and the forms of cauteries.
And I have placed chapters from the head to the foot.
And I will proceed in this chapter by the same method, so that it may be alleviated from the questioning inquiry about it.
And before I begin that, it is necessary for you to learn, my sons, what is in this chapter, because it arises from the fear of that which is in the first chapter about cautery.
And because of that, it is necessary to be more cautious, since in the operation which is in this chapter, often there is a collapse with bleeding, when life stands at the opening of a vein, or an incision over an abscess, or an opening of an exit, or a curing of a wound, or an extraction of an arrow, or an incision over a stone, and similar things; from all of which tremble, fear, and death occur in many of them.
And I warn you, lest it falls upon you that which is hesitation, for when they fall to you in this art of men with modes of infirmity. For there is one who becomes angry with his own illness, and death is light for him: because of the violence of that which he finds from his infirmity and the length of his evil. And with illness there is fear because it signifies death.
And there is one who gives his own treatment, and says to you with it, hoping for health, but his illness is pernicious.
Therefore, it is not necessary to consent to him who comes to you from those whose manner is such. And let our caution be greater than our desire and our own grasping avarice. And let us not presume upon anything from that, unless after certain knowledge, which verifies for us that thing to which a praiseworthy success has arrived.
And let us use prognosis and indication in the treatment of all our patients, for that which is most conducive to their health.
For it is a helper to you for the acquisition of fame and glory, and of memory and praise.
May God inspire you, O sons, with His intellect, and may He not withhold from you direction and inspiration; for that is in His hand.
And I have indeed arranged this chapter, distinguishing it by chapters, according to what preceded in the chapter of Cauterii, from the head to the feet: so that you may be relieved of what you wish to ask about, and what you need.
On the treatment of water that accumulates on the heads of children.
Head 1.
You should know that this illness often happens to children at birth: or when the midwife tightly grasps the child's head without gentleness.
And it also happens sometimes due to a hidden cause that is not known.
And I have indeed not seen this disease in others than in children: and to all whom I saw it was a hastening of death: therefore, for that reason, it seemed best to me to abandon the operation on them.
And I have indeed seen one of them, a child whose head was filled with water, and his head was greatly enlarged every day, until he could not sit up by himself, due to the greatness of his head: and the moisture increased until he died.
And this moisture indeed either accumulates between the skin and bone: or it accumulates beneath the bone on the surface.
And the operation in this case, if there is moisture between the skin and bone, and the abscess is small, then it is necessary to make an incision in the middle of the head in a transverse direction: and let the length of the incision be about two knots, until the moisture flows out.
And this is the form of a scalpel.
If therefore the moisture is greatly increased, and the abscess is larger, then make two incisions, according to this form.
And if the moisture is under the bone, and its sign is that you see the sutures of the head opened from every side; and the water is pressed out when you compress it with your hand towards the interior, and it does not hide from you: then it is necessary to make three incisions in the middle of the head, according to this method.
And after the incision, extract all the moisture. Then close the incisions with bandages and poultices. Then apply a compress of wine and oil above it until the fifth day.
Then remove the bandage, and treat the wound with tents and ointments.
And do not forget to bind the head with equal pressure. And give the patient food that is dry and of little humidity, until the member is comforted and healed.
And another method of incision is to consider where the greatness of the abscess appears, and the collection of water.
Since sometimes it is more in the back of the head, or in the forehead, or on the right, or on the left.
Therefore, ascend with the incision where you see the abscess and collection of water: and divide it according to what is possible for you.
And take care not to cut an artery, and a flow of blood may occur, and the patient may die from that flow with evacuation of moisture.
Concerning the incision of arteries which are behind the ears.
Chapter 2.
When there occurs a flow of humor to the eyes or to the chest, and it becomes chronic, and medical treatments do not help, then the last resort is surgery, namely the cutting of these two arteries.
It is necessary therefore, when you want to make an incision, that the weak head should be shaved. Then rub the place with a rough cloth, so that the arteries may appear. Then let the weak-necked one tighten his neck with any cloth of his own. Then consider where the vein pulses. And the places on both sides are those that are depressed behind the ears; and they are rarely hidden, unless in certain men.
Then mark with a hot iron on both sides; and make an incision on both sides with a three-edged scalpel, making the incision reach to the bone: and let it be done across the width of the head.
And if you wish, insert the scalpel under the artery, and cut it from above with an incision.
And let the length of the incision be about two fingers joined together.
For when the vein is cut, blood flows out with a pulsating discharge, which leaps inward with frequent jumps.
If, however, the artery does not appear to the senses, then it is necessary to measure from the ear a space of three fingers' width. Then mark with a hot iron, and make an incision up to the bone.
And what is necessary to emit from the blood is six ounces, or perhaps more or less will be emitted from it. All of that according to the quantity which appears to you from the strength of the weak man and the fullness of his artery.
Then consider the ulcer. Then if something remains on the bone from the suppuration, then cut that out, so that a hot abscess does not occur; then bind the ulcer with a linen bandage.
Then treat it with an ointment, until it heals.
On the extraction of arteries, which are in the temples.
Head 3.
When an old hemicrania affects a person, or acute catarrh due to acidic and salty humidities, and heat in the temples, or old soda, it is vehement and similar to those; and it is treated with the methods of medical curation, but it does not help: then we have resorted to extracting arteries from the temples, or cauterizing them, as we have narrated.
And the method of operating in extracting them is to shave off the weak hairs that are in the temples, and to direct it towards the apparent artery in the temple. It is itself shown to you from its pulse, and is rarely hidden except in a few people, or due to the weakness of cold.
If it is hidden from you, then let him bind his weak head with any cloth of his; afterwards, rub the place with a rough cloth. Or warm the place with hot water, until it appears to you in a clear manifestation. Then take the scalpel, which I formed a little while before. Then scrape off the skin with it easily, until you reach the artery. Then insert a hook into it, and draw it out upwards, until you have drawn it out of the skin, and make it emerge from the tunics that are beneath it on every side.
If the artery is subtle: then enfold it with the extremity of the hook. Then cut from it a part according to the quantity by which its extremities are lengthened and contracted, so that there is no flow of blood. For if it is not cut, and if it is not separated, the blood does not ascend deeply.
Then evacuate the blood from six to three ounces.
If the artery is large, then it is necessary to ligate it in two places with double thread, strongly, from silk or from Alhohod's cord, so that putrefaction does not occur before the consolidation of the wound and the flux of blood occurs.
Then incise the superfluity which is between the two ligaments. Do it at that hour, or after another hour.
And if you wish, cauterize it with a cautery iron up to the bone, with a cautery iron shaped like a knife: until the extremities of it are incised and it is stable in its place in the same operation.
And it is a better work, unless the patient has a fever, or is of a hot and dry temperament. Since cautery iron is one of those things that help to dispel humidity. Therefore it is a better remedy.
And it is necessary after the extraction of the arteries to fill the place with old cotton: and that soft poultices made with art should be applied over it.
And after the surgical treatment is finished with dry medicines that promote the growth of flesh, and with bandages, until it heals.
If during the operation a flux of blood occurs from the artery, then hasten to stop it with a cautery iron, or to fill the place with zegi: and bind your hand tightly, until the bleeding stops. If none of these is available to you at present, then put your finger on the place, until the blood congeals. And bathe the place with water of vehement coldness, until the acuteness subsides, and bind it according to what is necessary.
And from what is lighter and easier for the extraction of the artery, it is to cauterize the vein with this cautery iron having two blades: and let the acuteness be similar to that of two blades, like Almagdat's. However, they are much smaller and less sharp than two scalpels. Because if they are sharp, like the two scalpels, they would cause both cold and injury to the flesh with swiftness. Since therefore there is a certain amount of thickness in them, heat from the fire is retained in them, and the flesh is separated quickly; thus this method is better than any other operation, and easier, and more convenient.
And this is the form of the cautery.
And let there be a space that is the thickness of a finger between the two scalpels, after you have marked two places with ink; and apply both ignited (scalpels) strongly, until they reach the bone, and make an incision in the two places: so that what is between the extremities may be elongated. For they do not consolidate deeply with this cautery.
Chapter 4.
On the treatment of acute and chronic tears flowing from the eyes.
When there are chronic tears and the flow of them is from the veins which are on the outer surface of the skull; and no medical treatment with medicines is effective for them, and you see the face of the patient already red, and they feel a sensation of walking in their forehead, as if it were an army of ants: and their eyes are sunken, moist, so that the eyelashes have already been corroded by the corrosion; and their eyelids are hot from the acuteness of the tears: then the ancient (doctors) needed help for the treatment of these with this operation, and they called it "Ense" treatment.
And it is that you should warn the patient to shave the hairs that are on their forehead. Then make three equal distant incisions on the forehead along its length: and let the length of each incision be about two fingers, and one incision be equidistant from the nose in the middle of the forehead, and the second according to the length a little above the movement of the eyebrows, and the third on the other side: and beware of cutting the arteries that are on both sides: and extend your hand at the continuation of the two jawbones, and let there be a space of three fingers' width for the entire incision: and have ready a piece of dry sponge or many layers of dry cloth, with which you will dry the blood.
Then insert a spatula of two acute extremities, whose following shape is sequential. From the incision which is on the temporal part, up to the second incision: and excavate with it all the skin that is between the two incisions, together with the sifa, which is above the bone. Then do the same also from the middle incision up to the second incision. Then extract this spatula, and insert into the first incision again another instrument, which is called a sharp scalpel, having one side blunt, not sharp on the other side. And this is its shape.
And place its sharp side towards the flesh attached to the skin, and its blunt side towards the bone: and push it, until it reaches the middle fissure: and cut away with it all the vessels that descend from the head to the eyes: except what is contained in the incision up to what appears of the skin.
Then do the same in the middle fissure up to another fissure.
And after a equal amount of blood has flowed out, press on the place with pieces of coagulated blood.
Then put a linen cloth into every fissure, soaked in old wine, and put over them small cotton pads soaked in wine or oil, or vinegar. And see that there does not occur a hot aposteme.
And on the third day dissolve the ligature, and administer a plentiful infusion with lukewarm water. Then treat it with royal ointment, and the remaining remedies by which wounds are treated: until it heals.
Head 5.
Concerning the treatment of acute tears and catarrhs in the eyes from within the head.
When acute catarrhs occur, bitter, persistent: and you see the eyes of that person exhausted, small, and already their sight is weakened: and the eyelids are ulcerated, and hair falls out from them, and in the depths of the head there is sharp pain, annoying, and a consequent sneezing: then take from these accidents, that those materials and catarrhs do not come, unless from many veins.
And better treatment for them is this. And it is, as you should carefully shave the patient's forehead. Then make an incision in the middle of the forehead, or slightly to one side along the width, and start from a point on the left temple to the right temple; and let the incision be up to the bone: and extend your hand from the temples that move during mastication: until the bone is exposed: and dry up all the blood with a sponge.
Then separate between the two lips of the incision with a bandage of old cloth, or with a linen thread. Then sprinkle on top with powders: and moisten the powders with wine and oil, so that a hot abscess does not form.
And when you dissolve it, and you see that a hot abscess is already forming: then it is necessary to rub the bone, until flesh begins to grow on it.
Then treat it with a drying regimen that promotes flesh growth: as if you take two parts of wheat flour and four parts of rose oil, and prepare an ointment from them, and apply it to the birthplace of the flesh in these wounds.
Chapter 6.
Of the treatment of that which falls into the Golden (Ointment).
Everything that falls into the Golden (Ointment) is of one of four species: either a mineral stone, or similar to a stone, such as iron and copper; or it is from a plant, such as chickpea and beans; or it is a fluid substance, such as water, vinegar, and their likes; or it is something animal.
When therefore a stone falls into the Golden (Ointment), or a type of stone from those that do not combine with it, nor grow in the Golden, expose the Golden to the sun: if therefore you see a stone, then distill something into the Golden from violet oil or siuminum. Then administer the extraction, and make a sternutary with condiments, and apply soft linings at the approach of the sternutation, after you place a wrapping of cloth or wool around the ear, and extend the ear to the top.
For it often happens that he walks out with this treatment.
If however he does not walk out, then administer the extraction of it with gestures, that is, with subtle manipulations: whose form is this.
If therefore he walks out with gestures, it is good.
And if not, then administer the extraction of it with a subtle hook of little curvature.
If therefore he does not walk out through that, then make a cannula from copper, and introduce the extremity of the cannula into the ear hole as much as possible, and apply what is around the cannula with soft wool softened with oil, so that there may be no passage except through the cannula: then extract with your strong attraction.
For it often happens that he walks out with what we have described. If however he does not walk out in this way: then take from helkalimbat, or from uisco, that is, prepared glue, with which birds are caught, a small amount: and put it at the extremity of the radius after you have wrapped around it a well-placed cot; then introduce it into the ear hole with ease, after you have removed the ear from humidity.
If therefore he does not walk out with all that we have described, then hasten to dissect, before a hot abscess or spasms occur.
And the method of incision is, to make a small cut in the head at first, and then extract from him blood according to the measure of his strength. Then make the patient sit between your hands, and turn his ear to the top, and find a small incision at the root of the ear near its fatty part in the depressed place itself: and let the incision be a lunar shape, until you reach the bone: then remove it with what is possible for you from the instruments.
Then you should make an incision with your knife quickly and treat it, until it heals.
What if the thing that falls into the ear is from one of the grains that grow and become inflamed: then administer its extraction.
If it does not obey you at the outlet, then take a thin, subtle, and secondary spatula according to this form.
And administer with it an excision of that species from the grains that fall into the ear, and do not do that when you think that the grain has already been moistened by the vapor of the ear, until you place many rough things: then extract them with hooks, or with subtle gestures, or with suction, as we have said, for the extraction of those alleviates.
In the water that flows into the ear, it is necessary to use a gentle irrigation with condensation at first: and now fill your own ear with some old cotton: and it lies above the ear in which there is water. If then it flows out through that, it is good.
And if not: then take many small stones, according to the length of the finger, thin, smooth, and warm them with fire for a short time, and gently insert one of them into the ear canal: and let it slip out beneath its foot on that side, and strike with another stone upon the stone that is in the ear. Do not cease to do that with stone and stone until all the water flows out.
And now the water flows out thus, that you take from a small paper or from one reed, and insert one end into the ear: and heat the other end with fire, until it burns most of it. Then take another reed, and do that many times, until all the water flows out: and extract it with a tube according to what has been previously mentioned about the stone.
In the extraction of an animal entering into it, if it is a small body, such as a flea, and similar to it, treat it as I have described in the division.
But if it is a large body, which appears to the senses: then administer its extraction with gestures and hooks: and its removal is easier than all those that are held in a grasp.
In the extraction of a worm generated in the ear, when you treat it with what we have said in the division, and in the treatment of dislocations, and your cure does not succeed: then it is necessary to examine the ear in solitude. If therefore something appears there from the worms, then extract it with gestures or with subtle hooks.
If however something does not appear there, then take a cannula, whose form is this, narrow below, wide above: and introduce the subtle extremity into the ear according to the quantity that the weakened part can tolerate: then suck with strong suction. Do it many times, until all the worms come out.
If however they do not obey you to come out, then smear the area around the cannula with wax, as I said in the stone.
What if they do not come out with what I have said: then administer the distillations that have been tried by the ancients in the infection of worms: and you will find it in the treatment of dislocations.
And let your pouring be with which you pour oils and medicines into the ear with this instrument, whose form is depicted here. As you see, make it of silver or copper, narrow below, wide above, with a small hole, and a large opening.
Let it be so that the thing which is propelled into the concavity of the cannula, let it be made from copper, properly fashioned. And if you wish, take the rod, and wrap a cotton thread around its extremity with decent wrapping: then pour oil or juice, or what you wish from those medicines into the cannula: and let it be in the ear: then insert the rod with the cotton thread above, and express it by hand with tempered compression, until the oil is propelled into the concavity of the hearing, and the weakened part feels it inside: and what is poured into the ear should already be warmed up with a small fire: and beware lest there be a thing that is distilled in it coldly: for medicines do not tolerate that.
Chapter 7.
About the treatment of an accidental wound of the ear.
Sometimes certain infants are born from their mothers' wombs unperforated.
And it has already happened that some men have had a perforation in the middle of their ear from a wound or flesh born in it.
And this perforation sometimes occurs deep within the ear canal, which does not impair vision; and sometimes it occurs at the outer part of the ear canal, and then it impairs vision.
Therefore, that which occurs deep within the ear, and which is not perceived by sight, is in many cases difficult to cure.
And in that which impairs vision, you should place the ear of the patient in a sunny spot and gaze into it; then if you see an apparent perforation, open it with a subtle spatula whose shape is this: its extremity should have a small width, one part of which should be acute; and the rest of the spatula should be smooth on both sides, so as not to harm the ear.
If therefore the perforation is from flesh born in the middle of the ear, then hold it with a subtle hook, and cut into it with gentle violence, until all the flesh is removed.
If the perforation is deep within the ear, then take a subtle rod, smooth and warm it over a small flame; then insert it into the middle of the ear.
If therefore you feel the perforation with it, which the patient has found with difficulty of hearing, try to open it gently; and beware, lest you wound the nerve of the ear.
Then put into the ear a small amount of linen according to the size of the ear canal, which you had wrapped in Egyptian unguent; do this for several days, until you are secure about the consolidation of the wound.
Or take linen, and soak it in rose water, and sprinkle powdered zeolite over it, and use it thus.
If you see that the abscess has become apostemated, then it is necessary to extract the pus, and allow it to flow out with another licinium, which you have made with rose oil, until the warm apostema settles; then treat it until it heals.
But if a flow of blood happens, then submerge a sponge or cloth in cold water and place it on the abscess; and use the remaining treatment which separates the flow of blood, as described in the treatise on distillation.
On the treatment of eyelids with Althel.
Chapter 8.
These are the Althel that occur on the eyelids when they are moist and become dry.
It is necessary therefore to hold them with tweezers or with a hook, and to cut them off from their roots with a spatula. Then apply powdered zegi on the places.
If blood flows from them, then cauterize them with a fine, lentil-shaped cautery.
And to cauterize them is better after the incision. For they often return when something remains from their roots. And when they are cauterized with fire, those roots are burned, and they do not return.
On the treatment of pustules on the eyelids of the eye.
Chapter 9.
It often happens on the eyelids that something occurs which resembles a pustule in its strength and hardness, and because of this it is called a Grandum; and it is an accumulation of thick moisture on the upper eyelid and lower eyelid.
The operation for them is, therefore, to consider then, if it is a Grandum that proceeds from the eyelid, which appears on the eyelid and moves to every part, and its treatment is easy.
Make a longitudinal incision above it along the width. Then scrape it from every part as easily as possible, until you reach. Then lift it with a hook, and cut it off.
If the cutting off of it is not prepared for you, unless after you have penetrated the eyelid with a short incision, then it will hurt the patient in some way.
If the wound is large: then bring it together with a suture: and care for it, until it heals.
And if it is small, no harm will come to you from it. For the ointment restores it, and flesh grows over it.
And if the perforation is sloping inward toward the inner surface of the ear, then invert the eyelid, and lift the perforation with a hook: besides what you need for the incision, and press it from every part.
For if the eyelid is lengthened through the incision, it will not hurt in any way.
Then wash the eye after the incision of the perforation with salty water: and care for the place with that which grows flesh, until the patient is healed.
On the treatment of eyelids.
Chapter 10.
Axirnath is a thickening that forms on the upper eyelids: and it mostly happens to children: and it weighs down their eyes, and they have morning discharge, and they cannot gaze at the light of the sun, because tears flow to them, and because of this they are seen to lie with their faces always bent downwards, and they sleep with their eyelids beneath their humid eyebrows, which have already been infected by inflammation: and indeed Axirnath appears obvious to the eye, and when you press on the place with your fingers, you feel Axirnath among them.
And the method of operating on it is that the patient puts his head in your lap.
Then take a linen cloth and prepare on it the threads, and make from that thread a second circle according to the quantity contained by the instrument from every part. Then place it upon it, and press with your fingers on every part, so that the instrument is gathered together in the middle of the circle.
Then find in the midst of that humidity with a spatula incident on the fissures across the width, and let there not be a greater fissure than that which is made in deep phlebotomy.
Or it is necessary to make a complete incision, until you reach the instrument in many arrangements, for the instrument proceeds from the fissure according to the form of the white albuminous crust.
Extract it then with the cloth, which you had placed between your fingers to the exterior; and you turn your hand to the right and left, until it is dispersed: and beware, lest you touch the fissure, so that you do not reach with the spatula to the eye, and harm it.
If however the instrument does not appear to you at the beginning of the fissure, you should add a little to the fissure with ease, until the instrument proceeds. Then extract it, as we have said.
Then soak the cloths in vinegar and water, and place them over the area, and bind it with poultices.
And there are those who rub salt, and place it in the concavity of the fissure, so that it liquefies what remains from that humidity.
Then treat it, until it is healed.
If however a warm aposteme occurs at the spot, then treat it with cooling plasters, until it is healed.
Concerning the methods of Ataxmir for the eye, that is, when the eyelid becomes soft and enervated, so that it becomes rough as it should not.
Chapter XI.
When hairs grow in the eyelids beyond their natural course under the natural lashes, and become entrenched: then they harm the eye, and bring about modes of illness, such as constant tears, and softening of the eyelids, and a white opacity, until it becomes a cause of destruction to the eye.
And Ataxmir indeed cures the eye according to four modes. Or by cauterization with fire. Or with acute medicine, according to what has been mentioned in the chapter on cauterization. Or Ataxmir cures by incision and suture. Or by tubes, according to what I shall say.
It is necessary that you put the head of the patient on your lap. Then turn back the eyelid of the eye with your left hand.
If it is thus turned back, it is good. And if not: introduce a needle into it, where the thread is from the lower part of the eyelid, and make the needle penetrate with the thread above, and let it be near the hairs themselves, that is, near the edge of the eyelid, where the hairs grow: and pull the thread upwards with the eyelid, and turn it back with a straight line.
Then find on the inner part of the eyelid, under the hairs that have grown, with a spatula inserted from the greater lacrimal to the lesser lacrimal.
Then extract the thread, and place under the eyelid a small poultice made of cotton or cloth: then mark on the eyelid with ink, which should be in the shape of a myrtle leaf.
However, it is necessary that the figure be according to the size and elevation of the eyelid: because already it varies in humans.
For there are some who need to have a large quantity excised from the eyelid, according to the quantity that is softened by the eyelid.
Then, when you find the spatula resting on two lines which you have marked, and begin at the larger lacrimal duct up to the smaller one, and let there be a single fissure near the natural hairs, just like the thickness of a radius.
Then introduce a hook into one of the two angles of the skin. Then excise the entire thing. Then bring together with a suture the two lips, with sharp needle and fine thread of wool: and cleanse the blood, and make adhere what is superfluous from the threads above the eyebrows, with certain things that are not visible, if you want to do it: and if not, do not worry.
Then leave the suture and threads until three days, or four: afterwards take care of it.
And if you wish, leave the wound without a suture, and take care of it with that which dries and constricts. For the eyelid is elevated at the sign of the wound and its aggregation: but the future is better.
The ancient ones taught this method of healing, attributed to Ataxmir.
However, there is concern about the weak patient, and it is from good operation, and there is no fear in it.
And another method is also from Ataxmir: and it is, that you mark on the eyelid a shape, which should be like the shape of a myrtle leaf, as we have narrated.
Then elevate the eyelid with three separate or aggregated hooks, according to this shape that follows, then cut away what is superfluous with small forceps, according to this shape, with equality of incision.
But if it is not possible for you to hold the hook, and it does not equal that: then take a needle in which there is a thread, and insert it in the middle of the shape: and insert one thread near the larger lacrimal duct, and another thread near the smaller one: and bring together the threads between your fingers with equality.
Then elevate your hand in elevation equal to it: and elevate the skin above which is marked with a scar, as we have narrated.
Then bring together the two lips of the wound with a suture: and take care of it, until it heals.
If indeed an abscess occurs at your incision, or your fissure: but treat that abscess with a poultice, and similar things, from soothing ointments.
And when it happens to the eyelids as well, so that their hairs may be turned away.
It is necessary therefore that you use what we have said about the incision: but the suture of both is more artificial. On the treatment of Ataxmir with canes.
And it is, that you turn away the eyelid, and sew up the fissure which is within, according to what I have narrated. Then skillfully make two canes, or two subtle wooden rods: whose length is according to the length of the eyelid, and their width is less than the width of the spatula: and you have already made an incision at the extremities of both, from which you hold threads.
Then bring together each one with subtlety above what is overflowing from the eyelid of the eye, and tie two canes from both parts with a strong binding, and leave it for some days. For the skin will be tightly constricted, and will blacken, and will putrefy, until it falls off by itself.
If it is thus delayed, then cut it away with forceps. Then treat it, until it heals.
When it is thus consolidated, the eyelid is elevated: and the hairs do not prick.
And this is the form of two canes, which you make according to this figure, and quantity in length and width.
Head 12.
On elevating pricking hairs in the eye with a needle.
The operation is to take a subtle needle and insert into it a thread of fine silk, thin. Then you should join the extremities together, and make knots on both sides with a subtle knot, and let the length of the threads be one palm.
Then you should insert another subtle thread underneath in a short space, and tie together the extremities if it is necessary.
Then the patient should place his head on your lap, and it should be near a window so that the operation can be illuminated: because this is a subtle operation, or minute.
Then you should insert the needle with the thread into the root of the eyelash, and make it penetrate the eyelid firmly, until you extract it above the natural hair.
Then draw out the hair up to the thread; and insert into the thread that hair: if it is one, or two, or three, no more.
Then draw your hand with it, until the hair emerges with the thread in the eyelid with the natural hair.
If, however, the thread is drawn and the hair does not emerge with it: draw the thread downwards, with the filament that you composed in it, until the thread emerges from the superior opening, and you will see it with the vision of the eye: then indeed draw the thread, and the filament: and extract both, and close the eye: and keep it closed for two days, or three, until the hair adheres to its place, and flesh grows over it.
If the hair is short, then either associate with it a long hair from the natural hairs, and elevate it with that: or leave it, until it elongates after a space, and then elevate it.
Head 13.
When this occurs in the eye, it is called a cataract.
And this cataract is either innate or accidental.
The accidental one occurs therefore from the consolidation of a wound, or a cut, or a burn, and similar things.
And the method of operating on it is that you make a consolidation, and separate its lips, and place between them a lint made of linen, and bind it, until it heals.
And it is not suitable to use in the treatment of it things that dry and constrict; for if you do that, the cataract will return worse than it was. Instead, use in its treatment things that soften, such as fenugreek; and boil it in water in which there is marshmallow root, flaxseed: and anoint with a liquid unguent, which has been liquefied with some oil: and wrap with a lint, and take care of it.
And the treasure of your treatment is that you strive with all ingenuity, so that it does not consolidate, according to the form it had at first.
And indeed this operation which we have described is not anything but a certain rectification of the cataract, so that the form of the place does not return to what it was entirely.
About the treatment of a cataract that occurs in the lower eyelid, and is a wrinkling or contraction upwards to the right and left.
Chapter 13.
This cataract that occurs below is truly called a cataract. And it is innate, and it is accidental.
And the accidental one occurs from a wound, or a crack, or a burn, and similar things.
And the method of operating on it is that you take a needle, in which there is a double thread, and pierce the flesh, and make it penetrate from the left tear duct to the right tear duct, until the thread reaches both extremities of the flesh.
Then stretch the flesh upwards with a hook and make an incision with a broad spatula. If then the shape of the eyelid returns according to what is fitting, it is good.
And if not, take a rod, and place it in the fissure, and turn the eyelid with it: and find two fissures on the inner side of the eyelid, and let the extremities of the two fissures be from two angles of the incision, until they converge and form an angle: until when they are gathered together, this figure is formed, and it is a praised Greek letter.
Then remove that flesh in quantity, which is the sharp side below, from what follows the eyelid. Then gather the separated parts: sew them together with a thread of wool.
Then treat them with what we have said, with softening medications and bandages, until they heal.
And if a fracture occurs from the incision and suture, or cautery: then it is necessary to make a flat fissure under the hairs of the eyelids, also according to what has preceded. Then separate between the two lips with a bandage, according to what we have said.
And the summary of the treatment of Alxatrati, when it is above or below, is that it runs into this operation, according to what is prepared from the form of Alxatrati.
For it is indeed of many diverse forms: and the skilled artisan prepares their ingenuity with whatever method is possible for them, so that they may restore the figure to its natural form, or near to it, and themselves infirm, according to what is fitting for them from the operation and instruments in many dispositions.
Chapter 15.
Concerning the adhesion of the eyelid to the eye with the conjunctiva or cornea.
When this consolidation happens to many people, so that the upper eyelid is consolidated with the whiteness of the eye, and prevents it from its natural operations.
Therefore, you should introduce the extremity of the radius under the eyelid and elevate it upwards: or extend it with a hook. Then make an incision with a subtle spatula, which is not acute, but rather obtuse for a short distance: so that the patient is not disturbed during the operation, and the spatula is removed, and the eye is irritated by its acuteness. And let your incision be such that you cut away the adhesion with ease, until when the eyelid returns to its natural form, and the entire adhesion is healed.
Then pour salty water into the eye, with water washing it away: or distill into it a solution made from zinc oxide dissolved in water.
Then separate the eyelid from the eye with a thread of flax: and place on the eye a fleece soaked in egg whites: and after three days use a collyrium, and with consolidating remedies, until it is healed.
Concerning the incision of the nail and the prominent flesh of the tear-producing glands.
Chapter 16.
You should know that the nail is removed in two ways. Either it is nerveless: and it is similar to a hard, subtle callus. Or it is not nerveless, similar to a frozen white humidity: which when touched with iron, or hooked with a hook, becomes detached, and the hook does not stick into it.
And both types do not begin unless from the larger tear-producing gland, until it flows gradually, until it covers the sight, and prevents movement of the eye.
And the method of operating on it is: that the patient should place his head in your lap. Then open his eyes and elevate the eyelid with your hand. Then grasp the nail with a hook of little duplication, and extend it upwards. Then take a needle and insert it into the pilum made of horse or cow hair, or goat hair: and let the thread be strong, and double the extremity of theacus somewhat, and fix it in the middle of the nail: and pierce it with anacus, and tie it with a thread to the nail, and extend it upwards: and scrape away the pilum from the side of the nail that follows the pupil, as if you were to sew it with a pilum right up to its posterior.
Then cut the remainder at the root of the tear duct with a subtle spatula or small forceps: and let the natural flesh of the tear duct remain, so that the flow of tears is not hindered by the incision.
And when the nail is extended with a hook alone: or with a thread, as we have said. Then scrape away with a gentle spatula, whose shape is this.
And beware, lest the spatula touches the corneal tunic and causes a rupture there, and the pupil is perforated.
Then after the incision, apply to the eye some crushed salt or a concoction made from zinc, and let it remain there until another day. Then treat it with what is fitting until it is healed.
But if the nail is not nervy, and you cannot insert a needle into it, nor fix a hook in it, then this type of nail is often treated with medicines, and healed as I have described in the division.
But if you wish to cut it, then open the eye of the injured one, and take a subtle, gentle, weak and precise spatula, according to this shape. And shave the nail from above with subtlety. But if you see that it is rarefied and roughened, and an impression is made on it by the razor, then distill at that hour into the eye a concoction made from zinc, or from red copper, or from tritulated salt: and cover the eye until another day.
Then you should repeat the same operation, until everything is removed from it. Unless there is a contrary abscess in your eye, which is warm and inflamed: then indeed leave it, and treat the abscess, until it heals.
Then repeat the operation on it with scraping, until it heals.
The prominence of the eyelid flesh, if it harms the eye with great annoyance, should be suspended with a hook, and a part of it should be cut away: and not the last incision, so that the flow of tears does not occur.
Then apply a styptic to the eyelid if it is red, or made from zinc, until it heals.
On the incision of Al-Guardenzie, and flesh born in the eye.
Chapter 17.
There is born sometimes in certain eyes of men a red fleshy growth, either composite or superimposed, until it covers the pupil, or approaches, or presses on the eyelids, and perhaps turns them outward: and it resembles a rose-like excrescence.
And the operation for it is also such that he puts his weak head on your lap. Then open his eyes, and gather all that flesh together with suitable hooks convenient to it: and hold it with one forceps, or carry it.
Then cut the flesh at first, until everything is finished with an incision. And beware of the eye, so that you do not harm it during the operation: and let your incision be such as you make it with a spatumili, which we have described in the incision of the nail: or with small forceps, with which the asperity is collected, according to what form it takes after this chapter.
When therefore your incision is complete, and the entire Al-Guardenzie is removed, then fill the eye with a contrary poultice of salt: or distill into it a red powder, and similar things from corrosive medicines: and place over the eye a defensive cotton pad with albumen water: so that it may be secured from warm abscess.
If something remains from the surgery and warm blood dominates you, and a warm abscess is forming: then leave the eye alone, and treat it with what soothes the abscess.
Then repeat over it with the treatment, until it is healed.
And similarly do with the flesh that has grown in the eye from this type.
However, it is necessary to avoid alienating the weak curative power of the whole eye from its natural or accidental way, by operating with iron: and do not introduce your hand in any of these operations, until you see that the member is tolerant of that operation.
On collecting pus from the eye.
Chapter 18.
Pus is a red vein that forms on the eye and prevents the power of vision from operating, and it weakens the eye over time.
It is necessary for you, therefore, to consider first whether the eye in which there is pus is strong and does not have any illness except the pus: then collect its pus.
And it is, that you should advise the weak one to place their head on your lap.
Then suspend those veins with one hook, or two according to your prudence: and let the hook be subtle and double-layered, according to this form, or let there be two hooks graduated on one body, according to this form.
Then collect with subtle forceps those veins subtly, and absorb the blood hour after hour, until you see those veins being removed from the eye, and they resolve: and beware not to harm the eye with excessively sharp instruments.
And let your operation be at midday before the sun, and be firm in your operation indeed: so that you do not touch anything except those veins.
And when you have completed it, then distill into the eye a green or red [substance]: so that its sharpness corrodes what remains of the pus.
If you are not able to gather that whole thing at that hour, then apply a plaster to the eye with what soothes the pain of the eye; and leave it there for several days, until the pain is calmed; and let it be secured from an apostemic heat: then apply again in the same way, until it heals.
And this is the form of a scalpel.
On the Reduction of a Fracture of the Nose.
Chapter 19.
The doctor calls a fracture of the nose a fistula, which he treats with cauterization or with acute medication that burns, according to what has preceded in his narration.
And if it does not heal, then there is no cleverness in that; unless you place a poultice on the aposteme at its birthplace, and extract all the moisture that is in it and pus, until the bone is exposed.
When therefore the bone is exposed, and you see in it corruption or blackness, then scrape it with an instrument, whose form is this.
And it is called a rasp of the head.
Let it be made from iron, and let its head be round like a file, which is marked with the marking of a lime or the subtle marking of a scalpel; and put it on the corrupted place of the bone.
Then turn it around between your fingers, and press your hand for a while, until you know that the corruption has been scraped away; and do it several times.
Then restore the place with dry, stimulating medicines.
If therefore the place consolidates, and flesh grows in it, and the flow of blood is stopped: and it remains for forty days, and does not get worse, and does not become apostemic, and no accident happens to it: then you know that it has already healed.
And if not, then there is no cleverness in it, unless you reduce the fistula to the nostril, according to this form.
And it is, that you detach from the bone with a second iron, or with an acute medicine; and when the bone is detected, then take a second trephine of this form, whether it is an iron extremity, triangular: and its wood should be a pyramid extended to the extremity, as you see.
Then place that on the bone itself: and let it be near the tear-drop; and extend your hand a little from the eye. Then turn your hand with the trephine, until it penetrates the bone, and let it feel the weakness; for when it finds an exit from there, it will come out, when you hold your hand over your nose.
Therefore then restore the place with astringent medicines that dry, as I have instructed you.
When therefore flesh grows, and the place hardens: then the matter that flowed out to the exterior returns to the nose: it is therefore lighter on the weakness.
On the Reduction of a Prominence in the Eye.
Chapter 20.
When the eye protrudes with its entirety, and no harm occurs in the sight, nor diminution: then it is necessary to loosen the weakness; afterwards, phlebotomize it; next, apply cups to the nape of the neck without scarification, but with suction.
Then place on the eye an ointment that is made from acacia, and aloe, and olibanum, and sarcocolla. Then bind the eye above with a plaster containing many powders.
And the method of powders is: that you take many soft cloths, and each cloth should be doubled over four; make many from them; then place one on top of another, according to the quantity which the eye needs; then bind over them with a hard cloth, tightly fastened.
And apply cups again with suction without scarification.
Then apply poultices, and release the constricted eye by day and night.
If, however, the ligament is softened again, then it is necessary to constrict it much: then apply a poultice to the ligament by day and night, as we have said.
If, therefore, you see the eye already recovered to its own membrane, it is good: and if not, then try again a plaster, and poultices, and constrictions, and applications, until it is healed.
On the incision of the conjunctiva.
Chapter 21.
When a disruption occurs in the conjunctiva, then it protrudes and proceeds outside the eyelids like a grain of conjunctiva, and it is deformed into a human-like shape because of that, and it is necessary to cut into it: then the operation on it is, according to what I relate: and it is, as you introduce a needle in the root of the conjunctiva from the lower to the upper part.
Then introduce another needle where there is a double thread on the lacrimal side, and make it penetrate: and release the first needle according to its own arrangement.
Then cut the place of the double thread, and tie it with the conjunctiva around the circumference of the needle: and constrict it much.
Then withdraw the needle, and place a soaked linen cloth over the white of the eye: and leave it there, until the thread falls away with the conjunctiva.
Then treat the eye with what comforts it, until the wound is healed.
And when the conjunctiva is constricted from all sides with a circle of cloth, until the eye adds great prominence.
Then it should be perforated with a subtle spatula, which reaches the depth of the eye, and the humidity of the white part is drained, and the eye subsides, and it enters immediately: then constrict it, until it is healed.
About the treatment of a wound on the head.
Chapter 22.
This disease which is called Alcomnati is not, unless it be a flux, that gathers in the eye, like descending water, and it is not itself.
And the method of operating on it is to make the patient sit on a prepared or directed seat.
Then take his head with your two hands from both sides, and move it until you feel the flux coming down to the lower part of the eyes. Then it is pressed, and does not flow down, and the light is freed; and the patient sees things as he saw them before; and if it does not flow down below, you will know that it is water.
But if the flux of the discharge does not come down with what we have said, then make the patient sit between your hands. Then take a subtle sponge, and apply it above the cornual pannicle near the junction with the corneal tunic, until the discharge comes out.
When it comes out, then pour warm water into the eye, in which you have mixed honey; or water in which you have already boiled fenugreek and honey; then treat with the remaining treatment, until he is healed.
About the treatment of water that flows into the eye, or a cataract.
Chapter 23.
Now we have discussed the types of water in the division, and what is suitable for piercing, declaring and explaining it with a sermon, then take the same according to health.
Then it is necessary to make the patient sit between your hands, squarely facing the light, near a window; and bind his healthy eye, and tie it tightly; then touch the eyelid of his eye with your right hand, if the eye in which there is water is the left eye; or with your left hand, if it is the right eye.
Then take with your right hand the cotton, if the eye is left; or with your left hand, if the eye is right.
Then place the cotton near the crown through the thickness of the radius in the white part of the eye appearing as a small lachrymal lake; then push the cotton with force; and you will revolve with it your hand, until it penetrates into the whiteness of the eye: and you will feel that the cotton has now reached the empty space.
And it is necessary that the measure of the path of the cotton be to the depth, a measure of space which is from the pupil up to the end of the blackness; and this is the crown of the eye. You will see them in the same pupil of the vision of the eye, due to the clarity of the transparent corneal tunic.
Then put the cotton up to the place where there is water. Then press it downwards with one finger after another.
If therefore the water descends immediately, then the weak one sees that which appears above his sight immediately, and the cotton is in his eye.
Then rest a little while. If therefore the water descends, then put it down for a second, except that the cotton should come out.
When therefore it is fixed, and does not ascend: then extract the cotton with ease: and you will revolve your hand slowly.
Then dissolve something in water from a clear gem-like salt: and wash the eye within with it. Then put outside the whole eye a gauze, or a wool cloth soaked with rose oil, and of the whiteness of the eye: and bind it with a healthy eye.
We, however, and those who are of our time, put on top of it a layer of triturated cumin with the whiteness of the eye.
If the cotton does not obey you at the entrance into the eye due to its hardness, since it is from a man whose eye is very hard: then it is necessary that you take a spatula, which is called Alberid, of which this is the form.
Here is the translation:
Then introduce the scalpel, secondly as we have described.
And at the completion of your operation, prepare a comfortable bed for the weak patient, made in a dark room, where they can sleep on their back: and prohibit them from all movements, and from coughing: and give them food that soothes their nature: and let them not move their head to the right or left at all.
And let the dressing remain in place according to its own arrangement until the third day.
Then remove it in that dark room, and test its strength: and make him see things clearly. Then reduce the dressing until the seventh day.
And it is not suitable to do that at the time of cure, or immediately after the incision: on the contrary, it is necessary to delay it: because water ascends quickly through a violent aspect.
But if a hot aposteme occurs: then it is necessary to remove the dressing before the seventh day: and correct it with what soothes the aposteme, until it is soothed: then absolutely restore his sight, and place upon his face an oral application that regulates his sight under those days, while he remains in that dark room.
Then let him gradually go out of the room, and take exercise in his own quarters.
And know that in this matter the student is not exempt from seeing many times: then indeed he will be confident about the operation.
And now indeed it has come to us from some of those who are from Alayrach, who said that a perforated madan was made in Alayrach, which is pierced by water.
But truly I did not see anyone in your land who made it: nor did I read about it in any of the ancient books: and it is possible that it may be new.
And these are forms of species from madan, so that they stand upon those who ignore them.
Be made from a proper copper: and let their extremities be with the same subtlety triangular-shaped, and the extremities acute.
Head 24.
On the treatment of flesh born in the nose.
When various flesh growths are born in the nose, among which there is something that resembles a scorpion with many feet; and from them is cancerous flesh, stony, dark-colored; and from them is soft flesh, not dark-colored.
Therefore, among these fleshes that is soft, not deceitful, nor cancerous, you should make the weak sit between your hands, opposite to the ground, and open their nostrils, and insert a hook into those fleshes: then draw them outward, and cut what you have comprehended from them with a subtle, acute instrument on one side, until you know that the entire flesh has been removed.
If something remains of it, whose cutting away is not possible: then scrape that with one of the subtle instruments with ease, until nothing remains of it. If, however, blood dominates you, or a hot abscess occurs: then oppose it with what is necessary: or it is among the malignant abscesses, then prepare to cauterize it, until the blood is cut off and all the fleshes are removed.
Then let there be poured into the nose after the incision vinegar and water, or wine. If, however, the nose is opened and moisture proceeds from it up to the palate, then know that he is now healthy.
If, indeed, the moisture does not penetrate, according to what is necessary, then know that within it is a flesh born in the upper bones of the nose, which did not come forth with the incision of the instrument.
Then therefore it is necessary that you introduce a thread of linen with some thickness, and knot many knots on it; and place between each knot the quantity of a finger or less: and ingeniously make the weak one insert one end of the thread into the nose with a rod, or as much as possible after he has made something similar to a crook; and pull out his mucus until it reaches the cavity and comes out above his throat.
And many times, indeed, boys in schools make a similar thing to this atom; and it is an easy thing for him who wants.
Then place two extremities of a thread, one extremity which emerges above the nose, and another which remains in the nose. Then take a ministering or serving of flesh with knots that are in the thread. Do that until you know that the pieces of flesh are now with knots of the thread.
Then extract the thread; and put it in the nose after the blood has been purged away, with the licinium that you have imbibed in the Egyptian ointment; do that for three days or more, until the ointment corrodes away all that remains of the flesh.
Then put a small tube of lead in the nose at the end of the thing, for some days, until it is healed.
If however it needs a drying cure, use that.
To make a head-cleansing device, with which oils are distilled and other medicines are administered into the nose, make it from silver or copper: something like a small lamp, open like a shell: and its passage similarly.
And if you want to make a closed tube, like a reed.
And the shell-shaped instrument to be made for the head-cleansing device should be full and uncovered: which has a handle at its end, with which you hold it, when you heat oil in it, or whatever you want from juices and flowing liquids.
Chapter 25.
Many times an ulcer originates at the extremity of the nose and grows and increases with days until its appearance becomes foul.
And because of that, it is necessary to burn it out at the beginning of its appearance and eradicate all of it. Then place on the site, either a cautery, or a burning medicine which stands in its place.
If the incision is slow to heal, until it becomes magnificent, then consider if it is stony, hard, of a dark colour, with little sensation: then do not touch it with iron: for it is a cancerous aposteme.
For many times I have seen one who has made an incision on a man's aposteme, and great evil has befallen him who possessed it.
And if the aposteme is of a gentle touch, not of a dark colour, and you see that an incision is possible throughout its entirety, then evacuate the weak part, and make the incision without fear, without hesitation: and treat the site with what evacuates and constricts, until it is healed.
Chapter 26.
On the suture of the nose, and lip, and ear.
You know that when a solution of continuity occurs in one of these cartilages, it contributes little to the operation, unless in certain men.
It is necessary therefore when something happens to someone from that, that you consider, if it is a recent wound with its own blood: and then join the edges of the wound with a suture: then treat it, until it is healed.
And if the lips of continuity are already separated, and each part has become healthy: then it is necessary to excavate every part from its own apparent skin, until it becomes bloody. Then join the two lips with a suture, and bind them together, and sprinkle above it the blood of dragon's, and powdered olibanum thrice: and place above the powder a layer of emplastri diafinicon, and one or other of the consolidating emplasters: and leave it bound for two days, or three. Then dissolve it, and change the medicine: and leave it, until the threads separate by themselves. Then treat it with an ointment, until it heals.
The method of suturing is to make a continuous solution, or with a hook, as we have described in suturing the womb: or to make a solution with a thread, as I have made you know.
Chapter 27.
On the extraction of laborious knots.
Many people suffer from painful swellings in their own labors, like hard grain-like abscesses: and some of them are smaller, and larger.
Therefore, it is necessary to convert the lip, and to apply a poultice over every knot of it, and to suspend it with a hook, and to cut into it from every side.
Then fill the place after the incision with old troty, until the blood is absorbed.
Then it should be washed with vinegar, and the place should be treated with it, where there is suppuration, until the wounds heal.
Chapter 28.
On the incision of flesh born over the gum.
A flesh often grows over the gum, which the ancients call a bulb.
Therefore, it is necessary to suspend it with a hook: or to hold it with forceps, and cut into it at its root, and allow the serum to flow, or the blood.
Then put over the place old troty, or other dry, stiptic powders, of an evacuating nature.
If the flesh returns after treatment, for it often returns, then cut into it a second time, and cauterize it: for it does not return after cauterization.
Chapter 29.
On the scraping of teeth with iron.
When they accumulate on the surface of teeth from the inner and outer part, and between the rough, asperous, and citrine-colored cortices of the gum, until corruption spreads from that to the gum, and the teeth become foul through that.
Here is the translation:
If therefore something is removed from the beginning of the reasoning, it is good; and if not, then one should proceed with another reasoning on the second day, and the third, until one arrives at the ultimate study in that which is useful.
And you should know that a dense bone needs diverse forms of rasping and many shapes; according to what is prepared for your operation: therefore, the rasp with which the density is smoothed from the lower part is different from the rasp with which it is smoothed between the teeth, according to other shapes.
And let these forms of rasps be prepared by you, which you see.
Chapter 30.
On the Extraction of Pain from Teeth.
It is necessary that you cure the tooth of its pain with all your ingenuity, and be slow in eradicating it. For it is not that the vigor of the tooth is supplied when it is eradicated: because it is a sublime substance: until when there is no excuse for its eradication, then it is necessary to eradicate it when it is weakened, so that it may be strengthened and certified by you as a painful dense tooth.
For often the pain of a weakened tooth deceives, and it is thought to be in a healthy tooth, and it is eradicated: then the pain does not cease until the weakened dense tooth is eradicated.
For we have already seen that from the operation of bloodletting physicians.
When therefore the painful dense tooth itself is certified by you, then it is necessary to scarify around the tooth with a spatula, in which there is some virtue, until the gum is loosened on all sides: then move it with your fingers or with subtle forceps at first gradually, until it is shaken out.
Then place the large forceps in a good position on it, and hold the head of the weakened tooth between your knees: what you have already held well, so that it does not move: then pull the tooth straight out, so that you do not break it.
If it does not emerge, then take one of those instruments and insert it underneath from all sides with ease, and feel its movement as you did at first.
If it is dense and perforated or corroded, then it is necessary to fill that hole with a pad, and bind it with a thin radius extension, so that it does not break during the time of your constriction upon it with forceps.
And it is necessary to make a careful incision with scarification around the gum on all sides, much.
And control your strength, so that you do not break it, and a part of it remains, and it returns to the weak place from that greater evil which is more painful than its first pain.
And beware, lest you do what ignorant bloodletting practitioners do in their haste, and the boldness of theirs beyond its eradication, contrary to what we have described.
For they often bring about great infirmities in men, whose difficulties are that they break them, and all their roots remain, or some of them; or that they extract it with certain bones of the jaw: as we have often testified to that.
Then it is washed out after its eradication with wine, or with vinegar and salt.
If a flow of blood happens from the places (for it often happens), then take something from a vessel, and fill the place with it: and if not, cauterize it if the vessel does not conduce to you.
The forms of delicate forceps which are moved densely at first, should be long in their extremities, short in their handles, thick, so that they do not double over when pressed with them on the tooth: they should be like you see of thick handles, until when you bind with them, they do not slip, nor double over: having a short extremity, and made from iron or forged from well-centered files, with straight extremities: and in their extremities there should be teeth, some of which are inserted into others, and bind with decent constriction, strongly.
And when they are made into extremities like the shape of a bird's beak, which is called a cicATRIX, and they are strong constrictions.
Chapter 31.
On the eradication of teeth and the extraction of jawbone fragments.
When something remains in the eradication of a tooth which is broken, then it is necessary to put on the place a cotym with butter for one day or two days, until the location is softened: afterwards introduce into it an instrument, or forceps: whose extremities are assimilated to the beak of a bird, which is called a cicatrix. The form of this is a forceps.
Their extremities are made like a file within: or like an Aliskilfegi.
If therefore it does not obey you at the exit with these forceps, then it is necessary to hollow out above the root, and to detach the whole flesh, and to introduce an instrument which is called a small Palanca, whose form is this.
Let it be a short extremity, somewhat thick: and let it not be soaked, lest it break.
If therefore the root comes out through that, it is good: and if not, it is necessary to help with these other instruments whose forms are these.
The form of the first triangular extremity, in which there is a certain thickness.
The form of the triangular extremity, subtle.
And with other instruments and tools which have preceded in the filing of teeth.
And it is a help with this instrument which is assimilated to a large hook, of this form, a triangular twisted extremity, in which there is a certain thickness, so that it does not break: and let it not be soaked.
And know that there are many instruments for teeth: and similarly the remaining instruments are not counted, and the prudent craftsman, skilled in his art, finds for himself the instrument, according to what is suitable for him, operation and pains.
Since they are from painful places and were not mentioned by ancient authorities as an instrument, because of the diversity of their forms.
But if a bone is broken from the jaw or from other bones of the face, or becomes putrid: then probe deeply into its own place with what suits it from the instruments and forceps that I mentioned in extracting roots, and help it with gestures, whose form is this.
Let something of thickness be placed in it gradually, so that it is tightened or held with the bone, and does not flee or slip away, until the bone emerges: and restore the place with suitable medicines for that.
But if there is a small amount of decay in the bone, then scrape it clean of its decay, and take care of it, until it is healed.
Head 32.
On the serration of prominent teeth above others.
When prominent teeth do not follow their natural course, a foul appearance is made through that form: and especially when it happens to women and girls, namely the venal ones.
It is necessary therefore to consider. For if a tooth is born behind another tooth, and does not occupy its place, or is possible its serration, nor its polishing: then eradicate it: and if it is joined to another tooth, then cut it with that instrument, whose form is this.
It is similar to a small file, and is made from iron, with a sharp extremity indeed.
And let your cutting be such that you cut it over many days, and because of the hardness of the tooth, and so that another is not disturbed among the teeth.
But if it is prominent and exposed to its polishing: then polish it with a file made of iron, whose form is this.
Let it be entirely made of iron, and its handle with many small points, as a file with which needles are made: with which one polishes the tooth gradually over many days with ease, so that the tooth is not disturbed and falls out: then smooth it, finally scrape it with certain rasps.
What if it is dense, from which a part is broken off and hurts the language: then it is necessary to smooth it out and also to remove the roughness of that fracture, and to make it even, and not to hurt the language, nor corrupt the speech.
Chapter 33.
Concerning the extraction of teeth with golden threads.
When the front teeth are subject to concussion and commotion from a blow or fall, and the weak one cannot hold on to what it chews so that it does not fall out, and you have treated them with astringent medicines and the treatment did not help: then the clever solution is to tie them with a golden thread, because silver turns greenish and decays after a few days, but gold never changes.
And let the medium thread be of subtlety and thickness according to the quantity that it can grasp between the teeth.
And the form of the retention is such that you take the thread and insert its double between two healthy teeth: then weave it with both extremities of the thread between the moving teeth, whether one or several, until you reach the web all the way to the healthy tooth on the other side. Then repeat the weaving until you reach the part where you began: and tie your hand with subtlety and wisdom, so that it does not come loose: and let your constriction be where you tie the thread, at the roots of the teeth, so that it does not come out.
Then cut off the superfluous extremities of the thread with scissors: and gather both, and convert them into a knot: and hide them between the healthy tooth and the moving tooth, so that they do not hurt the language: then let it be thus tightly fastened until it remains.
If however it becomes loose or is cut, tie them with another thread, and let it stand firm with it for the whole time.
And this is the form of teeth, and the figure of the retention of two healthy teeth and two moving teeth, as you see.
And when it happens that one or two dens return to their proper places after a urine case, and are retained as we have narrated, and remain: and it does not happen unless by an artisan skilled, prudent, and experienced.
And when something is prepared from the bones of a suckling: and it is made into the shape of a tooth, and placed in its position, where the tooth is strengthened and tightened, as we have said: and it remains, and serves for a long time.
Chapter 34.
When the ligament that occurs under the tongue is either natural, with which man is born, or accidental, from a wound that has already consolidated.
And the operation for this is to open the mouth of the infirm person in your lap, and lift up their tongue: then cut that nerve ligament along its width, until the tongue is freed from its restraint.
If there is something hard and knotted in it, and it has come from the consolidation of a wound: then insert the hook into that, and feel it along its width, until you cut the ligament, and the knot is freed.
And beware, lest there be a fissure in the deep flesh, and you cut an artery there, and a flow of blood occurs.
Then it is cleansed at the site of the incision with rose water, or with vinegar, or cold water.
Then put under the tongue a swab of linen, which the patient should hold in place every night: so that it does not consolidate again.
If, however, a flow of blood occurs, then apply powdered zeolite to the spot. If, indeed, the blood does not stop, then cauterize the spot with a gentle cautery, which is suitable for that: then treat it with the remaining treatment, until it is healed.
Chapter 35.
When an abscess occurs under the tongue, which is similar to a small frog, preventing the tongue from performing its natural function: and perhaps it becomes so magnificent, until it fills the mouth.
And the operation for this is to open the mouth of the weak patient alone: and examine the abscess.
If you see it is of a dark or black color, hard, which the weak patient does not feel sensation: then do not touch it, because it is cancer.
And if it has declined to whiteness, in which there is humidity, then apply a hook to it, and cut it with a subtle spatula, and free it from every part. If blood flows out during your operation, then put powdered zingiber (ginger) on it, until the bleeding stops: then return to your operation, until you extract it with its completeness.
Then it is washed out with vinegar and salt: and take care of the rest of the treatment conveniently suitable for that, until it heals.
On the treatment of two abscesses of the tonsils.
Chapter 36.
When abscesses occur in the throat, that is, glands, which are similar to almonds, which occur before: and they are called two Tonsils: which when you treat with what we mentioned earlier, and do not heal, then consider.
If it is a hard abscess, of dark color, little sensation: then do not touch it with iron.
And if it is of a red color, and its root is thick: then do not touch it also with iron, fearing a flow of blood, or rather leave it alone, until it matures. And then either you will perforate it: or it will rupture by itself.
And if it is of a white color, round, and its root is subtle: then it is necessary to cut into it.
And the operation is this, that you consider beforehand your own operation, if the patient's apostema is quiet and completely warm, or it is diminished by some diminution: then indeed make the weak person sit in front of a light, and their head should be in your lap: and open their mouth, and receive the saliva between your hands, and press their tongue downwards with an instrument, whose shape is this.
Let it be made from silver or copper, which should be subtle like a scalpel.
When you press their tongue with it, and the apostema is shown to you, and your gaze falls upon it: then take a hook, and fix it in the amigdala, and extract it as much as possible towards the outside, except that you draw out something from the tunics with it.
Then cut it with an instrument, whose shape is this which follows. It is similar to forceps: indeed the extremities of these are curved, so that the opening of each one is directed towards the other's acute angle: therefore take care that it be made from iron or tempered and quenched.
If however this instrument is not present, then cut it with a spatula, whose shape is this. It is sharp on one side, not sharp on the other side.
And after you have cut one tonsil, cut the other according to the same type of incision.
Then after the incision, gargle the weak person with cold water, or with vinegar and water.
If however a flow of blood occurs to them, gargle with water in which the bark of granatorum has been boiled: or myrtle leaves, and similar things from styptics, until the flow of blood is stopped: then take care of them, until they are healed.
And when other apostemas are born in the throat, besides the two tonsils. Cut therefore those two equally according to what I said in the incision of the two equal membranes.
And I indeed had treated a woman who had an abscess, which was born between her throat, which was pulling towards the dark color, little sensation, which had almost closed off her throat: and the woman was breathing with difficulty from the constricted passage, and already forbade her from eating, and drinking water: and already she was approaching death, if it had remained one day or two days.
And the abscess had only risen, which had sent out two branches, until they emerged through two openings of her nose.
I prepared therefore a rapid instrument, and fixed it into one of the hooks. Then I drew it out, and a large portion was pulled out with it.
Then I cut it off, where I had grasped it through the nostril.
Then I did to her what proceeded from the other nostril.
Then I opened her mouth, and pressed her tongue: and afterwards I fixed the hook into the abscess: then I cut off a part of it, and hardly any blood flowed out: the throat of the woman was freed, and she began immediately to drink water, then took food.
I did not cease to cut into that abscess many times over a long period: and the abscess succeeded in its place what I was cutting, until it was prolonged excessively and with that.
I resorted therefore, and cauterized the abscess in her throat.
It stood therefore from then on: then I walked away, and did not know what God did with it afterwards beyond me.
On the Incision of an Abscess of the Uvula.
Chapter 37.
When the catarrh descends to the uvula and becomes an abscess, and it is long: then it is called perpendicular: and if it is in the lower part thick, round, then it is called a uuva.
When it is treated with what we have mentioned in the division, and treatment does not help, you see that a hot aposteme has moved away from it, and it is subtle: then it is necessary to cut into it.
And what is gathered from it is round, and it has no length, and it is bloody, or of a dark color, or black, and it has no sensation: then it is necessary to make a deep incision into it. For in it there is fear above the weak place.
It is necessary therefore when you see it according to the method which I mentioned, and its length, so that you make the weak place sit before the lamp: and press its tongue with an instrument, whose description has preceded: then fix a hook in the wound, and draw it downwards: and cut into it with one of the two instruments which I mentioned for incisions of two glands.
And it is necessary that you do not cut into it, unless that which is added above the natural term without addition.
For if you cut into it more, you will harm the voice and speech.
Then after the incision, use what we have narrated about in the incision of two glands: and care for it, until it is healed.
If, however, the weak place is terrified by the incision: then it is necessary to use artfulness in its cauterization without fear and trembling.
And the method of cauterization in it is not, unless with sharp water: and it is, as you place the head of the weak place on your lap. Then press its tongue with the instrument which I mentioned. Then take from the water which I mentioned to you in the chapter on cauterization, and mix with it a lime not extinguished, and put it not thick, nor subtle, and fill with it the concavity of this instrument, whose shape is this.
The extremities of the area where the medication is applied are concave, like the concavity of a spoon.
And place the instrument with medication on the same ulcer: and let the patient sit sideways, so that the saliva flows out of his mouth from the inwardly applied medication, so that nothing descends from it into his throat, and hurts him.
Then hold your hand with the medication. And you apply it to the ulcer in a moderate quantity for a half hour, until you see it already blackened and soothed by the biting of the medication.
And if you wish to receive the pus, and wrap it around the extremity of the radius, and pour the pus with medication, and insert the radius with the pus into a canal above, until it adheres to the pus on the ulcer.
Do that many times, until you achieve what you want from the cautery of the ulcer. Then leave it alone: for it will dry up and fall off after three days, or four.
If you need to repeat the medication, repeat it: and after cauterization, clean around the ulcer with a butter-soaked cloth, and purify what is around it from the medication: and cool it down with cold water.
And let it be treated externally with poultices, and internally with gargles, until it is healed.
Therefore, this type of treatment is safer than incision and farther from fear.
And when the ulcer is treated also with something that is more subtle than cautery and incision: it is treated indeed with fumigation, in this manner. Take calament, and hyssop, and origan, and rue, and sseah, and chamomile, and abrotanum, and similar herbs to these: and gather all of them, or some of them in a pot, and submerge them with vinegar, and boil: and let the pot be coated with clay, and let there be a hole in the middle of the pot, on which the concave instrument is placed according to this method.
Let it be made from silver or copper, and the extremity is introduced into the place where there is a granulation, into the mouth of the weak [area], until the vapor ascends to the ulcer above the canal, until the ulcer becomes greatly obscured.
Then it is turned over the same place many times, until it scars.
And beware, lest you make this treatment at the beginning of an abscess that has not yet come to a head. For a poultice is added to the abscess, and it is not fitting to make that unless at the decline of the abscess's heat.
If you do not have this instrument at hand, then take a reed, and apply the bark of it to the extremity, so that the weak area is not burned; because the bark of the reed prevents the vapor from burning the area: and this is good treatment with health.
Concerning the extraction of spinal roots and bones from the throat.
Chapter 38.
Many times it adheres to a bone in the throat, or a fishbone, or something else.
It is necessary therefore to extract what is apparent above what falls under the sight, after you press the tongue with an instrument at the root, and it is revealed to you what is in the throat.
And what does not appear to you and is hidden in the throat, it is necessary to make the weak area vomit before food is digested in the stomach. Perhaps the attached thing will come out through vomiting.
Or the weak person swallows a fragment of turnip, or the root of lettuce, or swallows a morsel of dry bread; or takes a fragment of dry marine sponge tied with a thread, and then swallows it. When therefore it reaches the place where the bones or fishbones are, and is extracted, then it comes out.
If therefore it does not come out with what we have said, then use an instrument made of lead according to this form.
The thick one is slightly shorter than the Radius, and its extremity is curved, which it easily inserts into its own throat with ease: and itself has its head elevated upwards.
And let it touch its own epiglottis, so that it does not cause a cough, and it propels with it the mouth or the spine, or the physician inserts it by hand.
However, when the weak person inserts it, this is better: on account of their knowledge of the place adjacent to the thing; and they propel from below, or draw their hand with an instrument upwards, that whole thing according to the quantity that is prepared for them, until it emerges.
On the extraction of a blood-sucking insect (or leech).
Chapter 39.
When the leech is applied with what I said earlier in the division from the cure with medicines, and it does not work, then consider the throat of the weak person in front of the sun, or at the sun after you have pressed its tongue with the instrument that I described to you.
If then your vision falls upon the leech, extract it with a small hook, or with gentle and precise gestures.
If it is not possible with these: then take a curved cannula, and insert it into the throat of the weak person up to the near part of the throat: then insert the iron ignited with fire into the curvature of the cannula. Do that many times: and let the weak person abstain from water for the whole day.
Then let him take a treated full of cold water, and open his mouth in it: and let him rinse his mouth with it, and not swallow anything from it: and move the water one hour after another with his hand. For the leech falls away when it feels the water.
If however it does not emerge with what we have described, then fumigate the weak person with steam, or with a copper instrument that I described for fumigating the uvula.
Do it many times, for that very thing will fall.
And the method of operation in suffumigation is to receive a vessel, in which there are burning coals with fire: and let the vessel be covered with a covering, in the middle of which there is a hole: and let the extremity of the instrument be composed in that hole.
Then apply the suffumigation, and let the patient place his limb in the extremity of the cannula, and close his limb, so that the suffumigation does not escape, until you know that the suffumigation has already reached the blood vessel. For the blood vessel will immediately fall.
If it does not fall, then repeat the suffumigation many times.
And let the patient be hungry and eat salty things and garlic, and not drink water.
It is necessary therefore that it should exit with this regimen.
And this is the form of the instrument with which the blood vessel is extracted from the guttur, when it falls upon the same vision.
It is similar to forceps, as you see: except that it has this curvature which is introduced into the guttur. And its extremity is similar to the beak of a bird called a stork, in which there is roughness of lime: when it comprehends something, it does not release it at all.
Concerning the opening of abscesses, and their section, and care in general.
Chapter 40.
There are many species of abscesses, of many modes, according to the remembrance that comes from them, namely one, and one in this book: and they are diverse in their perforation and section, which is from two modes.
Of which one is of the species of abscess in itself, and that which comprehends from humidity.
And the second mode is on account of the places, in which it happens through the body.
Since an abscess occurring on the head is different from an abscess occurring on the anus; and an abscess occurring in a fleshy place is different from an abscess occurring in a joint; and each of them has its own judgment from the operation.
And among the abscesses are those which should not be perforated unless after maturation of the pus in them, and their completion; and among them are those which should be perforated while they are raw and do not mature according to their completion.
Like abscesses that are near the joints.
Since an abscess, when it occurs near a joint and prolongs its existence, until it putrefies what is around it, perhaps corrupting the ligaments or nerves of that joint; therefore it is the cause of a more pronounced contraction of that limb.
Or it is an abscess near a principal member: since if you delay its perforation until it matures, it will harm either the limb itself or the principal member through that limb.
Or it is near the anus, so perforate it while it is still immature: and it is not fitting to perforate a raw abscess, not completely digested, unless it is near the anus, lest it putrefy deeply and reach the interior of the anus, and a fistula forms, or it ends in what cannot be healed.
It is necessary to know the time of perforating an abscess, which has matured according to its completion: and it is at the subsiding of pain, the recession of fever, and the diminution of redness, and pulsation, and the acuteness of the head of the abscess: and the remaining signs.
And it is necessary to make the perforation in the lower place of the abscess, and at the prominent elevation: and let the perforation be directed in the length of the body, if the abscesses are in the parts of the hands and feet, and in the places of the tendons, and the cartilages, and the nerves, and the arteries, and finally in all equal places where there is no reflexion.
In those cases where reflections occur, a passage is made with a secondary perforation according to that membrane.
When an abscess is located in fleshy areas, it is better to delay the perforation until its digestion is confirmed, as we have said according to the accompanying treatment.
Because if you perforate it before that, the flow of pus from it is prolonged, and there is much foulness and filthiness, and perhaps its lips will harden, and its depth.
And some abscesses are perforated according to the width of the body in case of necessity, or according to that which the membrane needs.
And it is fitting to administer a small perforation in small abscesses and a large perforation in large abscesses, or many sections according to the similarity of the magnitude of the abscess.
And there are abscesses in which it is fitting to sew up the skin: and an incision should be made when it has already become like a pannus, and has formed at the terminus, which is now dead tissue: as happens in many cases, such as ulcers and buboes.
And among them are those that are cut with a triangular incision. And among them is one which is incised in the shape of a myrtle leaf figure.
Like an inguinal abscess.
And among them are those in which a round incision is administered, and a lunar incision: and similar ones according to the incisions.
That one which has no head, such as are superficial abscesses, it is fitting to perforate it with a superficial perforation, or only with a flat one.
And it is fitting, when the abscess is large and has already collected much matter, to perforate it so that you do not press out and extract all the pus at that hour; rather, you should extract a portion of it from itself. Then apply a poultice to the abscess until another day. Then extract something from the purulent matter.
Do it many times according to the grade, until it comes out: especially if the patient is weak in strength, or a pregnant woman, or a small child, or an old and decrepit person: for the animal spirit is often resolved with the egress of sanies; and perhaps the weak person will die, and you do not perceive.
Beware therefore in this chapter great caution.
And after your perforation, by which you have made an opening into the abscess, it is necessary to cleanse the wound: and consider. If therefore the wound of the abscess is small, or it is a flat section, then apply a linen bandage, or an old cloth. And if the abscess is large, and there are many openings of the perforation, then it is necessary to insert a linen bandage into every opening, until they reach the adjacent skin.
And if you have cut away a part of the skin in the abscess, or have concaved it around: then it is necessary to fill it with old cloth, or as when a fabric is woven, or lined with a woolen thread without moisture: and bind it until the third day.
Then put it aside, and take care of it with what is necessary from an ointment, until it heals.
If however a flow of blood occurs during your operation, then apply cold water and vinegar, after it has been soaked into the cloth: and place it many times over the site of the bleeding.
If however the flow of blood persists, then it is necessary to administer a regime and treatment, and powders, which I have described in many places of this our book, and from division.
If however it is in winter time, and the site of the abscess is very cold: then it is necessary to pour poultices with wine, and warm oil: and place them over the site.
And if it should be in summer, and the locations are fleshy: then it is necessary to apply poultices soaked in water, or wine and oil, and all that coldness. Until the third day, as we have said, then it is necessary to dissolve the aposteme, and to cleanse it, and to administer in its treatment what is convenient for it, until it be healed.
This is therefore what is necessary from the knowledge of universal treatment of apostemes.
According to the method of distinction, I have already spoken about every type of aposteme, how it is a path to its specific and individualized treatment.
Head 41.
About the excision of apostemes that occur on the skin of the head.
Apostemes that occur on the skin of the head are small and are of the type of Nodes, which are contained in pouches, which are like husks of hen's eggs.
And there are many species of them.
Some of them are fatty; and some contain moisture similar to that of mud; and some contain moisture similar to that of frost and pus; and some are similar to these, and some are hard and stony.
And in the excision of all of them, and their removal is not feared, as long as during their excision it does not cause a counteraction of the artery.
And the operation in their excision is, that you should try it with an instrument whose form comes after this, which is called the Intromissum, until you know what it contains.
For if it is that which contains moisture, then dry it out in the excision according to the length of the superficial incision: according to this form.
And begin with the incision from line b to line g. When therefore the moisture is evacuated, then scrape out the cyst which contains that moisture, and do not leave anything deep within it.
For it often returns if something remains from them.
Then submerge the cotum in Egyptian unguent, if it is available; and if not, in water and salt; and fill a ulcer with it, and leave it until another day. For it corrodes what remains from the kisti.
Then apply the Egyptian ointment to the cotum a second and third time, and if you desire it, until you are confident that nothing remains from the kisti; then treat the ulcer with an ointment, until it is healed.
If the aposteme contains a fatty node, then dry it according to this method, having the shape of a cross-section; and apply scarifications between the two labia of the section, and excoriate it from every part; and take care to extract the tunica that contains it.
If, however, the artery opposes you, then do what I will tell you afterwards.
And similarly, act on the aposteme if it is stony, from the section and cure, in the same way as we have said.
And the section above a stony aposteme is easier, because it has little blood and moisture. And sometimes there are certain apostemes of these that are on the head in some men, with which there is no hidden moisture.
That is to say: because I cut above an aposteme on the head of a old woman, and I found the aposteme like a solid and hard stone, rough, white, which could not be broken; and if someone struck it with something projecting, it would wound him.
In other cases of aposteme accidents on the head, besides these, namely the apostemes that occur on the heads of children and at the roots of the ears, the section of all of them should be a superficial section.
Or make a perforation always from the lower part of them, so that the flow of sanies is directed downwards.
Then treat them with what is suitable for their cure from treatment.
Concerning the surgical procedure on the throat in the neck.
Chapter 42.
These abscesses often occur in the neck, and under the arm-pits, and in the groins; and sometimes they occur in other parts of the body.
And those that occur on the neck are one and many; and they arise from inward causes; and every tumor on the neck is inside its own proper tunic, just as it is with knots and abscesses of the head, as we have described.
And there are many kinds of these tumors of the neck. And among them are stone-like ones; and among them are those that contain fluids; and among them are malignant ones that do not respond to treatment.
Therefore, when you find one of them that is good and well-disposed to the touch, whose color is close to that of the skin, and it moves freely in every direction, and is not attached to the nerves of the neck, nor to the veins, nor to the arteries, nor is it deep: it is necessary to cut into it superficially from the upper part to the lower part of the body along a line, b. to line g., and to excise it from every side: and to extend the two lips of the skin with a hook, or with many hooks if needed, as we have said in the case of abscesses of the head, and to extract it gradually.
And it is with caution, so that a vein or nerve is not cut into.
And let the instrument be not too sharp, so that you do not apply your hand with the incision, or disturb the weak part, and cut what is not necessary.
If you cut into a vein, or an artery, and it prevents you from operating, then apply to the wound a dry powder of zegi, or some powders that staunch blood, and bind the wound, and leave it until the acute pain of the abscess subsides, and the wound softens; or else it begins to putrefy.
For when blood is poured out from the Tunica of Redi, therefore proceed to your operation, until it is complete.
Then inspect with your index finger, if anything remains from the small Strophuli; therefore cut them, and cleanse them.
What if there is a large vein in the root of the Strophula: then it is necessary not to cut that Strophula at its root; rather it is necessary to ligate it with a double thread strongly, and leave it until it falls off by itself without harm.
Then fill the hollow of the old wound with Egyptian unguent, which you have already mixed in. Then take care of it.
If the whole Strophula is cut, then it is necessary to bring together the two lips of the wound: and they will settle immediately, after you see that there is no excess remaining.
If you see that excess remains because of the size of the Strophula, then it is necessary to direct yourself to cutting its root, and extracting it: and administer the suture as we have said.
And what contains moisture from the Strophuli, pierce it with a superficial piercing: so that you may see the place of its maturity: and put the piercing from what follows below in the body, as we have said.
Then administer after the piercing a dressing with ointment, and similarly to them, so that it corrodes what remains from the corruption, until you see the wound is already clean: then take care of it with a generating ointment of flesh, until it heals.
Chapter 43.
Concerning the section on the Epiglottis, which has become inflamed inside the throat due to an abscess.
The ancients spoke of this section on the Epiglottis, and I did not see anyone in our land who has performed it: and this is the writing of their discourse.
In those having suffocation, it is necessary to make an incision of the Epiglottis, since there is no benefit through that; because all the veins and lung are weak.
In those indeed who have a hot abscess in the mouth or throat or two tonsils, when there is no sickness in the canal, it is necessary to make an incision of the Epiglottis, to flee from the destruction which happens due to suffocation.
It is necessary therefore when we want to do that, to cut the Epiglottis under three circular rings of the Epiglottis, or four, with a small incision in width, in that which is between two circles in quantity, so that it is a section in the sifa, not in the cartilage: and this place is suitable for an incision, because it is deprived of flesh, and the blood vessels are far away from it.
If the doctor is timid, then it is necessary to stretch the skin of the throat with a hook. Then he should probe the skin until he reaches the canal: he should avoid the blood vessels, if he sees anything from them.
Then he should cut the sifa as we have described: and it is indicated by a section of the canal from the phlegm that comes out of it, with what is discharged, and by the separation of the voice.
And let the wound remain open for some time.
When therefore the time arrives in which suffocation is feared, join the two lips of the wound together, and sew it itself alone without cartilage.
Then administer medications that cause flesh to grow, until it is healed.
Said Albucasis. The summary of this sermon which we have narrated is not an explanation, unless when they see that some of these apostems have already affected the weak throat: and the weak one was elevated above death, and wanted to interrupt his breathing: they hasten to cut the Epiglottis, so that the weak one may breathe again at the place of the wound with a certain respiration, and be saved from death: and for this reason they have ordered to leave the wound open, until the evil of the disease is consumed, and it is an evil of three days, and as if itself: then therefore they have ordered to sew the wound, and to take care of it, until it is healed.
And that which I saw through my own observation is that a young girl swallowed a knife, and it went into her throat, and pierced with it a portion of the pulmonary canal.
And I was called to her cure, and I found her groaning, as is the groaning of the dying.
I examined therefore the wound, and I found blood which had flowed out from the small wound. I was therefore confused, because she had not severed a vein, nor an artery: and air was escaping from the wound.
I treated it accordingly, and I sewed up the wound, and I cured it, until it was healthy: and nothing happened to the young girl except hoarseness of voice: and she returned after some days to a better state of her health.
Therefore I say: that in the cutting of the Epiglottis there is no fear.
On the Cutting of Throat Hernias.
Chapter 43.
This abscess called Throat Hernia is a large abscess, according to the color of the body, and it occurs frequently in women.
And it is according to two modes: either it is natural or it is accidental.
In the natural one, certainly there is no ingenuity.
The accidental one, indeed, is according to two modes: of which one is similar to fatty knots. And the other mode is similar to an abscess that occurs from the knotting of an artery. And in that there is fear, and it is not fitting to make a premature assumption about it with an iron instrument, unless it is small: and you should prove it, and investigate it with a probe. If therefore you find it similar to a fatty knot, and it is not suspended with any of the veins: then cut it off, just as knots are cut off: and remove it with what it contains from the sac, if it is in a sac: and if not, then thoroughly examine all of it. Then treat the place with what is necessary for the cure, until it is healed.
Chapter 45.
On the excision of nodules by species.
There are many species of nodules, and I have already described all their species in the division; and it is necessary for me to describe here the difference between a nodule and an excrescence, since there is confusion.
I say therefore that when there is an excrescence, there is heat and fever and violent pains, until the inflammation subsides and the putrefaction is complete; then indeed the fever and heat cease.
But with a nodule, there is no heat, nor fever, nor pains, and it contains a kistis sifachin, which is its own sac, and is according to the color of the body: and its containment is like a chickpea, and it becomes like a swelling, and it is greater or smaller.
And they are according to two species: either fatty or containing moisture. And the colors of the moisture are many, according to what I said in the division.
Therefore, when you come to the cure of a nodule, it is necessary to examine it and inquire into it first with an instrument called an introgressor, according to what will be described in the chapter that follows this one.
And the method of inquiring into apostems and all nodules is that you take this instrument and introduce it into a humid place which you find in the apostem; and you revolve your fingers with it gradually, until you know that the instrument has already penetrated the skin. Then finally, you measure your hand according to the size of the apostem.
Then extract the introgressor and consider what comes out in its investigation.
If therefore a flowing moisture comes out, whatever the color may be: then dry it with a superficial incision, according to what I said about other apostems.
And if moisture does not exit in the wound that has been opened, then you will know that it is fat: so make a section on it having the shape of a cross, according to this shape as I have shown you; and suspend it with hooks, and excise the skin from every part with ease; and keep it still if you can above it, so that you may extract the sound tissue with a knot.
But if the tissue is disintegrated during the operation and it is not possible to extract the sound tissue, for this often happens, then extract it fragment by fragment until nothing remains of it.
For if a little or much of it remains, the knot returns according to the greatest part.
Which if it defeats you and a little of it remains: then fill the wound at its completion with certain sharp corrosive powders; and bind the wound, and place above it a warm apostema sitting, and treat it with the remaining treatment, until it is healed.
If therefore there is a large knot, then sew its two lips together, and treat it with that which incarnates.
If however there is a contrary pulsating vein, or not pulsating: then prepare, and fill the place with a triple bandage, and leave it tightly bound for two days, or three, until the wound putrefies, and the ebullition of the blood subsides: then return to cutting what remained of the Knot.
Chapter 46.
Concerning the forms of instruments for section and perforation.
These are the forms of instruments that are thrust in, and they are of three species.
For there is a large one among them, and there is a medium one among them, and there is a small one among them.
They are made of iron, with a square, extended extremity, so that they may be fixed in an apostema (compress).
And these are the forms of Experiments, that is, piercings: and one of them is called "baris", that is, a piercer: and they are of three species.
For there are large, medium, and small ones among them.
They are suitable for investigating through these affected areas, and ulcers, and fistulas, and abscesses that come from the bones among them.
And others are made round, tight, smooth, like large needles which have an edge underneath, namely from citrus wood, or from copper, or iron, or silver.
And the better ones among them are those that are made from citrus wood.
And they make Experiments also from black lead, which are suitable for experimenting on fistulas, whose concavities are reflections, so that they reflect with their smoothness together with those reflections.
And they are again of three species. Because there are long ones among them, medium ones, and short ones, according to the quantity of the width of the fistula and its stricture.
The form of probes, and they are of many species.
Because there are simple ones, namely those with a single curvature: and they are of three species, as you see, Large, Medium, and Small.
And among them are obtuse probes: and they are of three species.
And among them are probes having two curvatures, and they are of three species: and among them are probes having three curvatures, and they are of three species: and all these are necessary in their place.
And these are the forms of Scalpels, with which they cut and scrape away Knots and affected areas: and they are of three species: because among them there is large, medium, and small.
Their extremities with which they make a section are acute, other extremities are not acute: and they are not placed thus, unless so that there may be help in scraping away Knots with fear of incision into the vein or nerve: and so that it may be healed through them, and find tranquility for a short time after the inflammation which it finds at the scraping away of the affected area.
They are made of copper, and they resemble a file, with which one makes alcohol; and at the end of the broad spatula there is a hidden point: and it runs inward and outward when desired, as you see.
The forms of the spatulae that are hidden between the fingers at the site of the affected perforation; and they do not perceive these things in weakness; and there are three species, large, medium, and small.
The forms of the vessels with which the flow of blood is stopped; and there are three species, large, medium, and small.
They are made of copper or brass, rounded, slightly longer in length, as you see; and they should be subtle.
And it is necessary that you have these species of vessels, large and small; so that you may stop the blood flow through them with speed when there is a need, and then when medical help is not present for you.
However, you should not use them in stopping blood flow at every location of the body, and you should only use them in fleshy areas: such as the muscles of the thigh, and hip, and muscles of the arms, and breasts, and abdomen, and groin, and similar fleshy areas.
And sometimes they are made into small instruments similar to those with a circular form, according to their shape: with which blood is stopped when it flows from the location of phlebotomy, or at the incision of a vein, or artery; and sometimes they are made round according to this form.
Chapter 47.
Concerning the treatment of breasts in men that resemble those of women.
Sometimes the breasts of certain men become inflated during the complement of sleep (that is, when they begin to be polluted in their sleep), until they resemble those of women; and they remain shameful apostemes.
Who then abhors that, it is necessary to make an incision above the nipple in a lunar shape, following this form from line a to line b, and then to excavate the entire fatty tissue. Afterwards, fill up the wound with a medicinal poultice of incarnation. Then bring together the two lips of the wound with a suture, and take care of it, until it heals.
If however the nipple declines downwards, and becomes soft due to its size, as it happens with women: then it is necessary to make two similar lunar-shaped incisions on both sides, each of which is connected to the other at the edges, so that a larger line contains a smaller one, following this form from line a to line b, g. Afterwards, excavate the skin that is between the two lips, and remove the fatty tissue, and administer what we have said about sutures and poultices, which is necessary for healing, until it heals.
If however you do not complete the incision as it is necessary to make, due to the anxiety of the patient, or due to a flow of blood: then it is necessary to fill up the wound with a submerging corrosive ointment, and leave it, until it corrodes away what remains of the fatty tissue. Then take care of it, until it heals.
Concerning the perforation of an abscess that occurs beneath the arm-pits.
Chapter 48.
These abscesses that occur beneath the arm-pits are of the species of hard Strophuli, which contain cysts, and among them are those that contain humidity.
Those therefore which are among them that contain humidity, it is necessary to make an incision with a lunar-shaped section, following this form, from line b to line g, so that all that is in the abscess is evacuated from the pus, then fill it up with old cloth, and leave it until another day.
Then the wound should be opened and treated with a suitable ointment until it heals.
What if the abscess was of the type of nodular swellings, then scrape above it, as we described in the section on nodular swellings, equally.
If, however, the wound extends to this point so as to emit pus, then apply a cautery to it, according to what we have said previously.
Chapter 49.
On the section of an abscess that occurs because of the Artery and Vein.
When an artery is broken and the skin that is above it becomes consolidated, then often an abscess occurs there; and similarly it happens with the veins as well, so that an abscess and inflammation occur in them.
And the signs by which it is recognized that an abscess and inflammation are due to the artery and vein are: when an abscess is due to an artery, it is long and collected deep in the body; and when you press on the abscess with your fingers, you feel as if there is a grating or scratching sensation.
And that which is due to the vein is round and visible on the surface of the body.
And surgery above this abscess is a mistake, and especially that which is under the armpits, and in the groin, and neck, and in many places of the body: and it is a great danger indeed. Therefore, it is necessary to avoid its treatment with an iron instrument, and since it also exists in the extremities or in the head, it is necessary to avoid it.
Therefore, on that which exists due to the inflammation of the artery's opening, make an incision in the skin in a longitudinal direction. Then open the incision with forceps, afterwards the artery; and free it from its coverings until it is visible.
Then insert a hook underneath it, and make it penetrate until the other side, and tie the artery with a double thread at two places, according to what I taught you in the removal of the two arteries that are in the temples.
Then prick the place that is between two ligaments with a spatula until all the blood that is in it comes out and the abscess dissolves.
Then administer a treatment that produces pus, until the ligaments fall away; afterwards treat it with suitable ointments, until it heals.
If there is an abscess because of a cut in the vein, then it is necessary to hold with your hand what you can from the abscess along with the skin. Then insert a needle under the place you held with your hand, and make it penetrate; and let there be a double thread, until you extract it from the other side. Then tie it with a good ligature to the abscess; as I told you about the ligature of the veins, from two parts with two extremities of the thread.
If however the time comes to extract the thread, then insert another needle with another thread under the entire abscess at the incision of theacus: press, and tie your threads in four places.
Then drain the abscess in its middle, until what is in it comes out; then incise the excess of skin, and release what was tied up from it.
Then put on top of it a poultice which you had soaked in wine and oil. Then administer treatment with bandages and ointments, until it heals.
Chapter 50.
Concerning the abscess that occurs from twisting of the nerves.
As an abscess occurs in the Artery and Vein, similarly an abscess occurs in the Nerves; which occurs from blows, or from excessive labor, and similar things; and it most often happens to them in the places of joints, such as the ankle, and in every place where the joints move; and it is a serious abscess.
Its color is similar to that of the rest of the body, and it is in many dispositions without pain; and when it is pressed with vehemence, one feels in it a weakness similar to numbness.
And it is not an aggregated abscess deep within the body, but rather it is beneath the skin, and it moves towards every part, and does not pass to the anterior, nor ahead, nor back to the posterior.
Since that is so, it is not necessary to make an incision with an iron instrument. Perhaps a contraction will occur afterwards.
In that case, since it is on the head or on the forehead, make an incision with a spatula. If it is a small abscess, then hold it with forceps, and cut it off from the root.
And if it is large, then suspend it with a hook, and excavate it: then remove it, and bring the wound together with a suture: and treat it, until it heals.
Chapter 51.
On the excision of an abscess that occurs in the belly.
It happens to certain men often in their bellies and in other parts of their bodies, ulcers which are called Fungalia, on account of their resemblance to mushrooms.
Whose root is subtle, and their head is thick, and their lips are turned inwards. And it is small among them: and it is magnificent among them indeed.
And I have seen a man, and in his belly there were two ulcers, which were more similar to mushrooms than anything else: there was no difference between them, white, with minute roots, and their lips were turned inwards, and they were covered, and moisture flowed from them always.
I cut into them, and I found that one weighed almost 10 ounces and the other almost 8 ounces. And the operation of cutting into them is, as you consider then, if the patient is humid, and the color of the ulcer is white, humid, with a subtle root: then cut into it with a broad spatula, and have your cauterizing irons ready in the fire.
For often indeed a great deal of blood is expelled at that incision: therefore if you are overcome by the blood, then cauterize it.
If you see a weak and timid patient falter from the incision with the iron, then take a thread made from lead in a decentering way, and tie it with an athel; this is the method we have described, and leave it for two days.
Then add to the stricture of lead. Do not cease to tie the lead, as often as it impresses on the wound, until it be cut off, and falls away by itself without effort.
But if the wound was thick-rooted, then there is something of fear and trembling in its incision: especially because it is in the belly.
Truly, it is possible to cut into half of it. Then cauterize it, so that it does not return.
Then treat it, until the wound is healed.
And beware of presuming to cut into a wound that is of a dark color, little sensation, foul appearance: for it is a cancerous aposteme: and I warn you with remembrance of Cancer after this.
Chapter 52.
On the treatment of umbilical eminences.
Umbilical eminences occur from many causes. Or they come from fissures of the peritoneum, which is above the belly: and there issues from it a fluid or intestine, according to what happens in other ruptures. Or they come from blood that flows from a vein, or from an artery, according to what has been mentioned before. Or they come from flatulence constricted in it.
If, however, it is due to a fissure of the peritoneum and an issue of thin fluid: then it has a color similar to that of the body, and is soft, without pain: and appears in diverse places. And if it is because of a protrusion of the intestine, then that is its location, with what we have narrated, of a more severe diversity. When you press it with your fingers, it is hidden; then it returns, and perhaps there is a noise with it; and it is greatly magnified at the entrance of the bath, and a laborious pain.
If it is because of moisture, it is slack, then it is not hidden when you press it with your hand, nor does it contract, nor is it added to.
What if it is because of blood, then with these signs an abscess appears turning black from the cliave.
If it is because of born flesh: then it is a grave abscess, thick, hard, and is shaped according to one quantity.
If it is because of windiness, then its touch is gentle.
And the operation on it is, that you should consider then, if the prominence of the navel is because of blood of the Artery, or Vein, or windiness: then it is necessary to refrain from its treatment. For there is fear and awe, as I instructed you in the chapter, where I said that abscesses are because of the artery and vein.
What if the prominence of the navel is because of the intestine or a scirrhous tumor: then it is necessary to prescribe for the weak, so that it may hold its breath, and stand upright extended. Then apply signs with an encaustic around the entire circumference of the navel. Afterwards, instruct him to take a deep breath between your hands on his back. Then encircle with a broad compress around the circumference of the navel over the place which you signed with an encaustic. Afterwards, extend the middle of the abscess upwards, with a large hook. Then bind it around with a strong thread or with a cord of silk by a firm ligature: and let the knot of the ligature be hidden.
Then open the middle of the swollen apostema above the ligament. If you find it already captured by the ligament: then extract the congealed matter, and insert your index finger into it, and push the intestine towards the interior of the belly: and if you find a circle, then take it with a hook, and cut above its superfluity.
If, however, an artery or vein is opposite to you: then surround it greatly. Then return to your operation. And take two hooks, and insert them into the two strong threads: and insert two hooks around the circle you made around the apostema in the form of a cross, which you make penetrate.
Then tie the apostema in four places above the hooks: and if it is useful, remove the hooks, and leave the place until the extended rotten flesh falls off by itself: or cut it when it is separated and rotted.
Then treat it with what is suitable from ointments, until it heals.
What if there is a prominence of the navel from the raw flesh in it, or from moisture: then it is necessary to concave the apostema, as we said. And extract the blood, or moisture, which you find in it.
Then treat it with what solidifies the place.
Chapter 53.
On the treatment of CANCER.
We have already spoken in the division of the species of Cancer, and how it is a way to its cure with medicines: and beware of it with its cure through iron, so that it does not ulcerate: and we have spoken of Cancer generated in the matrix, and caution from its cure.
And the ancients said that when Cancer is in a place where its eradication is possible: such as Cancer which is in the breasts, or in the hip, and similar ones, located in limbs to be entirely removed: especially when it is a small beginning.
When a wound is old and large, it does not need one to approach it closely.
For I was not able to heal anyone from it: nor did I see another before me who had persevered in that.
And the operation on it, when it is located as we have said, is to open and release the weak part from black bile several times. Then a blood-letting instrument should be applied if you find it full with manifest overabundance.
Then prepare the weak part by preparation, in which it is located with the operation.
Then apply to the ulcerous sores that are suitable for it. After that, clean it from every side with a knife, according to the examination, until nothing remains of its roots: and let the blood flow, and do not cut it quickly, but press out the place, and wipe away all the thick blood with your hand, or as much as possible there with instruments.
But if the flow of thick blood makes a contrary action against you from the incision of the artery or vein: then cauterize the vein, until the blood is staunched. Then treat it with the remaining treatment, until it is healed.
On the Treatment of Hydrophobia.
Chapter 54. Now we will describe the division of the species of Hydrophobia, and how the gathering of water occurs: and the signs of each species, and its treatment with medicines.
And that which is treated with iron is not only a single species of ascites: and it does not approach the species of tympanic diseases with iron: nor the deeply hidden species of hypochondria: for that is mortal.
When you have already treated this species of Hydrophobia, tympanic with medicines, and your medication has not been successful: then consider. For if the patient has already been weakened by debility, or is afflicted with another disease besides Hydrophobia: such as if it is accompanied by coughing, or dissolution of the stomach, and similar things: then beware of medicating him with iron: for that is fearful.
If you see a patient with an excessive abundance of virtues, and there is no illness present except for hydropsy alone: and he is neither a boy nor an old man: then the method of operation in this case is that you stand behind him, placing your hands on his sides, and your assistant presses his abdomen with his hand, forcing water towards the lower part of the chest.
Then take a spinal spatula, of this shape. It is a tool with two pointed parts, long, with a pointed extremity, like a Spatula. However, there should be something of shortness in it, so that you do not penetrate too far with it during the operation up to the intestine, and harm it.
Then consider. For if the generation of hydropsy is from the part of the intestines, then it is necessary that you extend with a section from the navel by a measure of three fingers, downwards directly above the chest.
If indeed the generation of hydropsy is due to an illness of the liver: then let your section be on the left from the navel by three fingers.
And if the generation of it is due to the spleen, then let the section be on the right side: and it is not necessary also that there should be a section above where the patient wants to lie down, so that excesses do not flow back to that weak place.
Then pierce with an instrument through the entire skin. Then introduce into that section, and raise your hand with the spatula between the skin, and make a separation, as if you were excavating it: and let the amount that is excavated be the amount of a nail, or around that.
Then pierce in a separating manner until the spatula reaches the empty space: and it is the place of water. Then extract it, and introduce into the opening an instrument, which has this shape. And it is similar to a cannula: made from silver, or copper, or gold alloy, smooth, polished: which has a small hole in its lower part, and on its sides are three holes, two on one side and one on the other; and its end is cut obliquely, according to the manner of cutting a reed, as you see: and at its upper end is a little arm.
For when the instrument reaches the water, then it descends immediately over the instrument, and thus evacuates from the water at that time a moderate quantity.
Because if you evacuate from it more than is opportune, perhaps the weak patient may die at that time by a resolution of his vital spirit: or a syncope which approaches death may occur to him.
But evacuate from it according to the quantity of its virtue, and according to what the pulses of the patient signify to you about his disposition, and from his goodness.
Then withdraw the instrument, and retain the water.
That is, because it is retained immediately on account of the skin which retains the hole that is above the sifac: about which I spoke, so that you may perform it according to that method.
Then repeat the instrument on another day, if you see the patient can tolerate that: and withdraw also from the water a small quantity.
Do that on several days without fear, and guard yourself against error: until there remains only a little from the water.
But if you operate on the patient, and let out a large amount from the water: then treat him with burial in hot sand, and with much sweat in the bath and sun, and wait upon his condition: and treat him with drying medicines, until he is healed: and cauterize over the stomach, and liver, and spleen, after the extraction of water: according to what I narrated previously.
Concerning the treatment of infants who are born with unperforated urinary places.
Head 55.
When some infant is born from its mother's womb and the head of the mole is not perforated, or the opening is narrow, or it is not in its proper place.
It is therefore necessary to assist with the perforation immediately after birth with a very fine spatula, according to this method.
Then put a small lead key in the opening and tie it: and hold it thus for three days or four.
When therefore it wants to pass urine, it is removed, and the flow is established. Then reduce it.
And if you do not put in the lead, it is now possible that the urine which accumulates above the location does not allow it to close.
He, however, whose opening is narrow, is treated with lead, as we said, for many days, until it is enlarged.
Those, however, in whom the opening is not in its proper place, are lamented. That is, because in those who are born, the opening is at the end of the head of the mole: therefore it cannot flow to the front, until it raises the mole with its hand to the upper parts. Nor is it generation for them, because the sperm cannot reach the womb according to rectitude: and it is a foul and very loathsome disease.
And the method of operation for that is to rest the weak person on their back. Then extend the head of the mole with your left hand, exerting strong force, and cut the head of the mole from its proper place with a needle or a fine pointed spatula: as it is an incision like a reed, or as you scrape something, so that the middle part comes out similar to the head of the mole: and so that the opening falls in the middle according to what is necessary.
And beware lest there be a flow of blood during your operation. For indeed it often happens that thing. Resist therefore with him what cuts off the blood, and cure the wound, until he is healed.
Concerning the ulcers that occur on the glans penis and head of the foreskin, and the corruption, blackening, and adherences.
Head 56.
These ulcers often occur on the penis, and it is a prominence of foul flesh.
And of them, some are malignant, and some are not malignant.
You should therefore treat the non-malignant one by suspending it with a subtle hook, and cutting it off, until you cleanse the entire thing. Then put on top of it a covered compress soaked in Egyptian ointment. Then treat the wound itself afterwards with dyaphenic ointment, until it is healed.
If the ulcer is malignant, of foul color, then it is necessary to apply a cautery to it after the incision and removal of its roots.
If the ulcer is on the foreskin of an uncircumcised person, and part of the ulcer is within the foreskin and part of it is outside, then you should remove the ulcer that is inside first, until when it consolidates, then treat the outer one; because if you treat them both at once, the foreskin will not be secure unless it is prefabricated.
And now they also occur on the testicles, and there is blackening and corruption of the foreskin. It is necessary, therefore, to excise all that has already become blackened and what wants to corrupt or is already corrupted.
Then apply on top of it afterwards a liniment made with honey that has been mixed with flour of roasted granators and powder of triturated herbs.
Then treat it with the remaining treatment, until it is healed.
If a flow of blood occurs, then apply a lunar cautery with the cautery in this manner.
The cauterization is a helpful remedy for two conditions at the same time, namely for a flow of blood and a wound when it becomes corrupted.
If the ulcerated head of the vein is corroded, and everything is destroyed within an hour; then it is necessary to introduce into the mouth a small cannula made of lead, so that the weakened patient may urinate upon it.
In the adhesion of the foreskin to the head of the vein, and this adhesion does not occur unless in one whose foreskin is healthy and does not require circumcision: and when an adhesion occurs due to a wound or aposteme; it is necessary therefore to excoriate it with a blunt Spatumili until the ligament is loosened and the head of the vein is freed from every part.
If it is difficult to discern those things precisely, then it is necessary to excoriate something from the head of the vein and from the foreskin. Because the foreskin, when it is subtle, is perhaps perforated on account of its own subtlety, quickly.
Then separate the foreskin from the head of the vein with a subtle linen cloth, which has already been soaked in cold water, so that they do not stick together again.
Then it should be treated with a tightening wine, until it is consolidated.
Chapter 57.
Concerning the cleansing of infants and the treatment of errors that occur in their accidents.
Circumcision is not a solution for continuity, like other wounds: however, since it arises from our operation, our will, and its use is especially in children, it is necessary that we mark out a better operation and a lighter way leading to health.
I say therefore that the ancients did not mention circumcision in any of their books: because they did not use it in their laws and it is only what we have acquired through experience.
Here is the translation:
And I have indeed already tested all these methods, and I did not find a better purification with cauterization, and binding with thread.
Because in purification with a branding iron, the skin often escapes. Because the skin has two layers: therefore perhaps the outer skin is cut and the inner layer is touched; thus it is driven to make an incision in order to cut the other, and future pain. And when purification is done by touching with the fingers, that is, digitally, which surgeons use, they do not worry about an external incision of a vital member; because perhaps it enters into its opening.
But in purification with a scalpel, perhaps the iron will putrefy and corrupt your operation; and indeed the skin of a child is brief by nature, and often they are born in such a way that they do not need purification; and I have seen that already.
Purification with cauterization and binding with thread has revealed a good experiment to me; because the branding irons are proportionate to the incision: therefore, what is above is like what is below. When therefore you press your hand, the two edges are proportionate, and they meet according to one operation at one time; and there is a compression of similar figure, containing the skin of the limb from every part, with which no error falls entirely.
And the proper method of operation is to make it seem external, especially with a child, if he is one of those who understands for a short time, that you do not do anything unless you bind the thread on his limb only; and you leave him until another day.
Then make him rejoice and be happy in every way possible to you, because he receives his own understanding. Then make him stand between your prepared hands, and let him not be sitting; and hide the branding irons in your sleeve or under your foot, so that the boy does not see them at all, nor anything from the instruments.
Then insert your hand into its scrotum and support it on the skin, and draw it upwards, until the head of the scrotum emerges. Then cleanse it from what has accumulated in it filthily.
Then bind the marked place with a double thread. Afterwards, bind below it a second ligature, somewhat lower. Then hold with your index finger, and with your thumb retain the place of the lower ligature in good retention, and make an incision between the two ligatures. Then lift the skin upwards quickly, and extract the head of the scrotum. Then let the blood flow slowly (for it is better), and put powder on top; and above the powder a cloth in which the yolk of an egg cooked in rose water has been spread out, mixed with fresh rose oil that is good: and leave it on until another day: and take care of it with the remaining treatment, until it is healed.
This is the formula for a cleansing ointment.
Let the two extremities be numb and let them be inclined, so that no branch of a nail emerges from them, and let the length of the two be equal, as the length of two wrists is equal.
There is an error, indeed, in the cleansing, for perhaps the entire inner skin has escaped, or part of it at the incision.
Therefore, it is necessary that you stretch it out from your hour with your finger before the suppuration of the place, and make an incision according to its equality.
But if you are not able to hold it with your finger, then extract it with a hook, and make an incision.
But if three days have passed and the swelling under the scrotum remains inflamed, a suppuration: then leave it until the warm suppuration settles, and scrape it off with ease, and make an incision according to what is prepared for you: and beware of the head of the scrotum. For it will not harm him.
Therefore, treat it with what consolidates the wound from powders, which we have described in the treatise on powders; and if it is incised above a measure from the skin, and evacuates upwards, it will not harm him.
Therefore, treat it with what we have said, until he is healed.
Chapter 58.
On the extraction of a retained urine in the bladder.
The retention of urine in the bladder occurs from an obstruction made by a stone, or congealed blood, or pus, or born flesh, and similar things from those which we have mentioned in the modes of treatment in the division.
And if the urine does not flow, and you see that its retention is due to a stone, which is now in the neck of the bladder: then it is necessary for him to be bent over on his knees. Then his feet should be placed on his back, and he should stretch out his abdomen from the upper part of his back, and the patient should strain his breath as much as possible. Therefore, pressure is applied to the neck of the bladder for the expulsion of the stone towards the back: whereupon the urine is released.
If it is not released with what we have said, and the situation is severe for the patient: then it is necessary to administer the extraction of it with an instrument, which is called a syringe, whose shape is this: made of silver, subtle, smooth, concave like a cannula of a bird's feather in subtlety of radius, long in likeness of one and a half palms; having a subtle cannula at its head.
And the method of urine exit through it is this: that you receive a double thread, and tie at its extremity a wool or a plug, with a good ligature; and you introduce the extremity of the thread into the lower part of the Syringe; and incise with forceps if something overflows from the wool, but truly introduce into the cannula with violence, like an eaglet.
Then apply a poultice with oil or butter, and to the affected area: and make the patient sit on a seat, and anoint the affected limb, and apply the poultice with moist olive oil, and olive oil, and warm water.
Then insert the poultice into the affected limb with ease, until it reaches the root of the affected area.
Then apply a double layer of it above the navel.
Then push the poultice into it, until it reaches the bladder, and the patient feels that it has already reached the empty area: and this does not happen according to this order, unless the passage, through which it passes, is one where there is twisting.
Then extend a thread with a piece of wool gradually. For the wool will follow the thread.
Then extract it, and make the thread flow through the passage of urine: and repeat the poultice, and do not stop doing that until the bladder is emptied, and the patient finds relief.
Regarding the quality of the bladder's cleansing with a Clyster.
Chapter 59.
When an ulcer occurs in the bladder, or blood congeals in it, or pus is confined in it, and there is a need to distill waters and medications into it: then it should be done with an instrument called a Clyster, and this is its form.
It is deaf, that is, closed. And in it there are three openings, two on one side and one on the other side, as you see.
And the concave place, in which is what pushes it, should be according to the quantity that it needs without addition, until when something is drawn out with it, it attracts from the humidities: and when it is pushed, it expels to a distance: according to what the Clyster does, through which naphta, that is, Greek fire, is projected in the praetorian martis.
When therefore you wish to inject moisture into the bladder, introduce the extremity of the Clyster into the moisture, and draw with it what propels towards the above, for the moisture is drawn into the concavity of the Clyster.
Then introduce its extremity into the rod, according to what we have described in the syringe. Then push the moisture with what pushes it, for the moisture quickly reaches the bladder, so that the patient feels it.
The form of the Clyster is subtle, by which the bladder is clystered.
Let it be made of silver or gold alloy: its head should be slightly higher, like a small hook, and underneath it a curve where the ligament falls.
Then take the bladder of a goat, and put moisture in it, so that you may clyster the bladder. Then tie it between two curves of a strong ligature with double thread: and warm that moisture slightly above the fire.
Then introduce the extremity of the Clyster into the rod, afterwards grasp your hand over the bladder with the moisture, with a suitable compression, until the patient feels it, because that moisture has now reached the bladder.
But if a bladder is not present to you, then take a piece of parchment, and make from it a circle, and pierce it throughout its entire roundness. Then introduce a strong thread into those perforations, as they are turned around. Then gather the circle together, as it is gathered into an alsufra: afterwards you put in it what you wish from the moistures, and oils, and waters.
Then tie it to the instrument: and do with it as you did with the bladder from expression with your hand, until the moisture reaches the bladder.
Chapter 60.
Of the Extraction of a Stone.
I have described in the division of species of stone, and its treatment with medicines; and I have described the difference between a stone generated in the kidneys, and in the bladder, and its signs in the whole body; and I have described the stone on which the operation falls with hand and section; and it is a stone generated in the bladder properly; and he who is struck by the rod; and I am narrating that with clear exposition and abbreviation.
I say therefore, that a stone generated in the bladder, most often happens to boys.
And among its signs is that the urine emerges from the bladder similar to water in its subtlety; and it appears with white sediment, and the weak rod is rubbed, and it labors with it, and often hangs. Then it erects itself, and emerges with it to the anus in many of them.
And it is an easy healing for boys, from the fact that they are up to fourteen years old. And it is difficult in the elderly. In the young, however, it is moderate, in that which is between those: and whose stone is larger, the treatment is easier; and if small, its care is conversely.
When we arrive at the treatment, it is necessary first to cleanse the weak area with clysters, which extracts all the feces that are in its intestines; for it prevents the detection of the stone during the examination.
Then the weak area is taken with its feet, and it is shaken, and moved downwards; so that the stone descends to the bottom of the bladder, or jumps down from a high place many times.
Then make him sit between your hands prepared, and his hands are under his hips, so that the whole bladder is inclined downwards.
Then press on him, and touch him externally.
If therefore you feel a stone in the space, then at once with haste take a section above it.
What if it does not fall under your touch at all, then it is necessary that you wipe the index finger with oil of your left hand, if it is a weak boy: or the middle finger if he is a complete youth: and insert it into his anus, and feel for the stone until it stands under your finger: and turn him around slowly to the neck of the bladder.
Then press on it with your finger, and push it towards the outside against the place of its section: and order the assistant to press the bladder with his hand, and order another assistant to stretch out the testicles with his right hand upwards: and with his other hand, to remove the skin which is beneath the testicles in the part where the section is.
Then insert a spatula, whose shape is this. And find in it what is between the anus and testicles, and not in the middle, towards the left side of the hip: and let the section be above the stone, and your finger should be in the anus: and let the section be transverse, so that the outer section is wide and the inner one is strict, according to the quantity that it is possible for the stone to come out from there without being larger.
Perhaps indeed the finger compresses, which is in the anus, the stone at the section, and it comes out without difficulty.
And know that the stone has angles and edges, wherefore its exit is difficult because of that.
And it is smooth, similar to a gland, and rounded: and its exit becomes easy.
Therefore add to the fissure for those which have angles and edges.
What if it does not come out thus, then it is necessary to contrive over it: or to bind around it with a gesture of decent art, whose extremity is like the Moon, which binds around the stone and does not leave it: or to insert beneath it an instrument of subtle curvature.
If you cannot operate above with it, then enlarge the opening a little further. What if something flows from the blood, cut it off with a scalpel.
If there is more than one stone, then push the largest first into the mouth of the bladder. Then cut above it. Next, push a small one after that; and do similarly if there are more than two.
What if it is very large, then ignorance is to cut above it with a large section. Because it happens to the weak one of two things, either that he dies or that he suffers from a continuous dripping of urine; therefore, because the place is not consolidated at all.
But truly administer its expulsion, until it comes out; or use your ingenuity in breaking it with forceps, until you extract it bit by bit.
When you have completed your operation, then fill the wound with turpentine, and aloe, and dragon's blood; and sprinkle it, and put on it a cloth infused with oil and wine, or rose oil, and cold water; so that a warm apostemum may be induced.
Then prop up the weak person on their neck, and do not loosen the bandage, until the third day. When you have loosened it, bathe the place with water, and much oil.
Then treat it with dyaphinicon ointment and basilicon ointment, until it heals.
If however a warm apostemum is added to the wound, and it corrodes, and similar things; as if blood congeals in the bladder, and urine is prohibited from it; and that is recognized by the emission of blood with urine. Therefore introduce your finger into the wound, and extract the blood. For if it remains, it provokes the corrosion of the bladder, and its putrefaction.
Then apply a poultice made with vinegar, water, and salt; and oppose it to every type of wound that is suitable for its cure, until it heals.
And it is necessary during the hours of treatment to bind two hip bones together, and to assemble, for a cause of medicinal remedies that are placed on the spot.
What if the stone is small and is located in the middle of the urinary tract, and it is fixed there, and prohibits the exit of urine: then cure it with what is narrowed before you arrive at the section. For many times indeed you will excuse yourself from the section through this treatment, now indeed I have proven that.
And it is, to receive a Perforator made of iron alloy, whose shape is this, a triangular pointed extremity, fixed in wood.
Then take a thread, and bind it with the hip bone under the stone so that it does not return to the bladder.
Then introduce the perforating iron into the hip bone with ease, until it reaches the stone: and turn the Perforator by hand in that very stone little by little: and endeavor to make a perforation of it, until you make it penetrate from the other side.
The urine is indeed released immediately.
Then press your hand on what remains of the stone from the outer part of the hip bone. It indeed breaks apart, and comes out with the urine, and the sick person is healed.
But if this treatment is not prepared for you, because of something that prohibits it from that: then bind a thread under the stone, and another thread above the stone. Then cut above the stone on that very hip bone between the two bindings. Then extract it. Afterwards release the binding, and clean the congealed blood that forms in the wound.
And it is not necessary to bind the thread under the stone, unless so that it does not return to the bladder: and another binding above, unless when the thread is released after the exit of the stone, the skin returns to its place, and closes the wound: and for this reason it is necessary for you to do that when you bind the thread above, to elevate the skin upwards, so that it returns to its complement, and closes the wound, as we said.
Chapter 61.
On the Extraction of Stones in Women.
A stone is rarely generated in women.
But if it happens to any of them that a stone forms, then the treatment is difficult and is prohibited because of many methods.
The cause of theirs is: because the woman perhaps is a virgin.
And the second reason is that you do not find a woman who reveals herself to a doctor, when she is chaste, or among those having husbands.
The third reason is that you do not find a woman who knows this art well, especially the operation with her hand.
And the fourth reason is the remoteness of the location of the stone: because it requires a deep incision, and there is fear in that.
Because if necessity leads to that, then it is necessary to take a woman doctor, well-informed: and she is hardly found.
If you truly desire those things, then seek a chaste doctor, subtle and well-informed, and present a midwife experienced in women's affairs, or a woman who has acquired part of the art: make her present, and especially entrust it to her, so that she may do all that you prescribe to her from the inquiry about the stone.
Firstly, it is necessary to examine if the woman is a virgin: then it is necessary to introduce a finger into her anus, and to seek the stone.
If therefore he finds it, he should grasp it under his finger, and then instruct the midwife to introduce her finger into the womb of the weak woman, and to inquire about the stone, after she places her left hand on the bladder, and presses it with a good compression.
If therefore he finds the stone, then it is necessary to gradually move it from the opening of the bladder downwards with all his might, until he reaches it at the root of the hip.
Then let him be seated on the opposite side of the middle of the vulva at the root of the hip, from whichever part it is prepared for him, and he feels the stone in that part; and his finger does not move away from the stone, constricted beneath it; and let the incision be small at first. Then insert a rod upon that incision.
Then insert a rod upon that incision. If he feels the stone, then let him add to the second incision a quantity proportionate to that which the stone emerges from it.
And know that there are many kinds of stones. For among them is the small one, and the large, the smooth and the rough, the long, and the round having branches.
Know therefore its kind, that it may be signified to you through this on account of what you wish.
If blood overflows you, then add to the affected place a triple bandage, and hold it for one hour, until the bleeding is stanched.
Then return to your operation, until the stone emerges: and make sure you have prepared yourself with the instruments I mentioned for extracting stones from the bladder, so that you may be assisted by them in your operation.
If the flow of blood overcomes you, and you know that the expulsion of blood is from an artery that has been cut: then put powder on the place, and bind it with a decent ligature of poultices: and do not move it: and leave the stone, and do not extract it. Perhaps the weak woman will die. Then treat the wound.
When therefore the sharpness of the blood settles down after days, and the place putrefies, then return to your operation, until the stone emerges.
Chapter 62.
About the incision above the watery hernia.
The watery hernia is not anything except an aggregation of humidity in the white vein, which is under the skin of the testicle containing the egg, and it is called a siphac.
And when it is in its own little cloth, which nature has prepared for it in the part of the ovum, until it is putrefied: because it is another thing, and it is the skin of the testicle between the white albumen, as we have said: and it does not happen unless rarely.
And the generation of this ramification is from the debility that occurs in the testicles: because this material is poured out to them. And when it happens from a blow on the testicles.
And this humidity has many colors. For it is either a pale yellowish color, or it is blood-red, or faecal, black, or it is watery-white, and it is that which is more.
And the signs by which it is known where the collection of water is, are these. For if it is in the white albumen that we mentioned, then the abscess is round in length for a short time, like the figure of an ovum: and the testicle does not appear, because the humidity surrounds it on all sides.
And if the humidity is in its own little cloth, then the abscess is round with a part of the ovum, and on account of this a man thinks that it is another ovum.
And if the humidity is between the skin of the testicles and the white albumen, then it falls under perception.
When therefore you seek the cognition of the color of the humidity, then you experience the color of the humidity in the abscess with an introjected square, whose form has preceded. According to that which proceeds from the investigation of the Introjected, judge concerning that which is between it.
When therefore we come to the cure with iron, then it is necessary that you precipitate on the weak part, so that it may be phlebotomized if possible, and you see its body full.
Then he should lean back on his back on a high place a little, and put many cloths under him.
Then sit on his left side, and order the assistant to sit on his right side, who should stretch out his rod to one of the two lateral skin flaps of the buttocks, and to a portion of the stomach's membrane.
Then take a broad spatula, and dissect the skin flap from the middle along its length, up to the perineum: and make the incision straight and equidistant from the line that divides the skin flaps, until you reach the white membrane surrounding it: and excavate it and observe, or be cautious about this, so that you do not injure it: and let your excavation be on the part that is suspended with the ovum plus: and carefully examine with the excavation according to the quantity that is possible for you.
Then pierce the membrane full of water with a wide perforation, and extract all the water.
Then separate between the two labia of the section with hooks, and extend the membrane upwards, and do not touch the skin flap that surrounds it: and incise the membrane as much as possible for you to incise it, either in its entirety or partially, especially the subtle part beneath. For if you do not carefully examine it, there will be no security in the incision, lest the water returns.
But if the ovum proceeds to come out of its skin during your operation hour: then when you have completed the section of the membrane, reduce it. Then bring together the two skin flaps of the buttocks with a suture.
Then treat it as you would other wounds, until it heals.
But if you find the ovum corrupted by blackness or other things, then it is necessary to tie up the veins that are its suspenders, fearing a flow of blood.
Then cut off the buttock with its suspender, and extract the ovum: afterwards treat it as we have said.
But if water has accumulated in the two parts, then know that there are two branches: therefore dissect the other part equally according to what you did in the other.
And if it is equal to you, so that it may be one operation, then do this: afterwards abstain from blood. And introduce a woolen thread soaked in oil or rose oil: and put before it another thread which you had soaked in wine and oil, and spread it over the two testicles, and strengthen the belly: and put above it doubled cloths, and they are poultices: and tie them above with a ligature, which has six threads according to this form.
Then two cloths are applied, and they are soaked, and they fill with a non-carmine lotion, according to this similarity: and they make extremities which are pressed from a pouch, or damp wool: and they are gathered with a strapping in the lumbar region of the arms: and one extremity receives above the hip up to the back, and the second receives towards the part of the chest: and two extremities above the two hips below, and two other extremities above the two groin areas, and the whole strapping is gathered in the lumbar region of the arms.
And when these extremities are artificially medicated with a cautery at the place of the incision with iron: and it is, that you receive a subtle cautery knife, and cut with it the skin of the testicles: and it is ignited, according to what we have narrated: until when it is detected, a white album containing water: then receive the cautery, according to this form.
They are assimilated to Greek letters.
Then pierce with it that album, and it is ignited, until all moisture departs.
Then stretch out the album with hooks, and scrape it with a subtly ignited cautery, and cut into it according to what is possible for you, until you eradicate all of it.
And beware lest you touch it with fire.
And know that this operation is more saving, and farther from the flow of blood, and better than an operation with incision.
If indeed an opposing condition makes itself known to you at the time of surgical incision, or at the time of cauterization, or a warm aposteme, or a flux of blood, or something else: then it is necessary that you should cure what makes the opposing condition, along with the treatment that is suitable for it, according to what has been previously mentioned.
But if the patient is faint-hearted and does not expect to survive this operation, due to its horror: then administer the perforation according to what I describe, and it is.
When it is certified to you through what we have said about the signs, that the humors are watery: then it is necessary that you should make the patient sit on an elevated seat.
Then make a perforation into the lower part of the abscess with a broad spatula: and place the perforation according to the length of the body, and let there be a wide opening, until all the water flows out.
Then put a compress on the affected place, and bind it, and let it stay until the remaining water flows out: then treat it, until the wound is healed.
But if there is an obstruction to the flow of water at the time when you make a perforation: and it does not happen for any other reason, because the white membrane causes an opposing condition at the orifice of the wound, and prevents the exit of water: then it is necessary that you insert a feather into the wound, or an instrument with which to extract the hydropic waters, whose form has been described previously: or add it in the operation of the wound for a short time.
And know that the water returns and accumulates after six months, or around that time. When it has accumulated, then it is necessary to puncture it again in the same way, and the patient will pass his days.
Chapter 63.
Concerning the treatment of a fleshy abscess.
Know that in the incision above this abscess, it is due to a pervasive fear of causing harm in many dispositional arrangements. Therefore, it seems to me that its dismissal is to be saved from those things.
And I am mindful of the operation in it, and the species of abscesses.
I say therefore that many abscesses occur in bodies, from which lumps are composed: and it happens for many reasons.
Or from an acute surplus or sharpness, which is poured out into the lumps. Or from a blow.
And the color of the abscess is according to the color of the body, and no pain is found in it: and it is a grave abscess.
And perhaps it is a stone-like abscess, whose color is dark, and there is no sensation in it.
And sometimes it happens from the knotting of arteries, and their inflammation: as I have already mentioned in its remembrance: or from the inflammation of veins.
Which therefore is from the inflammation of arteries, is recognized by the arrangement of the abscess, when you compress it with your fingers. And it is not necessary to touch it directly.
That which happens from the inflammation of veins, does not disappear at all with compression by the fingers.
And now it is possible that a section be made about this species, and about the remaining flesh: and it is, as if you were cutting into the skin of lumps. Then extend the skin upwards, and extract it with a white sifach: and free the suspensory from the veins, and bind the veins: and incise the suspensory after you have freed it from all parts of the skin.
If therefore the skin is consolidated with those born flesh, then it is necessary to draw back the skin, and incise it.
And if there is an adhesion between something from the siphacel, or in what is between the veins: then it is necessary to free the entire adhesion, and incise it with a round incision.
If however there is a growth of flesh at the place of adhesion which is behind: then it is necessary to make an incision throughout all of it, and extract the tumor, as we have said.
When therefore the operation is complete, then apply a dressing soaked in rose oil and wine; afterwards treat it with the remaining treatment until it heals.
Chapter 63.
On the treatment of fractures, which is with Vite.
It is a hidden abscess, similar to a boil, with softening of the testicles, and it makes movement and exercise difficult for the patient, and walking.
And in the treatment of this disease, there is fear because of the previous memory of what preceded it.
However, it is necessary that we describe the operation in this according to what the first ones did.
I say therefore, that it is necessary for you to make the patient sit on an elevated seat. Then apply a poultice to the lower testicles. Then hold the skin of the testicles with your fingers, with vessels that are near the veins; and let another assistant hold them, and stretch them with a vigorous stretching.
Then make an incision with a broad, sharp scalpel, making a transverse section directly into the vessels, until they are exposed.
Then remove everything from every side, as we have told you in the extraction of the arteries that are in the temples.
Next, place a thread in them where there is a double filament, and tie it first to the places where the Vites meet; and tie it again at their ends. Then cut them off in a straight section in the middle, according to the length of the body, and extract what has accumulated from foul, corrupt humors.
Then treat the wound with the treatment of other wounds, in which it is necessary to generate a healthy humor, so that the vessels which nourish one testicle may fall. It is not an evil through that.
If, however, it happens to all the vessels, then it is necessary that they be extracted on account of this: so that the eye may not be deprived of its nourishment, because of the incision, and become dry, or wither away, and there may not be a remedy with them.
Chapter 65.
On the treatment of an intestinal rupture.
The cause of this rupture is from a blow, which occurs in an extended area above the navel on the part of the groin from a stroke of the belly.
Because the intestines descend from that rupture to one of the testicles. And this rupture is either from a blow or from its extension.
And these two types occur from many causes: either from a blow, or a fall, or a shout, or the lifting of a heavy thing, and similar things.
And the symptom is when it is from an extension of a blow. It is what occurs gradually over a long period of time and does not occur suddenly: and it is an equal abscess towards the deep part: therefore, because the blow compresses the intestine.
And the symptom of it when it is from a blow, because it causes sudden severe pain from the beginning: and it is a diverse abscess, appearing under the skin nearby: and that is because of the exit of the intestine, and its course to the external area of the blow.
And sometimes it goes out with the intestine a little piece: and this is called intestinal rupture, and hernia: and sometimes it happens with flatulence.
And sometimes feces runs into the intestine and is retained there: and it is with that a very harmful affliction: because it causes severe pain, and especially when it is pressed.
And in the treatment of this type of illness with an iron instrument, there is fear: because it is necessary to beware of accidents in it.
And the method of operation is to press gently on the affected area, so that he may reduce the intestine with his hand to its internal concavities. Then it will be placed back onto its neck between your hands: and you will lift up its legs.
Then stretch out the skin that follows the skin to the upper areas, and cut the entire length of the testicles along their longitude. Then place the two labia of the perineal section, according to what is necessary to open up the section with them: and let the section be according to the quantity that is possible, so that it may emerge from it an egg.
Then scrape away the sipnach, and what is beneath the skin of the testicles, until when the white album is detected, hard on every side: then insert your index finger into what follows the testicle, in what is between the white sipnach, which is beneath the skin of the egg, and between the sipnach according to, and completely separate it from the adhesion that is in the posterior part of the egg.
Then move with your right hand to the interior of the skin of the testicles: and with this stretch the white sipnach upwards, with your left hand: and lift the egg with the sipnach to the part of the section: and instruct the assistant, that he should stretch out the egg upwards: and you release the adhesion, which is behind a complete solution.
And examine with your fingers, that there should be nothing there from the intestine wrapped up in the hard white sipnach. But if you find something there: then push it down into the lower abdomen.
Then take a thread, on which is a thick string, made into a licinium from ten threads: and insert it at the posterior sipnach, that is, the tunic, which is beneath the skin of the testicles following the section: then cut the extremities that emerge from the thread, until there are four threads. Then arrange some of them above others in a cross-shaped pattern, and tie with alsifach, which we mentioned earlier, because it is under the skin's tender ligament, so that nothing from the ulcer can seep out to nourish them, lest a warm apostema develop. And put the second ligature outside the first ligature, at a distance of less than two fingers from it. And after these two ligatures, release from the alsifach, which is under the skin's tender ligament, an amount the size of a finger: and cut out the entire remainder according to its roundness, and extract the humor.
Then cut below the skin of the testicles, where the blood and serum flow, as we have described in what has been mentioned before.
Then apply a woolen dressing soaked in oil, and put it on the wound: and apply the ligature that we have described. And when the alsifach is cauterized with the white substance we mentioned, after the incision, fearing a flow of blood. For it often happens that way. And leave the ligature until it falls off by itself.
If, however, the case is delayed, then it should be fomented with warm water: and put on it what we mentioned, until it falls off.
Then treat the wound with the remaining treatment of wounds, until it is cured.
Chapter 66.
On the Treatment of Varicose Veins.
In this varicose vein, I have not seen anyone who has dared to attempt its treatment with iron.
And the first ones certainly said that it would be as we described in the case of varicose veins with vitiligo. Which is to tie the vessels below the section with facility: then cut in the middle, and treat afterwards with what opens them, until the vessels fall off: and treat the wound, according to what we have said, until it heals.
Chapter 67.
On the rupture that occurs in the groin.
When a rupture occurs in the groin, as we have said, and a place protrudes, but nothing from the intestines descends to the testicles; and if it does descend, it is small, and returns at all hours. But if it is prolonged over time, a fissure is added in the sifach, until the intestines descend into the sifach.
And this occurs from the extension of the sifach, which is in the groin, as we have said. Because it is extended: then it becomes soft and putrid, and the place swells and protrudes.
And its treatment is with a cautery, as was previously mentioned in its description.
And sometimes it is treated with an iron, according to this method: and it is, that the patient lies weakly on his back between your hands. Then dry the place of the ruptured and swollen area, applying pressure across its width, according to the size of three fingers.
Then bind the alsifak and what is beneath the skin, until when the white sifach is detected, which is beneath the skin that follows it.
Then take a scalpel and place it on the prominent place of the sifach, and press it deeply into the belly.
Then make two prominent places on the end of the radius from the sifach, and connect one of them with the other by a suture; then extract the end of the radius.
And do not cut the alsifak at all, nor stretch a vein, nor anything else, as I have made you aware of in the treatment of an intestinal rupture.
Then treat it with the treatment for wounds. When you have made an incision, clean it, and restore the wound, until it heals.
For the sifach is constricted, and the prominence of the Rupture does not increase.
And cautery is better in this place, since it is closer to health.
Chapter 68.
On the softening of the skin of the testicles.
The skin of the testicles is often softened in certain men, because the flesh that is between them becomes soft and their appearance is disfigured.
Therefore it is necessary for the one who is seeking a cure for this condition to make the weak area rest on his back, and to incise the entire skin that has become soft over the natural skin.
Then he should bring together the two lips with a suture: and if it is necessary, he should first remove the excess of softened skin with three or four sutures, and make a firm suture.
Then he should incise between the sutures.
Then he should take care of the remaining wounds with a treatment, until they heal, and the threads fall off.
Chapter 69.
On Castration.
You should know that Castration is forbidden by our law: and because of this, it would be lawful for me not to mention it in my book: and there is no need to mention it, except for two reasons.
One of which is that it should be in the knowledge of a physician when he is questioned about it: and so that he knows the treatment for one who has suffered it.
And the other method is that we often need to castrate certain animals for our own benefit through it, such as goats, hyraxes, and cats, and similar animals.
I say therefore, that Castration is done according to two methods. Or by attrition. Or by fissure and section.
In that which is done by attrition, the method of operation is this: we make the animal sit in warm water, until its testicles become soft and relaxed, and hang down; then we rub them with our hand, until they resolve and do not appear to the touch.
In castration, it is necessary to hold the animal firmly and to press on the skin of its testicles with your left hand.
Then tie the suspensor, and cut above each testicle in one section, until two testicles proceed: then incise these after you have removed both, and do not leave anything above them except a subtle sifa, which is above the vessels.
And this method of castration is better than that which is done by attrition: because attrition perhaps leaves something in the testicles, and therefore the animal desires coitus.
Then treat the wound, until it heals.
Chapter 70.
On the treatment of Hermaphrodites in two modes.
The Hermaphrodite is treated from the urine in two modes. The sign of theirs is, because it appears in what follows, either in the skin of the testicles, or in the region between the two testicles, a figure like a woman's vulva, in which there are hairs; and sometimes urine runs out from what is in the skin of the testicles.
In females, however, there is one form, and it is a woman's vulva above the perineum like small men's testicles entirely, protruding to the outside: of which one is like a man's priapus, and two are like two testicles.
And the treatment of three species, two from men and one from women, is: because it is necessary to cut away the excess flesh, until their impression disappears. Then treat them for the remaining wounds.
In the second species of men, from which urine flows out, which is in the skin of the testicles, there is no operation, nor is there any treatment at all.
Chapter 71.
On the incision of the Twitching [or Hernia], and of the protruding flesh in women's vulvae.
Perhaps the fat is added to the natural thing, until it becomes foul and its appearance becomes repulsive; and sometimes it is even magnified in certain women, until it expands like in men, and reaches up to the groin.
You should therefore hold back the excess of the fat with your hand or with a hook, and cut into it: and do not delay in the incision, especially at the deep root: so that there is no flow of blood.
Then take care to cure the wound itself, until it heals.
But there is also a type of flesh that grows in the orifice of the womb, until it fills it: and perhaps it emerges to the outside according to the likeness of a tail: and because of this, some people first call it a "tail-like" disease. Therefore, we should cut into it as we cut into the fat, and take care of it, until it heals.
Concerning the treatment of a prolapsed womb that is not perforated.
Chapter 72.
A prolapsed womb is when it is a womb of a woman not perforated, or if it has a small opening. And it is either natural or accidental.
The accidental one is from a preceding illness: and it indeed occurs either from flesh that has grown added, or from thinness, or from tension: and it occurs either in the depths of the womb, or in its sides, or in its upper part, or lower part: and it prevents coitus and impregnation, and childbirth, and perhaps prevents menstruation.
And the recognition of it is made by the obstetrician's examination, if the obstruction is apparently close at hand.
But if it is not apparent, then you should examine it with your fingers, or with a probe.
But if the obstruction is from thinness and is close to the two labia: then push gently and break it apart.
And it is, as you place above two swollen lips.
Then place the tips of your two hands there, and let the woman sit on her back with her knees extended. Then stretch out the two lips with force, until the subtle suture is disrupted, and the opacity is opened up.
Then take a linen cloth, and soak it in oil, and place it on the location: and let the woman do this every day, so that the place is not consolidated with another ulcer.
If, however, the suture is thick and dense: then it is necessary to cut it with a broad spatula-like leaf of myrtle.
If, however, the opacity is born from native flesh, then suspend it with hooks, and incise it: and have with you medicines that calm the flow of blood without biting, such as acacia, and dragon's blood, and thus aggregated with white albumen.
Then administer a tube of ample lead, so that the wound is not consolidated quickly, hold it for some days: and administer a dressing of dry linen, then let the rest be cured with usual treatment, until it is healed.
And when there are born in the womb carnal nativities of other flesh: therefore it is necessary to incise according to this method: since it is not a cancerous aposteme, for an aposteme of cancer that is in the womb does not contradict with iron at all.
Chapter 73.
On the treatment of hemorrhoids, Athelil, and red ulcers on the vulvas of women.
Hemorrhoids are indeed the opening of venous orifices, so that much blood flows out from them constantly.
Since therefore hemorrhoids are ancient, they become habitual: and I have already spoken in the division of their species, and their signs: and I will say here which ones receive a cure from them, and which ones do not.
I say therefore that hemorrhoids which are in the opening of the matrix, and do not appear to the senses; then it is not suitable for him to be treated with iron.
But those of them which are in the opening of the matrix on which the sense falls, are those that can be treated.
It is necessary therefore that you introduce a woman into a cold house. Then stretch out the uterus with forceps, or with a rough cloth, and cut them out from their roots.
Then powder over them at the flux of blood from one powder of incisions without causing pain: such as acacia, and dragon's blood, and frankincense, and similar things.
Then press her feet against the wall for one hour. Afterwards, put her in cold water.
If the flow of blood persists: then make her sit in a decoction of sumac, and quince cortex, and gall, and similar things.
Then take barley flour, and mix it with honey and vinegar, and make a plaster with it on her back.
If therefore the blood is cut off with it, it is good: and if not, make them adhere to the back with ventoses, and breasts, without scratching.
Then take wool, and soak it in the juice of tarathita, or the juice of agnoglossa, or the juice of willow branches, that is, of aglantine, of Pontic wine, and make them adhere to the place.
When therefore the aposteme has quieted down, then treat the place with ointments, until it is healed.
The Albarth indeed is a red substance similar to the heads of alhaasse, and has a rough appearance.
It is necessary therefore that you cut away what appears from it, according to what I said in the lil equally: and treat it, until it is healed.
Chapter 74.
On the Perforation of the Rectum which occurs in the Matrix.
Many kinds of tumors occur in the matrix, such as cancer and stone-like tumors, and ulcers, and putrid matters, and lividities, that is, herpes, a kind of ulceration, and fistulas, and hemorrhoids, and ragadiae, and thelil, and hot tumors.
And I have already described all these diseases and their species, and their signs, and their cures in the division: it is necessary to discuss in this treatise the hot tumor which occurs in the matrix, when it is one of the tumors that collect bad blood, and it is useful to know how its opening is made with an iron instrument.
It is therefore necessary to consider. Then if the pain of the tumor in its inception is acute with percussion and inflammation, and fever: and you see it red: if sense falls upon it, then do not hasten with its perforation: and cure it with that which aids its maturation, until when the acute accidents quiet down.
Then it is necessary to make the woman sit on a seat that has two footrests, and recline, or support herself on her back, and bring her feet together to the lower part of the belly: and let her hips be expanded, and place her arms under her thighs, and bind them with a convenient ligament to that.
Then the midwife should sit on the right side, and administer the instrument by which the orifice of the matrix is opened.
And it is necessary when you administer this instrument, to direct it with the radius of the deep matrix of the woman: so that it may not be that which enters further from the instrument than the depth of the matrix, and harms the weak woman.
But if the instrument is longer than the depth, then it is necessary to place pillows on the upper surface of the deep matrix: so that the entrance of the whole instrument into the depth of the matrix may be prevented: and it is necessary to place a twist, which runs in the instrument, from the upper side: and to hold the instrument, and to turn the minister's twist, until the depth of the matrix is opened.
When therefore the wound appears and is touched by the hand, and it is gentle and soft: then it is fitting to separate it at its head with a broad spatula.
When therefore the blood is evacuated, then it is fitting to put a linen cloth soaked in rose oil or green oil, in which there is some astringency; and put the cloth, and extract the suppuration from the depths of the wound.
And put a clean woolen cloth soaked in water, in which there are boilings of mallows, over the wound and over the area around it.
Then it should be treated after two days with an ointment that is suitable for that, until it heals.
And when the wound and ulcer are washed out, so that it is cleansed with water and honey; then with water in which the root of lily or long aristolochia has been boiled; then return to the ointment.
If the ulcer has been hidden inside the wound, then it is fitting to refrain from curing it with iron, rather cure it with what we have said in the division.
Chapter 70.
The doctrine of obstetrics, how they medicate living embryos that have emerged into a form not according to nature.
It is necessary for the obstetrician to recognize first the natural form of the fetus.
From these signs it is evident, when you see a woman striving to press down below, and longing to smell the air, and alleviated above what is above her from the fetus, and hastening the exit of the embryo: then know that this fetus is according to natural form, and its exit is above its head, and the afterbirth with it: or suspended, or hanging from the navel.
When therefore you see these signs, then it is fitting to press down her womb, so that the embryo may descend quickly.
When it descends upon its head, a second thing descends with it, and it is cleansed of those excessive impurities by a good cleansing.
Whoever is beyond this boundary is unnatural, unworthy of praise.
Because when the fetus emerges on its feet, and the body emerges before its head, and one of its feet, or one of its hands: or its head emerges and its hand: or its belly emerges: and perhaps it turns upon its neck, and similar things from those unnatural shapes.
It is necessary therefore for the Obstetrician to be prudent and subtle in all these things, and to beware of error and deception: and I am showing every figure from them, and how the intelligence is in it, and it is signified by that, and it stands upon that.
When the fetus emerges with its natural headfirst presentation, and it is oppressive to the woman, and childbirth becomes difficult for her, and you see that her strength is already debilitated: then make her sit on a seat, or let the women hold her: and apply warm vapors to her womb with a decoction of fenugreek, and with humid oils.
Then the Obstetrician inserts a small spatula between her fingers, and finds with it the secondine, and cuts it with her nail, until she feels what is in it from the humidity: and presses the woman's belly, until the fetus descends.
If it does not descend, then it is necessary that the woman be clistized with a suppository of fenugreek mucilage, with sesame oil.
Then advise her to compress herself after the suppository, and make her sniff with a condition, and hold her mouth and nostrils for one hour. For the fetus will emerge immediately.
If two hands of the fetus emerge first, then it is necessary to reduce them with gentle facilitation little by little. If she does not deliver at the entrance, then place the woman on a seat and elevate her feet upwards; afterwards strike the seat against the ground; and the woman should hold on, so that she does not fall during the concussion.
If therefore the hands do not come out, and the fetus is dead: then cut them, and extract the remainder of the fetus: and bind her hand with a cloth, and extract it with equality: for itself will come out.
The delivery of the embryo on its feet. When the fetus comes out onto its feet, then it is necessary to push them upwards; afterwards, convert the fetus slowly; then balance it.
Then take one of its feet and extend it slowly.
When they come out as far as the hips, then command her to push, so that it is compressed, and make her sneeze with effort: for it will come out, if God wills.
And if it does not come out with what we have described, then reduce the fetus slowly, until you place it according to its natural figure. For itself will come out then with an easy delivery.
What if it is prohibited with all that we have described: then take from the mucilage of the altaea, and oil of sesame, and dissolved gum: and strike everything in a mortar with good percussion: afterwards mix it with the woman's vulva, and beneath her belly. Then make her sit in warm water, until she gets a hypochondriac condition.
When you see that the lower parts of hers are already warm, then make her a drink of myrrh: and support it. When she holds the drink for one hour, then make her sit on a seat. Then make her sneeze: and constrict its mouth and nose: and press the lower part of the belly with easy compression. The abscess should be opened at once.
The fetus exits over the knees and hands. When it emerges in this manner, then one should insert their hands gradually while introducing them little by little. Then the woman should lean back on her neck, and let her feet hang down below: and she herself should sit on a couch, and clasp her hands. Then press gently on her abdomen little by little. Then take out what is beneath her feet from the cushions, until it is prepared in the lower part. If the fetus does not emerge, then take hold of her feet and move them with a vigorous motion. Then press what is above the pubic area gently, until the fetus ascends to the top. Then insert your hands, and gently adjust the fetus: and instruct the woman to press, until the fetus emerges.
The fetus emerges, hanging widthwise from the hands. It is introduced into the reduction by her hands. If however it cannot be reduced, then lift up the woman and make her walk.
If indeed she is unable to walk, then make her lie on a couch: and strike her thighs with a vigorous concussion.
Then administer the liniment that you prepared from poultices.
If it receives the birth, then make her sit on a seat. Then strive in the reduction with your hands, and adjust the fetus according to its natural figure: and make the woman sneeze, and instruct her to press herself, until it emerges.
The fetus emerges over its neck, with outstretched hands, and its face is towards the back of its mother. It is necessary for the midwife to hold the hand of the fetus, then turn it around little by little, and adjust it with ease.
When it is equalized, then place on his wound what we have prepared from olive oil and mucus-like substances.
Then advise him to move slowly. When you have done that, then have him sit on a seat, and advise him to incline towards his right side. Then advise him to compress it, and have him sniff with a consonant.
The prepared fetus is turned towards the side. When it descends to the mouth of the womb in this manner with the afterbirth, then separate the afterbirth with your fingernail, until it is evacuated from the moisture.
If it is suspended over the face of the fetus and its neck, then cut it off from the navel: so that it may not be retained and die.
Then push the fetus inward, until you place it as needed: and advise the woman to compress herself frequently: for it will then come out with an easy delivery.
The delivery of twins, or of many fetuses. You should know that twins are often born: and sometimes three, and four. However, that is unusual, and rarely happens.
Five is indeed a thing beyond nature, and they do not live deeply: and they are contained by one afterbirth, even if they are multiple; and they are separated through the navel, distinguishing between them with a tie in the navel of each.
And sometimes they come out just like a single fetus comes out naturally, easily: and they come out with an excellent delivery, as we have described.
But if some of them are difficult at birth, and they come to what we said about unnatural shapes, then treat them as we described: and let there be a subtle and skilled hand, and it will do what it does with facility and delay, and it will be adapted according to every shape with what is prepared for it from the leading ingenuity towards health.
The reminder of that which is formed in the womb from embryos and are aborted.
Sometimes one is formed in the womb, and two, and three, and four, and five, and six, and seven, and more than ten: and it has been verified by me that a woman aborting gave birth to seven, and another to fifteen, all fully formed.
That which was done is the measurement of the glorious wise one.
Therefore, all this ought to be in the science of Obstetrics. Perhaps it will happen similarly to that one: therefore, it should be opposed to it with what is fitting.
Chapter 76.
On the extraction of a dead fetus.
When you treat a dead fetus with what I said in the division from medicine, and it does not come out, and you are forced to use manual operation, then it is necessary to consider.
If the woman is of sane virtue and not with any of the accidents from which loss is feared for her: then it is necessary that the woman be placed on a bed, on her back, and her head be inclined downward, and her thighs be elevated: and the assistant should hold her by both parts, or tie her to the bed, so that her body does not extricate itself during the extraction of the fetus.
Then moisten the womb's mouth with humid oils of musk and linseed, and fenugreek, and flaxseed.
Then the midwife mixes her hand with these oils and mucilages: then she inserts it into the womb with ease. Then she feels with her hand the place where the cotyledons of the fetus are attached, and finds a suitable location for that.
Consider then, if the fetus is prepared to descend onto its head: then it attaches cotyledons on its eyes, or neck, or mouth, or palate, or under its beard, or in its armpits, or in places near the ribs, and under the hypochondria.
If it has descended onto his feet, then on the soles and the middle of his ribs.
And it is necessary to hold the hook with his right hand; and he should place its curvature between the fingers of his left hand; and he should insert it with his hand with ease, and fix the hook in one of those places that we have mentioned, until it reaches a vacant space.
Then he should insert another hook opposite it, or a third if necessary, so that the contraction is equal and does not lean to one side.
Then it should be extended with an equal extension, and not only straightened according to its original direction, but moved to every part, so that the outcome is alleviated: just as it is done with a tooth during its extraction.
And it is necessary in that which is between them, that the extension is made soft. If a part of it is retained, then it is necessary to anoint the obstetrix with some fingers and oil, and insert them from that side, so that it revolves with what is retained.
If a part of the fetus emerges, then the hooks are changed to another place which is higher: do this until the whole fetus emerges.
If a hand emerges before the others, and it is not possible to reduce it, because of its contraction: then it is necessary to wrap a cloth around it. Then extract it until the whole emerges, and cut it off either at the joint of the arm or at the elbow; and thus it is necessary to do the same with the other hand and with both feet.
If the head of the fetus is large, or if it encounters contraction at the exit, or if water has accumulated in its head: then it is necessary to insert a perforated spatula between the fingers, and to find the head with it, and to extract the water; or to dislodge it with an instrument called Almisdac: whose shape comes with the shapes of other instruments in the chapter that follows this one.
Likewise, if the fetus is of a large-headed nature, then it is necessary to make an incision with a sudden jerk; or extract it with a misdirected push, as we have said. Then grasp the bones with forceps.
What if the head emerges and is stuck at the furcula (pubic bone): then it is to be cut until the humidity that is in the chest is poured out.
But if it does not progress and does not obey at the exit: then cut the head a little, according to what is possible for you.
What if the lower part of the womb is affected with a gathering (abscess), or there is dropsy in it: then it is necessary to perforate it, until the humidity flows out from it.
If indeed the fetus is on its feet, then its extraction is easy, and its direction to the mouth of the womb is light.
If however it is stuck at the womb or chest: then it is necessary to extract it with a cloth which you have wrapped around your hand: and cut the womb or chest until what is in them flows out.
If however the remaining limbs are removed, and the head returns: then the midwife should insert her left hand. If therefore the mouth of the womb is open, then she should insert her hand deep into the womb and search for the head with it, and grasp it with her fingers up to the mouth of the womb: then she should insert one hook or two hooks, and grasp it with them.
What if the mouth of the womb is stuck, because of a hot abscess that has happened to it: then it is not proper to struggle over it, rather it is proper to administer an effusion of humid and greasy things, and apply a plaster: and sit in waters that soften and moisten.
What if the fetus is on its side, then it is possible to straighten it: then administer what we have said about the living fetus.
What if it is not possible, then it should be cut away a little and extracted.
And it is necessary that you do not leave anything behind from the secondary wound entirely.
When therefore you have completed your operation, then administer what we have said in hot applications that occur in the matrices.
What if there is a flow of blood, then it should be stopped with aqueous styptics, and administer the remaining treatment.
And I have indeed already seen a woman, in whose womb a dead fetus was; then she was impregnated on top of it with another vice, afterwards another fetus also died. So a abscess occurred to her after a long time in her navel, and it became swollen, until it opened up: and it began to discharge pus.
I was therefore called in for her treatment, and I treated her for a long time: and the wound did not heal.
I applied therefore on top of it certain strong attractant plasters: and the bone came out from its place. Then several days passed by, and another bone came out. I was amazed therefore at that time, since there is no bone in the womb.
I thought therefore that they were from the bones of the dead fetus.
I examined the wound therefore, and extracted many bones, while the woman was in her better dispositions: and now she lived for a long time, and discharged a little pus from its place.
And I did not confirm this strange thing here, unless there is science in it, and aid to that which the skilled physician administers with his hand from treatment.
Chapter 77.
Concerning the forms of necessary instruments for extracting a fetus.
The shape of the Vertigo which is opened by a matrix.
Here is described the form of a Speculum, which is equal to books, having two equal arms at the extremities of two wooden pieces. However, this vertigo requires that it be more subtle, and so that it happens, either from ebony or from boxwood.
And the width of each wood is almost two fingers; and the edge of each of them is almost one finger, and their length is a palm and a half; and in the middle of the two woods there are two additions from the same kind of wood, which have already been attached to both, whose length is a half palm plus a little more; and the width of each is almost two fingers, or a little more.
And these two additions are inserted into the maternal bone, so that they may be opened with them when you revolve the two Vertigos.
Another shape similar to that, more subtle and lighter.
Let it be made from ebony wood or boxwood, according to the similarity of the forceps. However, at the end of it there are two additions, as you see here above: and the length of each addition from them is almost a palm; and the width of each is two fingers.
When you want to open the matrix with it, then make the woman sit on a couch, her feet hanging down, with what is between her thighs opened. Then insert these two additions joined together into the matrix; and you, holding the end of the instrument below between her hips. Then open your hand with the instrument, as you do with forceps, equally according to the quantity that you want from the opening of the maternal orifice, until the Obstetrix does what she wants.
The shape of another Vertigo which the ancients called the Form of an Impeller by which the fetus is propelled.
The shape of Almisdac, with which a large head is treated; and it is similar to forceps, which have teeth at the end, as you see.
And when it is made oblong, like a forceps according to this shape, as you see, which has teeth like saw teeth, where it is cut and crushed.
The form of a hook having a single spine.
The form of a hook having two spines.
The form of a spatula having two extremities for cutting off the head.
The form of two broad spatulas also.
All these instruments are exercised, and the more their species are multiplied, and they are prepared by the craftsman, the more swiftly they perform their operation, and the greater they are esteemed by men, on account of their quantity.
Do not therefore despise any of these instruments, as long as it is prepared by you. For the necessity of them is inexcusable.
Head 78.
Of the extraction of the Afterbirth.
When the Afterbirth is retained in the womb, then it is necessary to precipitate the weak parts, so that it retains its own breath. Then make her sniff with a concoction; and press your hand on her vulva, and her nostrils. If it comes out through this, it is good.
If not: then take a pot, and perforate it in the closed aperture: and put in it herbs opening the womb, such as calamine, rue, and anetum, and chamomile, and sseham, and ligneam cassia, and centaurea: take all these herbs, or some of them, and submerge them with water, and put them over the fire.
Then put a pessary of papyrus over the aperture of the pot, and another extremity into the womb: and hold it until the vapour reaches the concavity of the womb.
Then make it firm, as we have directed. For the second one should come out with ease.
If however it remains after this treatment, and does not come out: then order the Midwife to immerse her hand in warm oil of sesame, or in a thick mucilage. Then insert into the womb and feel for it with the Secundina. When therefore he has found it, then take hold of it, and pull it out slowly.
If however it was attached deep in the womb, then insert the hand, as we have narrated, until when he has found the Secundina, and pulls it out slowly according to rectitude, so that the womb does not collapse from violent attraction: indeed it is necessary, that it be turned with ease to the right and left sides: then add to the quantity of attraction. It itself will obey then, and will be freed, and will be separated from the adhesions.
What if the mouth of the womb is constricted, as we have already narrated: treat it with firmness, and from medications of oils with herbs.
If however it does not come out with all that we have narrated, then beware lest you fatigue yourself over it in the repetition of the extraction.
It is truly necessary, that what comes out to the mouth of the womb from it, be tied to the hip of the woman. Then clysterize her with an ointment of tetrapharmacum. It itself will putrefy it after days, and it will dissolve, and come out.
However, when it putrefies, a bad smell rises from it to the stomach and head, and troubles that weak woman. It is necessary therefore that suitable fumigations be administered to her.
Some of the ancient experienced ones have tried the fumigation of nasturtium and dry figs.
The shape of the instrument with which a woman is assisted during the retention of the secondines and menses.
Let it be made from a small copper vessel or from zinc: and let the wide extremity be placed over the fire: and let the fumigation be put in place of the pubic area: hold it, until that fumigation is consumed: and repeat another.
Chapter 79.
On the treatment of an unperforated anus.
Many boys are born, and their anuses are not perforated, which have already been obstructed by a subtle skin. It is necessary, therefore, that the midwife should perforate that skin with her finger: and if not, she should perforate it with a sharp spatula: and let her beware of the tenderness, lest she touches it.
Then put on top of it a woolen cloth soaked in wine and oil. Then treat it with ointments, until it is healed.
If, however, the time arrives when it becomes obstructed, then put a lead tube in the anus for many days, and let it be removed when the boy wants to evacuate.
And now it happens that an obstruction of the anus occurs also from the consolidation of a wound or an abscess. It is necessary, therefore, that the consolidation be cut away, then treated with what we have said about treatment and lead.
Chapter 80.
On the treatment of fistulas that occur in the lower part.
The fistulas that occur in the lower part are a swelling and a hardness that occurs near the anus or in one of its parts: and it is one fistula or several.
When, therefore, that swelling becomes old, it opens up, and a watery fluid, white or subtle pus, flows out from it.
And sometimes they are penetrating fistulas from these. Therefore, the penetrating ones are recognized by what comes out from the evacuation and flatulence, when the weak person makes an effort to evacuate: and perhaps worms come out from them.
And there are those fistulas when they penetrate into a space up to the bladder and up to the end of the virga. And there are those penetrating up to the joint of the hip, and up to the node of the tail.
From that place, however, it is recognized that the penetrating fistula reaches up to the anus, and also from the non-penetrating one, it is thus: you insert your finger into the anus, and you insert a subtle probe into the fistula through the air or iron, when there is no twisting.
If there is twisting in it, then you insert into it a subtle probe made of lead, or a pin from the pins of the horsemen, until you feel the probe or the pin on your finger.
If you do not feel it deeply, nor does anything proceed from the orifice through evacuation, nor wind, nor worm as I said: then you should know that it is not penetrating: therefore hasten to the cure.
And when the fistula is penetrating up to the bladder or to the end of the urine: then its significance is the flow of urine from it, and its prevention by this so that the location may be consolidated with medicines.
If indeed it is penetrating up to the joint of the hip or to the opening of the hip: then its sign is that the probe reaches there, if there is no twisting up to the opening: and the discovery of pain in the surrounding area, and that pus always flows out from it: and that medicine does not prevail in it, nor is it consolidated with an ointment.
And in all these penetrating fistulas there is no complete cure: and the treatment of them is labor and vanity to him, from foolish doctors, on whom it is formed.
In that one, however, which is not penetrating and not ancient, healing is hoped for with a serum: according to what I narrate to you, and I have already tried: and it is thus, that the invalid lies between your hands on his back: and lift up his legs above his hips, and let his hips be inclined towards his belly. Then they should insert a lead probe, or one of copper, if there is twisted tortuosity in the fistula, until they know where it turns.
If however you feel it is weak around the nail, then it is necessary to insert your finger into the anus.
If you feel the probe having penetrated through the ulcer detected by itself, beyond what you feel between your finger and the anus or flesh; then you know certainly that it is penetrating: do not struggle with it, since there is no healing of this sort, as we have said.
They have said that it can be healed in some men by flesh, and from the medication by which they hope for a remedy, it is to apply subtle cauterization according to the width of the fistula, as previously mentioned, and insert the ignited (cauterized) part into the fistula until it reaches around the anus. Then repeat that two or three times, until you know that all those added and filtered fleshy growths, which are like a bird's feather quill, are already burned.
Then treat it with linen wraps soaked in butter, until those burned fleshy growths are discharged: then treat it with ointments that generate and consolidate flesh.
If it is thus healed, it is good.
And if not, then it is never healed by another cure.
And if the probe emerges and has not reached as far as your finger, which is in the anus, and there is a thick, fleshy or membranous barrier between it and the probe: and you see the fistula in that which follows the surface of the skin, then cut away the skin from the beginning of the fistula, and you will be separating with the probe that is in the fistula, until the separation reaches where the probe's extremity has reached, and the probe is freed and falls out.
Then clean those fleshy filaments that resemble the quill pen of a bird, so that nothing remains in them.
If however the blood overcomes you, and separates between you and your operation, so that it divides those fleshy parts: then it is better to do what is fitting, and to hasten the healing, to cauterize it with fire, or with acute medicine.
Because the cautery with fire adds good habits, to the scorching of those fleshy parts that are added, and to the separation of blood, and to the drying of moistures.
Then treat it with a wrapping of linen soaked in butter, or with tritated poultices, until the place emits pus, and those scorched fleshy parts go out into the pus.
Then treat the wound with consolidating ointments, generating hard flesh: and there are medicines in which there are astringents and drying.
For when they are restored, then already they are healed: and you do not fear relapse.
If however the fistula has already penetrated to the deep part of the anus, and is prolonged from the surplus of the body: then insert your finger into the anus, and explore with it.
If therefore you feel a tension, and between you and it there is a thin membrane of sifa or flesh, and it is near to penetration: then there is no operation on that, unless according to the way of trust and hope.
That is, because one of the three modes is administered to it: either you cauterize it, as we said: or you divide it, until you arrive at its concavity, so that it is possible for you to insert a linen and a cure from near. And do not proceed much with the cutting, lest you hurt the surrounding tissue of the anus, and cause a bad outcome of evacuation without control. Then treat it with what we said earlier.
Perhaps it will be healed: or you will lengthen it with a bandage, and cleanse it after you have cut it up to the bone, as we have described, or with a probe, or with another sharp instrument for the extremity. Then cleanse those filtered flesh wounds that are in the incision, until you can see through them with a thorough examination.
Then consider the restoration of the whole wound with the incision, and the upper orifice where it is consolidated; and a remaining open fistula will be in the interior part of the anus, and it will be easier on the patient.
And when it becomes a Fistula in this manner: and it is, when you insert the probe into the Fistula; and it is on the side of the anus near the surface of the body with the skin and margin of the anus: then take the perforated probe of the extremity, which is like a sharp point, that is, preparing the skin according to this form. And insert into it a twisted thread made from five threads, and encircle it with them. Then insert the probe with the thread into the Fistula, until it reaches its concavity.
If therefore it penetrates into the margin of the anus internally near, then draw out the thread from that orifice: so that you insert your finger into the anus and pull out the extremity of the thread, and join the two extremities together: and tie them both, and leave it for one day, or two days: and as the thread is more embedded in the flesh, tie it well, until those flesh wounds which are between the two extremities of the thread unite and close up: then treat the wound, until it consolidates and heals.
If however the orifice of the Fistula does not penetrate: then make it penetrate by whatever means are prepared for you, unless it is deeply embedded. You should not try to force it, lest you push it further in and do not succeed in cutting it out.
Then do with it as we have said, until it is healed.
For a spiny fistula which is found in the spine, whose curvature is acute and strong, and the other part is not acute, so that it does not cut what is not necessary, as you see.
Chapter 81.
Concerning the suturing of hemorrhoids, from which blood flows out through the incision of them, and the treatment of fissures.
There are hemorrhoids in two modes. Either they are inside the anus, similar to vesicles of charcoal, or pomegranates; or as if they were grains of wheat. And among them are small ones and large ones; and blood always flows from them, and there is one, and there are many. And they are outside the anus, and on its extremities.
However, those that are outside the anus are mostly of little humidity, from which a watery discharge flows, or a little blood in a steady flow; and they are according to the color of the body.
And the treatment of those that are inside the anus is to press on the weak part so that it may be driven out; and it is pressed until the anus goes out, and the threadlike fibers appear. Therefore, you should also suspend them with hooks or hold them with your fingernail. Then cut them off at their roots.
If however they are not held back by the hooks, due to their humidity and softness; then take them with a rough cloth or with a doubled lane cloth, and extract them with your fingers. Then cut them off, and sprinkle hot powders over them after the incision, so that they may take the place of a cauterization. Or cauterize them according to what was previously mentioned in the chapter on cauterization. Then treat them with the remaining treatment, until they are healed.
What if the anus does not obey the exit of the clyster, then a weak clyster should be inserted into it, where there is a small biting sensation, so that it may be loosened with what is in the anus, and it quickly obeys the exit, when the weak person excretes.
If however the intestines are extrinsic from the anus, then their affair is light, easy: and it is as if you catch them with your finger, or catch them with a hook, and cut them. Then treat them with what we have said, until they are healed.
And he who abhors an incision with iron, then it is necessary that you should administer their suture according to this method. Take a twisted thread, and insert it into the point. Then draw out the intestines upwards, and make them penetrate with the thread at the root of it from the other side: and twist the two ends of the thread on the lower part of the point, and let them be crosswise: and constrict the intestines with a strong binding. Then knot the thread, and pull out the point.
Do that with all the intestines, and release one from them: nor let it be its own, so that it may flow out excess blood from it.
Then put on the anus a cloth infused with rose oil or cerate, and put it on the anus: and advise the patient to rest. Then leave it alone, until it falls off.
When the intestines have fallen out, treat them with ointments and the rest of the treatment, until they are healed.
On the Treatment of Fissures. For it often happens from dryness of the feces and constriction of nature.
When therefore they are antiquated and medicine does not avail in them, then it is necessary to scrape them with the points of a spatula, or with your finger, until they become humid, and the superior crust which prevents their consolidation is removed. Then treat them, until they consolidate according to what is suitable.
If they do not consolidate: then treat them with a more vigorous treatment than before, until they bleed much and are evacuated; afterwards treat them until they are healthy.
On the treatment of inverted wounds, and not of inverted ones: and thus for lacerations, and for ulcers.
Chapter 82.
You know that Almirmar is nothing but a round node according to the color of the body, similar to the head of a nail: and it occurs throughout the entire body, especially in the lower parts of the feet and toes: and it causes pain while walking.
Therefore, it is necessary to cut what is around the nail, and to grasp it with forceps or with a hook, and to eradicate it from its root.
Then treat that: and if you want to cauterize that according to what was mentioned in its chapter.
From lacerations, however, one is a small, rough, fissured, rounded prominence on the surface of the body. And they often occur on the hands of children.
And its treatment is to stretch out the laceration, and to cut into it: or to bind it with a silk thread: or with a hair, until it falls off. And if you want, cauterize it according to what was previously mentioned with fire, or with sharp medicine: and now the inverted lacerations are eradicated, and not the inverted ones with the instrument that I will mention.
A ulcer, however, is also a small, fissured, rough prominence on the surface of the body, eating deeply into the flesh: and when it finds cold, it is felt as if bitten by an ant, and it occurs throughout the entire body: and most of them occur on the hands.
And its treatment is to take a tube from the feather of a goose or a strong vulture's feather: and place that tube over the ulcer, until it contains the circle of the tube with parts of it. Then revolve your hand with a cannula until you reach what is in the circumference of the abscess; and put it deep into the flesh, and eradicate the abscess from its root.
And if you wish, do that with a cannula of copper or iron, according to this form.
Place the upper part of the cannula at the limit of the swollen and twisted area, so that it is lifted above the finger's grasp and its own rotation.
And if you wish, cauterize the abscess according to what has been mentioned in the chapter on cauterization by Athelil.
Chapter 83.
Of the forms of instruments that are administered for enemas in diseases of the anus, and for solutions of the belly, and for colic.
When an enema is made of silver, or of gold alloy, or of fused copper, or of hammered (metal).
And when it is made small and large from these instruments, according to those for which they are administered.
Therefore, what is administered in the treatment of small children should be small; and for those whose anus is weak or painful, thus also their enemas.
Large enema.
The tube of it, that is, the upper head in which the ligature is tied, should be large according to this mode: and let there be a distinction so that the ligature is tied as you see, and the lower extremity which is inserted into the anus should be smooth, that is, not open, gentle, indeed, drawing to subtlety: and on one side of it there should be two small openings, and on the other side one opening.
And let the width of the small openings be according to the thickness of the roots, and let it be slightly smaller, and let the ligature be in which medicines are placed from the bladder of an animal: or from papyrus, which is according to the form of a small asafoetida: whose root is one palm.
And it is perforated with many holes as it revolves, and let there be a space that is between all the holes the thickness of a finger. Then insert into those holes a strong thread made from raw thread, which should be of ten threads or around that, and tie it with a uterine ligature as in the manner of astringents. When therefore it is placed in the uterus, let it be tied at the head of the cluster between two distinct constrictions with a strong binding. Then clusterize with it.
And this is the form of a circular uterus depicted here, and of its holes.
The quality of clustering with it, however, is this: that you should fill the uterus, or a vesicle with medicine, which should be warmed according to the amount of tolerance of the patient: and beware lest it be too hot or too cold.
Then the patient should be placed on his back, and his legs should be elevated above: and place under it a mattress, that is, a leather cushion on which men lie, or a linen cloth.
Then anoint the extremity of the cluster with oil, or with egg whites, or with a foam-like substance from fenugreek, or similar things. Then insert it into the anus with ease. Then let the assistant take hold of the uterus with both his hands at once, and press it out with force, until he evacuates everything that is in the cluster into the intestine.
Then extract the cluster, and raise the patient's legs against the wall.
If the medicine seems to be bringing him to an exit, then let him hold on as much as he can. And if he sleeps with it all that night, it is more useful in the healing process.
If however you clusterize him in the solvents of the belly's ailments, and hasten the exit of his disease: then repeat the clustering, until he is healed.
If there are hemorrhoids in the anus or painful swellings, then a subtle and gentle ointment should be applied from those ointments with which children are anointed.
And this should be the form of a subtle ointment above, on account of the skin being tightly stretched.
Head 83.
Here I have said in the division of healing of wounds which was convenient for the book, and I will say here their healing with manual treatment, and with medicines according to completion.
I say therefore that wounds are diversified according to the way they are made and according to the place where the wound falls.
Therefore, the things by which wounds are made many times are like a blow of a stone: or an incision with a sword, or a knife: or a percussion with a lance, or a wooden beam, or an arrow: and similar to these from many other things.
However, wounds that are made according to the locations of the body are such as a wound that falls on the head, or neck, or chest, or belly, or liver: and similar ones from these members.
And I am describing the healings of certain wounds, so that I may put in order and set a rule for the remaining wounds.
And I begin with simple head wounds: because the composition of remedies will come at the beginning of the third chapter.
I say therefore. When a simple wound occurs on the head and there is no fracture of bone: consider then if it is from a blow of a stone or similar things, and has already broken the skin only: and it is a large wound, and there are superincumbent apostemes of hot inflammation: then hasten and perform phlebotomy on the head at once: and do not delay it: and extract from him according to the quantity of his strength: if nothing prohibits phlebotomy, especially if the blood which flows out from the wound is scant. And let bloodletting be from the opposite part of the wounded area.
And let bloodletting be from the opposite part of the wounded area. Let the weak person beware of replenishment, and wine, and coarse foods.
If something prohibits diminution, then it will be diminished by food, and does not approach the flesh, nor is it wine.
And put on the wound if there happens to be a hot aposteme, a cotton pad soaked in rose oil alone, or with wine in which there is stiping.
If you are free from the hot aposteme, then put on the wound if it is recent with its own blood, and has not changed the air; powder which I will describe soon: and if it has already changed the air, then put on it some ointments until it is healed.
If the wound is large, or is from a cutting incision, and similar: and its lips do not gather together through small ulcers, then gather them with a suture, according to what I will describe concerning the wounds of the belly regarding their suture.
If the wound has already been discovered to be from a bone, and it hangs, and there is no retention of it, except in a small suspensory bandage: then incise it. Then treat the wound with medications, and restore to it hard flesh in place of skin, and especially instruct the weak person to take foods in which there is grossness, such as are heads and cooked wheat, until it is like a pulse: and similar things.
What if you find putrefaction in the skin, and it does not adhere to the bone: then incise the whole putrefied area, and cast it out: then treat that.
If there is an artery in these wounds, or a vein from which blood flows: and it cannot be stopped by medications, then tie above the artery. If therefore you find it not to be cut, then dry it with a Spatumili, or bind it. What if necessity calls when it does not concur with what we have said, then cauterize it, until the blood is separated.
If the wounds are small, simple, then their treatment is easy, light: so that you powder them with this powder; because it consolidates them before they change into a worse condition.
Method of Incarnative Powder. Recipe one part of olibanum, and two parts of dragon's blood, and three parts of unextinguished lime: grind everything together much, and sift: and fill the wound with it, and constrict with good constriction, until it adheres well to it, and coagulates with the blood.
Then sprinkle it on top with powders, and leave it, without loosening it while it remains, so that it does not become infected. For the medicine is not eradicated from it until it heals.
And when it happens that lime alone does the same thing, when you do not have olibanum and dragon's blood present, and also dragon's blood performs the same operation in many great wounds, when it is convenient to apply it to them and sprinkle, and they are recent wounds with their own blood, which has not changed into a worse condition.
What if the wounds have already become worse through some alteration, especially when it is in the summer season, then this powder's intention is not in its position: therefore take care of it with what we have said, so that you apply certain digestive ointments to them: or apply poultices made from barley flour, mixed with water and honey, until they emit pus. Then take care of the remaining wounds with treatment, until they heal.
If it happens that a fracture occurs with a wound on the bone, and it is small, then extract it with Gest: and I will now describe the treatment of fractures of the head in what is to come.
Of wounds of the neck.
If a wound occurs on the neck, then there is no difference between it and a head wound when it is simple.
If the nerve of the neck has been cut, or an artery: then if it is a nerve, there is no ingenuity in it, unless treatment is given to it with what causes vehement stitching, such as zinc, and zei, and similar things. Because they harm the nerves and contract them.
And do not apply anything cold to the wound at all: because the substance of the nerves is cold, and its continuation is with the brain, which is the most sublime of the members; and it is thus that it is treated with gentle medicines, such as a soft poultice infused many times with sweet water, or with rose oil, and tutia, when washed also with sweet water; and the remaining mineral stones, according to this method, and humid unguents.
If the wound is large, then administer a suture: or bind its lips with poultices. Then treat it, until it is healed.
If the wound has depth, or a sinus has formed in its lower part, where pus is already gathering, then puncture it in a more depressed place.
What if an artery has been cut in the wound and its blood flow has followed: then separate or ligate it, and bind it: or cauterize it, if necessity demands it.
If the vertebrae of the neck have been injured, or the whole, and the jugular veins are preserved: then bring together the lips of the skin with a suture over the cane of the neck, and do not touch the neck, but equalize it, and reduce it to its natural shape. Then bind it with a suitable bandage, and leave it for several days. Then treat it with ointments in which there is stitching and excision, until it heals.
If the wound has already made an impression on the bone, then probe it: then if there are fragments of bone in it, extract all of them, or what you can from them: and what is not prepared, leave that, until the wound putrefies, and its passage is separated and evacuated.
What if the wound is fresh, then powder it with the powder that I described. If it appears there is bone in the wound and it becomes a fistula, then treat it with that which I mentioned in its chapter.
On wounds on the ribs.
If it is a thrust of a lance or a dagger, and you see its depth, then consider. If therefore bad air emerges from the wound, when the patient is short of breath because of it, then know that the wound is mortal.
What if it has not reached depth, and is fresh with its own blood: then do not put powder on it at the first hour, nor bind it tightly, so that the blood is not retained in its depth, and returns to the heart, and kills the patient: but put an attractive ointment on it, and loosen it twice a day.
If you do not have an ointment at hand, then put a clean cloth on the orifice of the wound, so that it absorbs what emerges from it due to humidity: and make the patient sleep on the wound, so that what accumulates in it flows out.
If indeed three days or more have already passed for the wound, and no spasm has occurred to the patient, nor bad tremor of the heart, nor constriction in breathing, and you see the remaining dispositions of it are good: then know that the wound is healthy. Treat him therefore with bandages and the rest of the treatment, until he is healed.
If indeed the healing of it is excavated, and now it always opens, then you should know that a fistula has been made. Treat it therefore from its source.
And if the wound is from a thrusting incision, or a knife, and it is simple on the surface of the breast, or back: then treat it with what has preceded from suture, if it is large: or with powder, if it is small.
If, however, it has made an impression on the bone, and a fragment has broken off from it: then probe the wound, and prepare to extract that fragment, if they are separated. If, however, they are not separated, then leave them, until the wound putsrefies, for extraction of them is alleviated.
The judgment of other accidental wounds in other limbs regarding treatment is the same as what we have said.
Concerning wounds of the abdomen and the egress of the intestines and their treatment.
The disruption that occurs in the abdomen is great, moderate, and small.
From the great ones, it happens when the intestine emerges, or a portion of the intestines.
Therefore their introduction and their suture is more vehement and difficult.
And a small disruption also becomes difficult in another manner. It follows therefore, that the reduction of them is more difficult, if you do not promptly restore them to their place at once: because they become inflated, open up, and enlarge: for this reason their entrance becomes difficult.
Because of this, therefore, a moderate disruption is better: since with these there is no difficult reduction of the intestine, as it is dissimilar in these two species.
You should know that the suture of the abdomen is according to four modes.
Two common sutures are suitable for a suture of the belly, and for a suture of other wounds of the body; and two other sutures properly communicate with the remaining wounds. However, there are more proper ones for a suture of the belly; and I will describe each one to you with an explanation and declaration.
I say therefore, because when the wound is small and something protrudes from it out of the intestine, and it becomes difficult to reduce it; then that is on account of one of two modes. Or because of the smallness of the disruption, as we said; or because there is inflammation in the intestine on account of the coldness of the air.
When therefore it is so, then it is necessary to warm it thus, that you may apply a sponge or a moist cloth in lukewarm water alone. Or you steep it in water with cyperus, and cardamom, and spica, and embrocations with that intestine, until the inflammation is resolved.
When it makes a wine in which there is astringency; and it is better than water alone in resolving the inflammation.
Since you see that the inflammation is already resolved, then moisten the intestine with water in which has been decocted either marshmallow or mallow. For through that, its entrance is alleviated with a small thing.
If however it happens that its return is excavated after this cure, then find a small opening in the disruption with an instrument by which hemorrhoids are cut.
And the first cure is better when it is prepared, than cutting: and there is no need to cut after necessity and deficiency of the instrument.
There is one part of it which is twisted, acute, and another part not acute, and the extremity subtle is not with the subtlety of a spatula, indeed it should be more obtuse for a time; and that is the one which resembles a reed, as you see.
When the wound is enlarged and the intestine is ingested, then it is necessary to reduce it according to its natural form in its own proper place, if possible, because it is better.
When the disruption is large in the lower part of the abdomen, then it is necessary to make the weak person lie on their back, and place their knees higher than their head. And if it is in the upper part of the abdomen, then place his head and chest higher than his lower parts.
And similarly, if there is a disruption in one of the two parts of the abdomen, then direct your attention and consideration to this, so that the part where the wound is may be higher than the other part.
And it is necessary to administer it in large wounds and in medium-sized wounds.
In small wounds, however, place it according to what is prepared for you.
Then make sure that the pious minister who holds the entire disruption in his hand is present between your hands, and join the lips together. Then take away from it what follows after the suture, something after something, and this is the common method of a single suture.
And it is, that you should receive the needle, or the number of needles according to the quantity of the wound's amplitude. Then measure from the edge of the disruption the quantity of a ring finger, that is, of a doctor; and fix a needle beyond what you introduce into the thread in the two ends of the skin, with the two ends of the suture beneath the skin from the inside, until you make it penetrate from another part, and now you have joined two ends of the skin, and two ends of the suture: and four orders are made.
Then bind with a double thread around the needle several times from both parts together, until the two lips of the wound are joined together by a decent union.
Then release the thickness of the finger and also fix a needle in them: afterwards return it with a thread, just as you did with the first thread. Do not cease to do that with the instrument which you have chosen from the needles, until you complete the constriction of the entire wound.
And let the medium-sized needles be between thickness and fineness: because subtle needles very quickly pierce the flesh: and thick ones are difficult to introduce into the skin: on account of this it is necessary that they be medium-sized in fineness and thickness.
And it is not fitting that the needle be inserted into two adjacent extremities of the skin to a great extent: so that the flesh may not be quickly pierced, and the wound may not be opened before its consolidation, and they may not be stretched out even with the suture, so that the wound may not be prevented from consolidating.
Then cut the end of the thread, so that it may not harm the weak part during its sleep: and put little pads made from cloths on every side, which hold the ends of the thread: and leave them until you know that the wound has already consolidated.
And this type of suture with needles is indeed more suitable for small wounds. Because a single needle suffices for their suture, or two, or around them.
But the second common suture is to gather with the suture four extremities: two skin extremities and two superficial extremities in one place, with a needle in which there is an equally wound thread in fineness and thickness.
Then when you have penetrated with the needle these four extremities, return the needle to the part from which you started, so that the thread returns to the superior part of the wound: so that it may be a suture, just as the suture of cloth which is stitched together, and place amidst the entire suture the quantity of thickness of the smaller finger.
These men know how to suture.
And when I treated a wound that had occurred to a man in his belly, who had been wounded with a knife, and there was a major disruption of the wound the size of one palm; and about two palms of intestine had come out from the middle of the intestines, and there was a disruption in the middle of the belly.
I then reduced it after the intestine had stood outside the wound for 24 hours.
The wound was then consolidated in a period of about 15 days: and I treated it, and he was healed: and he lived for many years after that, enjoying his own faculties.
And the physicians had judged that he would not be healed.
And it was a miracle, because I did not treat him with an ointment. For I was in a place where no ointment was found, nor anything from medicines. I therefore applied an old cloth over the wound twice a day, and continually cleansed it with honey water, until he was healed.
I will now describe two proper species of suture according to the narrative of my speech.
And it is, that you begin with an acute suture: and you introduce a needle from the outer to the inner part.
When the needle has penetrated into the flesh, and into the connecting wound along the length and width of the whole body: release the extremity of the thread on the side where you introduced the needle, and make it penetrate from the inner part to the outer part in the other extremity of the thread.
When you have made it penetrate, then make it penetrate according to this in the same extremity of the thread from the outer part to the inner: and release the extremity of the thread, which is on this side, and make the needle penetrate into the other extremity from the inner part to the outer: and make it penetrate with your penetration, by which you make it penetrate into the extremity of the thread, which is in that part, until it penetrates into the whole.
Then cut also from this same side, and with it the extremity that is from the skin on the other side, and extract the point that has penetrated the skin.
Then reduce it to the skin, and with this extremity of the skin that is on the other side, with this extremity mirach; and extract it from the skin which is from its part, and make it one vein, and another: and make it one vein after the vein, until you have extracted the whole extremity according to that example.
And the sum of this suture is that you sew the skin of those who have split skins: so that you make one vein from one part of one extremity of the skin: and so that you release another vein from another part, until it is complete.
The second type of proper suture, which Galen described.
This speech of his is narrated, so that you sew it according to similarity, as some physicians sew them, so that they gather all the parts together to compare their natural fitting: and apply the extremity of the skin to its other extremity, and the extremity mirach to its other extremity. And that is done according to what I narrate to you.
It is necessary to fix the point in the extremity of the mirach close to you from the outer part, and make it penetrate to the inner part alone: and release the two extremities of the skin. Then turn back the point, and make it penetrate from the outer part to the inner part in the two extremities of the skin, namely on both sides.
Then turn back both, and also make them penetrate both from the inner to the outer, in the two extremities of the mirach as well, which are on the opposite side.
And this method of suture is better than the common easy suture, and it is a suture that precedes the remembrance.
This is therefore the treatise of Galen also.
And some have said. The stitching of the wound is reinforced with two hooks. That is, so that you introduce into them a single thread: and begin with the introduction of the hook, from what is at hand, and make it penetrate up to the other side, according to the stitching of those who sew equal leathers.
And know that when there is a disruption in the middle of the belly, then its stitching is more difficult than that of other places of the belly.
The judgment of the medicine for wounds is the judgment of the remaining wounds.
That is, because when you treat a fresh wound with its own blood, before it changes into air: and you reduce the inflammation, and soothe it, and adapt it: then put on a powder of incarnate.
If the air has already changed the wound: then put on it some ointments which are present to you, until they make pus: and the threads fall out, and the skin is consoled, and marvel. Then treat it as it is the treatment of other wounds, until it is healed.
If you do not have the medicines present, then put on it immediately, from which it begins to discharge pus, an old compress: and change it twice a day, as I instructed you, until it is healed.
For you do not need other medications in many arrangements, when the wounds are simple.
But if the wound communicates with the principal members in the lesion, then it is necessary to dip a soft wool in oil of tempered warmth, or in rose oil: and put it around the circumference of the places that are between the groin, and under the armpits.
If it feels pain, or pruritus, or putrefaction in its intestines (for this often happens) then give it an enema with astringent wine, black, and warm: especially if the putrefaction has already penetrated into the intestine, and a penetrating flux has been made up to the concavity of it.
And you should know that what is from a thick intestine is of easier healing, and what is from those is from a subtle one, of more difficult healing.
The intestine, however, which is called "fasting", does not receive healing from a wound that occurs in it at all: and this is because of its multitude, which is from veins, and the greatness of those, and because of the subtlety of its body, and proximity to the natural nature of nerves.
If, however, what proceeds from the wound is pus, and you follow it freshly: reduce it according to your reduction, by which you reduce the intestines equally.
If, indeed, a space has opened up to it, and it has already become green or black: then it is necessary that you tie it with a thread above the place which has been denigrated by it, so that there does not occur a flow of blood. For in pus there are veins and arteries.
Then cut what is beyond that ligament, and place two hanging ends of a thread from the lower part of the wound outside it: so that there may be alleviated above you the attraction of it, and the extraction of it in case of pus, and the emission of pus from the wound.
A reminder of the wound that occurs in the intestine.
When disruption occurs in the intestine, and it is small: then it is possible that it can be restored in certain men: for I have seen someone who was wounded in his belly with a thrust of a lance, and there was a wound on the right side of the stomach, and an old wound: and it became a fistula, and excrement came out from it, and windiness.
I therefore applied treatment, until I was not confident in its healing: nor did I cease to handle it subtly, until it was healed and the place was consolidated.
After I saw the place was already consolidated, I feared for the weak man, that a bad thing would happen to him in his belly: and it did not happen to him from that bad occurrence. And he remained in his better arrangements, eating and drinking, and being bathed, and having taken a warm bath, and exercising in his diets.
And now some experimenters have said that when a wound occurs in the intestine and it is small, then it is necessary to bind it up according to this method. And it is, as you receive the forms of large headed wounds. Then bring together the two lips of the wound, and put one formica (ant) from those that have their mouth open on top of the two lips of the wound. When it thus takes hold upon them, and closes its mouth, cut off its head, for it adheres and does not come loose.
Then put another formica near the first, and do not cease to make that with a formica after a formica according to the quantity of the entire wound.
Then reduce it, and sew up the wound. For those heads remain attached in the intestine, until the intestine is nourished, and healed, and does not receive a chronic painful harm.
And now it is possible to bind the intestine also with a subtle thread: which has been cleansed from the intestine of an animal, and attached to it after being introduced into the wound.
And it is, as you receive the extremity of this thread from the intestine, and much is extracted. Then bind on its extremity a subtle flaxen thread wrapped around. Then introduce that thread into the wound, and sew up the intestine with it. Then reduce it to a scar.
And this method of suturing with ants and intestine is not but according to the way of confidence and hope.
You know that a wound which is large and wide, especially if it is in one of the slender intestines: then there is no ingenuity unless subtle treatment, nor is its healing complete.
On the treatment of hernias and fistulas.
You know that every wound or aposteme, when it becomes old and chronic, and turns into an ulcer, and does not consolidate, and always discharges pus, and is not separated: then it is universally called a fistula in whatever member it may be; and we call it Zuchemen.
And indeed a fistula is a hardened, white, filtered nodulation, without pain, which is surrounded by the wing of a bird; and because of this some people call it Risati, that is, a feather.
And it is sometimes moist, which discharges pus. And perhaps the moisture is separated at certain times. And sometimes this moisture is abundant, and sometimes it is scanty; and it is thick, and it is subtle.
And I have already stated in the division, then when I spoke of wounds, that every ulcer which does not heal, nor is flesh born in it, is not that except on account of one of the nine new causes.
One of which is either because of the scarcity of blood in the body, or its malignity; or because there is hard flesh between it and its lips, preventing the growth of new flesh; or because it is full of much filth and corruption; or because the ulcer itself is putrid, and the material that is applied to it is of bad quality; or because the medicine is inconvenient for its cure; or because a pestilential decay falls upon the region, or through the properties of the region, as happens in Caesaraugusta; where digestion of diseases is difficult, and healing of apostemes is slow by nature; or because there is one bone, or a number of bones.
And I have already shown all these causes and signs of them, and their treatments with medicines in the division; and it is fitting here that I make you know the treatment of Fistula and Zuchemen, which is done by surgical operation with the hand.
You should know that a fistula occurs in all members of the body. For there are fistulas that reach the large veins and arteries, or nerves, or skin; or to the intestine, or to the bladder, or to some of the ribs; or to some of the dorsal vertebrae, or to some of the composite joints; such as the hand and foot: and there are those that approach the proximity of a principal member and its similars.
Those therefore among these fistulas which are of this kind, are from chronic diseases that are difficult to heal, and do not receive treatment, and their occupation with them is laborious and ignorance.
If it is from fistulas that some of whose profundity does not reach to these places which I mentioned: and you hope, and trust in its cure, and wish to penetrate to the knowledge of it, then take a probe made of copper or iron, if the fistula tends according to straightness, and probe it with the same.
If, however, there is tortuosity in the fistula, then investigate it with a leaden probe of subtle quality. Because lead, with the softness of its body, is bent and curved around the tortuosity.
If the fistula has many openings, it is not possible for you to investigate it with a probe. Therefore, cleanse one of its openings from its own openings.
For the moisture that you cleanse it with, flows towards other openings, and runs out of them.
Then, inquire carefully according to what method is possible for you: so that you may know what is there, whether it is a bone, or a nerve, and whether the fistula is concave and remote, or near; or whether it is one fistula with many openings, and stands over the whole of it, with the greatest strength of yours; with your questioning, in which you question the weak, and with the invention of pain at compression with your hand on the place, and similar signs and causes of accidental accidents.
When you stand over all those true stations, then proceed to the secondary cure with confidence; and it is thus, as you consider at that time, if there is a nearby fistula appearing, or in a healthy place far from the joint, or nerve, or artery, or vein, or one of the places that I will tell you: then cut the fistula according to what has been described in my narrative, and remove what is in it through filtration, and corrupted flesh, which is born in its opening from the flesh, or pus, and similar things; and cure it, until it is healed.
If the fistula is of great depth and is according to the straightness; then it is necessary that you cut it as deeply as possible. Then cleanse it of all its corrupted flesh.
Then administer wrapped licinia in acute medicines; and introduce it until you reach the concavity of the fistula that you comprehended with the iron: do this several times, until the acute medicine corrodes all that remains in the concavity of the fistula from the corruption.
Then restore it with ointments that generate healthy flesh, until it is healed.
If it does not heal through that, then cauterize it according to what we have narrated.
If the cause of the fistula is a bone, and it is certified by you in that place: then investigate it, and cut it according to what I have narrated to you: if nothing prohibits you from the vein, or nerve, or principal member, as we said.
If a bone is detected by you and it has something of corruption and blackness in it: then scrape it until the entire corruption is removed. Then treat it with that which incarnates it, until it is healed.
What if it does not heal, and emits pus as it was doing before: then know that you did not achieve total eradication of the corruption.
So examine it thoroughly at that second point, and make a precise judgment about it, and cleanse it with your utmost strength.
Then restore it. If it becomes healthy, that is good; and if not, then you will know that the corruption is deep within the body, which you have not reached. There is no ingenuity for you in this, unless you leave it to nature.
If the small bone is corrupted, and it is possible for you, extract it with subtle forceps that are suitable for that.
If there are many bones, then make a precise extraction of all of them, and do not leave anything behind with your strength.
If indeed something is opposed to you from the moistures, and there is no fear of incision among them, or error: then cut into those moistures and flesh, if they are there, and free the bones.
If indeed you do not have the preparation to remove the bones at that hour, then place on the wound what will rot it: and leave it, until it rots what is around those bones from the flesh and moistures.
And keep watch over the wound so that it does not consolidate. And let the section be constricted which you have cut out in your operation. Put on it, if you can, a burnt copper with triturated sulfur and oil: or a burnt copper in Egyptian ointment, or some other green ointments.
For when those moistures rot, and the bones are separated from them, the evacuation of them is alleviated, and their extraction.
If there is one large bone, such as the thigh bone or hip bone, and similar to those, and what is corrupted from it is a great part: then scrape it with a final rasping, until that blackness and corruption are removed. Then restore the wound.
If indeed what is in it is greatly corrupted, and the corruption has already reached the marrow of the bone, then it is necessary to saw it, and to cut it all the way up to the place where the corruption reaches; then treat it until it becomes consolidated.
And I relate to you a case that happened to a man with his own wound, so that you may put it as an example and aid to your operation.
There was a young man of around thirty years old, who had pain in his thigh, caused by a moving thing inside his body, that is, from the interior, until the materials reached the thigh, and it became an abscess with a large swelling: and there was no external cause for him.
It was extended therefore over time with his error of doctors, until the abscess opened, and many materials gathered with him. And his treatment was postponed, until the thigh became fistulous, and many openings were made in it: all of which emitted pus and bodily discharges.
Many doctors treated him for almost two years, and there was no one skilled in the art of healing, until I was called, and I saw his thigh, and the materials that were flowing out of those openings in a great stream: also, the whole body of the man was already weakened, and its color was citrine.
I then introduced a probe into one of the openings, and it reached the bone.
Then I thoroughly examined all the openings: and I found that they were coming from a single source, extending from all parts of the thigh.
I proceeded therefore, and I cut around one of those openings, until I laid bare a part of the bone: and I found it corrupted: which was already decayed, and blackened, and rotten, and perforated, so that it had penetrated all the way to the marrow.
I therefore remove what is apparent to me and prepared from a rotten bone.
And I put aside what was not in the bone except that corruption which I cut away, and I removed. And now I have eradicated it.
Then I applied a restoration of the wound with consolidating medicines over a long period of time. And it was not consolidated.
Then I probed and examined above the bone a second time above the first detection, and I found a continuous corruption with the bone; and I removed what appeared to me also from that corruption.
Then I attempted its restoration. And it was not restored.
I therefore examined it again, and did not cease to cut into the bone in parts, and to try to restore it: and it was not restored, until I cut out about a handful from the bone, and extracted that with its marrow.
Then I restored it with medicines, and it was consolidated quickly, and healed: and this repetition would not have been necessary in the operation, and section of it, except for the weakness and frailty of the patient, and the scarcity of his tolerance, and my fear for him of death: because there was a constant risk to him at all times from the abundance of bad evacuations.
He was therefore completely healed: and flesh grew in the place of the bone, and a good arrangement was made in his body, and his strength returned: and he was restored to his own dispositions: and it did not cause him any harmful opposition in walking.
But if the prominent bone in the body is already broken, then it is necessary to saw it, according to this method: and it is done thus: that you take a ligament, and tie it around the extremity of the prominent bone: and order someone, who stretches it upwards: and put another ligament made of thick wool on top of the first ligament. Then bind it on the flesh that is above the bone; and stretch out the limb, so that you draw the flesh towards the lower parts. And you shall touch the flesh over the place where you wish to make an incision, so that the incision does not harm the flesh.
Place a splint or board beneath the bone below; because when you do that, it is not prevented from cutting through the corrupted flesh.
And it is necessary that the incision be above the corrupted place for a short time, so that there is no concavity of the bone's corruption; and it does not appear in its appearance to the sense, and it is forced to make an incision in another place.
If the bone is corrupted and does not protrude, but rather continues with its part; and the corruption is in the middle of it, or in that very part: then remove the flesh from all parts entirely. Then place a splint below.
Next, make an incision from the first part where the corruption is, until the incision continues from the other part; and let the incision be according to the length, a little away from the corruption, as we have said.
If the corruption is in the joint, cut through the corrupted joint, and make an incision into the bone where it continues from the other part.
If indeed the corruption is in the continuation of two joints, then there is no ingenuity in it except scraping away.
If indeed the corruption is in the web of the hand or in the web of the foot, then the matter is very difficult indeed. It is truly necessary that you investigate the corruption as it appears to you. And scrape it away, and cleanse it according to whatever disposition is possible for you, and with whatever ingenuity you may rectify it for yourself; when it does not cause a contradiction in the Vein or Nerve.
And know that the incisions and sawings to be made on these bones are many, according to the position of the bones, and their preparation, and their thickness, and subtlety, and size, and smallness, and hardness, and rarity. Therefore, it is necessary to prepare an instrument suitable for every species of operation.
And know that these operations signify to you the type of instrument which you need, when there is a prolonged study with you. And knowledge of the methods of this art is a testament to the methods of healing: for then you will already have discovered through yourself that which is suitable for every infirmity from the instruments.
And I am setting out for you at the end of this chapter a list of instruments, which you will set as examples on those which you cut, and a test by which you experience others.
The form of another saw.
The form of a razor for suturing. Let the head of this razor be according to the form of a star-shaped key: and let its points be according to the form of Elisch's lancets.
And it is not suitable unless the heads of the suturing instruments are rubbed against it when they become rusty, or the opening is wide and large.
The form of a larger razor.
The form of a broad razor.
The form of a razor in which there is a concavity.
The form of another subtle razor.
The form of a razor with a curved extremity.
The form of a small razor, subtly held.
This resembles a file, and it is an instrument like a saw; it is demonstrated in many places for the division of bones.
The form of a rasp which is suitable for scraping what is perforated through the bones.
Its extremity is triangular, and it is pointed at the extremities.
It comes from India. And similarly it is necessary that all things which we have mentioned should be made from rasps, and incisors, and saws.
Concerning the incision of extremities, and the sawing of bones.
The extremities putrefy, either from an external cause or an internal one.
When therefore you have treated that corruption with medicinal cures and it does not respond to treatment: and you see the corruption spreading into the limb, which does not yield to anything: then it is necessary to cut off that limb up to where the corruption reaches, so that the patient may be freed from death or from the evil which is a greater defect of the limb.
And the sign of this is that the limb becomes blackened, until it becomes putrid: as if fire had consumed it, or it had rotted after becoming black; until the putrefaction is cut away up to where the healthy part of the limb follows, and spreads into the entire body.
Therefore it is proper to make an incision of it, and similarly if the cause of the corruption is from the sting of certain venomous animals: such as the sea scorpion, and the viper, and the rattlesnake, and similar ones.
If therefore the corruption or sting is in a finger, then cut off the finger, and do not leave space for the corruption to spread into the rest of the hand.
And similarly if it happens in the hand, then cut it off from the root of the forearm, and do not leave space for the corruption to spread until it reaches the forearm.
And if it has penetrated there, then cut the arm at the elbow in its joint.
If however the corruption has passed and you see it around the elbow: then in that case it is a mortal illness. And to administer beyond that from the treatment, is a quantity of strength.
And similarly do with the foot, when corruption has penetrated into a toe, then cut it off at one of its joints: and if it has reached the arch of the foot, then cut off the whole foot. If however it has ascended to the knee, then cut off the leg at the joint of the knee.
What if the corruption has already reached above the knee, then there is no ingenuity in it, unless abandonment and leaving the sick person to death.
And the method of cutting a limb, or sawing it off, is to tighten a ligature below, which you want to cut: and tighten another ligature above the place. And the assistant tightens one ligature below: and the assistant tightens another ligature above upwards. And you separate the flesh that is between the two ligatures with a spatula, until the entire flesh is uncovered. Then it should be cut, or sawed.
And it is necessary to put a linen cloth on all parts, and not touch the saw to a healthy place: and there may be additional harm to the sick person, and a warm aposteme.
If however there is a flow of blood internally while you operate, then cauterize the place quickly: or put some powder that stops the bleeding on it. Then return to your medication, until it is complete.
Then bind the wounded limb with a suitable ligature, and care for it, until it heals.
And I tell you what happened to the man with his foot, this same thing happening that I tell you.
What happens is that a blackening occurs on his foot, with a burning sensation similar to fire combustion; and that corruption first occurs on the toe, until it infects the entire foot.
Therefore, a man was preserved from his gangrene, after he saw the corruption falling upon his limb with its fury, which he found from the pain and burning sensation; and it happened to him at the joint, and he was healed.
And after a long time had passed for him, that same corruption happened to him again on the index finger of his hand.
He came to me, and I attempted to remove that excess with what I applied to his hand from medicines after cleansing his body: and the excess did not recede, but began to spread to another finger; until the corruption began on his hand.
He called upon me to cut into his hand; and I did not want that, hoping for a recoil from the excess; and I also feared death itself at the cutting of his hand. Because the man's strength was above the case.
After he despaired of me, he returned to his own land; and he came back to me about it, because he was preserved, and his entire hand was cut open; and he was healed.
And I did not add this narrative, unless it be an aid for that which falls from the kind of this disease; and to be a signification by which it may be signified, and according to what may be done.
Of the treatment of sinews, and the quality of cleansing with medicines.
When an abscess occurs in certain fleshy members, and the space of the abscess is prolonged, until it makes a collection of sanious matter: then it bursts or perforates, and what is in it exits through the sanious matter, and a vacant place remains as if it were a vessel: and the skin which is above it is like a pannus that has already been emptied: and it does not reach its ultimate corruption, nor does it impress on the bone, nor on the nerve, nor on the ligament: it deserves to be named Sinus: and it is not named Fistula: but if its space is prolonged until the corruption impresses on one of these members, then it is named Fistula or zuken.
And its treatment is to cut the entire skin as it rotates, especially when it has become thin and is made like a piece of cloth, and you should be confident because it does not adhere to the place due to its own corruption.
But if you think that the skin adheres and does not follow from the last corruption, and if there is thickness on the skin from the flesh, then treat it with a clyster, and it is as if you should consider it according to the sinus.
Then if it is large and the pus that is emitted from it has a foul odor, then clysterize it with Egyptian medicine, which is made of vinegar, oil, and ziniar, taking equal parts, mixed together in a vessel: and they are decocted over fire until the medicine is red-hot: and it is applied to the thickness of honey.
Then take from it what you need: and dissolve it with water and honey, and clysterize the sinus with it: and close its orifice, and administer the medicine to it for a quantity of two hours.
Then extract it with expression: do that for several days, until the sinus is cleansed and the foul smell is removed.
And when you clysterize with water of ashes, when this medicine is not present to you: and it is, as if you take the ash of vitis wood or the ash of ilex wood: and you cast it upon the water. Then strain it, and clysterize with it, until you are confident that the sinus has now been cleansed.
What if the patient is not tolerant of the Egyptian medicine, nor of the water of ashes, then clysterize it with water and honey, to which something from crushed ziniar has already been mixed. Or clysterize it with honey and wine mixed together, since it is a property of honey to cleanse and purify: and the wine makes the sinus adhere, especially when there is an abundance of stickiness and dryness in the wine.
When you have done that several times, and are confident that the corruption of the sinus is now removed: then inject it with what makes flesh grow in it.
And it is, that you should take from the plaster of dyafinion: and dissolve it with rose oil and wine of stipticon; or inject it with certain medicines and other ointments, whose properties I have written about in the treatise on ointments.
What if the orifice of the sinus is constricted, where the cannula of the injection cannot enter: then enlarge it with an iron instrument for a short time: or put in it a wrapped-on license in Egyptian ointment, or in royal ointment, until it is enlarged.
And similarly, if the orifice is also wide, then bring its lips together with a suture: and allow from it a quantity in which it can be injected without excess.
And similarly, if the orifice from which pus flows is elevated to the higher areas: then dry it in a depressed place that is in it, so that the pus may flow out of it downwards: for when pus is confined in the depth of the sinus, it prevents flesh from being generated in it.
What if it is not possible for you to dry the sinus around its lower part according to your intention: then try, that you prepare the limb by a preparation through which the pus may flow out with ease, according to what is prepared for you. Try, that nothing of the pus is retained in it at all: and take consolidating medicines which are applied to the wound, suitable for what you intend. And spread them out on a linen cloth. And let the cloth be of such a quantity that it makes contact with the entire sinus. Then cut with forceps directly into the orifice of the sinus, making the opening of the sinus a little wider. Then spread from gentle ointments onto another cloth, according to the size of the opening: and place it over the position farthest from the orifice of the sinus, so that the flow of pus from it is alleviated: and do not remove the large cloth, unless after several days, one time.
That one who is above the orifice of the abscess, is the one who removes it at every hour, so that what accumulates in it from pus may come out; and so you know whether what flows out from it is a lot, or a little: or digested, or undigested.
And when you repeat this, consider the location of the abscess itself, whether the master of its pain is felt in it, or if there is no pain in it, and whether there is an aposteme in it, or if there is no aposteme in it.
When therefore your medication is extended thus, and you see the matter that comes out above the orifice of the abscess, then you know that the abscess has already adhered, or is approximating to adherence: then therefore dissolve it in the morning, or on the third day: and when you dissolve the ulcer, then change the dressing with another, and renew the ointment.
If however a subtle virus comes out of the abscess after a long time, then do not despair about its adherence, for its healing is approaching, since there are people who slow down the generation of flesh in their wounds, and among them are those who act contrary to that.
If however there comes out from the abscess after many days undigested pus, then you know that the abscess has not adhered.
If therefore the adherence of the abscess is delayed, and its resolution is prolonged: then add to the desiccation of medicines, what true doctors do, so that the medicines may be in their humid substance and in their dry virtue: such as the dyaphenic ointment, when it is added to it with an excessive addition from zegi.
And from the last utmost remedy by which it is cured, is to receive the dyaphenic ointment and dissolve it with rose oil, and return it to the old equal wine in its substance.
Then mix it with that, and use it.
And now it does similarly to this action, when you do not have the present ointment of dyafinicon, honey, when you dissolve it, then it is absorbed, and you use it. Or take myrrh, and aloe, and galbanum: grind all of it, and pulverize that over the honey while it is over the flame. Then apply a layer over the honey, and spread it over the wound: and apply with honey what you have dissolved, until it is absorbed: and sprinkle the powder over it, and put it on the bandage, and tie it up.
And when it is administered in that aristolochia longa, and roots of celestial lily, and it is lily: and flour of herb, and centaury. Use them in simple forms, or combined, grind them, and sieve them: and pulverize over the honey what you have narrated, and use it.
What if the wound is prolonged and not healed by this treatment: then know that there is deep-seated corruption: or now it makes an impression on the bones, or in the remaining hard members, or ligaments: then treat it with the fistula cure, according to what has been previously mentioned.
On the treatment of panaritium and worn away nails, and incision of added finger, and cutting.
Panaritium is a type of abscess that grows under the nail of the thumb or foot, and perhaps it grows on the other fingers.
When therefore the matter of it is prolonged, and its treatment is neglected, and it becomes abscessed with a hot aposteme: or it becomes corrupted, and discharges pus, until it corrodes the root of the nail: and perhaps it corrupts the whole of it, and perhaps the corruption reaches to the bone, until it has a foul smell: and the extremity of the finger becomes swollen, and its color becomes dark.
When you treat it, with what we have said in the division, and your treatment does not help: then it is necessary to cut away the entire surplus that remains from the nail. Then cauterize the ulcer after that. For cauterization is a very helpful remedy.
If indeed the bone is healthy, and the nail is also healthy, and the excess flesh of the nail is now compressing the inner flesh, and begins to sting it, and hurts it: then it is necessary to place a subtle file under the angle of the nail that stings the flesh, and push it upwards: and cut away the flesh with ease, and apply what remains of the flesh from burning remedies, corrosives, until all of it is removed. Then treat it with ointments, until it is healed.
But if the corruption has already spread to the bone, then it is necessary to cut away that bone, and extract it: for it will never be healed as long as the corrupted bone remains.
If you see corrosion and corruption advancing on the finger, then cut it off at one of the nodes, according to what has been previously mentioned about its removal. Then treat it, until it is healed.
But if nail abrasion or contusion occurs: and there is severe pain in it, then it is necessary to bleed the patient first. Then cut away the nail with a sharp Spatula-like instrument, making a transverse section from top to bottom.
And be careful, lest the section reaches the flesh that is under the nail, for you will cause severe pain to the patient, and it will be a cause of inflammation and suppuration at the site.
Then treat the place with what soothes the pain.
But an added finger that grows on some people's hands is perhaps entirely fleshy: and perhaps there are bones in some of them, and perhaps there is a nail on it: and some of them grow from the root joint, or their growth is in certain nodes of the finger. Therefore, one who is born with certain nodes on their fingers does not move; and one who is born at the joint of a finger, perhaps moves.
Therefore, one who is fleshy from those is easy to section. Because it is, as you cut it at its root with a broad spatula.
But one whose growth is in the root of the joint, cure is difficult. Desist therefore from cutting it.
In that one who is born on the finger at the last node, then it is necessary to cut into the flesh first with a rounded incision up to the bone. Then saw into the bone with one of those suitable saws for that purpose. Then cure it, until it is healed.
But the consolidation that occurs in the fingers is often due to the natural disposition of man, that is, being born with it, or from the consolidation of a wound, or burning by fire, and similar things.
It is necessary therefore to dissect that consolidation, until the fingers return to their natural form. Then put between them a linen bandage, or cloths soaked in rose oil: so that they do not consolidate too quickly, and separate them: or put between them a thin lead plate, until the place is consolidated as needed.
And similarly if a consolidation occurs in certain fingers with the palm, then dissect that consolidation, according to how it is prepared and suits the shape of the limb.
Concerning the Incision of Veins.
Veins are twisted, thick, full of superfluous melancholic humor which occurs in many parts of the body; and their most frequent occurrence is in the legs, especially in the legs of those who travel and labor, and carry heavy loads.
Therefore, it is necessary to administer a strong purging of the body with black bile several times with forceful evacuation.
Then, a bloodletting from the patient's arm into the basilic vein.
The treatment of the ears with iron is according to two methods. Their vein is, so that they may be cut, and black blood is extracted. And another method is, to evacuate the vein, and to extract completely.
The incision of it is according to this method. One should soak the leg first with much warm water until the thick, foul blood is dissolved. Then bind the weak leg from the upper part of its hip to the lower part of the knee with a bandage. Then, cut the vein at one place, or two, or three, in a broad section.
Then evacuate, that is, extract the blood with your hand from the lower part of the leg, up to above, and it is necessary to bleed the weak patient first. Then cut the nail with a vein up to below: until there issues from the blood as much as you see is sufficient, and as much as the strength of the weak patient can tolerate.
Then bind it: and instruct him to abstain from foods generating black bile: and repeat the evacuation and bloodletting when the veins are full, and that harms the weak patient.
The evacuation of it is according to this method. Shave the weak leg, if there are many hairs on it. Then put it in a bath: or soak it in its leg with warm water, until it becomes red and the veins overflow: or exercise it with strong exercise, if there is no bath present, until the member becomes hot.
Then cut the skin directly along the vein's length: or at its end near the knee, or at its lower part near the heel.
Then open the skin with hooks, and remove the vein from every part, until it appears to the senses: and it is upon its appearance that you see it turning from redness to blackness. When therefore it emerges from the skin, you see it white as if it were a tendon.
Then introduce beneath it a rod, until when it is elevated and emerges from the skin: suspend it with a blunt hook, gently.
Then cut a section close to that section with three fingers. Then remove the skin from the upper part of the vein, until it appears. Then elevate it with rods as you did, and suspend it with another hook, as you did at first.
Then cut another section, or more sections, if it is necessary for that. Then elevate, and make an incision at the last section near the heel.
Then extract it to the section that is above it.
And do that, until you extract it from the section that is superior, or all the other sections, until when it emerges whole: then incise it.
If however it does not obey you to extract and elevate: then introduce a strong double thread, and tie it, and extract it: or introduce beneath it a rod; and turn your hand to every part, until it emerges. And beware, lest it be incised. For if it is incised, it will be difficult for you to elevate it strongly, and it will become inflamed above the weak part from that harm.
When therefore you have extracted it whole: then put on the wound a compress soaked in wine and rose oil, or oil: and take care of it, until it is healed.
What if the vein is contracted, having a twisted condition where there is an involution to the parts, and it is not as we said according to straightness: then it is necessary to find on it every part of its twisting, and the places of its involution.
Then hang it with hooks, so that you elevate the entire thing; and beware at your operating site not to inflict a wound or lesions on yourself, for it will be difficult to raise it above you or extract it. Be careful therefore and preserve your prudence.
The shape of the wound is what heals the damage.
The shape of the hook is blind.
It is not curved like the other hooks, nor is it of acute extremity, so as not to wound; and it has a coarse flexibility, gentle: for if it were subtle, it would wound with its subtlety; rather it has a redundant coarseness, as we have said.
On the extraction of the veins of the leg.
This vein is generated in the legs in hot and dry lands, such as those of Alizegi, and the land of the Arabs, and in hot and dry lands with little tenderness, that is, in which neither herb nor tree grows.
And perhaps it is generated in other places of the body besides the legs.
And its generation indeed is from the putrefaction that occurs under the skin, just as it happens within bodies of snakes and worms, and worms generated between the skin and flesh.
And a sign of the inception of this vein is that an inflammation occurs in the leg with intense heat. Then the place is ulcerated. Then the vein begins to emerge from that ulcerated place, as if it were the root of a plant, or an animal.
When therefore its extremity appears from it, then it is necessary to apply a poultice of crushed lead, whose weight is one dirham and two nodules, and suspend the lead from the leg.
Whenever something emerges from it to the outside, apply that to the lead, and nodulate it. What if it is prolonged much, then cut off a part of it, and leave the rest untouched. And do not cut it at the root before it has come out entirely. Because if you cut, it is constricted, and it grows into the flesh; and it causes an abscess to form, and putrefaction in the place, and a bad ulcer.
Wherefore it is necessary to handle gently and extract gradually, until it comes out from its very end, and nothing of it remains in the body; and indeed this vein comes out in some men which is five palms long and ten. And now it has reached me, because it has come out from a man who was twenty palms.
If, however, it is cut during your hour of medication: then insert the scalpel into its opening, and perforate it with a long opening, along with the body, until everything that is in it is evacuated from the material; and administer putrefaction of the place with medicines for some days. Then treat the apostema itself with a healing treatment.
And indeed this vein sometimes has many branches, especially when it appears at the junction of the foot, or in the foot itself; and many openings occur to it, and a branch comes out from every opening.
Heal it therefore, as we have said in the division, and with what has been sent beforehand.
Concerning the cutting away of worms generated under the skin, and it is called Bouine disease.
This disease is named Bouine disease in a certain land among us; because it often befalls oxen, and there is a small worm, which is born between the skin and flesh.
And it wanders throughout the entire body, ascending and descending; and it is perceived by sensation during its movement from limb to limb, until it bursts forth wherever it bursts forth through the skin.
And its generation is from the putrefaction of certain humors. Just like worms and serpents, that is, earthworms, and ascarids in the belly.
And it is feared on account of its evil nature. Because when it wanders in the body and rises to the head, and arrives at the location: then perhaps it appears in it, and emerges, and destroys the eye: and this happens many times.
When therefore you wish to cure it, and extract it, then it does not happen unless through its movement, and the manifestation of its own sensation.
It is necessary therefore, to bind what is above it, and what is below it with a strong constricting bandage. Then cut above it, and extract it.
If it is deeply rooted in the flesh, and you do not find it: then place a cautery on the location with fire, until it dies.
And the greater fear is its corruption, which corrupts the eye, as we have said.
If you see that it has already arrived at the head near the eye, then bind underneath it a good tight bandage above the eyebrow. Then cut above it, and extract it.
And it is necessary for the weak to use purification of their body, with medicines that dissolve bad putrid humors.
And let him beware of foods that generate putrefaction.
On the section about the disease Nakir.
This disease is called Nakir in our land, and it is a pain that occurs in certain members; then it moves from member to member.
And I have indeed seen it myself, according to what I relate to you. I was called to a weak woman in certain villages. And he stretched out his arm, and saw a small swelling in the vein of his arm.
And after he remained for one hour, he saw a swelling increase with a warm poultice, as it increases like a worm, ascending to his shoulder more quickly than it could be; so that it might be like living silver, when it moves from place to place.
The pain then receded from that place, and was fixed in his shoulder.
Then he sat for one hour, and it flowed into the rest of the body, until it reached another arm.
Then he told me that it had revolved throughout his whole body, according to what he saw.
I was amazed therefore at the swiftness of its transformation from limb to limb. And I, indeed, had not seen this disease before with my own eyes in such a manner according to this method. But I have seen many who find the pain changing from limb to limb: and I did not see it with my own eyes, as I saw it in a woman.
And I do not think that it was anything else, except because the woman was one of those who are afflicted with dryness of the bodily veins, which are detected from the veins of the body; hence it appears to the sense that this changing windiness.
And it is necessary, that they do not appear according to this reasoning in those who are delicate and have moist bodies, of hidden veins.
When therefore you wish to cure it, and the patient feels that pain: then if it appears to your eye as we have said, then bind tightly above it, and below it quickly; and dry above it until the confined windiness goes out: and cauterize the place.
If you do not see it with your eyes: then treat it with exercise of the body, and with what expels windiness, and charm them away with foul-smelling pills, and pills made from serpentine, and similar things.
On the Extraction of Arrowheads.
Arrowheads are distinguished according to their own kinds and according to the places in which they fall from the body.
Their diversity is this: because among them there are those that have large points and small ones; and concave and straight. And among them there are those that have three angles. And among them there are those that have flaps. And among them there are those that have stars or star-shaped heads.
Those, however, which are according to the limbs in which they fall, are according to two modes. Or indeed the limbs are from principal concave members, such as the brain, and heart, and liver, and lung, and kidneys, and intestines, and bladder, and similar ones. When therefore it falls into one of these principal members, and death's signs appear to you, which I will narrate to you afterwards, then it is necessary that you hasten the extraction of that arrowhead from them, for death follows him in whom it is, in many dispositions. And when these evil signs do not appear to you, and the arrowhead is not hidden deep in the member, then extract it, and cure the wound.
From the signs of the brain when an arrowhead falls into it and penetrates to the bone, and there is a siphac that is above the brain, are: because there occur from it severe headaches, and darkness, and dizziness, and redness in the eyes, and swelling, and redness of the tongue, and spasm, and confusion of intellect, and vomiting of bile. And perhaps blood flows out from the nostrils or ears. And perhaps speech is cut off, and the voice is destroyed. And there flows out from the place of the wound a white humidity similar to pus. And there emerges from it something similar to the suppuration of flesh.
If therefore these signs appear to you, then desist from treatment, and extract the arrow if it does not come out.
The signs of the arrow when it falls on the heart are: that it is near the left nipple; and one feels as if it were fixed in a hard substance, not in an empty space. And perhaps the movement of the arrow is similar to the movement of a pulse; and black blood flows out from the wound. And there follows that coldness of the extremities, and a chilly sweat, and fainting. Know therefore that death is approaching without doubt.
And the sign of the arrow when it wounds the lung is the emission of frothy blood from the wound; and the veins that follow the neck become inflamed, and the color of the patient changes. And he breathes out a great, high-pitched sigh; and he seeks to attract cold air.
If the arrow falls on the diaphragm, which is in the chest; then it is near the small ribs; and there occurs a great anxiety with vehement pain, with sighing; and all the members of the shoulders are moved.
And if the arrow falls on the stomach, then perhaps something undigested from the food emerges from the wound.
And if the arrow falls on the belly, and is fixed in it: there emerges from the wound something filthy, or faeces, or intestine which is already disrupted. There is therefore no hope in its cure, nor in the extraction of the arrow.
If the arrow falls on the bladder, and urine emerges: and something proceeds from it to the outside, and the pain is more severe over the patient: then know that it is mortal.
The remaining limbs, such as the face, and neck, and throat, and shoulder blades, and arms, and dorsal vertebrae, and shoulders, and hips, and legs, and similar ones from the saving limbs are treated according to various conditions: when the arrow does not find an artery or nerve; and there is no poisonous arrow.
And I will tell you what I saw about this arrow wound, so that I may signify it to you through your treatment.
What happened was that an arrow fell on the tear duct of his eye, at the root of his nose. I therefore extracted it from the other side beneath the fat of his ear, and he was healed, and no harm came to his eye.
And I extracted another arrow from a Jew, which had fallen into the fat of his eye beneath the lower eyelid: and the arrow was already hidden, and I did not reach it except for a small extremity of it, with which it adhered to its wooden shaft: and it was a large arrow from the Turkish bows, with smooth iron, on which there were no rusts.
The Jew was therefore healed, and no harm came to his eye.
And I extracted another arrow from the throat of a Christian.
And it was an Arabian arrow, and it is one that has rusts. I therefore cut above it between two ligatures: and it had already become submerged in his throat. I was therefore careful with it until I extracted it: and the Christian was healed.
And I extracted another arrow from a man who had been struck in his belly: and we thought that he would die from it.
After thirty days had passed for him, and nothing had changed in his condition, I operated on the arrow: and I made an incision above it, and extracted it: and he was healed, and no harm came to him.
And I saw a man whose arrow had fallen on his back, and the wound had consolidated above it. After seven years had passed, the arrow came out at the root of his hip.
And I saw a woman who had been struck by an arrow in her belly, and the wound had consolidated above it, and the arrow remained inside: and nothing had changed in her condition, and the woman did not experience any harm in any of her natural functions.
And I saw a man who had an arrow fall on his face, and the wound was consolidated and remained there, not causing him much pain; and many similar things to these.
And I extracted an arrow from a prince of the King, which had fallen on him in the middle of his nose, and had already declined to the right side for a while; and the whole arrow was hidden.
I was called therefore to his treatment after the accident of the arrow for up to three days. I found therefore a wound of the arrow strongly tightened.
I probed therefore with a subtle probe, and did not feel it; and he himself indeed felt a prickling sensation and pain under his right arm. I suspected therefore that it was a point from the end of the arrow.
I applied a plaster to the place with an attracting and digestive plaster, confiding in myself that the place would apostemate and show me a sign of the arrow, so I could cut around it; and nothing happened in the affected place indicating that the arrow had not reached the spot.
I applied a plaster over it for many days; and nothing happened, and the wound was consolidated in the meantime; and he remained weak from the extraction of that space for several days, until he felt the arrow on a certain day within his nose. And he told me that.
And he told me that. I put therefore a sharp, corroding medicine on the wound for many days, until it was opened; and when I probed it with a probe, I felt the subtle tip of the arrow's end which was sticking to the bone.
Then I added to the opening of the wound through that sharp medicine, until the tip of the arrow appeared visibly to us; and it took me around four months' time with him.
Then after the wound was enlarged, and it was possible for me to insert forceps into it, and move them, and it did not obstruct the exit: then I did not cease to be clever and ingenious over it with various ingenious methods, until I took hold of it on a certain day with carefully made forceps, according to the form they would take at the end of the chapter, until I extracted it. Then I restored the wound.
And physicians certainly judge that a nose cartilage is not restored. I restored it therefore, and the wound was consolidated, and the injured part was healed with complete integrity: nor did anything harm him at all.
And I tell you the quality of extracting a certain arrow: so that you may put that rule and significance over what I did not say.
Since the parts of this art and their distinctions are not understood with narration: nor does this book comprehend it, and the prudent artisan compares a little with much: and with what is present, over what is absent: and he finds a new operation, and a new instrument, according to the descent into extraneous things of this art when they occur.
I say therefore, that arrows do not come out from the limbs in which they are fixed, unless according to two methods. Or by attraction from the place into which it entered. Or through the opposite part of another.
And that which comes out from where it entered, or is an arrow proceeding into the fleshy place: and it is attracted, and comes out.
What if it does not obstruct the exit at the hour in which it falls: then it is necessary that you leave it for some days, until the flesh that is around it putrefies: and its attraction is alleviated, and its egress.
And similarly if it is fixed in a bone, and does not obstruct the exit for you, then leave it also for some days: and try it with attraction and motion every day, until it comes out.
If it does not obey you at the outlet after a few days, then it is necessary to make perforations around the arrowhead in the bone itself from every side with a subtle drill, until the arrowheads are enlarged. Then attract it, and extract it.
But if the arrow has already been concealed in the body and is hidden and concealed from sensation: then probe for it with a probe. But if you feel it, then attract it with certain instruments that are suitable for its attraction.
But if you cannot get above it, because of the constriction of the wound, and because of the length of the arrow in the depth: and there is no bone, nor nerve, nor vein: then enlarge above it, until the wound is enlarged, and it becomes possible to extract the arrow.
What if there are jagged edges which hold it fast, then free the fixed flesh from them on every side, with all the ingenuity you can, and use your skills, if it cannot be raised above the fracture of the auricles, and their contortion, until it is freed.
And you, when you perform the extraction of an arrowhead, in whatever location it is, then use the contortion of your hand, with forceps, towards all parts, until you make it come out: and with utmost subtlety, so that the arrowhead does not break, and its extraction becomes difficult for you.
What if you cannot get it out at that time, then leave it for some days, until the things that are around it putrefy. Then try again: for if a flow of blood is caused by the contrariety to you, then administer what we have said about curation in its chapter: and preserve your virtue from incision of a vein, or nerve, or cord.
And administer your ingenuity in every way possible to extract the arrowhead: and let it be with facility, and tranquility, or slowness, and firmness, as I have narrated to you.
And it is necessary, that when you pull out the arrowhead, it should be weakened according to its shape, according to what it was like at the time of the accident with the arrow. Because it is more beneficial. If however it is not possible for you to do that, then administer what is possible for you according to the circumstances.
The arrowhead that emerges from the opposite part of the other side, or already proceeds to exteriorize something from it: or it makes a prominence on the extremity of the arrow through sensation from the upper part of the adjacent skin, and you see it standing out: therefore cut above it, and let the section be according to the quantity that the forceps can grasp in it.
Then pull it out: for it itself will be easy to remove.
If it is retained in the bone, then twist your hand according to the roundness, until the arrowhead impresses itself into the bone, and becomes more firmly fixed: then pull it out.
And if not: leave her for a few days; then return to her, until she begins to recover.
What if the arrow's wood is in it, then push it out with that.
If the wood has fallen out, and you want to administer a push: then insert into her a concave instrument, so that it enters into the hollow of the arrow's tail; then push it out with that itself.
If the arrow is concave, then push it out with an instrument entering into it. For the arrow is extracted through that.
What if the arrow is poisoned, then it is necessary, to excavate the entire concave flesh, where the poison is; if that is possible for you. Then treat her with what is suitable for that.
What if the arrow is lodged in the breast, or in the belly, or in the bladder, or in the side; and it is near what you touch with a probe, and it is possible for you to cut above it: then cut, and be careful about the incision of the vein, or nerve, and extract it.
Then sew up the wound, if you see fit, and treat it, until it heals.
And this is the method of forceps, with which arrows are extracted.
There are extremities similar to a bird's beak, which were made like scissors: when they grasp above the arrow, they do not release it.
And they are made from them in many species, large, small, and medium, according to the quantity of the arrow's magnitude, and its smallness, and the width of the wound, and its constrictedness.
The form of a concave pusher.
And the form of a straight pusher.
This is the form of a straight extremity like a rod, so that its entrance is extracted into the concave arrow, and it is pushed out with it.
On the bloodletting of Veins.
Veins to be bloodletted, whose customary course is in the body, are thirty.
Out of these, there are sixteen in the head: two pulsatile veins, which are behind the ears, called two Herbae; and two arteries, which are visible on both temples; and two veins that are in both tear ducts of the eyes, which are called Aspicientes; and a prepared vein in the middle of the forehead; and a vein that is at the end of the nose. And two Jugular veins, which are in the neck. And two veins that are in the upper lip of the mouth. And two veins that are in the lower lip. And these are the veins that are called Algecherich. And two veins that are under the tongue.
The veins that are bloodletted in the arms are five veins in each arm.
One of them is the Cephalic vein, and it comes from the lateral Sylvian region; and the common people call it the vein of the head. And the Dark-colored one. And it is the Middle vein, and it is composed of a branch of the Basilic vein and a branch of the Cephalic vein; and the common people call it the vein of the body. And the Basilic vein, and it is situated on the domestic side; and it is also called Titillicaris. And the common people call it the vein of the belly. And the Funis of the arm, and it is situated above the flexion; and it is the one that is bloodletted, and it is the one that appears above the thumb with a clear manifestation.
And the Saluatella: and it is a vein which is between the ring-shaped and the smallest: and there are two branches to it.
And in the knee and in the foot there are three veins. One of them is which is under the curve of the thumb, from the outer side. And the second is the Saphena: and its place is at the heel, on the inner side. And the vein Ness: and its place is at the heel, on the outer side.
And in the other knee there are three similar veins.
On the phlebotomy of two veins behind the Ears.
The phlebotomy of two veins which are behind the Ears is useful for old catarrhs, and hemicrania, and saharfat, and evil old head sores.
And the quality of one performing phlebotomy is according to what I relate. And it is, that the head of the weak person should be shaved: and the back of their head should be rubbed at the place of the two veins with a rough cloth, using good friction. Then the weak person should bind their neck with a thread, until the two veins appear. And the places of them are behind the Ears in two depressed areas of the head. Therefore feel for them with your finger, and where you feel their pulse under your finger, mark it there with a branding iron.
Then take the lancet, which is called the Incider. Then insert it under the vein in the skin, until the lancet reaches the mouth of the vein. Then raise your hand with the vein and skin to above, and make an incision into the vein with a cutting incision. And let the length of the incision be the measure of two joined fingers, or around that: and make the blood flow out as much as you wish.
Then sew it up with cotton threads and leave it so until it heals.
And now the initial incision of the book has preceded, and their cauterization.
The bleeding of two arteries which are in the two temporal regions is a remedy for old hemicrania and also for wicked headaches and persistent eye troubles, and for an excessive flow of sharp and bitter humors to the eyes.
And the quality of the bleeding is according to what I will tell you. The weak neck is tightened strongly until two manifest veins appear to the sense of sight, and their pulse is demonstrated under your finger. Then indeed the signs are with a branding iron.
Then elevate the skin from above the vein upwards with your index finger, and insert the bleeding instrument incident below, and elevate the vein upwards. And cut it, as you did in the two other veins: and make the blood flow according to the quantity of your need.
Then release the constriction of the weak one, and put your finger on the vein for an hour. Afterwards put a bandage over it and cotton threads, and tighten it above with a strong constriction: and leave it so until it heals.
And now the reminder of them has preceded, and their incision, and their extraction at the beginning of the book.
The remedy of the bleeding of the vein of the forehead is after the bleeding of the cephalic vein, for old facial weaknesses: and for hemicrania, and redness: and foul ulcers.
And the quality of its bleeding is, according to what I will tell you. The weakened neck with its vein, until the vein appears. Then take the instrument that is called a Fossorium.
Place the sharp point that is on the head of the Fossorium over the vein, and strike it with a plectrum or with another instrument in its own way; and let the blood flow according to the quantity you wish. Then dissolve the perforation of the weakened part, and bind it up, until it is healed.
And when it is opened with a broad scalpel. However, it is not suitable that the scalpel should be of acute extremity, like other scalpels, but rather of broad extremity. And the scalpel is according to the transverse cut, because the bone is near; and perhaps the scalpel will be shattered when it is subtle.
The treatment of the two veins which are in the two tear-ducts of the two eyes, is for the eye affected by itch and redness; and also for the dirtiness in the eye, and the facial disorders.
And the quality of the scalpel operation on them is, that it tightens the weakened neck with its vein. Then make the incision: and you stand above its head.
And let the scalpel operation be according to the transverse cut, along a short length, with a small scalpel, broad and somewhat flat, for there is no flesh in that place. If the scalpel is of subtle extremity, perhaps it will be shattered.
Then let the blood flow as much as you need. And put a bandage over them, and bind them at night for one day, and loosen them.
The veins of the nose are conducive to acute fever, and a violent headache, and facial weaknesses, such as half-paralysis, and redness that occurs on the face; especially when it is chronic.
And the quality of its bloodletting is, that it draws out a weak neck. Then hold the nose with your left hand, and take a subtle, long bloodletting instrument: and place it in the middle of the nostril itself, between what distinguishes the nose according to its straightness. Since the vein does not appear to the sense there, and because the blood begins to flow immediately.
And it is necessary that you apply your hand with the bloodletting instrument for a little while: and make the blood flow according to your need. Then bind it up at night for one hour. For it is restored quickly indeed.
Indeed, the benefit of the bloodletting of the guides is for constriction of the breath, and interception of leprosy, and melancholic weaknesses, and bad eruptions and ulcers, and corroding, that is, herpes of the skin.
And the quality of their bloodletting is that it draws out a weak vein under both sides of the neck with a ligature: and let the craftsman stand over the head of the weak person, and let the weak person sit on a seat.
Then apply the bloodletting instrument to the length of the bloodletting vein for a little while more broadly. Then extract from the blood a moderate quantity, or according to what you see as necessary for that purpose. Then do similarly concerning the other vein.
Afterwards, release the ligature, and tighten the two veins with a moderate binding: so that the weak person is not suffocated. And leave it until morning. The wound will heal.
On the phlebotomy of veins by Algeber. The phlebotomy of veins by Algeber is a remedy: because it counteracts the bitter taste in the mouth, and gum corruption, and bad ulcers, and lip fissures, and bad ulcers, even those that are in the nose and its surroundings.
And the quality of their phlebotomy is that you should make the weak sit in front of you: and tie their neck with a band. Then turn back the lip, and look at the two veins: one of which is on the right side of the lip, and the second on its left: and the demonstration of both is through the dark bluish color. And that is true: because around them are small, black veins. Make the incision therefore on both sides with an oblique incision.
If however you are in doubt about them, and do not know which one is: then turn to the incision of the larger one, and make it more manifest.
And do similarly with the two veins that are in the upper lip: and certainly the customary practice is to cut them: and cut the two veins that are in the lower lip.
On the phlebotomy of the vein under the tongue, after the cephalic phlebotomy. The phlebotomy of the two veins that are under the tongue is a remedy: because the cephalic phlebotomy is for the affections that are in the throat, and the weakness of the uvula, and the weaknesses of the mouth.
And the quality of phlebotomizing them is that you should make the weak person sit between your hands in front of you: and raise their tongue, and look under the tongue on one side for one vein, and on the other side for another vein: and the color of both declines towards blackness.
Make an incision on both sides; and take care not to injure your own hand while performing the operation. There are arteries underneath, and perhaps a flow of blood may occur from those arteries.
There are three veins which are operated on in the elbow, and it is in these that the customary phlebotomy is performed on all people.
And the phlebotomy of those is done according to two methods. Either by pricking with a broad, blunt phlebotomy instrument; or by oiling to achieve subtlety of inclination; or by cutting with a knife-shaped phlebotomy instrument, and it is Al-nesil. And this is its form.
And from them there are broad and subtle species according to the amplitude of the veins and their constriction. The form of the phlebotomy instrument is broad, as you see. And it is suitable for opening concave, full, protruding, visible, thick veins, and those that contain thick, turbid blood.
And this phlebotomy instrument is of lesser width, and more subtle at the extremities.
And it is suitable for phlebotomy of subtle veins, which contain thin, clear blood.
The Basilica, however, which is one of those three veins of phlebotomy, is a help. Because it draws blood from the diseased places which are beneath the throat and neck, from that which follows the chest and stomach; and it is suitable for the phlebotomist to perform phlebotomy with caution, lest there be fear of bleeding from the artery that lies beneath. If therefore he has erred and added to the puncture of phlebotomy, he will cut into that artery and cause a flow of blood. Therefore it is necessary not to perform phlebotomy with a pointed phlebotome; instead it should be cutting with Al-nesil.
What if the basilic vein does not appear with a clear and manifest appearance, then it is necessary to transfer to another one, and to change to a different branch of it: or to use a phlebotome in place of the funis of the arm. For it is clear and should be cut with a phlebotome Al-nesil, as we have said.
If you want to perform phlebotomy on the same one, then it is necessary to constrict the arm beforehand, so that you touch the place until you recognize the site of the pulse. Then mark the place with a branding iron, afterwards constrict the arm, and cut the vein at an oblique section with a phlebotome Al-nesil, as we have said. And beware lest the percussion falls through the space to the location of the artery.
And when you observe, as you constrict the ligament, an inflammation at the place which you marked with a branding iron, then that inflation is an arterial inflation: therefore avoid it.
What if you see the blood at the phlebotomy jumping out, like the urine of a child, and it is thin, red blood: then know that it is from an arterial blood. Then press down, and put your finger on the space for a long time, then remove your finger. If therefore the blood is stopped (for it is often stopped), then constrict the arm, and release it: and beware lest the weak one be moved by its motion: and let him be above his fear of it.
And do not move him for some days, until he is healed.
If however the bleeding does not stop, and it overcomes you: and there is no present remedy for you at that moment, then cut the artery, if it appears to you. For the extremities are constricted, and the bleeding stops.
Or take a fistula dressing, and bind it: take one half, and tie it above the place of the vein's constriction with a ligature and soft padding until another day.
Then if the bleeding stops, it is good. And if not: then treat it with the treatment that preceded, remembering the place from which the powder of the bleeding stopped the flow of blood: and the stopping of its blood is not difficult in many circumstances, because of the small location of the wound, and the possibility of ligature from the arm.
The phlebotomy of the Dark Vein is beneficial, because it draws blood from the superior part of the head and the inferior part of the body: therefore, since it is composed of the basilic branch and the cephalic branch, as we said.
And it suits the phlebotomist to be above fear from his phlebotomy, for beneath it is a nerve. If therefore he adds to the puncture of the phlebotomy, and finds a nerve, it happens that numbness occurs in it, and the healing becomes difficult, and perhaps it may not be fully healed.
And this nerve often appears to sense. If however it is hidden in certain men, and is subtle, and does not show itself: then it is necessary that you place your phlebotomy where the phlebotomist makes an incision with Alnesil, and divides the nerve with your strength.
Since if the vein is between two nerves, then find the vein in its length.
On the Veins of the Head. The treatment of the Veins of the Head is phlebotomy, because it draws blood from the head and relieves the diseases of the eyes.
And it is necessary to perform phlebotomy properly on this vein, if you wish, by pricking with an olive-shaped phlebotome or a myrtle-shaped one: because it is the healthiest of all the veins, since there is no artery underneath, nor a nerve.
However, it is convenient for you to take care during phlebotomy, so that you should touch the head with the phlebotome only lightly, and seek a more tender spot: and it will not harm if you do not find it with the first strike, so that you may repeat it several times over the same spot.
However, perhaps there may be a relapse in certain individuals when they are not phlebotomized on the first strike, but that relapse does not harm them in any way.
On the usefulness of Phlebotomy and the precautions to be observed in it. The quality of Phlebotomy, however, and its accidents arising from it, are things which you should consider in its proper performance.
Firstly, therefore, it is necessary that you know this: that phlebotomy should not be administered unless for the conservation of health, and its preservation, and caution against the onset of diseases.
And that phlebotomy should be performed on one of the three veins which are in the elbow, namely the Cephalic, and the Fusca, and the Basilic. And that phlebotomy should be performed at the beginning of Spring, on an empty stomach, and in the spring season, and autumn, and winter after digestion, when signs of fullness appear.
And let phlebotomy be performed on the first day, or on the third, after three hours have passed from the previous day.
Bloodletting that is administered to the sick does not have a predetermined hour; but when it provokes convenience and necessity at that time, whether at night, or during the day, and at every hour, and at every moment.
And it is not suitable for bloodletting to be performed on children until they reach fourteen years of age. Nor should pregnant women be bloodletted, unless from the fourth month up to the seventh. Nor should the elderly be bloodletted, who have already passed sixty years.
When someone wants to be bloodletted for any reason whatsoever: it is necessary that they cleanse their intestines beforehand with a gentle clyster, if there is much retained feces in them; so that the veins do not attract noxious and putrid superfluities from the intestines during the bloodletting, which harm the principal members.
Nor should the patient be full of toxins, that is, excessively nauseous; nor drunk, nor trembling from intoxication, until they are freed from these things. Nor one who is weak with dropsy.
And bloodletting should be avoided after a bout of colic passion, and vomiting, and flux of the stomach, and excessive coition, and labor, and exercise, and wakefulness, and fasting, and everything that dissolves the virtue from the bodily or animal corpus.
Then consider the subtlety of the humors beforehand, if the blood is thick from food and drinks, and medicines; if it is possible for him.
Then let him take a bath, if nothing prohibits it; or let him be exercised by some exercise, so that the blood is made more subtle.
And let bloodletting be performed on him in the chest, around the third day, as we have said; and take care, so that his chest is freed from all bad animal accidents that day: such as anxiety, and anger, and fear; and from all bodily accidents, such as labor, and pain, and superfluity, and similar things.
And the surgeon should make present the things with which he is familiar through the use of aromatics, and perfumes, and trips to similar places, in accordance with the quantity of possibility.
Then the phlebotomist should sit on a cushion, which should be higher than the cushion of the one being phlebotomized: afterwards he should extract his arm, and rub it with his hand twice or three times. Then he should bind the ligament with a strap, and wrap it twice.
And the binding should be tempered, because when the binding is unequal, or excessive in the binding, then it prevents the flow of blood; or if it is too loose, then it also prevents the flow of blood.
Then after the binding, it is necessary to rub the hands of the one being phlebotomized simultaneously until the veins become swollen and declare themselves to the sense.
Then the phlebotomist should wipe away the phlebotomy with a little oil, in the ancient proper way.
Then he should place his index finger of the left hand on the vein below the spot where he wants to perform the phlebotomy, gently: so that the vein does not flee and the percussion is felt. Because the vein is like a fleeing string during phlebotomy: and among them there is one that is full of windiness: and when you place the phlebotomy on it, it contracts beneath the phlebotomy, and the phlebotomist is deceived, and does not open the vein: and if he opens it, it is constricted: therefore it is necessary for this reason, that the phlebotomist be steady, and be solicitous in all these things.
Then he should apply the phlebotomy instrument. If therefore the vein is opened with a single stroke, then it is good. And if not, then he should try another stroke in the same place gently, or above it with quickness: if the spot does not become inflamed.
What if he faints, or the patient becomes weak, then let him rest for a day, or two days: and do not tighten the bandage. Perhaps indeed he has attracted a warm abscess. Nor should he take a bath.
Then repeat the bloodletting, if he loves it.
What if the opening is small, or the blood flows subtly: and so that not too much quantity exits from the blood as desired: then repeat the phlebotomy at the same opening, according to correctness, and add a little to the operation.
And do that with hastening, before the place becomes inflamed, for an inflamed place is, in many men, during a small operation.
If you see that it has already become inflamed, then do not repeat it at all, for nothing excuses it in your regard. And put upon it something from the sediment of oil: because it alleviates the flow of blood. And it is better in this place than the oil itself, and than other oils.
And similarly administer the sediment of oil in all your phlebotomies, where phlebotomists prohibit the flow of blood: and they make it a tyriacal preparation, and a sagzenic one, when it is put on the place from one of them.
For the blood is subtly thickened and resolved, when it is coarse.
What if a great abscess occurs at the site of phlebotomy, for it often happens, especially to one who is not experienced except on that occasion, or has a small opening of the vein, then apply and put upon the place a sponge infused in water and salt, warmed for a little while: and tighten it for one hour: because it dissolves.
And it is necessary to do that after the blood has flowed out from that vein, with a supplement of itself, or from another vein.
If something black or greenish remains in the location after several days, it does not harm: and if you wish, apply to it some aloe solution, or myrrh, or something from the juice of mint, that is, calamen or similar to it.
And many times indeed abscesses and swellings occur at the incision sites of bloodletting according to the method of Basil.
Put your hand therefore upon it, then if you find softness under the pressure of your hand upon it, then that swelling is bad. Take heed therefore, so that you put on it something from what we have mentioned. For perhaps a flow of blood from the artery may occur.
But make an plaster for it with that in which there is sticking, so that the place may be bound together. Then treat it with the remaining treatment, until it is healed.
And it is necessary to extract from every man a certain quantity of blood according to the amount of his strength. And what appears from the coloring of the wine on the blood.
For if the blood is black, then let it flow out, until it becomes red: and similarly if you see it thick: then let it flow out, until it becomes subtle: and similarly if it is acute, until its acuteness is relieved.
And it is necessary for him who is full, strong, and needs the extraction of blood twice, to amplify the phlebotomy of the veins, and let the phlebotomist be skilled: and in him who is weak, let it be contrary to that.
And it is necessary to extract it in the veins, and that the opening be narrow: and what is better administered in phlebotomy of the veins is a transverse section, not a puncture.
And this method of phlebotomy is healthy from the flow of blood, and from the incision of a nerve: and it is more praiseworthy and healthier than phlebotomy through width and length.
And to one who has become accustomed to bleeding through phlebotomy, it is necessary that they eat moderately sweet bread infused with pomegranate water: or if they are hot, let them take it out from the blood in three veins, or four.
And if they have a cold complexion, then let them take before phlebotomy bread infused with juice of mead, or with juice of honey aromatized with spices, or with aromatized and fragrant juice.
What if it happens that they have a syncopic fit at the time of phlebotomy, and there is a cause for the abundant outflow of blood: then it is necessary to give them a drink of meat broth, and subtle fragrant syrup: and let them take aromatic things with galangal, and anoint their chest with it: and let them take the remaining things that we mentioned in the chapter on syncopic evacuations.
Whoever wants to evacuate their arm and release their blood a second time: it is necessary for the one whose phlebotomy is due to abundant evacuation, and their strength is weak, to release the blood gradually according to the quantity of their strength on continuous days.
Whoever wants to evacuate their arm and release their blood a second time, and their body is strong: then let them do it after seven hours, or nine hours from their first phlebotomy.
Whoever wants to attract blood from their body to the opposite part to which it inclines: it is necessary that they be evacuated on the second day, or the third.
In whom there is much hot and inflamed blood in their body, and it becomes sharp, and causes fever: it is necessary that the blood exit from them in one vein, and a large quantity be extracted from them: and the opening be widened until a syncopic fit occurs: after you have observed all the conditions of phlebotomy: and put your hand on their pulse at the course of the blood, so that death does not occur in place of the syncopic fit. For it often happens that, when the phlebotomist is ignorant and careless.
And it is not suitable when one wants to release the arm, and release the blood a second time, since the opening of the vein is already closed, and the exit of the blood becomes difficult, so that it presses excessively upon it with vehemence, and the curvature extends rapidly. For that is a great evil, or rather, to abandon it altogether, until it is phlebotomized a second time.
Or remove it with the acuteness of phlebotomy that which has coagulated from the blood in the opening of the vein, and apply to it something salty dissolved in water. And apply to it something from Tyriaca Alfaroch or Sagsena, and apply it with a gentle compression, until the blood flows out.
If indeed the vein has become apostematous, then abandon it, and do not touch it, until the apostema settles.
What if necessity provokes a second time to release the blood, and there is no excuse, then either phlebotomize it at that place, or in another arm at another vein.
The veins of the arm are phlebotomized at the place of the Fusea and Basilica, when they are not found, and are hidden, since they are composed from them.
And the quality of that phlebotomy is such that it introduces a weak hand into hot water, until the skin becomes red, and the veins appear manifestly.
Then bind over it with a ligature of moderate constriction. Then perform the second phlebotomy across the width gradually, not laterally, nor along the length; and let the opening be wide, and let your phlebotomy be such that you phlebotomize over the junction of the hand for a short time.
What if the flow of blood is prohibited, then immerse the hand in hot water, and let the blood flow into the water, until you achieve your necessity.
If you are suffering from summer days, then you should avoid repeated hand washing in hot water. And indeed the flow of blood is greatly increased by hot water at the time of winter.
And the bleeding of this vein is healthier for all veins, since there is no pulsating vessel under it, nor a nerve.
The bleeding of the Salvatella vein in the right hand is beneficial for liver diseases.
And the quality of this bleeding is such that you should bind the arm with a ligature or your hand, after you have inserted it into hot water, until the vein becomes inflamed and is strongly perceived by the sense. Then make an incision across the vein. And if you cut it completely, it will not harm him in any way.
And be careful, lest you ultimately injure your hand with the bleeding instrument. For underneath are naked nerves of the fingers, stripped of their flesh.
Then return your hand to hot water and allow the blood to flow from it. For if you do not return it to hot water, the blood will clot at the mouth of the vein and be prevented from flowing.
When you have extracted the necessary amount from the blood, then apply oil and salt to the vein: so that it may not close quickly.
And similarly, it is necessary to do this with every constricted branch.
The benefit of bleeding from the left hand is that it is helpful for spleen diseases; and do the same in this bleeding as you did in the second, equally.
The benefit of bleeding from the Saphena vein is for diseases that are in the lower part of the body, such as uterine diseases, and menstrual retention, and kidney weaknesses, and old ulcers of the hips and thighs, and similar diseases.
And the quality of his phlebotomy is that he inserts his ailing foot into warm water and performs friction upon it until the veins swell; and he binds above the joint of the foot with a bandage. And indeed the place of the veins is at the heel, appearing opposite the thumb; and they branch out from it into many branches on the surface of the foot.
Therefore, he performs phlebotomy on its larger branch, or at the heel in its collection; because it is better and more healthy.
If he performs phlebotomy on the surface of the foot, then beware of the nerves that are beneath it on the surface of the foot.
And place your phlebotomy where you perform phlebotomy across, as if you want to cut into it; and let the phlebotomist be skilled.
If the flow of blood is prohibited, then put his foot in warm water; and allow the blood to flow into it until it is evacuated.
If the phlebotomist has missed the vein at first attempt, then let him try again with phlebotomy at the upper parts, for the place is healthy and you do not fear evil from it, when you beware of the nerves, as we have said.
And similarly with the Saphenous vein of the other foot, equally.
The place of the Sciatic veins, as we have said, is at the heel on the outer side of the anklebone.
And the benefit of his phlebotomy is to alleviate pain in the ankle, when it is due to warm blood.
And the quality of his phlebotomy is that he enters the bath, and fasts; and binds his leg from the side of the ankle up to above the heel with four fingers, with a long thin thread: for it does not appear except on account of that.
When therefore it appears, then perform phlebotomy on it according to whatever method is possible for you, or according to the transverse technique; and it is better, either to cut into it with an incision, or to divide it with a section. The location of it is more saliva-like, and it is hidden in many people.
The location of it is more saliva-like, and it is hidden in many people. If you do not find it, and it does not appear to the senses at all: then make an incision on some branch of it, and it is the one that appears on the back of the foot, and near the ear; and be careful of the nerve, and make a flow of blood in the quantity that you wish.
Then loosen the constriction, and put a crust over the place of the incision, and bind the area tightly. It will heal quickly.
Concerning the ventosity, and the quality of its usage.
Ventoses are made from horns, and from copper, and from glass.
And the ventosity is performed indeed according to two methods. With scarification and bloodletting; and the other is ventosity without scarification.
And this ventosity which is without scarification, is according to two methods. Or it is with fire. Or it is without fire.
And the ventoses that are administered with scarification and bloodletting are fourteen places of the body. Of which one is the Ventosa of Alnocrati, and it is at the back of the head; and Alkehel, and it is in the middle of the neck; and the ventoses of Alhagdahim, and they are two layers of the neck from both sides together; and the ventoses of the mind, and it is under the jawbone in the lower mouth; and the ventoses of the two spatulas; and the ventosa of Alachosos on the end of the tail; and the ventoses of the two fossae, and they are in the middle of the two arms; and the ventoses of the two thighs; and the ventoses of the two hips.
And indeed the ventosity does not draw out blood from you through the small scattered veins in the flesh, and because of that, no virtue comes out from them, just as it is the case with phlebotomy. It is not expedient to apply a treatment with fire or without fire for any ailment that arises from overindulgence, until the whole body is evacuated.
If necessity prompts to apply treatment through evacuation due to overindulgence or because of habit, we administer it at every hour, at the beginning of the month, at its end, and in the middle, and at whatever time it may be.
Since there are men who when their blood increases, so they need to be relieved of it through evacuation, they find a heaviness in their head and dizziness.
And there are those who find fullness and redness in their face, head, and neck. And there are those who find itchiness on their face and forehead, and darkness, and dullness in their eyes.
And there are those who scratch the place of their evacuation. And there are those whose flatulence increases. And there are those who find the taste of blood in their mouth: or their tongue becomes ulcerated, and they spit out blood. And there are those whose drowsiness increases. And there are those who see in their sleep blood and redness, and wounds, and sores, and things that are similar to them.
When therefore we see something of those symptoms, and it is specifically during the third period of the month: we recommend that evacuation be done then, after two or three hours have passed.
The indication for evacuation of the neck, however, is: because it contributes to heaviness in the head and what flows down to the eyes. But it is expedient that it should be after the evacuation of the whole body.
And this indeed is instead of the phlebotomy of the head.
And it is not permitted for one who has a cold complexion, or in whom there is catarrh. For it brings him great harm.
And because of that, it is not fitting for old people to use them, and in whom there are cold headaches.
Whoever, however, uses it constantly, will generate upon himself an obstruction.
And because of that, it is fitting to advise the practitioner, to place his hand with a gentle puff downwards, fearing the generation of an obstruction.
Ventosatio or Alkehel is the place of dark phlebotomy, and of royal phlebotomy, and because of that it brings about asthma, and constriction of the windpipe, and fissure of the windpipe instrument, and coughing, and fullness.
And it is fitting to drive the Ventosa Alkehel gently, for if it is placed below, it generates weakness in the heart and stomach.
Ventosatio truly is alhagdahim, and it brings about sudden pains in the head, and blindness, and half-headaches, and perforations, and pain in the roots of the teeth; and it is the place of royal phlebotomy.
And it is fitting to advise the practitioner, not to press his hand with a scarification: so that he may not cut an artery and cause a flow of blood.
Ventosatio under the chin, however, brings about ulcers in the mouth, and corruption of the gums, and similar things from the diseases that are in the mouth: and it is in place of phlebotomy alieherich, which are in both lips.
Ventosatio of the spatula shape brings about a condition called alchafacham, which comes from inflammation and heat.
Ventosatio truly of the inner parts of the two hollows, brings about an aid to phlebotomy of the three veins, the Basilica, and the Fusca, and the Cephalica: because it itself attracts blood from all those small veins that are in the flesh; and those small veins attract from other larger veins, until the attraction reaches the three veins.
And it is necessary, that you should be cautious with the ventoser, lest it proceeds too much in the scarification; since the place is deprived of flesh, and beneath it are nerves and arteries.
The ventoser, however, which operates on the affected areas, helps hemorrhoids of the anus, and inferior ulcers.
And it is necessary, that you should be cautious with the ventoser, so that it be a large ventoser, and so that it be made of copper: since the place needs strong suction, and perhaps the subtle ventoses would break; and a large scarification would be scarified.
The ventoses, however, diminish the crurium by a manifest diminution: since they attract blood from the whole body, and contribute to ancient pains in the kidneys, and bladder, and uterus: they provoke menstrua, and contribute to bothor, and ademenul; and they stand in place of phlebotomy of two saphenous veins, and alhorcobeni.
However, they weaken the body greatly, and cause syncope to occur in many people.
And the treatment of the ventoses of the alhorcobeni is closely related to the treatment of the ventoses of two crura.
The quality of the position of the ventoses is, that you should put the ventoser in a primary empty space, and apply tempered suction: and do not prolong the position of the ventoser, but rather place them quickly, and remove them quickly, so that they attract the humors to the place equally: and do not cease to repeat it and continue, until you see the place now red and inflamed, and appears red with blood: then scarify, and apply suction gradually. Then consider the disposition of bodies.
For those who have a tender flesh, with rare pores, it is necessary to scarify them only once, not more: so that the place does not become ulcerated.
And advise the ventoser, to amplify the scarification, and to make it profound a little: and to temper the suction in facilitation, and quickness, and its own motion.
What if there is thickness in the blood, then it is necessary to scarify it twice. Indeed, at first, the way is opened by subtlety of blood refinement, and its clarification; and in the second, by precise scrutiny of exact blood extraction of thickness.
If the blood is very feculent, then a third scarification should be made: so that the ultimate consequence may follow.
And finally, when we want to extract blood little by little, or for a short time, one scarification is enough for us. What if we want to extract much blood, we make multiple scarifications with many scarifications.
And if we measure it, that the blood is thick: then it is necessary to make a deep scarification; and the equal term in scarification is the depth of the skin.
What is that which should be administered from enemas in the position of Ventura's, and what caution should be observed by him who administers the enema.
In that person whose skin is thick, hard, dark, and their pores are constricted, it is necessary to anoint the places of Ventura's with open, gentle, resolving oils: if it is in the summer season, such as oil of alkeiri, or violet oil, or oil from sweet almonds, or oil from cucumber seeds.
And if it is in the winter season, then narcissus oil, or oil from lily, or chamomile oil, or sarbatinum: and similar ones.
If the excess is thick and cold: then the oil should be bitter, or from balsamite, or almond oil, or anetine oil: and similar ones.
If the enema administrator has large pores and tender flesh: then it is necessary to prohibit the use of oil, and it is necessary for them to wash those places of Ventura's after administration with rose water, or cold water, or solatri water, or cucumber water, or portulaca water: and similar ones.
That person whose blood is of much humidity, washes with vinegar and water of myrtle, and sumac; and similarly to them.
Those whose excesses are thick, wash with their vinegar and old wine, or with water of samsuc, or with a decoction of anet, or of camomille; and to them similarly.
And it is fitting that a fomentation be made in the bath, or in the heat of the bath, namely it is fitting that it be administered after coming out of the bath for an hour, or for two hours.
And it is not fitting that someone sleeps after a fomentation.
What is it that requires to be regulated, either the one about to receive a fomentation or the one about to be phlebotomized before a fomentation.
And after that it is fitting to consider first: then if the one about to receive a fomentation or phlebotomy is choleric, and they overcome their blood with acute and inflammatory (humors), then it is fitting to take cooling remedies, such as granulated muzum; and also endivia with vinegar and lactuca, and secaniabin, and iuleb: and similarly to them.
And put his food as soft-boiled eggs, and old ox meat, and seasoned dishes with herbs: and similarly to them.
And whose temperament is cold, it is fitting to take in drink a syrup of honey, or of almiua, or alsacanabin made from seeds: and take medium wine that is fragrant, which is between old and new: and let him be advised, so that he uses moderation in food. And put his food as soft-boiled eggs, and cane berries; and sparrows, that is, small birds: and soft-boiled doves should be added.
And it is fitting that the drink of the day of fomentation and phlebotomy be more than food: and it is fitting that there be given in drink to certain people at Tyriac hours alfaroch, or medicine from musk, that is, muscat, or alesselithe before fomentation; and before phlebotomy, or after: so that the principal members may be comforted, and the blood may be subtly refined. And it is not suitable that they take it in a warm potion.
About wounds without scarification. Wounds that are without scarification are those that are located on the brain, and spleen, and lung, and on the navel, and umbilicus, and kidneys, and thigh; because these members do not undergo scarification upon themselves.
And there is no inquiry through them, unless an attraction occurs from a bloody member to a member: as we put a wound on the breasts in a flux of menstrual blood. And we treat them, so that we dissolve the cold, frozen ventosity from the member: as we put a wound on the navel and umbilicus. For it rarefies the member, and warms it, and removes the pain on that account, because it resolves that ventosity.
And it is also applied to the kidneys, when there occurs in them a stagnation or stone. For the power of its attraction perhaps reveals the stagnation, or eradicates the stone from its place.
And it does similarly when it is applied to the brain and spleen, for eliminating ventosity in both of them.
And these wounds are treated with evacuations, simply with incision alone. And sometimes they are treated with fire.
And sometimes they are treated with full warm water in inflammatory swellings: and that is, so that the wound may be filled, and it be large, with hot water alone, or with water in which herbs that are suitable have been decocted.
The form of wounds treated with fire.
The width of its orifice should be two fingers open, according to the form we have made: and its quantity in depth should be half a palm: and it should be on its side, in the place which is around its middle, a small hole, according to the quantity that the needle can enter: let it be made from copper simultaneously, or from tin, with thick, smooth, equal, polished edges: so that it does not harm the member at its position upon it: and let there be in its middle a transverse rod of copper, or iron, where the candle is placed with fire.
And now this large wound becomes great, greater than we described, and a little less than that, according to the weakness and age of the one who uses it.
For there are wounds for boys and thin people that are different from those of men and stout-bodied individuals.
The quality of placing this wound with fire above the membrane is such that you should bring a linen cloth with fire from a candle or a small lamp made of wax: and place it above the middle of the transverse vein which is in the middle of the wound: so that the fire may be kindled around the lower part of the wound, so as not to burn the infirm body.
Then it should be placed above the membrane: and a finger should be placed over the opening that I mentioned, until when we hold the wound: while we are in need, we lift the finger, and vapor exits through that opening, and the wound is immediately resolved.
Then a linen cloth with fire according to its own method, and repeat it, if you need that.
However, in a wound that is treated with an empyema of the lungs with water, there is no transverse vein, nor opening: and it is not treated unless it is filled with water, and placed above the membrane only.
And this is its form.
And this wound, because it is larger, can hold a lot of water, is better.
Of the suspension of blood-letting instruments.
Blood-letting instruments are not administered in many cases, unless in those members where it is not possible to apply cupping glasses, due to their smallness, such as the lip, and gums, and similar things. Or in a member deprived of flesh, such as a finger, and nose, and similar things.
And the quality of using them is: that you should choose blood-letting instruments that are in calm and sweet waters, clean from putridity.
Then they are left for a day and night in sweet water, until they are soft, and nothing remains in their belly. Then the body is cleansed at first with bloodletting, and with cupping. Then the weak member is scrubbed, until it becomes red. Thereafter they are applied above it.
When therefore they are filled, and fall, and it is possible to suck the place with a cupping glass, then it is almost the last resort in healing: and if not, then clean the place with vinegar. Then with much water, and it is rubbed, and pressed out.
What if the flow of blood is prolonged after the fall of the blood-sucker, and it is that which is being poured out: then soak a linen cloth in cold water, and put it above, until the pouring out ceases.
What if the blood is multiplied, then powder above it with powdered ze'eg or galas, and similar things from stimptics: until the blood ceases.
Or they are applied above the place of half-crushed beans that have been deprived of their outer skin: and they are left, until the beans adhere to the place, for the blood ceases.
And it is necessary, if iteration of the blood-sucker is necessary, when it is possible, to change them.
If, however, the blood-suckers are prohibited from suspension, then the place is cleansed with fresh blood. Or a fig is applied to the places, until something goes out of the blood. Then they are applied, for they themselves, when they feel something from the blood, adhere at once.
When therefore they are about to fall, powder above them something from triturated aloe, or salt, or ashes: and they fall at once.
This chapter is often necessary in the art of Medicine, and it is the restoration of fractures and dislocations occurring in bones.
Know, O sons, that they boast of this chapter, stupid medics and the common crowd, who have never examined an ancient book, nor read a letter from it.
And for this reason it happens that this method is banished from the science of our land. And I did not find anything good in it at all, and I did not acquire from it what I acquired, except through the length of reading ancient books and study surpassing their intellect, until I extracted the knowledge from them.
Then I added experimentation and lengthy study to my way of life.
And now I have described to you from that, in this Chapter, all that contains my science: and on what has preceded my experiment, after I abbreviated it for you, and freed it from the occupation of prolongation, and abbreviated it at the end of abbreviation, and showed it at the end of declension: and I formed in it many forms from the forms of instruments which are administered in it, with the addition of declension, as I did in the two preceding Chapters.
Chapter II.
It is fitting, as we say in the prologue of this Chapter, that summaries and chapters be directed to those whose intellect is moved first by the craftsman to establish themselves upon their truth: namely so that you, and those who are prompt, may know or learn this noble art, and others from you.
I say, therefore, that when a fracture or dislocation or twisting or accident occurs, then it is necessary to bleed him in the first instance, and to release it, or both at the same time: if nothing prevents it, such as weakness of virtue; or he is one who has suffered something from those illnesses, or an old decrepit man; or it is a time of intense heat, or intense cold.
Then let him be content with his usual food, cool drinks, and lean meats, and avoid wine, and fatty meats, and fill himself with foods that do not replenish the veins with blood. Until when he is secure from the inflammatory heat, and there is no effusion of matter to a limb: then the invalid returns to his first regimen with which his custom had accustomed him.
When therefore the fractured bone begins to be restored, then it is necessary that the invalid be fed with nutritious foods of much nourishment, thick, heavy, in which there is viscosity: such as food made from toasted bread with water, and rice, and heads, and feet, and innards of cattle, and eggs, and fresh fish: and thick wine, and similar things. For with this regimen the consolidation of the fracture happens more quickly and better.
And know that fractured bones, when they are in people who are in early old age and decrepit, it is not possible for them to be continued and consolidated according to their natural order forever, because of the dryness of their members: and they are consolidated and continued which are from them in a state of gentle weakness, such as the bones of small children.
However, nature adds to the fractured bone from every part something similar to glue, in which there is thickness, by which it adheres and binds, until they are glued together, and bound together, until it comes to a state of strength and firmness, as it was at first, so that nothing prevents it from its operations: and for this reason it is necessary to put nourishing food on the invalid's diet, in which there are heaviness, viscosity, and thickness, as we have said.
And know that fracture species are diverse, according to the diversity of members; since a fracture of the leg is different from a fracture of the skull bone, and a fracture of the chest bone is different from a fracture of the back bone; and similarly all remaining members exist with diverse connections; and I will come with remembrance of all fracture species exposed in their distinct chapter. And the species of fractures of bones are also differentiated within themselves.
Because a fracture of that kind is curved, besides which stars appear in it. And when a fracture of that kind occurs along the length of the bone; and there are fractures of that kind, namely, stars (or radiating lines), and additions proceeding, just as they are in a reed, when it is fitted with a stylus for writing. And not proceeding; and it is a fracture with wound and disruption in the head; and it is a fracture of a small fissure.
And for every species there is a genius or proper instrument in its restoration, according to what will come to remember it, distinctly in its places.
And from that which is known about the fracture of the bone, there is its twistedness, and its own prominence; and its appearance to the sense, and its sound when you press it with your hand.
When therefore there is no apparent twistedness in the place, nor sound upon your touch when you strike the bone with agitation, nor does the weak one feel great pain; then there is no fracture there, or it is possible that there is a twistedness or small fissure; not therefore is it necessary to move it with hand and compression altogether, but rather put upon it from medicines, whose remembrance comes after the moment that suits the place: afterwards, a subtle binding should be applied.
And know that the place when it is curved and divided into two, besides which stars appear in it, truly every part removes from its comparison: then it is necessary for you to begin from your hour to rectify it, making it equal before a hot aposteme happens to it.
If, however, a warm aposteme occurs, then leave it alone for several days until the aposteme quiets down. Then treat it equally in whichever way it can be treated with gentle care and ingenuity.
And know that its restoration and equalization are easier than those of bones, in which splints are applied.
Then bind it, according to what you have experienced as a reminder of its condition.
If there are splints on the bone, then extension of this fractured limb from two parts is necessary, whether it be hand or foot: or with your hand if it be a small limb: or with two ropes, or with a rope and hand.
And let your positioning be such that you place the limb on a level surface, according to its natural shape, until the parts of the fractured limb are extended: then try, with all ingenuity, to restore those additions in their proper places: and beware, according to your strength, lest pain or injury occur to the weakened part through your operation: and try, according to your strength, to apply one bone to its fellow, according to the better forms.
And it is necessary at that time to touch and feel it with your hand. If therefore you see something different there, correct it, and adjust it according to the quantity of your strength.
And beware of violent extension and strong compression, as many foolish people do. For they often cause a warm aposteme to occur through their operation, or a contraction in the limb: as we have already seen that happen many times through their operations.
Then connect after equalization, and perform a decent operation, and structuring of that limb, and quiet, and tranquility: and warn the weakened part about it. And make it cautious, lest it move during its hours of watchfulness, and its own sleep, and its revolution, and its agitation, and its evacuation, and all its movements with its ultimate strength. And beware lest the positioning of the limb be with a positioning that follows pain. Because it is so, since when he feels pain in the positioning of the limb or a lesion; then it is necessary to change it to another positioning that does not cause pain.
And beware with that, so its positioning is equal and straight: lest there occur twistedness in the limb when it is restored.
And the quality of the fracture of the broken limb is, according to what I describe.
You know that fractured limbs are differentiated in their smallness, and their size, and their shape.
Those therefore that are small from them, such as the arm, and finger, and neck, and similar to them, then it is necessary that there be an enveloping of a soft, fine cloth. Those however that are large from them, such as the hip, and leg, it is necessary that there be an enveloping of a broad, hard one.
Because the broad bandage connects the large limb, and tightens it from every part with an equal strictness, so that it does not admit any swelling.
Then begin to put after your evacuation a suitable linen bandage on the soft cushion above the place of the fracture itself. Then begin to envelop the bandage over the place of the fracture itself with three or four envelopings, according to what the limb deserves: and tighten your hand a little while with the bandage.
Then go with it to the upper part above the place of the fracture, and tighten less than was your previous strictness, by which you tightened the fractured place. Then extend yourself with the enveloping from the place of the fracture a little, and gradually soften the strictness, until you grasp the great thing from the healthy place.
Then take another cloth, and envelop it again over the fractured place with envelopings. Afterwards, you should proceed with an incision to the lower part of the fracture. And let your operation be in the tightening of the incision and its softening, according to what we have said concerning the first upper incision.
Then put between the incisions a piece of clean cloth or a linen pad, with which the twistedness of the fracture is eased, if there is twistedness in it; and if not, do not put anything in it.
Then incise above the same vein another. Afterwards, apply equal pressure on these incisions with applied stars, if there is no inflammation at the site, nor hot aposteme.
If there is inflammation or an aposteme, then apply to it what soothes that aposteme and reduces the inflammation; and leave it for several days. Then bind above it with applied stars.
And let the Stars be from middle-sized, broad, smooth, and skillfully formed canes; or let them be from wood where cribra are made, which are made from pine, or cedar, that is, palm branches, or reeds; and let the width of all Stars be according to this form and this same figure.
Truly, it is necessary that the Star which is applied above the tracture be somewhat thicker and broader than the other Stars; and the length of the Star should be according to what is permitted by the member from its size and smallness.
Then bind above the Stars with another vein, according to the first strictura of the same kind. Then tie above with threads in the middle, according to what we have said about the strictura; and it is, that your strictura should be above the place of the fracture more; and as much as the fracture is more elongated, the strictura is smaller.
And it is necessary that the middle threads be in moderate thickness and fineness, and let them be from soft flax.
Since the threads are thick, as is seen from the operation of stupid surgeons who place their own threads made of twisted linen cords, it is a great mistake: for the structure falls with them beyond its quality.
And thin threads do not suit again, because you do not achieve through the structure with them that which you wish.
And it is not suitable, so that it should be between the star-shaped (sutures) and the star-shaped, less than a finger.
What if the weakened part is hurt through the ends of the star-shaped (sutures) after the structure in healthy places: then put under them a layer of soft stuffing or combed wool, until nothing is hurt from that.
When there is a fracture with a wound, and disruption occurs in the skin, I will discuss it with remembrance of its singularity in the second chapter.
And know that not every fractured member needs to be bound with star-shaped (sutures) from the first day. What is, because when the member is large, it is not suitable to place star-shaped (sutures) upon it, unless after five days, or seven, or more, according to your security from the occurrence of a warm aposteme.
And this is the method of applying plaster, which the ancients used to restore, which are placed upon fractures and dislocations.
The method of common plaster, abbreviated, restoring a fracture, suitable for many complexions, especially for women and children: because it is from that which neither heat nor cold overcomes.
And it is, that you take from the dust of the mill, and it is the marrow of the flour which clings to the walls of the mill at the movement of the millstone: and mix it as it is, except that you sieve it with a thin layer of egg white: and put its confection not thick, nor subtle. Then use it.
The method of another plaster, restoring a fracture, and dislocation, and twisting. Here is the translation: Then apply this plaster. For it is of good composition, quickly restores fractured bones, and benefits many men.
Another method of plastering, which also benefits fractures and sprains. Take myrrh, and mess, and white papyrus, of each an ounce X, and myrrh and aloe of both an ounce V, and Armenian bole VI, and twenty tartar emetic, all are ground into many particles, and are strained through a sieve, and are mixed with water or vinegar: and are administered.
Another method of plastering for joining and separating bones from their proper places: and it soothes accidental pain in them, and the separation of bones, and fracture. Take lanolin fat, and soak it in vinegar, and decocted oil: and apply it to the affected area.
And indeed this plaster has no virtue of restoration, but it is good for soothing hot apostemes: and it expels pains properly.
Another method of plastering, which restores a fractured bone. Take the leaves of sweet figs, and the leaves of wild parsley: and grind all, and make a plaster from both.
Another method of abbreviated plastering, administered for the restoration of a fractured bone: and when you want to resolve the remaining inflammation of an aposteme. Take the root of papyrus, and chamomile, and violet flowers, and herb powder, each a single part: all are ground, and mixed with wine, if the limb is not hot.
If indeed it is hot, then mix it with coriander water and humid, or with water, and apply it.
Another method of plastering, stronger in resolution, than that first one, when a hard aposteme occurs during the restoration of a limb. Here is the translation: The whole of that which is secondary to the warmth of a member, and the quiet of its heat.
Hippocrates indeed did not say in his book that anything should be applied to a fractured member for its restoration, unless it is made from wax and oil; nothing else. And he narrated that it should be a medium between thickness and subtlety.
But to Galen it seemed best to apply to a fractured member for its restoration things in which there is an extraction of warmth, such as myrrh, and aloe, and frankincense, and similar things from those that we have narrated.
The method of applying a plaster that is suitable for a wound and pain. Take mugwort and ciceris, and human hair clippings, or bird's feathers, and altaea, and equal parts of salt: grind them, and sieve them, and mix them together: and let an plaster be made from that.
The quantity, however, according to what is necessary, so that the binding remains, then it dissolves, is that you should consider at that time, if there is no pain or discomfort, nor itching, nor does the fractured bone move from its place: then you will not resolve it for many days. But if there occurs to him in that place an intense itching, or disturbing pain, or swelling: then hasten, and dissolve it at that hour, and remove the plaster from it: and take a soft cloth, or a gentle marine sponge, humid: and submerge it in tepid water, and wash the place with it, until the itching subsides, and the pain is assuaged.
But if there occurs to him in that place an intense itching, or disturbing pain, or swelling: then hasten, and dissolve it at that hour, and remove the plaster from it: and take a soft cloth, or a gentle marine sponge, humid: and submerge it in tepid water, and wash the place with it, until the itching subsides, and the pain is assuaged. Then let the member rest for one hour. Then put on it a succid wool, soaked in vinegar and oil, or rose oil: and bind it on for one night, until you are secure from a warm aposteme, and the inflammation of the member subsides, and its pain is removed.
Then return it to a subtle stricture and a small poultice, and do not bind it with your first constriction, but subtly with it, until it heals.
Since you see that the abscess, and redness, and pain, and swelling, and all the accidents are now thoroughly removed, and you apply poultice and stricture, then return to that just as you did at first equally.
Since if nothing happens to the limb from those things that we mentioned, then do not release it, unless after three days, or four, or five, or seven. And when it is released after twenty days, the whole thing, according to what appears to you from the solution of the limb, as we mentioned, until when the fracture adheres and the coagulation of flesh approximates over it: add also then more in the stricture than your first entire stricture: and add also in the thickening of food for the weak patient, according to what the preceding remembrance of it is.
But if you see the place of the fracture already drying out and withering more than it should: then know that nourishment is prevented from reaching it. Bathe it therefore with warm water at every joint where it is released, and let it be so for three days, and alleviate the stricture a little.
Through this operation, nourishment will run to the limb, and it will heal quickly.
But that which foolish restorers do from a fracture of the limb at another joint, when it is not restored at first as it should be, and is restored according to their twisted method, is an error from their operation, and great fear: and if it were right, the ancients would have written it in their books, and would have operated with it.
And I did not see any of their traces at all in that whole matter, and it is better, so that it would not be done.
About the accidental wound on the head.
The types of fractures are diverse, and its figures are many: and their causes are distinct.
For there is a fracture that occurs from a blow with a sword: and the blow carries through the whole bone up to the siphac, which is beneath the bone, just as an axis does in wood: and because of this it is called this type of fracture Axial.
Or the sword strikes something of the bone, and strikes its surface, and does not penetrate to the end of it: and this type of fracture is called Kalaan, that is, Absolute Levation.
And there is a wound of two fractures, either large or small.
And there is a fracture that is a compression or an abrasion: and its cause is a blow with a stone, or a fall onto a stone, or similar things.
And this fracture is also either penetrating, which already approaches the membrane, which is beneath the bone: or it is on the surface of the bone: and it is a wound of these two fractures also, either small or large.
And there is a fracture that is hidden in the bone in the subtlety of hair: and it is a small fissure, and because of this it is called this type of fracture Capillary.
And there is a fracture that occurs from a fall or blow of a stone and similar things, which cause the lamina of the bone to ingress inward, and it becomes concave: just as it happens to copper vessels, when they receive a blow, and part of them ingresses inward.
And indeed this occurs most often in the humid bones of the head, such as are the heads of children.
And there are separate classifications for all these types of fractures, and I will discuss them with remembrance of the entire thing in its proper place.
And we recognize all these types of fractures by examination upon them, and inquiry into their conditions with tension, and the removal of corrupted flesh that is upon them.
The species of hairline fracture is recognized by this, that it is detected on the bone, and wiped away, and anointed over it with a cautery: for the fracture appears black.
In the treatment of fractures, consider first the accidents of the injured person: then if you see from the accidents what manifest signs are apparent over fear, such as vomiting of bile, and extension, and loss of intellect, and interruption of speech, and fainting, and acute fever, and protrusion of the eyes, and their redness, and similar things from the accidents in many dispositions, it is not doubtful that they will not be healthy: and if you see non-threatening accidents, and you hope for health: then begin the treatment of it.
What is, if a wounded person comes to you at first with a wound: and it is in winter days, then it is necessary that you hasten in the removal of bone before the fourteenth day according to every disposition.
And if it is in summer days, then it is necessary that you hasten to remove the bone before the seventh day, lest what is under the bone from the padding becomes corrupted, and those accidents occur which we have described.
What if the fracture of the bone has already reached the padding touching the brain, and it is with smallness, and attraction: then it is necessary that you cut into the comminuted part, and the attracted one, according to what I relate to you.
And it is, that you shave the head of the wounded person: and detect on the bone according to whatever mode is possible for you: and according to the shape of the wound, and what is lightly upon the injured person.
What if it happens to you upon detecting the bone a flow of blood, or a warm abscess: then oppose it with what is necessary. And it is thus, that you should fill the place with cloths soaked in wine and rose oil, and let the wound rest until the abscess settles, and you are secure from a flow of blood. Then begin with the treatment of the bone, and its removal.
And that is done according to one of two methods.
One method indeed is to cut the bone with a tight-binding forceps, and this is its form.
Then administer another instrument after the first one, wider than it by a little; and this is its form.
Then administer also another instrument, even wider than the second.
And the second method is, that you have a number of diverse forceps: some of which are wider than certain ones, and some of them shorter than certain ones: and they should be at the end of their sharp extremities, and they should be made of iron or steel: and use facility in percussion on the forceps, so that it does not strike the head, and hurts it.
But if the bone is hard and strong: then it is necessary, that you perforate around it, before you administer the forceps, with drills which are called non-penetrating Drills: and they are not so named, unless because they do not pass through the boundary of the bony tissue to that which is behind it: therefore, since the Drill is a rounded extremity above what is under its sharp head, similar to an edge, and a small circle prevents submersion, and piercing the thickness of the bone.
And it is fitting for you to take from these Drills a large number, each of which is suited to the thickness of the bone, until there is present to you a Drill for every skull: whose sharp extremity's quantity in length and breadth is, according to the thickness of that skull.
And this is the form of three species of Drills, or Trephines.
The quality of piercing in the vicinity of a fractured bone is such that you place the Trephine on the bone and turn it with your fingers until you know the bone has already been penetrated. Then you move the Trephine to another place, and put what is between all the holes a quantity of the thickness of the radius, or around that.
Then you cut with the Incisors what is between all the holes from the bone: and make it thinner than you can on the surface of the smoothness, as we said, until you remove the bone, or with your hand, or with some other instrument that you have prepared for that: such as forceps, and subtle hooks.
And it is necessary to beware with all caution, lest you touch the Trephine or Incisors with something from the sawdust.
When you have circumcised the bone by piercing, and it has been separated from the sawdust, if it was continuous with it, and you extract it, it is necessary to scrape, and equalize the extremity of what remains in the bone with another instrument similar to the Incisors. However, it is necessary that it be thinner and more subtle than the other Incisors.
What remains from the small bones, and fragments: then take them with ease, with that which is at hand among your instruments. Then treat the wound afterwards with bandages, and ointments which we mentioned.
And another method of operation is easy, far removed from fear: which Galen said, and praised it with great praise: and this is his statement. It is necessary for you first to begin to detach the part of the bone from the place where the fracture is most violent and most apparent: until when you have detached that part, and placed underneath it the extremity of this lenticular Incisor, whose shape is this.
And the lens-shaped part does not cut into anything, and its acute part presses on both sides of it along its length, as you see. So that the lens-shaped part is inclined towards the siphac, with its acute face cutting into the bone.
Then strike the Incisor from one side with a small hammer, until you cut through the whole bone with ease, as it revolves. And be careful with the skin flap, lest something happens to it, which you would regret afterwards.
And if the physician were not more foolish than men, and more ignorant of it, nor asleep, then he would leave something attached to the bone from the skin flap in certain places, he would cut it away from it with the extremity of his lens-shaped Incisor, and free it from it with ease. For it is freed from it without harm, and without fear.
And if the fracture of the bone does not reach the skin flap, and what is cut away from the bone is its surface, and roughness and subtle projections remain in it: then it is necessary to smooth out that roughness, and remove those projections with subtle rasping instruments which you have prepared in various quantities, so that it may be possible for you to administer from them in every place more convenient and direct ones, according to what the operation leads you to, and the fractured bone itself, and its shape. And it is necessary for you to administer in your rasping, where you first smooth out the bone with the broader rasping instruments. Then use the more subtle ones after that.
And it is necessary for you to administer in your rasping, where you first smooth out the bone with the broader rasping instruments. Then use the more subtle ones after that. And do not cease to do that according to continuity, until you come to administer the most delicate and subtle of all.
In every small remaining crack and subtle fracture of the hair-like filaments, it is necessary to administer care, according to what leads to its rectification.
And it is a thing which is not hidden from everyone, to whom in this art there is whatever study, and stands upon what we have written, and shows in great fractures.
If, however, the flap of skin is detected and held back, when you excavate the bone: then it is necessary, that you take a linen cloth, according to the size of the wound, and submerge it in rose oil, and place it over the opening of the wound. Then take another cloth, doubled or tripled, and submerge it in wine and rose oil, and place it over the first cloth: and do that which you can most easily over it, so that it does not oppress the suture.
Then apply the wide bandage over it: and do not tighten it, unless by the amount that holds the wound only just so much; and leave it with this care for one day, or two days, until you are secure from a warm aposteme. Then loosen it, and apply afterwards medicines with which there is excessive dryness: such as the roots of lily, and the flour of herb, and powder of frankincense, and aristolochia, and similar things; and it is, that you make from these medicines a powder, which is powdered over the wound as they are dry.
And universally apply to it all medicine from its property, which is that it cleanses and does not bite. And take care according to your skill, that the wound may be clear in your treatment: neither may there be dirty matter of ointment, nor filthiness.
And take care according to your skill, that the wound may be clear in your treatment: neither may there be dirty matter of ointment, nor filthiness. Neither allow pus to collect in it at all: for when pus collects on the brain's skin, it corrupts it and putrefies it, and great evil happens to the weak afterwards; and now it happens in the suture of the head, when it is cleaned from the bone, especially when its treatment is neglected, blackness appears on its surface.
Therefore, consider then, if an accident befalls a weak patient which we have mentioned, it is pernicious and fraught with doubt.
And if blackness does not occur, unless from the medicine which is applied to it, and it is in the virtue of that medicine, so as to produce that blackness: then it is necessary to take one part from honey, three parts from rose oil, and to bind them with a linen cloth. Then put it on the wound; afterwards treat it with the means of healing that are suitable, until it is healed.
On the restoration of the nose when it is fractured.
You know that the nose is not fractured unless its two upper parts are simultaneously broken, or one of them: because they themselves are two bones; since its lower part is cartilaginous, it does not break and only suffers from attrition, twisting, and numbness.
If one of its two parts is fractured, then it is necessary to insert a small finger into the nostril and gently adjust the fracture with your index finger and thumb from the outside, until the nose returns to its natural shape; and this should be done skillfully and with ease. And beware, lest you cause greater pain to the weak patient through your operation.
If the fracture is in the upper part of the nose and does not reach to the finger: then it is necessary to adjust the end of a rod, on which there is a small prominence.
If indeed the fracture is in two parts, then do likewise; and strive for its restoration on the first day of the fracture, if possible. And if not, then after seven days or ten, apply a gentle warmth with a cooling poultice.
Then insert into the nostril a linen thread from a linen cloth, if the fracture is in one part; or insert two threads if the fracture is in two parts: and let there be on the thread a prominence of such quantity that it fills the nostril.
And certain of the ancient restorers said that they should be soaked in butter and changed every day. That is not seen by me, rather it is necessary that the linen cloth be soaked in decoction of whey, mixed with powder of millet. Then apply the linen cloth until the bone becomes firm and the cartilage is indurated.
And when a feather of a goose is inserted into the nostril in place of the linen cloth, after it has been wrapped with a soft cloth: and it happens that it holds the fracture of the nose very firmly, and so that it does not obstruct the breathing.
And this is not a necessary thing. If you want, do that; and if you want, make linen cloths.
What if it happens that the nose becomes putrid again while you are operating on an aposteme, apply a plaster to the nose with cerate, or with cotone infused in rose oil, or moderately with dyachylum.
But if the hot aposteme does not occur, then it is necessary to apply a plaster made with flour of fenugreek, and powder of frankincense mixed with decoction of whey. Then put a soft stuffing over it, and do not bind the nose with anything at all.
If the bones of the nose are broken into small fragments, or are crushed, then it is necessary to separate them above, and extract them with instruments that are suitable for this purpose. Then sew up the wound, and care for it with that which brings flesh, and consolidate it with suitable plasters or ointments.
What if a wound occurs within the nose, then it is necessary to care for it with linen cloths: and administer a pipe of lead, until it heals.
Concerning the restoration of the lower jawbone when it is dislocated.
When the lower jawbone is dislocated and its fracture is not with a wound, consider then if its fracture is only outward, and it does not break into two, and curves inward; then its recognition is easy.
It is necessary, therefore, if the fracture is on the right side, to insert the index finger of the left hand into the mouth of the injured person; similarly, if the fracture is on the left jawbone, then insert the index finger of the right hand: and push with it the curvature of the fracture from inside towards the outside with your other hand from the inner part of the bone, and adjust it accordingly.
Because if the fracture of the jawbone is already separated into two, then it is necessary to administer extension from both parts, according to straightness, until its adjustment becomes possible.
If however there has been a concussion or disruption of the teeth, then tie them together with a thread of gold, or silver, or silk. Then put a cerate over the fractured jawbone. Then put over it a doubled cloth, and place over the cloth a large star-shaped bandage made from the center; or an equal piece of leather from the sole of a shoe, in the length of the jawbone.
Then bind it above, according to how the ligature is prepared for you, and its application is suitable, until it does not come apart; and instruct the patient to keep stillness and quiet; and give him light, soft food.
If however you think that something has already changed in some way regarding the shape; then make haste and release it on the third day. Then correct what has been altered from that, and apply a plaster made from flour of millet, with egg white, or with fine flour, after you have removed the cerate; and put over the plaster a soft wool.
As long as the adjacent plaster remains on it, and the bone's disposition is not altered, leave it alone, do not release it, until it heals; or bind the fracture. For this fracture is often bound with three bandages.
What if meanwhile a hot abscess happens, then administer what we have often mentioned for its soothing, until that abscess is removed.
And if the fracture is with a wound, consider. Now the fragment is separated from the bone, or from a splinter; then be subtle in this, so that you remove those fragments of the splinter with what is convenient to you in the removal of them by instruments.
If the orifice of the wound is constricted, then enlarge it with a scalpel according to the quantity of your necessity.
Then when you have removed those splinters, and none of them remain, then the orifice of the wound, if it is large: and if not, put over it from plaster that are suitable for that, and they will heal it, until it is cured.
Concerning the restoration of the Cranium, when it is fractured.
The Cranium is indeed fractured from the front part near the shoulder, and its fracture occurs in one of three ways.
Or it is fractured and separated into two, besides what happens to the splinters in it: and it is easier for its restoration.
Or it happens to the bone of the splinter: and it is more difficult for its restoration.
Or it is a fracture with a wound.
And the operation in this case when the fracture is without a wound is to have two assistants present, so that one of them holds the instrument that follows the fractured Cranium, and the other stretches out the neck towards the part.
Then equalize the fracture with your fingers, until its shape is formed, according to what is fitting: and let there not be in it any eminences or concavities.
What if you need to extend it more, then it is necessary, that you put under the title of the weak sphere a pad or a wool: and let its size be according to the quantity of your necessity: and extend, and lift the forked branch, and compress the sphere with your hand, until you reach an equal fracture, according to what is necessary.
What if you cannot draw out the extremity of the forked branch to the exterior: because it reaches to the deep: then it is necessary, that the weak one is raised over his cervix: and you place under his shoulder a medium-sized cushion in magnitude, and press down his servant's shoulder towards the lower parts, until the bone of the forked branch which is in the depths rises upwards: and then you straighten the fracture, and make it equal with your fingers.
If you feel something loose from the forked branch and it moves: then it is necessary, that you fix above that, and extract it, that loose thing with ease.
If it is held fast in the bone, then you use ingenuity in its incision with one of the Incisors which you prepared for that, after you have placed under the forked branch an instrument that holds a sifach: and the instrument is made of wood or iron. And this is its shape.
It is similar to a spoon which has not been hollowed out.
And let its width be according to that which you need for the size of the bone, and its smallness. The length of it, however, is also according to what is possible for you in the operation.
And let it have two extremities, as you see: and one extremity should be wide, and the other narrow.
If the disruption of the wound which you saw when you extracted the loose bone is wide, and you are safe from the warm aposteme: then join the two lips of the wound with a suture.
And if the disruption is small, or a warm poultice is applied: then fill the wound with cotton pads, and apply a second layer according to the quantity of the wound's cleavage.
What if a warm poultice is applied, then soak the cotton pad in rose oil, and vinegar, and wine, and put it on top.
A fracture of the bone is when it is without a wound and without a cut, it is, that you should put on top of the bone a plaster made from flour of a mill with egg white. And put a soft padding over it. Then put a bandage under the lid of his eyelid, if it is inflamed. Then take a bandage, that is, a circular one which the Saracens hold, which should be long indeed: and its width should be one palm or approximately that. Then put a double layer of cotton pads over the padding and plaster. Then take a splint from a thin board, whose width is three fingers, and similarly in length. Then wrap it in a cloth. Then wrap that cloth with the splint in place of the bandage which falls on the fracture and location. Then put the bandage over the fracture as it is turned around, and wrap it around his neck, and under his healthy eyelid, and under his diseased eyelid: and reduce it to every part, and as you see that the bandage holds the fracture in place decently: and it is this, that it should not be hidden from you, and entirely, so that the splint does not move away from the broken bone. And for this reason, it is necessary to examine the diseased area every day. As often as the bandage becomes soft, and you see that the splint is already moving away: then straighten it out, and tighten the bandage.
Then put a small pillow of the weak person behind their back, and place a small cushion under their armpit near their spine at night, so that when they are lifted up, their helper may be at their side. They will therefore be lifted by the fracture of the fork through the elevation of the shoulder.
Or bind his arm to his neck: and do not loosen the binding, unless it becomes inflamed at the site of the injury, or from an abscess, until twelve days.
Then renew the plaster, if you see his face is inclined towards that. And add to the bandage, and leave it, until it is restored and congealed.
And indeed the fracture of the fork is strengthened and comforted according to the greatest part in twenty-eight days: and sometimes it happens in certain men in a shorter time.
On the restoration of the fracture of the Shoulder-blade.
The shoulder-blade is rarely fractured, and at its broad part: and they are not fractured except at their edges.
When therefore it is fractured at that place, and it is fractured in the middle of it, and it is not recognized unless by touch: then according to the shape of the fracture prepare its treatment. And reduce it to its natural shape in every way of cleverness, as much as is possible for you.
Then put on the place a powder of flour mill with egg white, and a gentle padding, and put above it a small cushion made from doubled cloth. Then put on it a flat board from a subtle table according to the quantity of the entire shoulder-blade, or slightly larger than it.
If indeed under the board is a concavity at some place of the shoulder-blade, then equalize that concavity with gentle padding, until the board descends according to equality.
Then the surgeon should tighten it from above with a long constricting bandage, and fix it firmly with a star-shaped adhesive, so that it does not move out of its place.
And he should examine the ligature every day. As often as the ligature becomes soft, tighten it, and apply an equal star-shaped adhesive if it moves out of its place: and let the injured person lie on his healthy side.
And the splint is indeed restored within twenty days, or in twenty-five days.
When this number is complete, then loosen the ligature: and you will be safe. For it is an injury of bones whose communion is not feared, nor their separation.
But if a fragment of bone protrudes and pierces the skin: then cut above it, and remove it. And do what we said about fracture of the craggy bone from the sedation of a hot poultice, if something happens because of it.
Of the restoration of a fracture of the chest.
The chest when it is fractured in its middle, and that rarely happens. His limbs are indeed frequently fractured, and broken because of his falls.
When his chest is fractured, which declines to the lower parts, and he suffers severe pain, and difficulty in breathing, and coughing: and perhaps he vomits blood, and a concavity is declared in the fractured bone, and it does not escape notice. The restoration of it is, that the injured person lies on his back: and place under splints his mattress.
Then press his shoulders, and bring together the ribs from both sides or flanks with your hands: and adjust them in their proper alignment, according to every method that is possible and suitable, until the shape of the bone returns, according to what is needed.
Then place above it a plaster and a compress, and place above it a thin plate from a smooth tablet, or from willow, or from similar things in a soft state, after you have wrapped it in a cloth. Then bind it subtly over the fractured bone, so that it is not dislocated: and take care with the binding according to the roundness of the back several times, and constrict it with a decent compression.
Then consider the binding at every hour, and as often as it becomes soft, constrict it: and if its necessity calls for its solution at the time of itching, or corrosion which occurs in the place, or pain, or aposteme: then prepare, and dissolve it, and remove the plaster, and rectify what has occurred with the method of its cure.
Then reduce the plaster, if you see that it is for that purpose: and apply to it a compress, until it is healed.
On the restoration of ribs, when they are fractured.
You should know that a fracture of the ribs does not occur, unless in thick places which follow the back, and from the extremities of these from the front part. And it does not happen to them by attrition, unless because they are cartilaginous. And the recognition of it is not hidden from sense during the examination with fingers.
And its restoration is done in this way, that you equal the fracture with fingers according to the possible method, until it is equalized in shape, according to what is needed. Then apply a plaster, and constrict the fractured bone with a thin plate, if it needs that.
And if the fracture of the ribs is inclined towards the interior: then it happens that a severe pain occurs, and a puncture, like the puncture which happens to one who has pleurisy: because, since the bone is severely pungent, and also difficulty in breathing occurs, and coughing, and vomiting of much blood: and this is a difficult cure.
And now the ancients are ingenious in these things with many inventions: and among them are those who say that you should apply foods to the sick person which generate inflammation and flatulence, so that the stomach becomes inflamed, and swollen, and a fracture is driven outward.
We however disapprove, lest it not make a bad cause for making a hot aposteme, if it does not happen. If however it has already happened, then it adds to it.
And some of them have said: let a poultice be applied to the windy place, then it should be pressed with force, and it is more like a rational consideration. However, it is feared that the poultice attracts windy excesses to the place, on account of the disposition of debility.
And some of them have said: it is necessary that the place be covered with wool that has already been soaked in hot oil: and poultices are applied between the ribs, until it is full: so that there may be an equal binding when you wrap it round according to its roundness.
Then the sick person should be treated with a treatment of blisters, from food and medicine.
Because if the tightness of the sick person's chest is vehement, which it does not tolerate, and the bone is pained by a puncturing wound, and we fear for the sick person: then it is necessary to split open the place, and to detach from the fractured rib. Then we should apply to it an instrument that preserves a safac, whose memory has preceded: and we should make an incision into the bone with ease, and we should cut into it.
Then we should bring together the two lips of the wound, if it is large with a suture: and we should treat it with plasters, until it heals.
Because if a hot aposteme happens in the meantime, then it is fitting, and inject poultices soaked in rose oil, and apply them to the place: and the sick person should be treated with what is suitable for the aposteme.
Meanwhile, let him be placed on his side on which he slept, until he is healed.
On the restoration of fractures of the vertebrae of the back and neck.
Indeed, when a fracture of the neck vertebrae occurs, and rarely does it happen with their dislocation; and similarly, the vertebrae of the back also. When that happens to someone, and you want to know whether he will be healed or not; then consider it. For if you see that his hands are already numb, and paralyzed, and dead; and he cannot move them, nor extend them, nor constrict them; and when you constrict them with your fingers, and prick them with a needle, he does not feel it, and does not feel pain in them: then know that he will not be healed, and in many cases it is mortal.
But if he moves them, and feels constriction with your fingers and piercing; then know that the spinal bone is sound, and that the patient will be healed with treatment.
If it happens to the vertebrae of the back similarly to that, and you want to know whether he will be healed or not; then consider his feet: then if you see that they are numb, and the same thing happens to them as happened to his hands: next when he lies on his back, wind and excretion come out without his will; and when he turns onto his stomach, excretion comes out without his will; and when he turns onto his back, and wants to urinate, and cannot: then know that it is mortal. Do not therefore struggle with his treatment.
If indeed nothing happens to him from that, the case is lighter.
And the treatment for what happened from that is to attempt a gentle sedation of the affected area with warm compresses; thus, you should put rose oil only on the dislocated vertebrae; or with roasted egg yolks.
Here is the translation: And he should not sleep on the affected part with which he finds pain, until he is healed.
What if it happens because of the friction of a broken bone, or something that is already separated from it: then it is necessary to sew up over the skin, and to remove that. Then bring together the two lips of the wound, if it is large, with a suture. Then treat it with some kind of flesh-growing application, from ointments, until it is healed.
If, indeed, the last bone of the spine is broken, and it is the end of the tail: then it is necessary to put the thumb of the left hand into the anus, and to straighten the fractured bone with the other hand, as much as possible, and in a secondary straightening.
Then put on it, and remove it: and treat the wound with the treatment that preceded, until it is healed.
On the Restoration of the Anchor-shaped Bone.
Chapter 11.
The anchor-shaped bones are rarely broken. When they are broken, then their fracture is not, unless there is a comminution at the extremities of the same: and they split along the length, and decline towards the interior: and there occurs a weak pain in the place, and a puncture: and the leg that is broken becomes numb.
And indeed its restoration is to extend your hand over it, until you stand over the fracture in whatever shape it is.
If the fracture is only at the extremities of it, then equalize that fracture, according to what is prepared for you from the straightening, until it is assimilated to its natural shape.
If the fracture is along the length, or has already declined towards the interior: then make the weak part rest on its belly, until the restoration of that fracture is prepared for you. When you have equalized it, put a plaster over it: then put a splint made of wood or leather over it, and bind a tight strapping over it, so that you do not fear the shifting of the fracture, nor the removal of the splint.
And he should sit with those equalizing it with what fills it, until it captures the structure according to equality; and especially for the weak, so that they sleep on their back or on their healthy side.
If a warm abscess occurs to him: then cease from extending it, and its restoration, until the warm abscess settles; and put on it what sits on it, according to what has preceded, then return to its restoration: and bind it as is necessary.
If a septic condition occurs in the bone, or it becomes putrid, extract it.
Concerning the restoration of a fracture of the Helper.
The Helper is that which is between the elbow and the head of the Spatula.
If it is therefore fractured, then its restoration is according to one of two modes.
One of which is: that you take a flat piece of wood of medium thickness, according to this shape, which follows.
And two ligatures are tied at the two extremities.
Then it should be suspended from an elevated place: and the weak person should sit on a seat. Then he should lean his broken arm over the wood, until it reaches the joint of his elbow, where the crookedness of the wood is attached.
Then hang something heavy above it, so that it stretches the servant to the lower parts. Then the doctor should equalize the fracture with his hands, until the fracture is reassembled, according to what is necessary.
And another mode is that the weak person should recline on his pillow: and his hand should be suspended from his neck with a ligature. Then order two servants to hold it, one of them holding what is above the fracture with his hands: and let the other hold below it, and each of them should stretch towards their own part.
And if you wish, so that the extension may be stronger, then bind below the fracture with a bandage, and above it with another bandage: and each of the two assistants will extend it to their two respective parts.
If therefore the fracture is near the articulation of the shoulder, then it is necessary to put one bandage below the nipple and another below the fracture towards the elbow.
And similarly if the fracture is near the elbow, then it is necessary to put a bandage over that place and over the elbow itself.
Then equalize the fracture with ease without effort, until when the fracture is equalized according to what is necessary, and a good application is made: then bind it, if a warm apostem does not occur.
If a warm apostem occurs, then loosen the binding until the seventh day. And place on it a pledget of wool soaked in vinegar and rose oil, until the apostem quiets down: then bind it: and the manner of binding is to put a plaster over the fracture.
Then put a wrapping of new cloth over the plaster. Then add the arm to the assistant itself, and place his hand open upon his shoulder.
And put on a cloth, and bind over the assistant's arm, so that the arm stands in its place like a star: if nothing prevents you from it, nor is anything altered about you because of the fractured bone.
If sometimes, because of the fractured bone, something is altered about you, then use a star-shaped bandage: and it is, that you put on the fracture itself a star-shaped bandage which is wider and stronger than other star-shaped bandages. And put on the width of a finger between each star-shaped bandage: and let the length of the star-shaped bandages be according to the fracture with an addition of three fingers from every part.
Then thread a suture over the star-shaped structure which I mentioned at the beginning of the chapter.
And it is so that your suture should be stricter over the place of the fracture. And the more the fracture is elongated, the less tight should be the suture.
If you see the star-shaped structure and the suture, as we have said, at the time when you restore the member suddenly, then do it: and if you apply a warm poultice, then release the suture and the star-shaped structure until the seventh day, as we have said.
Then consider the ligament for three days, so that there may not occur irritation at the site, or inflammation, or be prevented from receiving nourishment to the member, due to the excessive tension of the suture. Therefore correct the whole thing, according to what we have said.
If you are confident in your faith, so that nothing happens to it from that: then do not loosen the ligature, unless after three days, or more.
And let the weak patient sleep on his back, and his hand on his stomach: and place a full cushion of equal lanolin under his support.
And consider at every hour of the night or day, so that the shape of the fractured member is not loosened, or the ligature is not softened. Therefore correct the whole thing with your virtue.
And give food to the weak patient according to the order which we have prescribed, so that the food is subtle at first, until the fracture begins to consolidate: then it is necessary to increase his food.
For it is customary for the hip and thigh to be bound for forty days: then therefore it is necessary to loosen, and to administer a bath, and to medicate with ointments that correct it.
If the fracture was foul and bruised: then do not loosen the ligature and star-shaped structure until fifty days, and until two months.
On the Restoration of Fractures of the Arm.
The arm is composed of two bones, which are called the two humeri.
One of them is small and it is the one that follows the thumb. And the other is large, and it is the one that is placed below the small one on the lower side.
Perhaps therefore the larger humerus is fractured alone, or the smaller one; and perhaps they are both fractured together.
When the smaller humerus above is fractured, then its restoration is easy, and its healing is easier.
And when the lower humerus is fractured, its fracture is bad, and its healing is difficult.
And it is worse when both bones are fractured together.
If therefore the bone that is fractured is the smaller humerus above, then it is fitting for the doctor, in restoring it, to apply a small extension with ease, until it is made equal.
If on the other hand the larger humerus is the one that is fractured: then it is necessary to apply a stronger traction indeed.
And it is necessary to apply the shape of the hand at its restoration, and its own extended extension above the pillow. And let the thumb of the hand be higher than all the fingers above: and let the joint below be inferior to all the fingers, or the remaining ones: and let the weak one sitting squarely on himself, and let the pillow be before him, or in a direct line with him, at a height, so that the weak one does not incur labor.
Then the assistant extends the arm from the lower part, or with his hand, or with a bandage. And another assistant extends it from above in a similar way.
Then the doctor adjusts the bone until he reduces it to its better shape as much as possible.
If there are splinters in the fracture of the bone, then try to reduce each fragment to its own place with your virtue.
If indeed it appears to you that the separated sathaiatum is festering, and it pains the skin, and there is no hope of its restoration: then place upon it, and remove it according to the method which we described in the preceding cases.
If the fracture is with a wound, I have already dealt with that chapter singularly, therefore take the treatment of it from there.
If it happens that at the beginning of your restoration a hot aposteme occurs, then apply a linen cloth with a warm cerate made from rose oil and white wax, and let it be a mean between thickness and subtlety: and bind the cloth over it with a subtle string, until the aposteme is ripe: then remove the cerate, and put on a prepared plaster made from powdered millstone and egg whites. Then put on splints, and let the splint that is put on the fracture itself be a little wider and stronger.
And know that the number of splints on the arm is six in most dispositions: whether the fracture is in one forearm or in two forearms at once.
Then put your bandage over the place of the fracture stronger and more violent, and a little more with the bandage to the upper part of the fracture, or to its lower part: or put a softer bandage, a little weaker, according to what was mentioned at the beginning of the chapter.
And let the cloths that are wrapped over the fracture be soft, moist cloths: and not hard, rough ones. And let the thread with which it is bound be a linen one, properly made, medium between subtle and thick, as we have narrated.
And consider the member and ligament after some days. If something happens that requires correction, such as itching that occurs in the member: then it is necessary to bathe the member with warm water until that itching ceases, and to release the member unbound, until it quiets down, then tighten the bandage again.
If the stricture has already become softened and the bone is already remote, and similar things: then correct the whole thing with your strength, and consider it again.
For if the nutrient is prevented from reaching the member because of the abundance of the stricture, then it is necessary to soften it for a short time and let it go for some days, until it flows back to the nutrient, and then constrict it.
If, however, none of the things we mentioned happens to the patient, then it is not necessary to release it, unless after twenty days or around that time.
Then let the hand of the patient be suspended at his neck. And let his neck be equal, and let it be guarded by its own strength against agitated motions. And make him sleep on his back.
And know that this fracture is restored in thirty days, or in thirty-two days: and perhaps it will be restored in twenty-eight days. The whole thing depends on the dispositions of the complexions and the dispositions of the strengths.
On the restoration of fractures of the hand.
Know that fracture rarely occurs in the skin of the hand and in the nodes of the fingers. And it does not happen to them unless there is repeated rubbing.
Therefore, when fracture of the sole occurs, or rubbing: then it is necessary for the patient to sit squarely, and let his seat be in front of him according to equality. Then put his hand on it extended.
Then the assistant extends the broken bone, and the physician adjusts it, until they join together with a good joint.
Then it is necessary to apply an emplaster and a poultice, if a hot abscess does not occur. Then put the splint on top according to the size of the place: and you have already wrapped it in a linen cloth.
If the fracture is around the lower part of the sole of the foot, then make a similar sphere out of cloth: and place it under the injured person, so that it presses on the fractured area along with its own plantar surface; then bind it with a long cloth.
And let there be a small star-shaped device made of leather, in which there is gentleness, so that the leather may be applied to the body of the foot with gentleness; and bind it, according to what is necessary.
If the fracture is on the outer side, then it is necessary to place a star-shaped device above and another below on the sole of the foot; and let the hand be open and straight. Then put on a bandage, as the hand is revolved, and extend it between the toes with a ligature.
If a fracture occurs at any of the nodes of the toes, then if it is the thumb, it should be adjusted according to what is necessary. Then bind it with a splint: and if you desire, place on it a small, straight star-shaped device, so that the fracture is elevated, and does not move.
If the fracture is of the remaining toes, such as the middle, index, or ring fingers, then it should be adjusted and bound with a healthy toe that follows it; or they should all be bound together according to their continuity; and this is better. Or place on top of it a small star-shaped device, as we mentioned for the thumb.
And consider in your restoration, and after the aforementioned disposition of a warm poultice; and oppose with it what is necessary, when something happens from that, according to how its narrative proceeds.
Concerning the Restoration of Fractures of the Hip.
The hip bone is often fractured and is revealed by sensation: because it turns inward and outward to the front and back parts.
And its restoration is done in this way, that a ligature is bound above the fracture, and another ligature below the fracture. And the patient is laid out on his face.
Then every ligament is extended to its own part according to equality: and this, when there is a fracture in the middle of the bone.
If, however, there is a fracture near the root of the hip, then let the ligament be towards the part of the buttock, so that the extension falls upwards: and another ligament beneath the fracture.
And similarly, if there is a fracture near the knee, then let the ligament be near the knee, so that the extension is towards the lower parts.
Then the physician equals the bone with both his hands, until he reduces it according to the similarity of its natural figure: and he connects the bone with a good conjunction.
Then it is necessary to apply an emplastry and a bandage, if there does not occur an abscess in the limb. But if an abscess occurs in it: then leave it for some days, until the hot abscess subsides, and afterwards return to your treatment.
The bandage of it should be thus. It is necessary to apply a soft envelopment over the fracture, that is, a binding: and double or triple it: and let what is excessive remain on it. Then envelop the leg, until the heel reaches the root of the hip.
And introduce a long thread between the hip and the leg near the knee towards the lower parts, and let the ends of the threads unite at the upper part of the two sections. Then roll back what is excessive over the leg and hip from the envelopment.
Then place on the hip at the location of the fracture itself a little star, and place one of them on the bone of the leg.
Then fill in the empty spaces between the leg and hip with soft cloths, so that the bandage is equalized.
Then begin with a strong bandage in the middle over the location of the fracture, three or four envelopments. And as much as it is more elongated with a bandage at the place of the fracture, your structure will be smaller and softer, and more gentle.
Then attend to the two extremities of the cord, which you have inserted between the hip and the leg. Bind it therefore with three splints that are above. Then pass with the two extremities of the cord to below, until you reach the heel of the foot. And with both strings, also bind the extremities of the splints on the other side, so that the bandage is not removed from its place.
Then leave the structure on that, as long as it remains, so that there does not occur corrosion of the limb, nor abscess, nor inflammation, and similar things. If something happens from that. Provide therefore with its treatment, and correct what has happened there entirely, according to what we have said many times.
If indeed there is a splinter of bone that pierces: then it is necessary, to equalize that, if it is possible for you. And if not, find above that, and remove that: and take care with what preceded the treatment, until it is healed.
And when this fracture of the hip is bound, besides what splints are added to it, as we have said in the case of the arm and forearm.
However, in the restoration of a fracture of this kind, there does not occur a weak limping. And if it is restored alone, besides what the other leg is applied to it, then it is necessary, that he whose it is, always limps.
And know that the hip is bound for fifty days, or a little more, or a little less: all of that is according to the diversity of complexions and the remaining dispositions.
On the restoration of a fracture of the kneecap.
You should know that fracture of the knee joint rarely occurs, but it often happens to him with frequent sprains.
If, indeed, a fracture occurs to him, then it is not unless either a crack or an opening in its parts. And it is with a wound and without a wound. And it stands upon the whole of it with sense.
And its restoration is thus, that it may be equalized what has been disrupted from its parts with fingers, until it aggregates and is joined together as much as possible from equality and facilitation, and formation.
Then put a plaster made from flour of emmer wheat or millet, with the white of an egg, and put above it a round stave, if you need it; and bind above it a suitable strapping to hold it in place.
Then consider all the dispositions that we have narrated about other fractures; such as a warm poultice and similar things to it; thus, that you may oppose every accident with what is convenient for it, until it is healed.
On the Restoration of Fractures of the Leg.
You should know that there are two bones in the legs, of which one is thick and is named by the name of the Leg; and the other is subtle and is named the Fibula.
And it happens that both bones of the leg are subject to the same types of fracture as those of the arm; and because of this, its restoration is made in the same way as the restoration of the arm, and the operation is one.
What if both bones are broken at the same time, the Leg is converted to all its parts.
And if the subtle bone is broken, the Leg is converted to the anterior part.
And if the thick bone is broken, you will find it inferior; and it is one of those things that do not hide from you.
Then administer extension, and adjustment, and ligature of the stellar bones according to that equality.
However, it is necessary, if the fracture of the leg is a foul fracture, having many stitches: so that the extension should be minor, and your alleviation more gentle.
And on the leg indeed there is something from the operation above the arm: and it is, when you adjust the stellar bones, and complete all your operation, then take two bandages of pine wood, which are administered in the fabrication of splints that are placed under the tables: and they are made from palm spatulas: and choose from them those that have small thickness, and not be from minute ones: and let their length be according to the length of the leg from the knee down to the bottom.
Then wrap around each bandage with two wrappings according to its length. And place one part of the leg on one side, and the other on the other side: and let them be from the knee down to the foot.
Then tie two bandages in three places, from the two extremities and the middle. For when the stricture is prohibited, the leg declines to the right and left, and stands in a good position.
And now indeed the splint is administered from wood according to the length of the leg, and the leg is placed in it, so that it may conserve it from motion.
And it is especially necessary, to do that in the fracture when there is a proper wound with it.
Then consider the leg every day, and study it with utmost care to prevent aposteme, or inflammation, or other remaining things. If therefore something happens from those, then oppose it with what is necessary, until it is healed, if God wills.
On the fracture of the bones of the Foot and Toes.
Indeed, a fracture does not occur deep in the heel bone.
However, a fracture of the foot bones occurs when it does, and a small fracture also occurs in the toes; and it does not occur unless there is bruising in multiple locations.
If a fracture of the foot bones occurs, and you see those bones protruding above each other, then the patient will place his injured foot on the prepared ground, just like someone walking.
Then stand there, and place your foot on what is elevated from those bones; afterwards press, or tread on it; and equalize it, until it returns to its proper places.
Then put on a plaster, and apply a bandage over it; and place under the foot a small flat board, which has two flat heads.
Then bind it with a suitable strap along with the foot, after you have wrapped it with cloths, and other things which it needs.
When therefore three days or four have passed for him, then loosen the bandage. For you will find the bones equalized, whether they were fractured or dislocated. The operation is therefore successful, as you see.
But if some toes are broken, then restore them, and equalize them according to what I narrated to you about the restoration of fingers on hands. Then put a splint on your toe according to the length of the toe, and let it be slightly wider; then put under the foot the board that I described to you, and bind it with a suitable strap.
If indeed what is broken from the bones is two, or three, or more, then put a splint of its own quantity on each toe, wrapped in linen cloth: and bind the board to the lower foot; and let it stand on one head of the board outside the belly of the foot, so that it holds with good retention.
And it is fitting for you not to forget, that you should consider all the things we have told you about the remaining fractures from the accidents we have mentioned; and oppose every accident with what is suitable.
About the fracture of a woman's pubic bone, and the fracture of the os Pubis, and the fracture of a man's penis.
When the pubic bone of a woman is fractured, then make her sit squarely. Then incline her to the same dorsal part, and let it be held back.
Then fill the obstetric instrument with her pubic bone, until it fills it: and let it be made into a sphere in the pubic bone from that.
Then the woman is shaken, and her back is raised little by little. For that cavity emerges, until it becomes a sphere before the gate of the pubic bone, and the broken bone returns.
Then put a small pillow on her back. When therefore she wants to urinate, remove the cavity with ease, then let her urinate: and return it according to the method by which you first introduced it; then let it return to its original pillow.
Let her do that for seven days or around that time, for the bone is indeed restored.
And if you wish, take a bladder of a goat, and tie over the opening of it a reed pipe, and insert the whole bladder into her pubic bone. Then blow into the pipe with strength, until the bladder is inflated inside the pubic bone, for the fracture returns.
Then it is filled with a cavity, and let it stand for some days, according to what we have narrated, until she is healed.
And when the bone of the pelvis of a man or woman is fractured, then administer its restoration, and balance it according to what we have narrated for the ankle bone.
And it is not hidden in these fractures that are close together, which touch a little, especially to one who has some knowledge or practice.
And understand my book, this one much, because the fracture itself shows you the way to restore it in many arrangements, and its constriction: understand therefore.
When the twig of a man breaks, take the gullet of a goose: and insert the twig into it itself. Then put a wrapping of cloth over it, and let it be wrapped, and leave it for three days or around that, and it will heal, if God wills.
Concerning the restoration of a fracture of bones, when it is with an ulcer.
It is fitting for one to whom a fracture with an ulcer has occurred, especially if it is large, such as the hip bone, or the adjoining ones, or similar to them, that they be treated promptly, and phlebotomists attend to it immediately: if the conditions of phlebotomy are testified to you, as we have mentioned before.
When the ulcer bursts forth with blood, then it is necessary to apply a poultice to its excision, so that you may dust it over with powdered zegi: if there is not another remedy present for you.
Then begin to restore the fracture on that same day: and do not put it off, unless an abscess occurs.
If a hot abscess occurs, then postpone the restoration until the ninth day, until the abscess subsides. And do not approach it on the third and fourth days at all, lest you cause bad accidents to happen to it.
If the broken bone is prominent above the detected wound: then it is necessary to try to reduce it, and adjust it with your hands using gentle and slight extension.
If the extension of it is not prepared, and its adjustment with your hands: then reduce it with that instrument. And it is an instrument made of iron, whose length is the measure of seven fingers, or eight; and its width is according to the size of the wound. And because of that, it is necessary for the physician to receive from them three or four according to the size that he needs for that cure in every kind of fracture.
And let it be round; and let there be a small thickness in it, so that it is not doubled at the time of compression upon it during the hour of operation; and let it have an acute extremity, which has an edge at its extremities. And let its upper part be in thickness from the middle of it to the lower parts.
And this is its form.
It is necessary in this operation that the acute curved extremity of it be placed over the prominent bone extremity; and push it with one force, until when the bone returns and is equalized by some equalization.
Therefore, make the extremities of the fracture equal to each other.
If the fractured extremity is subtle and does not receive the instrument with good reception, then it is necessary to cut into the extremity of that bone, until the instrument has power over it.
If indeed you cannot reduce them with what we have narrated altogether, then cut into it with what is convenient for it from the incisions that we have mentioned: or saw it with one of the saws in whatever way possible to you.
Then scrape off what remains on the bone from roughness and minute crusts.
When the bone is reduced and finds that it is weak after its reduction and feels a violent, piercing pain, then know that the bone did not return to its natural place.
Do that. For you bring great benefit to the weak, when you complete your restoration, which you do for the bone.
Then soak a cloth in styptic wine, black. And especially if it is in summer. And do not apply it to ulcerated wounds, nor anything in which there is oil: so that it does not cause decay and corruption.
Then administer the oils at the time of your recovery for the restoration of the bone. And uncover the wound: thus, that you may cut with forceps into the inversions according to the quantity of the wound.
And beware with all caution, lest you constrict the wound with a fracture. For many times indeed have foolish physicians done this: and they have caused to happen to their sick patients either death or decay, or gangrene, that is, putridity. And let your bandage be soft, gentle, and diverse in the bandaging of remaining fractures.
For if the wound is bad, or it is a great wound, and there are certain evil accidents that we have described, and you find pain in the suspended place: then it is not fitting to apply oils to it. And make inversions with hard cloths in the place of the oils, and constrict it with them.
When, however, it is after one day, or two days, and you see the wound already beginning to generate pus: then remove from above the cloth that you had applied with wine. Then administer the liniments, and ointments with which it is our custom to heal wounds: such as the four-drug ointment, and similar to that.
And it is fitting for you to loosen the bandage. And examine the wound every morning and evening, until it is consolidated and healed.
And it is necessary to prepare the limb in such a way that pus flows out of it easily downwards with facility.
If many days have passed over the wounds and they do not consolidate, nor is the pus separated from them: then know that there are small ulcers of the bones. It is necessary to investigate the wound with a probe. Indeed those which are separated from the ulcers, remove them, and extract themselves. And those which are not separated from them, and pierce the membrane, and cause to happen pain, try to cut them out, and remove them in every way that is possible for you.
If it happens that the wound becomes infected, or turns foul, that is, becomes putrid, or another kind of corruption and decay: then it is necessary to apply a remedy to each one of them with what is suitable for its cure, whose preceding narration is in its own chapter.
And from that in which it is necessary for my speech to stand, and you should have a present mind when the bone is fractured, and it protrudes above the membrane, such as the hip bone, and the assisting ones, and similar ones from the large members, it is, so that you do not assume an attraction of it, for many times it happens from that death, or rather, abandon it, until it putrefies.
Perhaps indeed it will fall off by itself after twenty days, or thirty.
Then therefore treat the wound, if it seems to you: and if not, abandon it.
On the treatment of swellings in fractures of the vertebrae.
This swelling often occurs in the healing of fractures of the vertebrae. Especially when it is near the joints: and it becomes deformed from the shape of the limb. And perhaps it prevents the limb from performing its natural function.
Therefore consider then, if the swelling is recent: administer to it medicines that have drying properties, such as aloe, and frankincense, and myrrh, and sarcocola, and acacia, and similar ones.
So, take some of these or all of them and mix them with wine styptic, or with egg white, or with vinegar; and apply them to the wound in a compress, and bind them on with a good bandage.
And leave the bandage on, without loosening it for many days. Then loosen it, and apply another, until the wound is healed.
Or bind on a plate of lead centered over it. For lead has the property of removing every pain that is felt in the limbs.
But if the wound has already turned into a hard scab, and is constricted, and a pressing necessity arises to remove it: then apply something over it from above, and cut away the redundant prominence: or shave it off with certain razors, until it is removed: and take care of it, until it is healed.
Concerning the treatment when it is restored, and a subtle member remains after that, not according to its own nature.
When a bone fracture is restored, and a subtle member remains after that, weak: then it does not become sound unless due to many causes. Of which one is, the multitude of solutions and bindings not according to what is needed: or due to the excess of constricting bandages, until nourishment is prevented from reaching the member: or due to the multitude of superfluous embrocations at an improper time: or due to the paucity of blood in the weak body, and its debility.
And the treatment for that is to nourish the weak person, and to make their body tender, until the blood is multiplied in it. And administer a bath. And bring joy and happiness upon him.
Then apply pitch over the member: so that it attracts much nourishment to itself. And you should repeatedly soften it with warm water, until the nourishment starts to flow, and it returns to its natural shape.
Concerning the treatment of fractured bones when they are restored to their proper alignment.
When a member is already restored after its healing, and the twistedness and prominence of the fractured bone or knot remain, and it is deformed by that shape of the member; yet the member is not prevented from performing its natural operation: then it is not necessary to receive the message of one who thinks that the member will be broken again.
And already there have been many foolish doctors and restorers, who have done that in our land.
And indeed this operation is utterly detestable, leading to death or great fear, as if it were mortal.
But if the numbness and knotting are recent: then it is necessary to soften them with warm water, in which are decoctions of herbs that soften, such as leaves of marshmallow, and its root, and melilot, and similar things. And let there be made for him a plaster with a softening plaster, such as a well-made diachylon.
Or let there be taken a poultice of marshmallow root, and it should be mixed with the fat of a hen, or sesame oil: and it should be plastered on with that.
Or let there be taken rich figs, and they should be crushed with dove's dung, and similar things which are named from medicines that diminish consolidation.
And when the knot is loosened with gentle, prolonged, and gentle friction, which is done with moist hands. And movement of the member should be administered to every part at all hours.
But if the twistedness has already preceded, and has become strong, and has turned into a stone, and necessity has provoked the need for its treatment with iron: then it is necessary to cut above it, and release the continuity of the bone, and remove what is superfluous from the knot or bone with subtle Incisions: and ease should be administered in that with solicitude and study.
About the treatment of dislocations.
A dislocation is the exit of a joint from its proper place. Because it is prevented from its natural movement, and the shape of the limb is deformed. And it causes to occur severe pains and vehement injuries on the weakened area.
When therefore a dislocation occurs, then it is necessary to hasten to its restoration: and not delay it at all.
For if it is delayed, the place becomes putrid, and perhaps with that, reduction of the dislocation will be more difficult.
Therefore, it is not advisable to move or stretch it during the time of its putrefaction. Because it often causes spasms and lacerating pains.
But when that happens, then it is necessary to resort to bloodletting of the weakened area. Then it should be left alone until the putrefaction subsides.
Then the limb should be anointed with warm water and oil. Then it should be reduced with ease.
And the whole limb should be treated with that which will bring its memory back to its proper place.
I have now arranged the chapters on dislocations, and also according to what has preceded in fracture, from the upper part of the body down to its lower part.
About the treatment of dislocation of the lower jawbone.
The two jawbones are rarely dislocated at the same time.
And the dislocation of both occurs according to one of two modes. Or they are removed from their places with a slight removal, and are softened for a short time. Or they are dislocated with a complete dislocation, until they are softened towards the chest, until saliva flows from the weakened area, and it cannot hold it, nor can it close its mouth, and its tongue is tangled with speech.
When the dislocation of it is small, then it returns to many dispositions by itself with fewness.
If the dislocation is complete and entire: then it is necessary that the reduction of it be administered quickly, and not delayed at all; and it is as if the servant head of the weak patient holds still, and the physician inserts the thumb of their hand into the root of the mandible of the dislocated jaw, if the dislocation is on one side. Or he inserts both thumbs simultaneously, if the dislocation is from two sides. And the remaining fingers of his hands are outside, which are equal.
And instruct the patient to cleanse their jaws, and release them for chewing on all sides. And the physician balances the jaw, and pushes the jaw, until it returns to its place.
If the reduction is difficult, especially if both jaws are involved at the same time: then administer a fumigation with hot water and oil, until the reduction of both becomes easy; nor delay the reduction of both altogether, as we have said.
When they return and are balanced, and the patient's mouth is closed, and not relaxed: then put over them a poultice of old cloths, with wax that is made from beeswax, and rose oil.
Then bind with a facilitative binding using soft ligaments.
And let the patient sleep on their back: and let his head be stationed between two pillows, so that he does not move it to the right or left; nor is it constricted, or cogitated to chew anything: indeed, let his food be given in a soft sorbitio, until when the pains are removed, and the jaw is settled: then let him eat what he wants, and administer it with facilitation.
Let him not exert himself over the operation of his mouth during eating and drinking, and kissing, until the jaw is settled, and healed.
If the reduction of two jawbones becomes difficult when they are dislocated at some hour and do not return to their places, then frequently fevers and constant pains occur; and perhaps the weakened stomach is relaxed, and perhaps it vomits pure bile.
Since you see that, then know that it is a loss, and frequently one dies who suffers that within ten days.
Concerning the reduction of a dislocated elbow, and the extremity of the shoulder.
The elbow indeed does not become dislocated from the inner side, on account of its continuity with the chest. And it becomes dislocated sometimes to the outer sides, and that is made clear by sensation.
And its restoration is, that the weak person should lie on his back, and extend his arms. Then you should bind the place with a strong bandage of your palm, for it will return to its position.
Then put on top of it an emplaster, and poultices, and bind it tightly.
The extremities, indeed, which follow the elbow, and are connected with it, do not become dislocated, unless rarely. If it becomes dislocated on some day: then it is necessary that it be reduced and set in order according to what we have said, and what has been prepared for you.
Then put on top of it an emplaster, and poultices, and a tightening bandage. And instruct the weak person to adhere to tranquility and quiet, until they are healed.
And with this same treatment, the extremity of the shoulder is reduced when it is also separated from its place.
Concerning the reduction of a dislocated shoulder.
Know that the shoulder is not dislocated, except in three ways.
One of them is to be displaced towards the lower parts of the perineum. The second is to be displaced towards the chest. And perhaps it is displaced towards the upper part of the shoulder, and that happens rarely.
And it is not displaced backwards, because of the blade. And it is not displaced forwards, because of the veins.
And indeed it is most often displaced and protrudes towards the lower parts near the perineum: especially in those whose flesh is lean. Since it protrudes quickly in them, and is reduced quickly.
But in those whose flesh is abundant, it is the opposite of that, namely because it protrudes with difficulty, and is reduced with difficulty.
And perhaps it happens to some men that they receive a blow or a fall, and the shoulder is affected by a hot abscess, and it is thought because of that, that it was already displaced.
It is necessary, therefore, to test that until you stand upon certain knowledge of it, and then proceed with its cure.
And the displacement is recognized when it is towards the lower parts near the perineum: and you distinguish between a displaced shoulder and a healthy one. For you find a clear difference between them, and you find a concavity in the head of the shoulder, and under the perineum upon touching the head of the shoulder as if it were a hollow: and the weak one cannot reduce his hand to his ear, nor move it with all its movements.
And similarly, if it is displaced towards the chest or upwards: then you find a clear and obvious touch, and it does not hide.
And indeed the reduction of this displacement is easy, when it is recent, or the patient is a weak boy.
And its reduction is, that the assistant raises their hand to the upper parts. Then put your fingers under the patient's eyelid, and with great strength lift it upwards to its proper place: and serve with your hand, and stretch it upwards. Then put it down below, for it will return quickly on its own.
But if it does not return through what we have said, and there are many days since the dislocation occurred: then it is necessary for the injured person to be bathed in warm water, and an embrocation should be administered that softens and soothes, such as if roots of altea, and fenugreek, and melilot are decocted in water, and administered.
Then the injured person should be raised up on their back: and a sphere and wool should be placed under their eyelid, which is balanced between gentleness and firmness.
Then the physician should place his heel on the sphere, and lift the head of the humerus with strength, and attract the hand of the injured person downwards.
And if you wish, reduce it according to this method: and it is, that you should make the strong man who is longer than the injured person present, and stand at his side, and insert his humerus under the eyelid of the injured person: and lift his eyelid upwards, until the injured person is suspended in the air. And another person should pull the hand of the injured person downwards towards his belly. But if the injured person is lightweight: then it is necessary to suspend something else with him, so that it weighs him down: for the dislocation will return immediately.
And it is reduced also according to another method: and it is, that a long wooden beam is fixed in the ground, whose head has a rounded figure: like a mason's hand-guard: which should not be thick, nor too subtle. Then let it be placed under the injured part after they are placed on top of a soft cloth headrest, and let the injured part stand upright according to the length of the wood.
Then his hand is extended to the lower part of the other side, and his body is extended from the other side with strength; for the joint returns to its place with swiftness.
If his reduction is difficult through all that we have said, then use this treatment: and it is, to take a wood whose length is the quantity of two arms, and its width the quantity of four fingers, and its thickness the quantity of two fingers: which has a round head, so that its entrance may be alleviated into the deep tissue, according to this form.
Then soft cloths are tied around the round head, so that they do not harm the injured wood.
Then it is placed under the injured tissue, so that the hand or arm may be extended onto the wood up to the lower parts: and the wood is tied over the assistant and arm and extremity of the hand.
Then the arm is placed on a step of a ladder by width, and the hand is extended to the lower parts, and the rest of the body is suspended hanging from the other side. For the joint enters immediately.
When therefore the entrance is completed according to whatever mode possible: then it is necessary to place under the tissue a sphere of equal quantity made of wool. Then put the prepared plaster made from mill dust with olive oil and egg white over the entire shoulder, as it revolves back to its place.
Then bind underneath the tissue a suitable strapping: and the ligament is revolved over the plaster above: and his hand is attached to his neck, and let it be left untouched, so that his hand may not be moved for seven days.
And it is necessary to put light food in front of the injured person, until the limb is comforted: because it is quicker for his healing.
Then a larger bandage should be put on after seven days, or five, and it should be tightened with movement. If it is then strengthened and not softened, then he is already healed.
If the joint is dislocated many times, because of the moisture that happens to it, or because of another cause: then it is necessary to administer a cautery with three probes, according to what was previously mentioned in the chapter on cautery.
What if all this is done, and the ligament is loosened after seven days, and the joint is not strengthened, and the plaster and bandage are applied many times, and it does not firm up, and it falls apart, and cannot be lifted to its former position: then know that the nerves that are at the head of the humerus have already been cut, or stretched, or softened: and know that the joint will never be fixed in its proper place.
Dislocations that occur towards the chest and nipple, or towards the back, are reduced with impulse and extension using the hands: until it returns to its place, and the remaining bandage and care are administered, until it is healed.
What if after healing a heaviness occurs in the limb, and slowness in its movement, then let the weakened person use a bath many times, until that heaviness is alleviated, and it returns to its original nature.
On the treatment of dislocation of the elbow.
Know that the joint of the elbow is dislocated with difficulty, and similarly returns with difficulty also: and it itself dislocates to all parts, and especially to the front or to the back.
And its dislocation is not hidden from you: because it falls under your sight and touch, according to whatever shape it is dislocated. And when you join the dislocated elbow with a healthy one, that becomes clearly apparent to you. For it is joined together and cannot bend its arm, nor can it touch its shoulder with it.
And it is necessary, as you approach, to reduce the dislocation at once, before a warm abscess forms on it.
For if a warm abscess forms on it, its reduction becomes difficult; and perhaps it will not heal entirely, especially when it is on the back. For it is the worst of all kinds of dislocations, and of the most violent pain to them; and many times it ends with death.
And its restoration, when it is among those that are possible to reduce, is that the hand of the patient should be extended with both hands: and his arm should be stretched out, and the doctor's hands should be above the elbow and below it, and he himself should push the joint with the thumbs of his hands together, or with the heel of his palm, until it returns to its place.
Or if the dislocation is to the front: then it returns thus, that he bends his hand with his own hand, until he strikes with the heel of his palm the elbow which is dislocated.
What if the dislocation does not obey reduction, then administer a strong and forceful extension: and it is thus, that two assistants should stretch out the arm: and those two assistants should hold it as well, so that it does not move back during the extension.
Then the arm should be bandaged to every part after a long, doubled cloth or a broad bandage is applied over his hand.
And when the doctor touches the joint with his hand, he should anoint it with oil: so that it is among those things that help to lubricate the joint and make it more flexible. Then he pushes the joint with a strong impulse, until it returns to its place.
And after its reduction, it is necessary to apply a plaster over it, on which there should be a powder of stipticity, and an application with albumen water: and a suitable bandage should be tightly bound. And let the arm be suspended from the neck of the weak person, and let it be left for some days.
Then let it be loosened. If then the joint is firmly fixed in its place, then loosen the bandage from it, and let it be.
And if you see that the joint is not well strung, then apply a plaster, and a bandage, and let it be for some days, until it becomes strong. Then loosen it.
If however it happens that there is heaviness after the reduction of the joint, and the arrangement is in motion: then administer moisture in bathing, and subtle friction, and compression, until it becomes smooth, or put over the joint a greasy ointment, namely, a rich fatty substance. Then let it be bound, and let it be left on it for a day and a night. Then remove it, and introduce it into a bath. When it sweats, then rub the joint with moderate friction. Then apply to it a first, second, and third ointment, one at a time, with the entrance of the bath, until it becomes smooth.
And if you wish, put on it a warm, moist, and heated dung plaster, with butter, and bind over it.
Do that several times. It itself becomes smooth, and returns to its own arrangement.
On the treatment of a dislocation by Almahassem.
The hand of Mahassem is often dislocated, that is, the joint which is between the arm and the hand.
And the reduction of his dislocation is easy. Unlike other joints. However, it is necessary that there be speed in the reduction of his dislocation at the hour in which it becomes dislocated, before the place becomes inflamed; or else a hot abscess may occur.
And the reduction of the dislocation in this is, that you should place your weak hand on the table, and stretch out your other hand; and the physician should place his own palm on the prominence of the joint, and push it, until it returns to its place.
However, it is necessary to consider that if the palm has already receded towards the back of the hand: then the weak person should place the back of their hand on the table at the extension and reduction; and if the dislocation progresses towards the back of the hand, then the position of the hand should be placed inwardly on the table, that is, the inner part of the hand should be placed on the table, so that the physician's hand falls upon the same prominence of the joint.
If it returns immediately, that is good; and if not, then bind it with a plaster dressing the swelling: and leave it, without repeating that.
For if it does not tolerate, nor can you achieve reduction, after the days have passed, however the joint remains crooked according to its own twist: and it does not harm the weak person at all, unless the hand becomes soft, and cannot grasp anything: then know that the nerves are cut or injured.
There is therefore no ingenuity in this, except to bind it with a hot iron near the fracture itself. And perhaps that does not help at all.
When therefore the dislocation does not return to its place, then put on it a plaster, which we have described. Then bind it, and let it be for five days: afterwards unbind it and let it be, and exercise the hand.
But if its movement is restricted, and some heaviness occurs in it: then soften it with warm water, and rub it several times, until it becomes soft.
On the treatment of dislocations of the fingers.
When a finger is dislocated from its joint, or from the back of the palm, or from its front: then extend the finger and push the dislocation with your thumb, until it returns to its place.
Then support the head of the fingers, and suspend it towards the part where it is dislocated, and leave it for two days.
Then suspend it, and extend it until it becomes straight on that day of its own.
When therefore the night has become calm, bind it according to its own narrative: and do not cease to loosen it on that day: and exercise it with motion: and bind it at night.
Do that for several days until it becomes stiff.
And do likewise with it, if it is dislocated towards the palm of the hand: and bind it to that same part, and perform your first operation on it until it heals.
And do likewise with it when it is dislocated towards the other parts.
On the treatment of dislocation of the vertebrae of the back.
When it happens to someone that the vertebrae of the back are dislocated, or a complete dislocation of the neck occurs, or many vertebrae are removed from their places: then there is no treatment for this, because death quickly follows for the sick person.
And the sign of this is that the sick person's evacuation happens without their will, nor can they hold it: and often certain members of theirs become soft because of this, such as one of his legs, or two arms, or one of them: or a vertebra is removed from its place.
For often it is removed, because often there is removal to the four parts.
Therefore, that which is removed towards the back is called Gibbosity.
The treatment of it is, as you should consider then, if Gibbosity occurs from childhood: then there is no treatment for it, nor is there any healing at all.
In that which occurs from a fall, or a blow, or similar things, the ancient ones have already spoken of methods of treatment in a lengthy discourse. He who does not return with profit.
I, however, have already abbreviated it from that, which excuses little of its multitude in proximity to my intention; and I have set forth my exposition as I have exhibited it, and have formed the instrument in a diverse manner from what they have shown, and have set it forth.
Therefore I say that the hump-shaped prominence which occurs on the anterior part is not a natural talent, nor a healing from it.
And similarly, in that which is done for the two sides also.
And it is not treated from them, unless that which occurs on the back properly, as I describe: and it is, that the weak person is stretched out on his face on a level platform near the wall: and a moist cloth is spread under him, so that his chest is not hurt.
Then a straight wooden stick is placed fixed in the ground at the end of the bed, near his head: and another stick near his feet at the other end of the bed: and an assistant holds the stick, and it should not be firmly fixed in the ground. And another assistant holds the other one.
Then a soft wrapping is put over the head of the weak person, and under his eyelids a gentle ligature is firmly tied: and the extremity of the ligament is extended to the stick that is near his head: and it is bound to it.
Then another ligature is tightened above his haunches, and above his knees, and at his ankles. Then all the ligatures are gathered together, and they are bound to the other stick that is near his feet.
Then all the assistants stretch out to the part of the stick with the ligature, and the two sticks are not removed from their places where they are fixed: however, they should not be firmly fastened, as we have said.
And the physician places his hands on the vertebra with strength, until it returns to its place: or he places it on a tablet. Then he should place his feet on a table, so that they hang down.
If, however, it does not respond to this treatment, then take a table whose length is about three cubits. And let the leg be placed on the wall of the thing we mentioned, which is near the patient, the place into which the end of the table enters. Then put a cushion in the middle of the table on the vertebrae. And let the doctor place his feet on the other end. And let him pull strongly, so that the vertebrae is constricted, and returns to its own place.
Then if you wish, operate with a turning instrument that is wrapped with your hand; and it is so that you fix two wooden pieces on the ground near the head of the patient at the end of the bed, each one cubit long; and likewise near his head at the end of the bed, two wooden pieces.
And let the length between each wooden piece be one palm; and now a hole has been made in every place where the turning instrument runs; and let all the wood be fixed firmly to the ground, so that it does not move at all.
And let a round wood be inserted; and it is a turning instrument on which the ligament is wound around in the two holes of the two wooden pieces.
And on its end is a hole, where the wood is fixed, whose length is one palm with that which is wound around; and in the two other wooden pieces there are similar ones.
Then pull the ligaments that you have bound on the chest of the patient with the turning instrument that is at his head; and the ligaments that you have bound on his legs with the turning instrument that is at his feet.
Then a servant stands at every turning instrument, who twists his hand with the rope, with which the turning instrument is wound; and the doctor sets the vertebrae in place, according to what we have said.
This is the form of a wound that follows.
Then, after the swelling has gone down, and the place is even, then it is suitable to apply a drying poultice with egg white. Then a dressing. Afterwards, place above the poultice a small plate made from a tablet, whose width is three fingers, or about that. And its length is the amount that covers the place of the gibbosity, and over the healthy part of the spine.
Then it is bound with a bandage which we mentioned. And let the patient be nourished with subtle sustenance until he is healed.
If something of the swelling remains in the place at the end of the healing: then it is suitable to administer medicines that soften and ease, with the application of the plate which we described for a long time. And now it is applied on that sheet of lead.
And when a swelling occurs at the last vertebra of the back: and it is thought to be a dislocation through that, and it is that bone which now protrudes. Therefore it is not suitable to make a assumption for him with this medicine: perhaps indeed it will cause death.
Concerning the treatment of a dislocated ankle.
You should know that the joints of the ankle and the joints of the shoulder do not occur unless there is a dislocation only: nor does it happen to them what happens to other joints from slight removal and concavity.
And indeed, the ankle joint is dislocated according to four parts. Which is, because it is dislocated forward and backward.
And indeed, it is most often dislocated inwardly: and little dislocated forward and backward.
And the treatment of its inward dislocation is this: because when you join the weak leg with the healthy one, it is longer: and its knee is more prominent than the healthy one, and the weak one cannot bend his foot at the groin: and there is a place that follows the groin, marked by a hot apostema, therefore, because the head of the hip has already arrived there.
And the sign of the one who suffers from a dislocation towards the exterior is what are the contrary accidents of those accidents.
And the sign of the one who suffers from a dislocation towards the front is that it stretches the healthy leg according to its complement: truly it does not bend it without pain which is in the knee: and if he tries to walk, he cannot do so towards the front: and his urine is retained, and his groin is inflamed, and during walking there is a weariness upon his heel.
And the sign of the one who suffers from a dislocation towards the back is that it does not stretch the knee, nor can he bend it until he bends the groin: and his leg is also shorter than the other: and the groin is softened, and the head of the hip is at the place of the ilium.
The reduction of this type of dislocation is indeed thus, that you should consider then, if the dislocation is old, which has already become accustomed to the one having it. Then if you administer its reduction, and it remains according to its own disposition: then there is no cure for it at all. Therefore it is not suitable that a deep supposition should be made about it.
In that case where the dislocation is recent, and it is one of the four species of dislocations: then you should strive for this, that you may join the ends, and extend it to the interior and exterior, and move it to the right and left: perhaps indeed it will return, and does not require another cure.
If, however, it does not return in this way, then it is necessary to prepare a strong assistant, and to extend his leg from the lower part: either with his own hands, or with a bandage, which is tied above his knee: and another assistant extends his hand above, so that he may insert his hands under his buttocks. Then he should bind with a soft bandage around the root of the hip, and hold the end of the other bandage.
And let the extension be from the front of the thigh to the part of the groin, or from the back to the part of the back.
And let their extension be in one way only, until the weak person is lifted with his body from the ground and remains hanging.
And this indeed is a type of extension that is a common type of the four types.
If therefore the dislocation returns with what we have said, it is good; and if not, then it is necessary for every type to add that which I will say about proper healing.
In the reduction of this proper type, when the dislocation is towards the interior, it is necessary that the weak person be placed on his healthy side. Then he should place a bandage over the root of the hip, where it is between the head of the hip and the place that is under the groin. Then he should extend the bandage upwards from the part of the groin to the higher part of the body, to the part of the flank.
Then another strong assistant should take his arm, and reduce the large swelling of the hip by gentle means, and extend it to the outer extension with a vigorous extension. Now indeed it returns to its place.
And this type is easier than the remaining types of healing, by which this limb is reduced.
If however it is elevated above you, and does not obey you at the entrance with this type of healing entirely: then it is necessary that both feet of the weak person be bound together with a strong bandage, gentle, over both heels, and over both knees: and let the length of each be compared to its own quantity of four fingers: and let the weak leg be extended more by the quantity of two fingers.
Then the weak person should be suspended over a wooden beam, which is in the house: and let its length from the ground be the quantity of two arms.
Then order a strong youth to support the head of the hip: and let him be suspended with the weak youth, another: and let another youth push, supporting the hip with strength, for the joint returns to its place with swiftness.
In the reduction of it, when there is a dislocation to the outside, it is necessary that the weakened person lies on a platform, according to what we have described in the case of having a hump. And let the ligament be tightened above his leg, weakened as it is, and above his chest.
Then two wooden boards should be placed, one at his feet and the other at his head. Then a wooden board should be placed in the middle of the platform, fixed well: on which are wrapped humid cloths, so that it does not hurt the weakened person; and let the board be between his hips, so that he is not pulled down towards the lower parts during extension.
Then everyone assisting should pull to their own side, and the physician makes the reduction with his own hand.
If it then obeys to reverting, it will be good.
And if not, place on that same platform, and press upon it, as we have said in the case of a hump, equally. Truly it is necessary that the weakened person lies on his healthy side.
And when the dislocation is to the front, then it is necessary that the weakened person's leg be extended quickly; and it is according to this same narration on the platform: and the physician should place the palm of his right hand on the groin of the weakened person. Then he should compress it with his other hand, and with that compression place it extended downwards towards the knee joint.
And if the dislocation is to the back: then it is not necessary that the weakened person be extended downwards, and he should be raised above the ground: rather it is necessary that he be placed on a hard surface, just as it is necessary if his joint is dislocated outward, according to what we said about lying on two joints: and it is on his face, and the ligaments are extended: according to what we said recently.
And it is necessary that compression with a plate should be administered over the place to which the joint returns, with completion of reduction according to what is necessary.
And the sign of its reduction is not hidden from you: and it is, that you stretch out two weakened legs; and when you see them as equal, and the weakened one draws in its leg, and expands it without excuse; then you know, because the limb has now returned according to what is necessary; then join the two hips together, and apply a plaster, and bind with a splint, that is, a circular bandage: so that it may not move to any part: and let the weakened one remain quiet for three days or four.
Then loosen the bandage and plaster, and compare the leg with the other; then if you see them as equal in condition, then you know that the dislocation is now firmly set; therefore, remove the weakened one from walking.
And if you see some softening; then return and apply a plaster to it, and bind it according to your first stricture; and leave it alone for three days as well.
Then loosen it and make it walk slowly on both legs for several days, until it is comforted well.
Of Dislocations of the Knee.
The knee is dislocated in three ways. It is dislocated outward, inward, and downward, that is, to the back.
And it is not dislocated forward.
And the sign of its dislocation is that you will notice the weakened one, so that it applies its leg to its hip. But if it does not adhere to the hip, then you know that the knee is dislocated.
And the restoration of all modes of its dislocation is to make the weakened one sit upright, so that it now stretches out its leg if it can above that, and attaches your back to its face; and put its foot between your feet.
Then adhere to its knee with your palms, and place them straight between your fingers over its knee. Then apply both your palms to the sides of its knee with strength. And another assistant stretches out its foot, until its knee returns to its place.
And the sign of reduction is that the leg adheres to the hip with gentleness, not laboriously.
Then apply a plaster to it, and make the leg adhere to the hip. Then bind them together with a bandage for three days, or four. Then loosen it.
And let the patient not use it for walking for some days, until it heals.
If, however, the reduction is refused to you, then administer a strong extension with bandages, whose preceding description was given in the treatment of dislocation, until it returns.
On the treatment of dislocation of the ankle bone.
The heel bone is sometimes removed with a small removal, and sometimes it is dislocated according to its joint. And its dislocation occurs either inward or outward.
And the sign of its dislocation is that you see the ankle bone swollen, proceeding to the side to which it is dislocated.
The treatment of its removal, however, is an easy reduction: and it is that it should be extended with ease by hand, and adjusted, until it returns.
In the treatment of it when it is dislocated according to its joint, it is necessary that you make the patient sit upright: and another strong assistant should hold it from behind, at the middle of his back.
Then you should hold with your right hand its foot from the upper part of it, and with your left hand from the lower part of its ankle at the heel.
Then pull the foot towards you with your right hand. Then with the left hand and two fingers.
Then stretch out with the left hand, and press the sole of the foot with the right hand turned towards the knee without effort.
Do that twice, as we have narrated.
Then press the sole of the foot towards the knee in a third position, and you will draw out the shaft.
If therefore it returns to its original position, or to the second according to this method, and you see the foot is equalized, it is good: and if not, then repeat the operation over it, for it itself will return.
If however the reduction of it is prohibited to you with what we have narrated: then make the weak part lie on its back on the ground, and fix a small peg firmly in the earth, so that it falls between its hips: and you have now enveloped it with a cloth, so that it does not hurt the weak part.
Then let the assistant take its hip: afterwards the assistant stretches out the other foot, either with their hands or with a bandage that binds around the neck of the foot. Then the assistant stretches out against the extension of his own comparison: and the small peg stands between the two hips of the weak part, retaining it, so that its body is not drawn downwards at the extension.
Then the doctor adjusts the dislocation with his hands, and the assistant holds the healthy leg downwards. For the dislocation returns with swiftness.
When therefore the dislocation returns, and the health of its reposition is declared to you: then apply an emplaster and a poultice, and bind it firmly with ligaments, and tie the foot with a bandage to the leg.
And it is necessary to beware lest you harm the nerves that are behind the heel, so that the bandage does not press upon them and hurts them.
Then leave it for two days, or three. If the bandage is softened, tighten it; then loosen it on the third or fourth day, and prohibit the injured person from walking for forty days. If indeed he is allowed to walk before that time, there will not be safety lest the dislocation dissolve upon it and become corrupted, and he does not receive a cure afterwards.
If a hot abscess happens to him: then it is necessary to administer to him the treatment which we previously mentioned in another place in our cure, and embrocation, until it is removed.
On the dislocation of the toes of the foot, and its cure.
It is necessary that what is dislocated be adjusted with a few gentle extensions without effort: and indeed this is not difficult, but rather it is easy.
If the dislocation is in certain nodes of the back of the foot, then it is necessary that the injured person sit with his foot on a level place on the ground or on a stool, and he stands as if walking.
Then you stand, and put your foot on that which protrudes from those joints. Then press it with your foot with strength, until it returns to its place, and you will see that it is already adjusted, and does not appear prominent in the location.
Then put under the foot a board which grasps the whole foot, having two horns. Then bind it with a suitable bandage for three days. Then loosen it, and make him rest from walking for many days, until it is strengthened and secured from the dislocation.
On the types of dislocations with wound or fracture.
When something happens from that and you desire to cure it and its restoration, death often follows; and because of this, it is not suitable to take responsibility for its cure, unless one is skilled in the long-practiced art, merciful, pious, slow, not reckless, nor presumptuous; and so that he may use gentle medicines which only soothe hot abscesses, and leave the injured person to divine judgment. Unless you despair, or hope for health with gentle treatment of the disease, and in which something of hope appears. Take care therefore to reduce it immediately at the beginning of the illness, before a hot aposteme occurs.
If therefore the limb is restored according to what you wished, then administer a regimen that soothes the aposteme; and treat the wound with what is suitable for it from drying ointments.
If there is dislocation with fracture, and it occurs in separated bones of the joint, then take care to ablate them, and do in that what we said in simple diseases from what has preceded in their places.
And beware according to your virtue, and guard yourself from the entrance into the way of fear: according to what has preceded my prediction to you.
For that is better for you with your Creator, and more permanent to your glory, and more healthful to your body among those in your time.
