After I had completed for you, sons, this book, which is the last part of science in medicine with its complement, and I had reached the end in it, from its explanations and declarations, it seemed to me that I should complete it for you with this Treatise, which is a part of operation, that is, surgery with hand.
Because the operation with hand is laid out in our region and time, and has been utterly privatized: so that perhaps the science of it has perished, and its investigation has been cut off: and there did not remain any of it, except for small descriptions in ancient books, which were distorted by hands: and error and hesitation occurred, until the intentions of it were closed, and its force was elongated. It seemed to me that I should revive it with the ordering of this Treatise, according to the way of positioning, declaration, and abbreviation: and so that I might bring it together with the forms of cauterium instruments, and other tools of work: as it is fitting from declarations of addition, and from its proper preparation which is necessary.
The reason why a good craftsman of it with his hand is not found in our time is: because the art of medicine is long and it is necessary for its author to have exercised beforehand in the science of anatomy, which Galen described, so that he may know the juiciness of members, and their forms, and their conjunction, and separation, and have cognition of bones, and nerves, and ligaments, and their number, and their egressions, and veins pulsating, and quiet ones, and exit places.
And on account of this, Hippocrates said that a name with a name is much, and with work is little, and especially in the art of hand.
We have now spoken about it in the introduction of this book.
Because whoever is not knowledgeable about what we have said about anatomy will not be cautious, lest they already fall into error, by which men are harmed: just as I have seen many of those who are formed by this science, and boast about it without knowledge, and without experience.
What happened was that a foolish doctor cut into a scrofulous apostem on the neck of a woman and severed certain arteries in her neck, so that her blood flowed out, until she fell dead at his hands.
And another foolish doctor who attempted to extract a stone from a man's testicle, which was swollen at the time, and the stone was large. He therefore approached him, and extracted it along with a piece of his bladder. Therefore the man died on the third day.
And I had already been called in to extract it: and I saw from the size of the stone and the condition of the sick man that he would die.
And I saw another doctor who received a stipend from a certain Duke of our land because of his medical practice: and it happened to a black eunuch who was with him, that he had a fracture in his leg near the ankle: and the doctor, with his ignorance, treated the fracture with poultices, and bound it tightly with a bandage, and did not allow the wound to breathe.
Then he dismissed him according to his foolish desires. Afterwards he sent him away for several days and instructed him not to remove the bandage: and it remained thus until his leg became infected and his foot, and it led to destruction.
I was therefore called in for him: and I hastened to remove the bandage: and calmness followed, and he was freed from his pains.
However, the corruption had already become established in the limb: and I was not able to restrain it.
So then the corruption ceased to spread through the limb, until he died.
And I saw another doctor who pierced a cancerous apostem: and it became ulcerated after days, until the evil of his lord was magnified with him.
What is, because when there is a pure cancer from melancholic humor, then it does not seem advisable to approach it with iron at all, unless it be in a member that can tolerate it, so that the whole of it may be cut away.
And because of that, O sons, it is necessary for you to know that the operation with the hand is divided into two divisions: namely, an operation associated with salvation, and an operation in which there is danger in many dispositions.
And I have already pointed out in every place of this book, where an operation comes up, in which there is fear and dread.
Therefore it is necessary for you to beware of that, and to moderate it: so that the stupid ones may not find a way to speak about it, and to discredit it.
Receive therefore the measurement with solicitude and protection, and your infirmities with facility and firmness, and may you have a better way of proceeding by the grace of God to salvation and laudable succession: and abandon the terrible difficulties of difficult healing: and remove your souls from what makes you fear, so that hesitation may not creep over you in your faith and your comfort.
For it is more remaining to your glory, and more sublime in this world, and afterwards to your quantities.
For Galen indeed has already said so in certain of his admonitions. You do not heal the bad illness: lest you be named a bad doctor.
Now, however, I have divided this Treatise into three Chapters.
First Chapter.
On Cauterization with fire, and Cauterization with acute medicine, chaptered, and arranged from head to feet, and the forms of instruments, and the furnishings of Cauterization: and all that is necessary for the operation.
Second Chapter.
On incision and perforation, phlebotomy and venesection, and wounds: and the extraction of arrowheads, and similar things: and the entire chapter, arranged in the forms of instruments.
The third chapter.
On restoration and dislocation, and the treatment of twisting, and similar things:  chapter, arranged from head to foot, and in the forms of instruments.
But before I discuss the operation with it, it is necessary that I describe the quality of its cauterizations and brandings: and in what complexions they are exhibited.
I say therefore that the discourse on the quality of cauterization by hot iron and its branding is a prolix, subtle, scientific, and hidden secret.
Also, many wise men have spoken about it, and they have disagreed about it: and to me, indeed, a little from their discourses is enough, fearing prolixity.
I say therefore that cauterization is suitable universally for every complexion, which is with matter and without matter: except for two complexions, which are the hot complexion without matter and the dry complexion without matter.
But in the hot and dry complexions with matter, they disagreed. For some said that cauterization is beneficial in them. And others said the opposite, namely that cauterization is not suitable for a illness which arises from hot and dry qualities: since the nature of fire is heat: and it is unsuitable to be healed from a hot and dry illness with hot and dry things.
And he who says the opposite of that said: that through cauterization a remedy is made in every hot and dry affliction that occurs in human bodies; because when you examine the body of a man and its humidity, according to the complexion of fire, you find the body of a man to be cold.
And I say through his discourse: because from my experiments he has already demonstrated that to me many times.
However, it is not proper for him to come forward with that, unless he who has already been tested and exercised in the last chapter of Cauterii's exercise, and has recognized the diversity of human complexions, and the disposition of afflictions within themselves, and their causes, and their accidents, and their time span.
But there is no fear from the remaining complexions over you: and especially in cold and moist afflictions. For all physicians have come to an agreement about these: and they do not disagree with Cauterius in their remedies.
And you should know, my sons, that the secret of curing through Cauterium with fire and its goodness is above Cauterium with combusting medicine: because fire is simple, whose action does not reach, unless to the member that is cauterized; and it does not harm another member joined to it, except by a small injury.
However, the action of combusting medicine reaches to that which is extended from the members; and perhaps it causes an affliction to occur in the member that is difficult to heal, and perhaps it interferes.
However, fire, because of its subtlety and the goodness of its substance, does not do that, unless it is excessive.
For we have learned that through experience, because of the length of service and study with art, and standing upon the truth of things; and because of that I excuse myself from the length of the discourse.
And if it were not, because it is not permitted to me in this book of mine, I would reveal to you the hidden secret in fire, and the quality of its operation on bodies through expulsion of their own diseases, which expels diseases by philosophical demonstration, which will be impressed upon your minds.
And you know, my sons, that they disagree among themselves at the time when it is suitable to perform cauterization, and they set a better time for spring.
And I say that cauterization is suitable at any time; because, when a harmful accident occurs due to the season being submerged in youth, which is attracted with cauterization. And especially if cauterization is because of pains from necessary pains, strong, swift, which do not tolerate delay: therefore, because it is feared that a greater evil may occur, which is more than the small harm that occurs at that time.
And do not let it occur to your minds, my sons, that they do not esteem, except the common and foolish physicians, namely that those diseases which are healed by cauterization, are not always a return: and they set forth that consequence, and the thing is not as they think: therefore, because cauterization is not, unless it changes the complexion, and dries out the humidities which are the causes, whence pains occur.
However, cauterization is superior to medicine through the swiftness of its healing, and the virtue of its operation, and the vehemence of its dominion: and it is possible that the disease may return at some time according to the complexion of the infirm person, and the location of the disease itself, and its virtue: and what is prepared in his body through an aggregation of superfluous things in it: and what reaches him in his acquisition from foods and similar causes, unless there is a disease for which cauterization is administered.
A subtle numbness in a few limbs that are swollen and moist, such as a burn from a tooth, due to pain, and similar to that, it is possible that the pain does not return to it. But that occurs in a few.
But truly the common speech is wrong, since cauterization is a last resort of medicine, and it's a correct speech: not towards that which they intend in it; because they believe that there is no cure that can be accomplished with medicine, nor with anything else after the use of cauterization.
The reality is contrary to that, and the intention, that cauterization is a last resort of medicine, is not so; unless when we administer methods of cure in some numbness, and they do not confer with those medicines: then we administer cauterization at the end, and it confers; therefore it falls, that cauterization is a last resort of medicine, not according to the intention which the common people and many stupid doctors understand.
The ancients, however, said that cauterization with gold is better than cauterization with iron; and they did not say that, except because of the equality of gold, and the sublimity of its substance: and they said that it does not produce pus at the place of cauterization. That is not absolutely true: because I have already tested that, and found that it does not do that in certain bodies without others.
And cauterization with gold itself is good, and better than with iron, as they said. However, when you heat cauterization fire in a gold fire, it is not declared to you, when it is ignited according to the quantity that you want, because of the redness of the gold: and when it approaches the cold, and if you add ignition on top of it, it melts in the fire and turns into plates.
Therefore the craftsman falls from that into the occupation: and because of that, cauterization with iron is more suitable and closer to us, due to its straightforwardness in operation.
And I have already arranged this chapter on cauterization, following the chapters; and I have arranged it from head to feet, so that they may find quickly what they want from it.
Head 2.
Here cauterization is beneficial for mastering humidity and coldness on the brain, which are two causes of diseases, and many fluxes of humors from the head to the parts of the eyes and ears, and many sleep disorders, and toothaches, and throat pains; and universally all sicknesses that occur from coldness, such as paralysis, and diseases, epilepsy, and apoplexy, and similar ones from those sicknesses.
The method of cauterization is to prepare the patient: so that they may be evacuated in the first place with cleansing medicine, purifying the head for three nights or four, according to what the strength of the patient requires, and their age, and their habit.
Then advise them to shave their head with a razor. Then make him sit between your hands squarely, so that he has already placed his hands on his chest.
Then put the root of your palm over the root of his nose between his eyes. Wherever your middle finger touches, mark that place with a cauterization.
Then apply the cautery of olive oil: this is its form.
Then place it over the marked spot with the cautery, descending gradually, as your hand contracts slowly, and you turn it around. Then lift your hand quickly, and inspect the spot.
If you see that it has already drawn out a quantity of brain marrow or a quantity of zeolite, then lift your hand. And if not, repeat with your hand in the same place, or with another from the same place if it becomes cold: until you see the bones, which I told you.
Then apply something from salt, and dissolve it in water, and soak the same cotton, and put it on the location: and leave it there for three days.
Then put the cotton soaked in butter on it, and leave it on the location until the scab is destroyed by fire. Then treat it with four-drug ointment, until it heals.
Some have said that when the wound remains open for a longer time, it discharges pus; therefore it is better and more beneficial.
And some of them have said that the skin should be cauterized up to the bone: and the cautery should be held in place until it reaches a certain degree of hardness of the bone.
Then scrape off what has been burned onto the bone, then treat it.
And others say that it is necessary to reach the bone with the cautery until the end, so that it makes an impression on the bone, so that it becomes like a shell shape: or an instrument which women use for inserting small letters: and they think that vapors rise from this place to the head, and the wound should be left open for a long time.
Then treat it, until it consolidates.
But to me, these two methods of cauterization do not seem useful at all, except in certain men according to the way of fear.
And to leave it alone is better for me, with the safety of his own health.
For the head is weakened by the dissolution of its natural continuity: as we have testified to in other members: and especially when the head of the infirm person is weak by nature: and indeed the first species of cauterization is safer and better for me, and I approve it: therefore operate with it for health.
Head 3.
When a chronic pain occurs throughout the whole head, and it is prolonged in the weak, and it uses yawning, and hiccuping, and purging of the head, and anointing with oil, and applying poultices. And especially if it has already been cauterized with one cautery, which we have described, and nothing of those things helps it: then consider. For if the head of the weak patient is of a strong natural constitution, and it is not feeble, and it finds a violent cold: then cauterize with another cautery beneath that place a little. Then cauterize him on the entire crown of his head with a cautery, so that it does not penetrate through the skin, and a quantity of bone is disclosed, as we have described. And cauterize him with one cautery on the back of his head, in the place that is called "uas": and it is a place where a vein is located: and elevate your material in this, and do not disclose the bone. For the weak patient finds relief from that violent pain, and is freed from the pain of the remaining cauteries of his entire head.
And I say that this Cautery is in its proper place: and it is necessary that there be a cautery, with which the crowns of the head are cauterized, and his back is more subtly cauterized with a cautery, with which the middle of the head is cauterized.
Head 4.
When pain and soreness occur in part of the head, or the pain extends to the eye, and it is cleansed with purifying medications, and the remaining treatment is administered, as I said in the divisions of diseases, and it does not help entirely: then cauterization there is according to two methods: either cauterization with a sharp burning medicine, or with iron.
The cauterization is done with acute medicine, burning as you receive one of the teeth of the other, and you excise it, and you cut off its extremities from both sides. Then, you make an incision at the place of pain at the time with a broad scalpel, until it becomes a spot beneath the skin, where the tooth is seized.
Introduce it therefore beneath the skin, until it is hidden: then bind above it with a decent constriction of poultice, and leave it for fifteen hours; then loosen it, and extract the tooth, and leave it for two days, or three. Afterwards, put above it a submerged cotym covered in butter, until the place makes pus: then treat it with ointment until it is healed.
And if you wish to do that with certain burning medicines, which I wrote about in the twelfth treatise, concerning medicines that draw out.
The cauterization is indeed done with iron, according to this method. A fiery cauterization, whose form is this.
And it is named Clavulus; because the form of its head is like the form of a little nail, in which there is some curvature, and in its middle there is a small prominence.
Then put it on the spot, and hold your hand firm; and you rotate the iron slowly with speed: and let the amount that is burned be from the thickness of the skin, as its middle. And lift your hand, so that the artery which is below is not burned, and a flow of blood occurs.
Then soak the cotym in salt water, and put it on the spot, and leave it for three days: then put the cotym with butter: afterwards treat it with ointment until it is healed.
And if you wish, cauterize this half of the skull with the secondary edge of the scalpel's cauterization. And beware of cutting into an artery in this half-cranium, not in the ancient proper way.
Concerning the method of cauterizing in the ancient half-cranium.
When you treat a half-cranium, with what we have said from previous cures and what we have said in divisions of illnesses, and the cure does not work: and you see from the illness that it does not suffice for him what we have said from the first cauterization with medicine, or with cauterization with fire, then it is necessary to apply a burning cauterization, until it becomes white after marking the place of pain with a line, whose length should be half a finger, or nearly so: and put your hand in place of one, and press it down until you cut into an artery, and penetrate to the bone.
However, it is necessary for you to beware of the continuation of the jawbone, which moves during mastication, lest it be dislocated, or the nerve that moves it, whence a spasm occurs.
And this is above the joint, and beware of the flow of blood from the artery, which has been cut off. For in cutting it off, there is fear, and especially for him who does not know what he is doing, and is not diligent, nor experienced: and he leaves the operation with this at the beginning.
And I come with a reminder of the rule for controlling the flow of blood that occurs from an artery according to its own method, and in its place in this book.
What if you see from the illness that this cauterization does not suffice for him, and you see the weak body tolerating the cauterization in the middle of the head, as we have narrated, cure the wound, until it is healed.
And if you wish, administer a cauterization, which we have said in the chapter on extracting an artery with a cauterization having two burning irons. For cauterization is better and more beneficial in this case.
Concerning the method of cauterizing in painful ear infections.
When pain in the ear occurs from cold, and it is treated with solutives, and other treatments that we mentioned earlier, and the pain does not subside, then cauterization by fire is applied: and this is what is called a Punctum, whose shape is as follows.
Then the punctures are made with it around the entire ear after its ignition, as it revolves: or around both ears, if there is pain in both. And stretch it out with the cauterizing iron at the root of the ear for a short time, after you have marked the places with ink: and let the quantity of the cauterization be ten punctures on each ear, or almost so.
Then treat the places until they heal.
Concerning the method of cauterizing for tetanus.
Chapter 7.
The tetanus that is treated with cauterization is not except for those cases which occur from phlegmatic causes, according to what we said in the divisions of diseases.
And it is necessary to apply cauterization to the type that occurs from dryness and nervous spasm.
When you treat this type of tetanus with hiera, and head purging, and gargling, and your treatment does not help, then it is necessary to cauterize the patient in three places: one at the root of the ear, and a second a little below the temple, and a third at the junction of the two lips.
And apply your cauterizing iron from the opposite side of the affected part. For softening does not occur except in the part that appears healthy.
And the form of cauterization is to cauterize it with the cauterizing iron directly on the upper extremity of the ear below the crown of the head, a little above the temple: and another on the same side, whose length should be according to the length of the thumb. And put your hand with a cautery until it burns to the extent of the moderate thickness of the skin.
And this is the form of a Cautery, and it is a type from a small knife, whose form is previously mentioned: however it is not too subtle, as you see; and it is necessary that the small knife be above a little bit of excessive thickness.
Then treat the place with what has preceded: until it is healed.
Concerning the method of cauterizing in ancient Apoplexy.
When ancient Apoplexy is antiquated, and you treat it with what we have said, and your medication does not help, and the patient does not have a fever, then cauterize him with four cauteries on every horn of his head, and a cautery in the middle of the head, as we have said, and a cautery at the back of the head, according to what has preceded: and the method of the cautery should be according to what has preceded.
He is also cauterized with a cautery on the bone of the stomach: and it is even more extreme.
Then he should be treated with what has preceded.
Chapter 9.
It is necessary that the drink be given first to the sick person with great hysteria, and purifying pills for cleansing the brain.
Then shave the whole head of the sick person, and put on his occiput a Synapic plaster described in the treatise on plasters: and put it on several times.
This indeed is the method of the Cautery: and do that according to the same order which I mentioned there.
If he is thus healed through that, it is good. If not: then make for him three cauteries on the back of his head, which should descend from the upper part of the head to the lower part of the eye: and put a thickness of a finger between each cautery.
Then treat the cauterization, with what has preceded it.
If however there is an addition and he is weakened, bearing that: then make a cauterization for him in the middle. What if there is an addition: then cauterize it above the two horns.
Then treat him, until he is healed: and let the cauterization be according to the second form, which has been mentioned before.
Concerning the method of cauterizing in paralysis, and softening.
Chapter 10.
It is necessary to proceed with cleansing the head with yolks of eggs, and with what we have said.
Then shave the head of the invalid: afterwards cauterize him with a cauterization in the middle of the head, and with a cauterization above every horn of the head, and with a cauterization above the nape of his neck, and three on the vertebrae of the neck.
If however you find him in a severe softening of the body from many of those, and he is weakened, bearing that, and the disease is strong: then cauterize him with four cauterizations on the vertebrae of the back, and finally with a cauterization, until it burns deeply into his skin, and lift your hand. Then treat him, until he is healed: and thus the cauterization is to be made with olive oil.
Concerning the method of cauterizing in epilepsy.
The epileptic is not to be cauterized, unless it is he whose epilepsy is from phlegm.
It is necessary therefore to cleanse his brain first with yolks of eggs, and with the remaining treatment which we mentioned earlier: when he is greatly weakened, or bears it in the acceptance of medicines.
If however he is a boy who does not tolerate medicines, then let him be given gargles and cleansing mastications for the brain, before that for many days with a blessing of foods.
Then shave the top of his head, afterwards cauterize it with one cautery in the middle of the head, according to what has been described previously; and with another cautery on its occiput, and over the entire horn-shaped part of his head with a cautery. What if the patient is strong and tolerant, then cauterize him with the cauteries that I mentioned in the case of one having paralysis, and mollification of the body on the vertebrae of the neck, and the vertebrae of the back; and let the cautery be oily according to the method that has been described previously.
If however the patient is a child, then apply a subtle cautery, according to this method.
On the method of cauterizing in Melancholy.
When the causes of melancholy are corrupted humors and thick phlegm, then cauterize him with the cauteries that we mentioned in the case of one having paralysis.
And if the cause of melancholy is an abundance of fluids inclined towards melancholy, and the body of the patient is moist, then give him a drink that will cleanse his brain, according to what has been described previously in the division: then shave the head of the patient, and afterwards make a well-made tortellum from linen, like a circle.
Then put it on the middle of his head: and let the patient, sitting squarely, be held firmly from all sides.
Then apply the liniment. And it is more worthy to use old butter or ancient oil. And heat it over a fire with a tempered measure of heat, which the finger can tolerate, when it is inserted into it. Then evacuate it on the middle of his head in a circle, and leave it until it cools down.
Do that to the patient every week once, with the rest of his good regime, until he is healed.
If you wish, burn him by making many small points with the cautery, taking care not to hold your hand too tightly on the cautery: namely, while smelling it.
For this type of cautery humidifies the brain with its quality.
Then put on top of it a cloth imbued with butter, or the fat of a hen.
Concerning the method of cauterizing in descending water to the eye.
Chapter 13.
When the principle of water in the eye is declared to you through signs, which I mentioned in the division, then begin and cleanse the weak part, together with what purifies his head.
And keep it away from all moistures, and make him sit in a bath, on fasting days for some time.
Then instruct him to shave his head, and to cauterize it in the middle of his head. Then cauterize him above the two temples with two cauteries, if there is a downward flow of water in both eyes at the same time: or from one side, if there is a flow of water in one eye: and cut off all the veins and arteries that are beneath the skin with the cautery: and let the cauteries be long in width across the temples: and beware of a flux of blood.
If you see anything coming out of it, then cut it off immediately with whatever medicine is possible: and I warn with wisdom, which is in the extraction of arteries, and their cutting off, and caution against a flux of blood.
And when it is cauterized on the neck, beneath the two bones, with two cauteries produced to the utmost extent.
Concerning the method of cauterizing in old tears.
When the tears of the eyes are old and frequent: and they are above the veins and arteries that are on the outer surface of the head, it is verified that it is from cold and phlegmatic superfluities: then cauterize with the cautery which I described in the flow of descending water, with a cautery in the middle of the head, and two cauteries above the two temples, and two cauteries on the neck beneath the two bones. And if you notice an excess, then cauterize it on every side of the eye, above the eyebrow with a small cautery.
On the method of cauterizing in the nasal fossa.
When you treat it, with what we said in the division, and the treatment does not help: then prepare, and give a potion of three nights to the weak-sighted; afterwards shave their head, and cauterize it with a medium cautery, with an oily cautery. Then cauterize it with two nail-shaped cauterizers, above the two eyebrows, beneath the hair, a little.
And be cautious of the artery, lest you wound it.
And this is the shape of a nail-shaped cautery.
On the method of cauterizing in the relaxation of the eyelid.
When the eyelid of the eye is relaxed from sickness or moisture, then cauterize the eyelid with one cautery, with this lunar-shaped cautery.
And if you wish, cauterize it above the two eyebrows a little with two cauteries on every side; and they will be lengthened from two temporal areas; and let the entire length of the cautery be according to the length of the eyebrow; and do not finally move your hand with the cautery, but rather according to the quantity that touches the third eyelid.
On the method of cauterizing an eyelid when hairs are embedded that pierce the eye.
The cautery is of two kinds: either a cautery with fire, or a cautery with burning medicine.
With the cautery of fire, warn the weak patient beforehand, so that they may release their hairs, if they are among those who clean them, until they grow long and equal. If they sting him at his own door, then bind his eyes with a cloth, so that they do not move until they are fully opened.
When they have opened and are equalized, then place the head of the afflicted one in your lap; afterwards, mark above his eyelids with a cautery, marking what is according to the shape of the myrtle leaf; and let the beginning of the mark be near the hairs.
Then put a bandage soaked in white egg or in a mucilage of psyllium over the eye.
Then apply a cautery of fire, whose shape is this.
Then cauterize over the shape that you marked gradually in many places, until the surface of the skin is burned, which is like the shape of the myrtle leaf, making it appear properly whole.
And the sign of the success of your work is this: that if you see the eyelid of the eye already contracted, and the hairs lifted up at the point of the eye.
Lift your hand then, and leave it for three days.
Then put a bandage with butter on it, until the scab is eradicated. Then treat it with an ointment, until it is healed.
If something returns from the hairs after that hour and the eyelid becomes soft, then apply the cautery again to that place, just as you did at first.
If the hairs are below, then cauterize them, until they lift up to their natural place: and equalize them so that they do not sting the eye.
It is as if you instruct the afflicted one to let the hairs grow, until they lengthen and equalize. Make a shape of the myrtle leaf from a paper template.
Then take from known soap and from unsoaked lime a pound and a half or nearly that amount; then grind those things together with good contraction, and make it with thorough mixing, so that it is not frozen. Then take from the pan the same amount that you made into a shape like a myrtle leaf, and put it on the eyelid of one eye or of two. And put under the eye a small piece of cloth soaked in white egg, and let the head of the injured person be in your lap.
And put your index finger on the medicine, and press it gently for a while. And you move it around whenever the injured person feels the biting of the medicine, because he finds its biting like fire.
While therefore it perseveres this which he himself has found the biting, then remove the medicine, and move it around with your finger. When therefore the biting subsides, then remove the medicine, and wash the eye with water.
And consider then, if you see the eyelid being elevated, as it is elevated by contraction with fire or with incision, it is good: and if not, then repeat over the same place from the medicine, where the medicine does not impress, and does not stain, until your operation is equalized, and the eye is contracted.
Then put over it a small piece of cloth with butter, until the skin is freed from burning. Then treat it with a diaphenic ointment or another, until it is healed.
And it is necessary for you during the operation to keep a final guard, lest something from the medicine falls into the eye.
If the eyelid becomes soft after a few days, and something struggles from the hairs into the eye, then repeat the medicine over that place which becomes soft from the eyelid itself, as you did at first. Then treat it, until it heals.
And this is the form of myrtle leaves.
And you should know that the eyes of men differ in size and smallness. Therefore, according to that, let your consideration be: and the way of righteousness is not hidden from him who has a zeal for this art.
On the method of cautery on the tear duct fistula.
When you treat the fistula, with that which we mentioned in the divisions of diseases, and your treatment does not help: then, it is necessary to cauterize it according to this method.
Order the patient to put his head on your lap, and let his servant hold his head between their hands in such a way that it is not moved or stirred with his own head.
Then put a cloth soaked in egg white or a poultice of powdered psyllium over his eye: then ignite the cautery iron, whose form is this.
It should be a concave shape, like the form of a feather's quill from one extremity, with which the cautery is made: and if you wish it to penetrate up to the other extremity, and if you wish it to be bent upwards in this way.
However, this concave shape is better suited for your work.
Then squeeze out the fistula, if it is open, and extract from it the sanious matter, and cleanse it: and if it is not open, then open it, and extract its pus.
Then put the cautery iron, which has been ignited strongly, on top of it.
And hold your hand with it for a short time near the cautery iron, away from the eye, towards the nose, so that your hand does not tremble or disturb the patient: and you will put the cautery iron in the fat of the eye and corrupt it.
If you therefore penetrate at the beginning of the cauterization up to the bone, it will be well. And if not: then repeat the cauterization once or twice, if it is necessary for that; and let it be left for three days.
Then put a dressing with butter, and take care of it with a stimulating ointment, until it heals.
If it has passed forty days and it does not heal: then put on top of it a sharp corroding medicine, until the bone is exposed; and scrape it according to what is written in its chapter.
And there is another method of cauterizing a fistula, which some first authorities have mentioned. Direct yourself to the place of the fistula and find it; then put into that fissure a subtle cannula, whose shape is this. And pour into it a quantity of drachmae from liquefied lead, and hold your hand with good cannula retention, and do not move the weak one at all, so that it does not flow, or the liquefied lead reaches its eye.
And it is necessary to put on the weak eye a dressing soaked in white egg, or in water.
For the lead indeed burns the place of the fistula, and heals it with a marvelous healing.
If the fistula is healed, along with what we have said about cauterization and treatment, it is good. And if not, then it is necessary to administer the nasal passage, and reduce the fistula to the course of the nose, according to what is suitable for its own place.
On the method of cauterizing in labial fissures.
Fissures often occur on the lip, which are called Pili, and especially on the lips of children.
When you treat these fissures, with what we have said in the division of diseases, and treatment does not help, then make a small cautery iron in the shape of a scalpel.
And let its concavity be according to the subtlety of the scalpel.
Then place it ignited hastily in those fissures, until the cautery reaches the depth of the fissures.
Then treat it with a poultice, until it heals.
On the method of cauterizing a fistula of the mouth.
When an abscess occurs at the root of the gums, or in the palate, or in the roots of the teeth: then it produces pus, and bursts forth: afterwards it becomes chronic, and a flow of pus ensues, and a fistula forms: then you should treat it, and if it does not respond to treatment, it is necessary to apply a cautery according to its size, which should encompass the fistula. Then insert the ignited iron into the opening of the fistula, and hold your hand steady, until the ignited iron reaches the depth of it and its extremity: do that once or twice.
Then treat it afterwards with what we have said about treatment, until it is cured.
If therefore the pus is cut off and heals, it will be good. And if not, then it is necessary to lay bare the location, and to remove the corrupted bone according to what appears in its head.
On the method of cauterizing swollen gums and teeth.
When the gums are swollen due to moisture, and the teeth are loose, and you treat it with medicines, and it does not respond: then place the head of the patient in your lap.
Then prepare a cautery, whose form will appear afterwards, so that you place a tube over the tooth: and insert the ignited cautery hastily into it: and hold your hand steady for a little while, until the patient feels the heat of the fire having reached the root of the tooth.
And elevate your hand: then again Cauterium several times, according to what you wish.
Then the weak member soaks its bone in salt water, and holds it for one hour: and extracts it.
For the movement is strengthened, and the gum softened by the string is tightened, and the corrupted humidity is dried.
On the method of cauterizing painful teeth.
When toothache is due to coldness, either the cold is in it or worm, and treatment with medicines does not help: then Cautery is applied to it in two ways: either Cautery with butter or Cautery with fire.
The Cautery with butter is however, that you take clarified butter, and boil it in an iron spoon, or in a vase. Then take cotton, and apply it to the extremity of the tooth. Then submerge it in the boiled butter: and place it quickly on the aching tooth, and hold it until it cools down: then repeat it several times, until the power of fire reaches the root of the tooth.
And if you wish, submerge wool, or cotton in cold butter, and place it on the painful tooth: and place ignited iron on top of it, until the fire reaches the depth of the tooth's concavity.
The Cautery with fire is however, that you direct it to a copper tube, or an iron tube. And let there be in its body some thickness, so that the sharpness of the fire does not reach the weak mouth.
Then apply the fire Cautery, whose form appears: and place it on that tooth: and hold your hand until the Cautery cools down.
Do that several times, for the pain is removed, either on that same day, or another day.
And it is necessary in the impression of that cautery, to fill the weakened bone with good pus, and to hold it for one hour; then to evacuate it.
And this is the form of the cautery.
Cauterize with a hot iron on whatever extremity you use, according to what is possible; and this is the form of the cannula.
On the method of cautery in Scrofula.
When Scrofula are from phlegm, and from cold humidities, and are not obedient to digestion through medicines, and you wish to hasten their digestion: then apply a concave cautery fire, whose form is this.
It has two open extremities, so that the smoke may emerge from the cautery at the other extremity: and place it ignited upon the aposteme once, and a second time, if it is necessary, until it reaches the depth of the aposteme.
If the aposteme is small: then place the cautery according to the quantity of the aposteme.
Then leave it for three days, and place upon it a cloth infused with butter, until what was burned by the fire is removed.
Then treat it with a denti's ointment, until the form of the cannula heals.
On the method of cautery on a hoarse voice and constricted breathing.
When humidities overcome the pulmonary canal, and especially when it is with a cold complexion, then it is necessary to evacuate the weakened area first with dissolving medicines.
Then cautery it at night beside the root of the throat in a depressed place: and beware, lest you penetrate with the cautery to the throat, or in the skin, unless something of it.
Then cautery it with another cautery at the joint of the neck in its last vertebra: and let the cautery be a moderate one according to the method that preceded.
Then treat him with what came before until he is healed.
On the method of cauterizing in cases of lung inflammation and cough.
When cough and lung inflammation are caused by cold humidities, and the patient is not feverish, nor consumptive, and the illness is not chronic: then cauterize him with two cauterizations above the ankle in depressed, slack, and empty places. And cauterize with another on the middle of the chest between the two breasts: and let the cauterization be according to the shape of the tube which came before.
And if you wish to cauterize by pricking with the cauterization tool, which is called a Point, whose shape came before in the pricking of the pain of the ears: and let there be points from thirty points up to almost sixty.
Then treat him with what came before until he is healed.
And now let the cauterization instrument have three branches: according to this shape. Because it is alleviated with that cauterization when you make it into one of the three Cauterizations.
Chapter 27.
When the head of the joint is dislocated due to humid causes, and it does not return to its place at once after its dislocation, until it becomes accustomed to returning to its own location, then it is dislocated by a small motion, which occurs as we have already demonstrated, then you should reduce the dislocation first. Then the patient should be placed on his back or on his healthy side. Then elevate the skin which is on the inside of the shoulder to the top with the fingers of your left hand: and if the joint is dislocated inward.
Then apply a cauterization instrument having two rods. This form is this.
Then cauterize the wound, until it penetrates to another side, and there will be a figure of cauterization with four cauteries.
And when a cauterization is made with a cautery having three arms, then the figure of cauterization will be of six cauteries; and they are arms according to the subtlety of the tension.
And this is the form of a cautery having three arms.
And when one is added in this way, then there are eight cauteries.
Then put rough salt on the cautery that has been contracted. Then make the weak part adhere to tranquility, so that the limb is not moved for some time, until it is comforted.
And if the dislocation is towards the upper parts, and this rarely happens, then cauterize it above the shoulder with a cautery of claws, or with multiple points.
For the joint is strengthened, and moisture is removed: and the weak part is healed.
On the method of cauterizing the Stomach.
When cold and many humidities accumulate in the Stomach, until they extract it from its natural complexion, and multiply the fluxes to it, and assiduous methods of cure do not help: then it is necessary that the weak part be supported on its back, and stretch out its legs, and hands. Then cauterize with three cauteries, a cautery under the spoon-shaped part of the chest in the quantity of one finger, and two cauteries below from the two sides of the cautery, until there appears a triangular figure of cauteries. And stretch out between both, so that they do not join together, when they make pus.
And let the depth of the cautery be the quantity of two thirds of the thickness of the skin.
And let the figure of cauteries be according to this form without addition; and if you wish to cauterize with a large cauterizing instrument in the middle of the stomach according to this form; and let the cauterizing instrument be one according to the circular figure according to this form.
And the stomach is cauterized by pricking him who is terrified by this cautery; and it is, as you mark on the stomach a point according to the quantity that you wish with an encaustic; then cauterize it with the cautery of the point; then cure it with the treatment that precedes until he is healed.
Concerning the method of cauterizing a cold Epiploic (fatty) appendix.
When there is pain in the liver due to coldness and humidity, or due to coarse flatulence, until it departs from its natural passage and the sick person becomes weak, as we have said, and does not benefit from it: then it is necessary for the sick person to be placed on their back, and marked with three cauteries according to this figure, and in the same quantity on the lower liver below the ribs, where the elbow of a man reaches; and let there be space between each cauterization according to the thickness of the finger: and let the cauterizing instrument be straight according to the length of the body: and do not press your hand too much with the cauterizing instrument.
And let the quantity of it that is touched be according to the thickness of the skin, a moderate quantity not added; and let the sick person stand on their own feet.
But if they are not standing, then let them lie down, who has already stretched out their legs and raised their arms.
This is the shape of the cautery.
And it is indeed possible for you to cauterize with this cautery using a knife-shaped cautery, when you have subtlety and prudence in the art.
And beware lest you proceed to the extreme in cauterization, and the hardness of the entire skin is scorched, because it scorches the entire body, and reaches to the intestines; for the skin there is subtle, so know that.
On the method of cauterizing apostemes of the liver.
When an aposteme occurs, and you want to know if that aposteme is in the flesh of the liver or in its membrane: then if it is in the flesh of the liver, it produces a dull pain and heaviness without acuteness: and if it is in the membrane of the liver, with pain there is vehement acuteness: and you see already, because it has exhausted the doctors with its treatment.
It is necessary therefore that the weak person takes a rest on his couch. Then mark out the place of the aposteme with encaustic: then apply a cautery that is similar to a star. And this is its shape. And cauterize with one cautery until the entire skin is burned, and reaches to the vitellus, until all the sanies are discharged: then take care of the same curation of apostemes, until it is healed.
And it is not fitting that one uses this type of cautery, unless one whose study in the medical art is prolonged: and through whose hands these diseases converge with some experimentation many times: then indeed he dares to undertake such an operation.
But truly to omit it, it is better in my opinion.
On the method of cauterizing in cases of Pleurisy.
The ancients said that a cautery with the roots of Aristolochia is beneficial for cold Pleurisy in this manner. And it is, that you take from the dry roots of Aristolochia a root, one longer than the others, which is found to be as thick as a finger. Then submerge it in oil and set it on fire. Then cauterize with a single cauterization at the point where the gullet meets the neck, and with two small cauteries under the guidance of small inclinations towards the part that is beneath the beard.
And with two cauteries also at the point that is between the fifth and sixth ribs, inclining towards the back a little; and with one cauterization in the middle of the chest, and another above the stomach. And with three cauteries from the back: one at the point that is between the two shoulder blades; and with two cauteries on both sides of the chest, the lower cauterization being between the two shoulder blades.
And it is not necessary to compress your hand with the cauterization, but rather let it be on the manifest skin, emitting an odour.
And now certain ancients have said that there are those who use cauterization with an iron instrument similar to a rod; and they ignite it, and insert it between the ribs until it reaches the aposteme itself, and the sanies flow out: as we have described in the case of Epatis' aposteme.
But in this perforation with a cauterization there is fear, lest the weak patient dies immediately, or a fistula occurs at that place, which has no healing.
On the method of cauterizing the Spleen, Chapter XXXII.
When you treat an illness of the spleen, with what we have said about cures in the division of illnesses, and your treatment does not work, then cauterization is used in three ways, all of which are correct.
One of which is to make three or four cauteries in a line along the length of the spleen, according to the figure of the cauteries of Epatis, whose figure has preceded.
And let there be between each cauterization a quantity of thickness equal to that of a finger, or a little more.
And this is the method of cautery, which we have described in the cautery of the liver, done equally.
And do not press your hand with the cautery: and let the patient lie down on his back.
And another method of cauteration is: to hold the two-pronged cautery, which we have described in the chapter on dislocation of the shoulder; and elevate the skin, which is on the direct splenetic line, where the cubit of the left arm reaches; and let your elevation be such that you elevate the skin according to the width of the body, so that the cauteries fall along the length of the body.
Then introduce the two-pronged ignited cautery, until you penetrate the skin on the other side: then withdraw the cautery: thus four cauteries are made.
And if you wish to cauterize with a cautery having three prongs.
Then take care to apply the cautery after you have released it, to bring forth pus for many days: for it is more beneficial than the rest that preceded in the cure.
Concerning the method of cauterizing in Dropsy.
The cautery does not fall in Dropsy, unless applied precisely.
When you treat a Dropsical patient with the methods of cure that we have described in the division, and the treatment does not help, then it is necessary to cauterize him with four cauteries around the navel, and one cautery above the stomach, and another above the liver, and one on the spleen, and two on the back between the vertebrae, and one on the direct line of the chest, and another on the direct line of the stomach: and let the depth of the cautery be close to the thickness of the skin.
Then leave the open cautery, so that it brings forth pus for a long time.
And do not evacuate the patient from the cure after the cautery with it: for it is necessary that two intentions are added to him: and he will be hastened to his healing with the help of God.
The shape of the cautery iron with which the belly is cauterized should be club-shaped: according to the preceding shape of it; and that with which the back is cauterized should be olive-shaped according to the preceding shape of it.
Concerning the method of cauterizing the feet and legs.
When they swell with hydroptic dropsy and are filled with citrine water: it is necessary to cauterize on the upper part of the foot at night, which is between the anklebone and the ring finger; and raise your hand with the cautery iron, and do not twist it; then raise your hand, and do not repeat it at all.
For the citrine water flows back, and the cautery iron should be according to this shape.
Then make two cauteries on each leg, and let the cautery iron be at the end of the knife-shaped cautery; and let it be according to the length of the leg, one below the knee, and another lower than that, around the middle of the leg; and above all the hip, two cauteries; and leave the cautery open without treatment for a long time: so that some water may flow out from it; then treat it with the rest as we have said.
Concerning the method of cauterizing in the case of a ruptured belly.
Chapter 35.
When there is a rupture of the belly due to cold and humidity, until it weakens the retentive and digestive powers which are in the stomach and intestines; and it is treated with methods of treatment, but not healed; and you see an infirm person tolerating a cautery of overflowing virtue, then cauterize it with a large cautery iron on their belly, according to what precedes in cauterizing the stomach with a circular cautery iron, and four subtle cauteries around the navel, with a club-shaped subtle cautery; and with a cautery above the groins above the hips with a large one, or with two cauteries.
And if you see excessive moistness, and the weak patient tolerates that, then cauterize it with a cautery on the pubic area, and cauterize all of that with a cautery: and perhaps add two small cauterizations on the stomach near the large one.
It is a profitable treatment, whose benefit does not fail.
On the method of cauterizing hemorrhoids.
Chapter 36.
When there are old and numerous hemorrhoids in the anus, or one, and they are from gross, cold, or corrupt humors, and are treated with what we said earlier, but the treatment does not help: then cauterize with three cauteries on the lower vertebra of the back below the waist, almost triangularly, and with a cautery near the navel, about two fingers wide.
And if you think that his stomach is chilled, and his food does not digest, and you see his face affected with aposteme, then cauterize him on the stomach with a large cautery, according to what has been said before: and with a cautery on his liver, and another on his spleen, with a cautery of the claws: and leave the cautery open for some time: then treat him until he is healed.
Chapter 37.
When you have surgically removed the ulcers, then apply a fiery cautery that is similar to a spark. Then insert the ignited cautery into the surgically removed ulcer: and ultimately with your hand, until the cautery reaches the opening of the vein, from which the blood flows: do it once or twice.
If there are many ulcers, then cauterize each one with a cautery according to what we have narrated. Then treat them with what is beneficial to them from ointments, until they are healed.
And if you cauterize him with a large cautery on the shoulder blade, it is more effective in the joint.
On the method of cauterizing a fistula in the anus.
Chapter 38.
When the sick person does not obey the treatment and operation that we have described in its proper place, and is troubled by it, perhaps he may be healed with a cautery.
When therefore a fistula happens to someone, and it becomes chronic, pus flows out of it, and the corrupted moisture ferments. It is more dignified therefore that what is fitting should be done, so that you may probe it with a subtle probe. Then recognize the quantity of its depth with the probe.
Then apply a cautery, which is similar to a rod. Then insert the ignited cautery itself into the fistula and the quantity where the nail went in.
And repeat over it the cautery, until all the corrupted bodily parts are burned away, once, or twice, or three times, according to the quantity of your necessary treatment.
And be cautious of the nerve's burning, if it is there, or of the great veins; or if the fistula reaches to the bladder or to the intestine, then beware of all these places.
And do not do that unless the fistula is in a fleshy place; and consider that it does not penetrate.
Then take care of the place until it is healed.
If however the place is sealed, and the materials are cut off from it, and it remains so for a long time; then know that it has already been fully healed.
And if the materials do not cut off from it, then know that it is penetrating, or there is a corrupted opening deep within it, or something like that among them; whose reminder will come in its proper place.
On the method of cauterizing Kidneys.
When pain occurs in the kidneys due to cold or excessive flatulence, and it is diminished because of that weak condition, then it is necessary to cauterize it above the loins, to cauterize each kidney with a cautery claw, whose preceding memory.
And perhaps we should cauterize it secondly in that very loin itself. Because three lines are drawn. Therefore they will be more effective in the treatment.
On the method of cauterizing the bladder.
When weakness occurs in the bladder due to cold and humidity, until it does not retain the urine of the weak person, then cauterize it on the lower part of the back above the bladder, where the hairs of the pubic region begin, and with a cautery from the right side of the back, and another from the left side: and let the length of that cautery be according to the size of the knot of the thumb: and cauterize it with a lower dorsal cautery, or with two cauteries if needed, and let it be according to what precedes the claw-like cautery.
On the method of cauterizing the womb.
When cold and humidity occur in the womb, and it is prevented by that from becoming pregnant, and its menses are corrupted, and their provocation is delayed, and pain occurs to her upon their arrival, then it is necessary to cauterize with three cauteries around the navel, as we said in the cauterization of the bladder, and with a cautery above the lower back, or with two cauteries: and let the claw-like cautery be used.
On the method of cauterizing the ankle in dislocation.
When mucous humidity flows to the hollow of the ankle, and becomes the cause of its exit from its place: and the sign of this is that the leg is prolonged above the other when they are compared to each other: and the location of the dislocation is found empty.
Therefore, it is necessary to cauterize the weak area above the ankle with a cautery similar to the circle of the ankle; after you mark out the circumference of the ankle with an encaustic, as it revolves: and so that the very pixy falls in the middle of the circle.
What if this cautery is not present to you, then cauterize it with three cauteries, with a large oily cautery: and let the depth of the cautery be according to the quantity of the thickness of the entire skin.
Then treat it, until it is healed.
Concerning the method of cauterizing for sciatica.
When pain occurs in the ankle, and the causes of it are cold and moisture: and the weak area is treated with what we mentioned earlier, and treatment does not help, and it gets worse: then it is necessary to free the weak area from thick humors with foul-smelling poultices, or with artificial poultices, and similar things. Then cauterize it.
And the method of cautery for it is according to two modes: either cautery with adhering medications, or cautery with fire.
Cautery with fire is according to many modes.
One of which is to cauterize above the ankle with three triangular cauteries, according to this form. And make their depth good or bad. And let the space that is between each cautery be of the quantity of the thickness of a finger: and let the cautery be oily.
When, however, a cautery is made in the middle above the head of the ankle itself. Because there are four cauteries.
And if you want to cauterize with a circle, whose form has preceded in the cauterization of dislocation of the ankle, one: so that it is a circle containing the entire ankle.
And burn the thickness of the whole skin.
This is the method of cauterization in sciatica, when the pain adheres to the anchaea itself and does not extend to the hip and leg.
If it extends to the hip and leg, then cauterize it with two cauteries above the hip, above the place where the pain is, in which there is pain, and with your cautery on the neck of the thigh four fingers' width towards the wooded part for a short time: and let the cautery be a knife-shaped one.
And let the depth of the cautery be according to the depth of the thickness of the skin.
What if the pain indicates that the pain extends almost to the toes of the foot, then cauterize it there where it indicates with a cautery of one point, three points, or four points, or more, if it needs it.
And if it indicates that the pain is beneath the knee towards the leg, then cauterize it there with a single knife-shaped cautery.
And be careful in all your cauterizations, so that you do not ultimately harm with the cautery to the point of burning a nerve or a large artery, and attracting through it a serious bad injury or contraction.
And I have indeed already seen one or another among those who cauterized above the thigh and ultimately harmed in the cauterization, and the leg became inflamed, until a tumor followed to the foot, and the whole foot was perforated and corrupted: then afterwards there occurred a discharge of pus, and death after that.
What if the pain is in two parts at once, cauterize each according to this method.
And certain wise men have said that in cauterizing the anchaea, whose method of cautery is this. Make a similar iron instrument, whose diameter is half a palm: and let it be at its orifice according to the thickness of the core of the finger, or slightly less: and within that instrument let there be a third instrument.
And let there be a space that is between all the veins by the quantity of the node of the thumb; and let the veins be opened from two parts; and let their height be like a knot, or two knots; and make for them a handle from iron, decently adapted in the veins.
Then it is heated in the fire until it becomes red-hot and shoots out sparks; then it is placed on a pillow or cushion with an injured limb resting on a healthy side. Burn him therefore with three rounded cauteries in one vein.
Then leave it alone for three days. Afterwards, apply a plaster with butter; and leave the wound open for many days. Then treat it with an ointment until it heals.
Albucasis said, "We have used this type of cautery little, on account of the terror of its appearance; and for this reason, we have found few who dare to try it out.
However, it is one of the good cauteries for him who endures it, and finds its place with it.
The cautery, however, is with medicines that are suitable, so that you make two veins having a perforated armlet, in which descends the hinge of its gate made of copper or iron, with a length equal to the wall; of which there should be two knots, or almost like them.
And let there be a space that is between the two quantities of the thickness of the finger, and let them be open above and below; and let it be what contains itself according to this form.
Then place it on a pillow or cushion with the injured limb lying on a healthy side. And press your hand strongly on the pillow or cushion. Then pour between two circles of hot water, which has been warmed with fire for a short time, and hold it for the duration of an hour; and let the injured person tolerate its bite and his own burning, for he finds the biting as fire, until the biting ceases.
Then wash your hand with a instrument and remove warm water from the entire limb with sweet water; then let it sit for three days.
And put butter on it, until the blackness of the burn is removed; and let it sit for several days, and then clean out the pus from it. It is indeed the last stage of the treatment.
Then treat it with ointments, until it heals.
If the pain extends to the hip or leg, make a plaster for it with water, according to what you did equally on the limb.
And this is the method of warm water; and I have already written about it in the treatise on medicinal rectifications. Take alkaline and non-extinguished lime of each one part: grind both, and put them in a new pot, whose lower part is perforated with a small hole, according to the quantity that can be poured in as a radius; and place beneath the base of the pot another pot, treated thus: and pour over the alkaline and lime from sweet water, which submerges both by a finger's width; then compress it with your hand with good pressure: and let the pot sit, until the sharp water descends to the lower part of the treated pot.
Then collect all that water, and pour it over another lime; and strain, until it is renewed.
For that will be a strong sharpness then, which is administered in many medical operations and in the cauterization of remaining limbs. Because it produces the operation of fire itself.
And they are among the medicines, with which limbs are cauterized, also like tetany, and honey of apricot, and lime with soap, so that both may be thoroughly mixed.
And Galen indeed reported that a certain man from the ancients was cured by a treatment, by which he was healed of pain in his limb and sciatic vein; and he magnified its effectiveness greatly. And he said that he did not need another treatment, and that he was healed from one vein, since it had been restored, because perhaps he himself had inserted a blocked bath, and had gone out already healed from it.
And it is, that he should be treated with a green poultice: and if a green one is not found, a dry fresh one should be applied; and it should be repeated many times with some fat, and placed on the affected area, where there is pain, or in the leg, or in the hip: and it should be bound, and left for three hours, or for as long as he feels the relief of the burning sensation. Then introduce him to a bath.
When therefore his body becomes very cold, introduce him to the sun. For the pain subsides, and he is healed.
And know that it is not fitting to use any cautery with these medicines, unless after the evacuation of the body.
And Dioscorides, who said that the dung of goats, when with it a vein is cauterized for sciatica, helps him; and it becomes a cautery according to this method. Let wool be applied, and it be soaked in old oil, and placed on the deep area which is between the thumb of the foot and the ankle, and is closest to the ankle.
Then take dry goat dung, and set it on fire until it becomes charcoal.
Then place it on the wool, and leave it until it is extinguished. Then repeat that. Do not cease to do that, until the sensation reaches the ankle through the middle, and the pain subsides.
And this method of cautery is called Cautery of Goat's Dung.
Of the cautery for pain in the back.
When pain occurs in the back from many causes, either from a fall, or a blow, or excessive evacuation, and similar things, from an infusion of cold and humid matter; and indeed cautery does not fail, except in this one species alone, which is caused by an infusion of cold matter.
Therefore, after evacuation of the patient with foul suppurating sores and similar ones, three lines according to the width of the ulcer itself should be made on the back where the pain is, after marking with ink in each line five cauteries or more according to the amount that comes from the tolerance of the patient's strength; and cauterization should be done with caution punctures.
And if you wish, cauterize with three cauteries or four, with a medial cautery claw, according to this method.
Concerning the method of cauterizing on the gibbosity of the navel.
This illness often occurs in small children.
And the sign of this illness in children is that it occurs with a constriction in the breathing upon elevation, and movement; and you will find it in the last vertebra of the back and its nodes, which already begin to emerge above the remaining vertebrae.
When you see that and want to do it, then cauterize it with a cautery that is circular in shape according to this method.
And let the cautery grasp equally over every part of the vertebrae; and if you want to cauterize around the vertebrae with a point-cautery, make two lines or three, and let the points be close together.
Then treat the place until it is healed with what we have said.
And beware, lest you administer the cautery to the gibbosity, which is caused by a spasm of the nerve.
Concerning the method of cauterizing for gout and joint pains.
When joint pains are caused by cold humidities that flow to whatever members of the body, then when pains occur in the feet, it is customary for doctors to call it Gout specifically.
Since the treatment of cold gouty causes with methods of cure does not remove the pains, then cauterization removes them.
And it is, as he is cauterized after evacuating the surrounding joint of the foot with many cauteries; and let the cautery be oily.
And if you need to make points on the surface of the foot, then make them with a cautery point. What if the pains ascend to the knees or other joints, and it often happens that, then cauterize it on every knee with three cauteries, or four from each part, with the same cautery of Clavus.
If however more are needed for you with this cautery, then cauterize it. And do not immerse your hand with the cautery, but rather let it be around the thickness of the skin only.
If however the pains ascend to the knees and back, then administer what we said from the cautery in its chapter.
What if the pains are only in the hands, then make points around the joints of the fingers, as two lines encircle.
If however some pain remains in the toes, then make points on every node of a toe, and on the heel of the hand.
If however the pains ascend after days to the elbows or shoulders, then cauterize both from every part.
And do not evacuate the weak patient from good regimen, from receiving medications. For if a good regimen is done, and the phlegm is evacuated, he will be healed with the help of God along with this cautery.
Concerning the method of cauterizing in hernias.
When a hernia occurs in the groin, and the intestine descends, or the scrotum to the testicle, and it is beginning to be near: then it is necessary that you should advise the patient to omit digestion on his day. And let it be opened gently, so that pus descends from its own belly.
Then place it between your hands on its back, and instruct it to hold its breath until it goes out, or shows a bubble, or intestine.
Then reduce it with your fingers, and mark it with a branding iron under the fracture on the bone of the chest, with a mark whose extremity is similar to the middle of a circle at the upper body.
Then apply a branding iron, which has this shape, until it produces a white spot, and pushes out the tiny fragments. Then reduce the intestine, or bubble, to its concavity. Then the assistant should place their hand on the spot, so that the intestine does not come out: and you have now opened between the thighs of the patient, and placed a pillow under them, and one servant is above their thighs, and another above their chest who holds their hands.
Then place the branding iron on the spot, with your hand holding the branding iron straight and steady. And hold it, until you reach the bone: or try again with another vice, if you have not succeeded with it at first until you reach the bone.
And carefully observe the intestine's exit during your branding operation, lest you burn it, and it becomes a fatal wound to the patient, or a great evil.
And know that when you do not reach the bone with the branding iron, your operation is of no use.
And it is necessary for the branding iron to be subtle and adapted to the size of the children.
Then take care with the remaining ointments, until they are healed.
And let the patient lie on their back for forty days, until the wound is sealed.
And it is necessary to put his nourishment in accordance with the length of time of his cure, so that it soothes his belly: lest the intestine comes out through straining and evacuation.
Then when you want to operate after forty days, then administer a bandage made in the meantime, and keep it for forty days more.
And let him be at rest from labor, and replenished with food and drink, and relieved of violent evacuations.
For when he uses this regimen, he will be healed with a complete healing.
And I will describe the treatment of hernias with an incision in its chapter.
When hernias occur in the rest of the abdomen, and are beginning, and it seems as though they do not add, then cauterize that hernia with a round cauterization according to its quantity: and let what is touched be one-third of it. Then treat it, with what we have said: and do not add to it.
And now some of the first ones have said: that a hernia should be cauterized with a triangular cauterization, according to this form.
After it is marked with encaustic, and a line is placed which is along the width on the upper side of the hernia, and another line below. And place your hand in the middle with a clave-shaped cauterization.
But the first cauterization is easier and better.
Concerning the method of cauterizing in pains due to a fall or blow.
Chapter 48.
When pain occurs in certain members due to a fall or blow, and the pain persists for a long time, and treatment with medicines does not help, then it is necessary to cauterize with a punctured cauterization.
And let the cauterization of each member be according to its magnitude, and its own smallness, and its weakness, and its own strength, and the location of the twisting, and the pain from it.
If therefore he is healed by the first cauterization, it is good. If not, then apply a cautery upon it.
Since it is customary to transfer these pains from the affected member to that which approaches it. Therefore it is necessary to follow them with a cautery until the afflicted part is healed.
Concerning the method of cauterizing in leprosy.
But lepers are sometimes helped by a cautery with the greatest benefit. And especially the type of leprosy that occurs due to the putrefaction of phlegm and melancholy; therefore, when you want to cauterize it, consider its nature.
If the leprosy is incurable and you have treated it with what we mentioned in the division, and it does not recede, nor does it stand still: and it spreads over the whole complexion of the patient: then cauterize him on the head with five cauteries: one on the middle of the head at the crown, and a second below that towards the forehead at the end of the hair, and two on the two horns, and one behind on the nape of the neck.
And finally, apply your hand with the cautery for a short time, until it impresses a small impression on the mouth, and the cortices are dislocated from it: so that the expiration of gross vapors is alleviated from it, and cauterize also over the spleen itself, according to what has preceded.
But if the leprosy has already spread over the patient and appears manifestly, then it is necessary to cauterize with those cauteries which we mentioned on the head, and with a cautery on the extremity of the nose, and two cauteries on the two jaws, and two cauteries on the vertebrae of the neck, and six on the vertebrae of the back, and one large one at the base of the tail and one above it, in that very place; and two on the hip: namely, one on each hip, and two on the knees: one on each knee, and two on the elbows, and two on the cubits, and two on the tenderness of his chest: and cauterize him on every joint, from the joints of his fingers and toes; and cauterize on every heel of his feet, and on the metacarpals of his hands.
And be cautious of the nerves that are above the heel bone, so you do not injure them.
And when a branding iron is applied to the bone of the pubic area, and another to the bone of the stomach, and another to the liver.
And know that the more you add branding iron, it is the greater harm, and the more it causes damage.
And know that the weak person does not feel pain from branding iron, as the healthy ones do: therefore, because their body is already numb.
And it is necessary that the branding irons be of a magnitude, and smaller according to the members and joints: according to what precedes from the species of iron instruments.
Then treat the branding iron with flour of herbs mixed with honey, and the rest of the treatment, until it is healed.
Concerning the method of branding in numbness.
When a limb is numb and is treated with medicines, and oils, and poultices, and it does not heal, then brand the numbed limb with branding irons, according to what the magnitude of the limb deserves, or its smallness.
And let your branding iron be slightly more penetrating into the thickness of the skin. Then treat it with an ointment, until it is healed.
And when branding is applied to a certain numbness that occurs in the hand or foot, in the vertebrae of the back near the exit of the nerves, which move that limb: and the numbness is removed.
But it does not work on that, unless one is skilled in the anatomy of limbs and the exit of moving nerves from the body.
Chapter 51.
When a wound is old and does not respond to any treatment from the ingenuity of medicine: then brand on it with a deep branding iron, according to the quantity of the thickness of the skin, until the whiteness is removed, and its color is changed.
Then treat it with the flour of a herb, and with lentils with rose oil, and with leaves of arnoglossa, and with pigeon's blood, and with hyrundine's blood: one part from each: mix all these, and spread on a cloth, and adhere to the place until it heals.
About the method of cauterizing in Cancer.
When the cancer is beginning and you wish to restrain it: then cauterize it with a circular cauterization around its circumference, as it revolves.
The wise men have said that it should be cauterized with the final cauterization in the middle.
But it does not seem to me: because I fear that it would become an ulcer; and I have already seen that many times.
And it is better to cauterize around its circumference with a circle, as we said; or with multiple cauterizations.
About the method of cauterizing in Ulceration.
When someone has an ulceration and it is delayed in maturation, either because of the excess matter that produces it, or because of the age of the weak patient, when there is a lack of blood, or because of the time, and you wish to hasten the maturation of the ulceration, then cauterize around its circumference with many small points, puncturing with multiple cauterizations. Then let it be. For it will hasten the maturation itself.
If you wish to make a perforation of it with a cauterization, then ignite the fire of the cauterization, whose form is this.
And place it in the middle of the ulceration until it penetrates to the skin: and let the cauterization be from what follows, so that the flow of pus may be alleviated.
Then treat it until it heals.
About the method of cauterizing in corroding evil.
Head 54.
It is not a corrosive unless it is a decay in a walking limb, and it devours it: just as fire consumes dry wood.
If therefore you see a corrosive in a place that can tolerate cautery with fire, then apply many small and large cauteries with fire, according to what is convenient for that place where the corrosive is.
Then cauterize it on every side until you eradicate the entire corruption, and nothing of it remains deeply.
Then leave it for three days, and apply sulfur powder mixed with oil to the cauterized places, until all scabs are eradicated, and all corruption.
Then treat it with ointments that generate flesh.
If therefore you see that after three days healthy flesh is born, in which there is no corruption, it is good.
And if not: then repeat the cautery on what remains of the corrupted places.
And a corrosive is treated with acute medicine whenever it is necessary. It itself rises up in the place of the cautery.
However, a cautery with fire is of quicker help; and I have already mentioned its cauteration with acute medicine in the division: therefore take it then when you need it.
On the method of cauterizing in nails and warts.
Head 55.
It often happens that this disease occurs in the lower parts of the feet: and it is a thick, filthy thing that hurts the foot.
And indeed, cautery on them is according to two methods: cautery with fire, and cautery with hot water.
As for the cautery with fire, it is like a hollow cautery iron shaped like a bird's feather: which is made from iron, according to the quantity that contains a nail on every side: and let its edge be subtle.
Then put it, ignited, on a nail. Then wrap the hand with a cauterizing iron around the nail, until the cautery reaches the depth of the nail; and leave it for three days, until it begins to discharge pus. Then apply a poultice made with forest herbs, mixed with salt; and leave the poultice on it at night. For it will be eradicated from its roots.
Then treat the place with a flesh-producing ointment, until it heals.
If they are not converted, and often occur on the surface of the body, especially on the hands and feet: then administer to them cautery with hot water: and it is, that you take a tube made of copper, or iron, or from the quill of a bird: and place it on the nail, or the flesh around it. Then pour a small amount of hot water into the tube: hold your hand, and wrap it with pressure from your hand for a short time, so that the mark of the tube is imprinted on the root of the nail, and the hot water finds its way to the depth, to the root of the nail: and wait a little while over the bite of the hot water for an hour.
Then leave it, for the nail is eradicated with its roots.
Do it thus to each one after another, until you are free from all of them that are on the body.
Then treat them after they are eradicated, with what generates flesh from ointments.
On the method of cautery for tremors.
When a tremor occurs from cold in the nerve, or from quartan fever, or from something else: then it is necessary to cauterize it with four cauteries, or five on the vertebrae of the back, and between each vertebra with a cautery, and on its chest with a cautery, and on its stomach with a cautery.
The trembling indeed ceases with the cautery of olive oil, and a healthy recovery is hastened from a cold disease.
On the method of cautery according to Albathir.
Chapter 57.
When there are formed on the body of Albathir's foul abscesses, that is, pustules, which come from corrupted gross materials.
It is necessary, therefore, first of all, when they appear, to apply a subtle cautery with a burning stick of myrtle wood to every pustule on the head. Or with the root of long aristolochia. Or with a lentricular cautery.
And when they are cauterized to the point of induration, at the beginning of their expulsion in this manner: and they do not increase: and the excess is dispersed, making them healthy, and they are healed from them.
However, it is necessary that it be done after evacuation with bloodletting.
On the method of cautery for a flow of blood from an artery in a vein.
It often happens that there is a flow of blood from an artery, which has been cut near the vein, whether it occurs externally, or at the incision of an abscess, or the cautery of a limb, and similar things: and it becomes difficult to stop it.
When it happens to someone in that way, then quickly put your hand over the orifice of the artery, and place your index finger on it: and press it strongly, until the blood is obstructed under your finger, and nothing comes out from it.
Then put small olive oil cauteries on the fire, and a large number of them: and blow on them, until they become very hot.
Then take one of them, or a small one, or a large one, according to the vein and place where the artery is disrupted, and apply the cautery to the vein itself, after which you quickly remove your finger: and hold the cautery until the blood is stopped.
If it is expelled with elevated fingers from the orifice of the artery, and you extinguish the cautery, then take another cautery, which has been prepared in the fire, quickly.
Therefore, do not cease to make that with one after another, until the blood is staunched.
And beware, lest you burn the nerve which is there, and a worse evil falls upon the patient.
And know that when blood flows from the artery, then it is not possible to stanch it: especially since the artery is large, unless with one of four methods. Or with a cautery, as we have said. Or with extraction, when it has not been extracted. For when it is extracted, the extremities of the artery contract, and the blood is staunched. Or it is tied with a strong thread of ligature. Or medicines of suitable properties are applied to it, which are for staunching blood, and are bound with a decent poultice of constriction.
Whoever administers the staunching of it with a ligature, and a binding with cloth, or a positioning of burning remedies, and similar things, does not confer a complete cure to him, unless rarely.
If it happens to anyone in that way, and there is no present doctor, nor medicine: then let him begin with the positioning of the index finger on the orifice of the vein itself, as we have narrated, and a strong constriction, until the blood is stopped from the upper part of the wound, and above the artery. And the finger is not removed, but instead remains on it with vehemently cold water, always, until the blood congeals, and coagulates, and is staunched.
And meanwhile, let him consider in that, what he needs from a cautery or from medicine.
On Incisions, Perforations, and Bloodletting for Wounds, and Similar Things.
We will discuss in the First Chapter all kinds of diseases for which it is suitable to use fire-cautery and burning medicine, and their occasions, their causes, and instruments, and forms of cauteries.
And I have placed chapters on the vertebrae up to the foot.
And I will proceed in this chapter by the same method: to alleviate the sufferings of the sufferer.
And before I begin that, it is necessary for you to learn, oh sons, what is in this chapter, which is about the terror of that which is in the first chapter on cauterization.
And because of that, it is necessary to be more cautious, since in the operation which is in this chapter, often evacuation with blood occurs, on which life depends at the opening of a vein, or incision over an abscess, or opening of an exit, or curing of a wound, or extraction of a arrow, or incision over a stone, and similar things: from all of which tremble, fear, and death often occur in many of them.
And I warn you, lest it falls upon you that which is hesitation, for when they fall to you in this art of men with modes of infirmities. For there is one who becomes angry with his own disease, and death is light to him: because of the violence of that which he finds from his own infirmity and the length of his evil. And the disease is from fear which signifies death.
And there is one who gives his own physician, and says to you with him, hoping for health, and his disease is pernicious.
Therefore it is not necessary to consent to him who comes to you from those, whose manner is such. And let our caution be greater than our desire and our own grasping avarice. And let us not presume upon anything from that unless after certain knowledge, which verifies with us what has been attained through successful experience.
And let us use judgment in the treatment of all our patients, in prognosis and indication to that which may conveniently be their salvation.
For in it lies your help towards acquiring fame and glory, and memory and praise.
May God inspire you, O sons, with His intellect, and may He not deprive you of direction and inspiration; for that is in His hand.
And I have indeed arranged this Chapter by distinguishing it into sections, according to what preceded in the Chapter of Cauterii, from the head to the feet: so that you may be alleviated of what you wish from it, and of what you need.
On the treatment of Water that accumulates on the heads of children.
Chapter I.
You should know that this illness often happens to children at birth: or when the midwife tightly grips the child's head without gentleness.
And it sometimes happens also from a hidden cause which is not known.
And I have indeed not seen this illness in others than in children: and to all whom I saw among them, death hastened; therefore it seemed to me that it was necessary to abandon the operation in these.
And I have indeed seen among them a child whose head was filled with water, and the head was enlarged every day, until he could not sit up by himself, due to the greatness of his head: and the moisture increased until he died.
And this moisture indeed collects either between the skin and bone, or it collects beneath the bone above the skull.
And the operation in that case, if there is humidity between the skin and bone, and the abscess is small, then it is necessary to make a fissure in the middle of the head, about two inches in length, until the humidity flows out.
And this is the form of a spatula-like instrument.
If therefore the humidity is greatly increased and the abscess is larger, then make two fissures, according to this form.
And if the humidity is under the bone, and its sign is that you see the commissures of the head open on all sides; and the water is pressed out when you press it with your hand inwardly, and it does not remain hidden from you: then it is necessary to make three fissures in the middle of the head, according to this method.
And after the incision, extract the entire humidity. Then close the fissures with bandages and poultices. Then apply a compress of wine and oil to it, until the fifth day.
Then remove the bandage, and treat the wound with tents and ointments.
And do not allow the head to be bound tightly. And give the patient light food with little humidity, until the member is comforted and healed.
And another method of incision is to consider where the greatness of the abscess appears, and the collection of water.
Since sometimes it is more in the occiput, or in the forehead, or on the right, or on the left.
Ascend therefore with the incision where you see the abscess and the collection of water, and divide it according to what is possible for you.
And take care not to cut the artery, and a flow of blood occurs, and the patient dies from that flow with the evacuation of humidity.
Concerning the incision of arteries which are behind the ears.
Head 2.
When some flux falls onto the eyes or chest, and it becomes chronic, and medical treatments do not help: then the last resort is to cut into those two arteries.
It is necessary, therefore, when you want to make an incision in them, that a weak head should be shaved. Then rub the place with a rough cloth, so that the arteries may appear. Then the weak person should constrict their neck with any cloth of theirs. Then consider where the vein pulses. And both places are located behind the ears, depressed areas; and they are rarely hidden, unless in certain individuals.
Then mark with a branding iron on both sides; and make an incision on each side with a three-edged scalpel, making the incision up to the bone: and let it be done across the width of the head.
And if you wish, insert the scalpel under the artery, and cut it upwards with an incision.
And let the length of the incision be about two fingers' width joined together.
For when a vein is cut, blood flows out in a pulsating flow, which jumps inward with frequent leaps.
If the artery does not appear to the senses, then it is necessary to measure from the ear the quantity of a three-finger space. Then mark with a branding iron, and find your way up to the bone.
And what is necessary to emit from the blood is six ounces, or perhaps more or less will be emitted from it. All that according to the quantity which appears to you from the strength of the weak person and the replenishment of their artery.
Then consider the ulcer. Then if something remains to the bone from the abscess, then cut into it, so that a hot aposteme does not occur: then constrict the ulcer with a linen bandage.
Then treat it with an ointment until it heals.
Concerning the removal of arteries that are in the temples.
Head 3.
When an old hemicrania afflicts a person, or acute catarrh due to acidic and salty humidities, and heat in the temples, or an old soda, which is vehement, and similar things: and they are treated with the methods of medical cure, but it does not help: then we have recourse to extracting the arteries from the temples, or cauterizing them, as we have described.
And the method of operating in extracting them is to shave the weak hairs that are in the temples, and to make an incision towards the apparent artery in the temple. It is shown to you by its own pulse, and is rarely hidden unless in a few men, or due to the vehemence of cold.
If it is hidden from you, then he should tightly bind his weak head with any cloth of his; then rub the place with a rough cloth. Or warm the place with hot water, until it appears to you in a clear manifestation. Then take the spatula that I formed a little while before. Then scrape with it the skin with ease, until you penetrate to the artery. Then insert a hook into it, and draw it upwards, until you extract it from the skin, and make it emerge from the tunics that are under it on every side.
If the artery is fine: then envelop it with the extremity of the hook. Then cut from it a part according to the quantity by which its extremities are lengthened, and contracted, so that there is no flow of blood. For if it is not cut, and if it is not separated, the blood does not ascend deeply.
Then evacuate from the blood about six ounces, until there are three.
If the artery is large, then it is necessary to tie it off in two places with double thread, strongly, from silk or from Al-od chord, so that putrefaction does not occur at the wound before consolidation, and a flow of blood happens.
Then cut away the excess, which is between the two ligatures. Do that at that hour, or after another hour.
And if you wish, cauterize it with a cautery up to the bone, with a cautery knife: until the extremities of it are cut away, and it stands firm in its place of operation.
And it is a better work, unless the patient has a fever, or is of a hot constitution. For the cautery is one of those things that help to end humidity. Therefore it is a better remedy.
And it is necessary after the extraction of the arteries, that the place be filled with old cotton: and that pieces of lint, decently made, be put over it.
And after the wound is cleansed with dry medicines that promote the growth of flesh, and with bandages, until it heals.
If during the operation a flow of blood occurs from the artery, then hasten to detach it with a cautery, or fill the place with cotton: and bind your hand tightly, until the bleeding is stopped. If none of these things is available to you, then put your finger on the place, until the blood congeals. And sprinkle the place with water of vehement coldness, until the inflammation subsides, and bind according to what is necessary.
And of what is lighter and easier for the extraction of the artery, it is to cauterize the vein with a cautery having two blades: and let the inflammation be similar to that of two-bladed Al-magdah. However, there are many of lesser acuteness than two scalpels. Because if they are sharp, like the two scalpels, they require corresponding coolness; and they do not cut into the flesh with swiftness. Since therefore there is a certain amount of roughness in them, the heat of the fire is retained in them, and the flesh is cut away swiftly; since this is better than any operation, and easier, and more facile.
And this is the form of the cautery.
And let there be a space that is between the two scalpels the amount of roughness of a finger, after you have marked two places with ink; and apply both ignited scalpels strongly, until they reach the bone, and cut the vein in two places: so that what is between the extremities may be elongated. For they do not consolidate with this cautery thoroughly.
Chapter 4.
On the treatment of chronic and acute tears flowing from the eyes.
When there are persistent tears and their flow is from the veins that are on the outer surface of the skull; and it does not help to apply any medical treatment with medicines, and you see the face of the patient already reddened, and he feels a sensation of walking in his forehead, as if it were the walking of ants; and his eyes are exhausted, moist, so that they have already been corroded by corrosion: and his eyelids are heated up from the acuteness of the tears. Then the ancients sought help in the treatment of this operation, and named it a cure, with Ense.
And it is so that you should advise the patient to scratch the hairs that are on his forehead. Then make three equal distant incisions in the forehead along its length: and let the length of each incision be about two fingers, and one incision should be equidistant from the nose in the middle of the forehead, and the second according to the length of a thumb's movement, and the third on the other side: and beware of cutting the arteries that are in both sides: and extend your hand at the continuation of the two jaws, and let the space of each incision be the amount of three joined fingers: and have a piece of prepared sponge or many dry cloths ready, with which you will dry the blood.
Then insert a spatula of two acute extremities, whose following shape is conical. From the incision which is on the temporal part, up to the second incision: and excavate with it all the skin, which is between the two incisions, along with the sfac, which is above the bone. Then do the same also from the middle incision up to the second incision. Then extract this spatula, and insert into the first incision again another instrument, which is called a sharp scalpel, being blunt on one side, not sharp on the other side. And this is its shape.
And place its sharp side towards the flesh attached to the skin, and its blunt side towards the bone: and push it, until it reaches the middle fissure: and cut away with it all the vessels, which descend from the head to the eyes: except what is contained in the incision up to that which appears from the skin.
Then do the same in the middle fissure up to another fissure.
And after a quantity of blood equal in amount has flowed out, press out the places from the clots of coagulated blood.
Then put into every fissure a linen cloth soaked in old cottages, and put over them soft cotton pads imbued with wine, or oil, or vinegar. And take care that a hot abscess does not occur.
And on the third day loosen the bandage, and administer a plentiful infusion with lukewarm water. Then treat it with royal ointment, and other remedies with which wounds are treated: until it is healed.
Head 5.
 On the treatment of acute tears and catarrhs in the eyes from the internal parts of the head.
When acute catarrhs occur, fierce, persistent: and you see the eyes of that person exhausted, small, and already their sight is weakened: and the eyelids are ulcerated, and hair falls out from them, and in the depths of the head there is sharp pain, annoying, and sneezing follows: then take it from these accidents, that those materials and catarrhs do not come, unless from many veins.
And better treatment for them is this. And it is, as you should gently shave the forehead of the weak patient. Then make an incision in the middle of the forehead, or somewhat wider along the width, and begin from the left temple to the right temple: and let the incision be up to the bone: and extend your hand from the temporal muscles, which move during mastication: until the bone is exposed: and you will dry up all the blood with a sponge.
Then separate between the two lips of the incision with a cloth of old linen, or with a thread from a linen fabric. Then sprinkle above with powders: and soak the powders with wine and oil, so that a hot aposteme does not occur.
And when you dissolve it, and you see that a hot aposteme is already imminent: then it is necessary to apply cold to the bone, until flesh begins to grow on it.
Then treat it with a drying regimen that promotes the growth of flesh: as if you take two parts from wheat flour and four parts from rose oil: and prepare an ointment from them, and administer it to promote the growth of flesh on these wounds.
Chapter 6.
Of the treatment of what falls into a fistula.
Everything that falls into a fistula is of one of four species: either a mineral stone, or similar to a stone, such as iron and glass: or it is from a plant, such as chickpeas and beans: or it is a fluid substance, such as water, vinegar, and their likes: or it is an animal.
When therefore a stone falls into a fistula, or a type of stone from those that do not adhere nor grow in the fistula, expose the fistula to the sun: if you see the stone, then distill into the fistula something from violet oil or iris. Then administer the extraction of it, and make it sternutate with a poultice, and apply a warm compress to the approach of the sternutation, after you place on the surrounding area of the ear a frusta made from pieces of cloth or wool, and extend the ear to the upper parts.
For it often exits with this treatment.
If, however, it does not exit, then administer the extraction of it with gestures, that is, with subtle finger movements: whose form is this.
If, therefore, it exits with gestures, it is good.
And if not, then administer the extraction of it with a gentle hook of subtle and slight duplication.
If, therefore, it does not exit through that, then make a cannula from copper, and insert the extremity of the cannula into the ear hole as much as possible, and apply what is around the cannula with soft and moistened ceramic cloth oiled, so that there may be no passage except through the cannula: then extract with your strong attractive force.
For it often exits with what we have described. If, however, it does not exit in this way: then take from helkalimbat, or from uisco, that is, prepared glue, with which birds are caught, a small amount: and place it at the extremity of the radian after you have covered it with a decently positioned cot; then insert it into the ear hole with ease, after you have freed the ear from humidity.
If, therefore, it does not exit with all that we have described, then hasten to cut, before a warm aposteme or spasm occurs.
And the method of cutting is, that you make an incision on the weak part first in the head: and extract from it blood according to the measure of its strength. Then make the weak part sit between your hands, and turn its ear to the upper parts, and find a small cutting in the root of the ear near its fat at the depressed place itself: and let the cutting be a lunar figure, until you reach the stone: then lift it out with that which is possible for you from the instruments.
Then make an incision with your hand quickly, and treat it, until it heals.
What falls into the ear is from one of the grains that grow and swell; then administer its extraction.
If it does not obey you at the outlet, then take a thin, subtle spatula, according to this form.
And administer with it an excision of that type from the grains which fall into the ear, and do not make it, when you think that that grain has already been moistened by the vapor of the ear, until you apply many gentle thrusts: then extract them with hooks, or with subtle gestures, or with suction, as we have said, for its extraction is alleviated.
In the water that enters the ear, it is necessary to use a weak sternutatory with condiments at first: and already fill the ear with some old cotton: and it lies on top of that ear, in which there is water. If therefore it comes out through that, it is good.
And if not: then take many small stones, according to the length of the finger, thin, smooth, and warm them with fire for a short time, and insert one of them gently into the ear opening: and let it rest on its base on that side, and strike with another stone against the stone that is in the ear. Do not cease to do that with stone and stone, until all the water comes out.
And now the water comes out thus, that you take from a small paper, or from one reed, and insert one end into the ear: and apply the other end to the fire, until it burns most of it. Then take another reed, and do that many times, until all the water comes out: and extract it with a cannula according to what has been mentioned about the stone.
In the extraction of an animal entering into it, if it is a small body, such as a flea, and similar to it, treat it as I have said in the division.
But if it is a large body, which appears to the senses: then administer its extraction with gestures and hooks: and its removal is easier than all those that are held in a golden vessel.
In the extraction of a worm generated in a golden vessel, when you treat it with what we have said in the division and in the treatment of distillations, and your treatment does not succeed: then it is necessary to gaze at the gold in the sun. If therefore something appears there from the worms, then extract it with gestures or with subtle hooks.
If however something does not appear there, then take a cannula, whose shape is this, narrow below, wide above: and insert the subtle extremity into the gold according to the quantity that the weak part can tolerate: then suck with strong suction. Do that many times, until all the worms come out.
If however they do not obey you for exit, then smear the circumference of the cannula with wax, as I said in the stone.
What if they do not come out with what we have said: then administer the distillations which the ancient ones have already experienced in the treatment of worms: and you will find it in the treatment of distillations.
And let your pouring out be with which you pour oils and medications into the gold with this instrument, whose shape is depicted here. As you see make it from silver or copper, narrow below, wide above, in which there is a small hole.
Let it be so, pushing what is in the concavity of the cannula, made decently from copper. And if you wish, take a rod, and wrap the cotton around its extremity with decent wrapping: then pour oil or juice or what you wish from these medications into the cannula: and let it be in the gold: then insert the rod with the cotton above, and express it by hand pressure tempered moderately, until the oil is pushed out into the concavity of the ear, and the weak part feels it inwardly: and what is poured into the gold, let it already be warmed up with fire for a short time: and beware lest there be something that distills into it cold and worthless: for medicines do not tolerate that.
Chapter 7.
On the treatment of accidental wounds to the ear.
When sometimes infants are born from their mothers' wombs unharmed.
And it has also happened to some men that they have suffered a wound in the middle of their ear from a blow or from flesh born in it.
And this wound sometimes occurs deep within the ear's passage, which does not impair vision; and sometimes it happens at the outer passage of the ear, and then it impairs vision.
Therefore, those wounds that occur deep within the ear, which do not affect the sight, are in many cases difficult to heal.
And in those cases where vision is impaired, you should place the ear of the injured person in a sunny spot and gaze into it; then if you see an apparent wound, open it with a subtle spatula whose shape is as follows: its extremity should have a small width, one part of which is acute, and the remaining spatula should be gentle on both sides, so that it does not harm the ear.
If therefore the wound is from flesh born in the middle of the ear, then hold it with a subtle hook and cut into it with a gentle instrument, until all the flesh is removed.
If the wound is deep within the ear, then take a subtle rod, gentle and warm it with fire for a short time; then insert it into the middle of the ear.
If therefore you feel the wound with it, which the injured person has discovered with difficulty of hearing, try to open it with ease; and beware, lest you injure the nerve of the ear.
Then put on the ear a layer of lichen according to the quantity of the width of the passage, which you have wrapped in Egyptian unguent; do this for several days, until you are certain about the consolidation of the wound.
Take cotton and soak it in rose water, and sprinkle powdered zegi on top of it, and apply it to the patient.
If you see that the abscess is already apostemating, then it's necessary to extract the cotton and replace it with another piece of cotton that has been wrapped in a cloth treated with rose oil, until the warm abscess subsides; afterwards, take care of it until it heals.
If a hemorrhage of blood occurs: then soak a sponge or cloth in cold water and apply it to the abscess; and use the remaining treatment that is described in the chapter on bleeding, which stops the flow of blood.
On the treatment of eyelids affected by Althel (i.e., trachoma).
Chapter 8.
These are the Althel that occur on the eyelids when they are moist and become dry.
Therefore, it is necessary to hold them with a bandage: or with an unguent, and to bind them with a plaster made from their roots. Then apply powdered zegi on top of the affected areas.
If blood flows from them, then cauterize them with a subtle lenticular cautery.
And it is better to cauterize them after making an incision. For they often return when something remains from their roots. And when they are cauterized with fire, those roots are burned, and they do not return.
On the treatment of pustules on the eyelids.
Chapter 9.
It often happens that something occurs on the eyelids which resembles Grandines in its strength and hardness, and because of this it is called a Grandine: and it is an accumulation of thick humidity on the upper and lower eyelids.
The operation for them is therefore to consider then, if it is a Grandine that is forming on the eyelid, which appears as a lump on the eyelid, and they move towards every part, and its treatment is easy.
Find therefore above it a fissure along the width. Then scrape it away from every part with ease, until it is evacuated. Then suspend it with a hook, and cut it off.
If, however, the cutting off of it is not prepared for you, unless after you penetrate the eyelid with a small incision, then it will cause harm to the weakened part.
What if the fissure is large: then bring it together with a suture: and care for it, until it heals.
And if it is small, no harm will come to you from it. For the ointment restores it, and puts flesh on it.
And if the perforation is sloping towards the interior of the ear against the inner surface, then invert the eyelid, and suspend the perforation with a hook: besides what you need an incision, and press it from every part.
What if the eyelid is lengthened by an incision, it will not harm that part.
Then wash the eye after the incision of the perforation with salty water: and care for the place with that which puts flesh on it, until the weakened part heals.
On the treatment of eyelids.
Chapter 10.
Axirnath is a thickening that forms in the upper eyelids: and it indeed often happens to children: and it weighs down their eyes, and they have a morning discharge, and cannot gaze at the light of the sun, because their tears flow forth towards them, and on account of this they are seen to lie prostrate upon their faces always, and sleep with their eyelids beneath their humid eyebrows, which have already been affected by inflammation: and indeed Axirnath appears evident to the eye, and when you press the place with your fingers, you feel Axirnath between them.
And the method of operating is that the patient should place his head in your lap.
Then take a linen cloth and prepare the threads on it, and make from those threads a circle according to the quantity that the tumor contains on all sides. Then place it on top of it, and press with your fingers on all sides, so that the tumor is gathered in the middle of the circle.
Then make an incision in the middle of that humidity with a spatula-like instrument, making lateral cuts, and let there not be a larger cut than is made in deep phlebotomy.
Or it is necessary to make a complete incision, until you reach the tumor in many dispositions, for the tumor proceeds from the incision according to the form of a white, fatty crust.
So extract it with the cloth that you had placed between your fingers to the exterior; and you turn your hand to the right and left until it is dispersed; and beware, lest you touch the incision, so that you do not reach with the spatula-like instrument to the eye and harm it.
If however the tumor does not appear to you at the beginning of the incision, you should add a little to the incision with ease, until the tumor proceeds. Then extract it, as we have said.
Then soak the cloths in vinegar and water, and place them on the site, and bind it with poultices.
And there are those who apply salt, and place it in the concavity of the incision, so that what remains from that humidity may be dissolved.
Then treat it, until it is healed.
If however a warm aposteme occurs at the site, then treat it with cooling plasters, until it is healed.
Concerning the methods of Ataxmir of the eye, that is, when the eyelid becomes soft, whence it happens that it bulges out as it should not.
Chapter 11.
When hairs grow in the eyelids beyond their natural course under the natural hairs, and they become entrenched: then they harm the eye, and cause to occur modes of sickness, such as constant tears, and softening of the eyelids, and a white opacity, until it becomes the cause of destruction of the eye.
And Ataxmir indeed cures the eye according to four modes. Or through cauterization with fire. Or with acute medicine, according to what was mentioned in the chapter on cautery. Or Ataxmir cures through incision and suture. Or through tubes, according to what I will say.
It is necessary that you put the head of the patient on your lap. Then turn back the eyelid of the eye with your left hand.
If it is turned back, it is good. And if not: introduce a needle into it, where there is a thread from the lower part of the eyelid, and make the needle penetrate with the thread above, and let it be near the hairs themselves, that is, near the edge of the eyelid, where the hairs grow: and draw the thread upwards with the eyelid, and turn it back with the needle.
Then find on the inner part of the eyelid beneath the added hairs with a spatula-like instrument incident from the larger lacrimal to the smaller one.
Then extract the thread, and place a small poultice under the eyelid made from cotton or cloth: then mark on the eyelid with ink, which should be like the shape of a myrtle leaf.
However, it is necessary that the shape be according to the size and elevation of the eyelid: because it is already diversified in humans.
For there are those who need to be cut from the eyelid a large quantity, according to the quantity which is softened by the eyelid.
Then, when you find the spatula-like [instrument] above two lines that you marked, and begin at the larger lacrimal duct up to the smaller one, and let there be a single fissure near the natural eyelashes, just like the thickness of a radius.
Then introduce a hook into one of the two angular skin flaps. Then remove the whole thing entirely. Then bring together the two lips with a suture, using a needle and thin woolen thread: and stop the bleeding, and make it adhere by what is superfluous from the threads above the eyebrows, with certain hidden things, if you want to do that: and if not, don't worry.
Then leave the suture and threads until three days or four: afterwards take care of it.
And if you want, leave the wound without a suture, and take care of it with that which dries and constricts. For the eyelid is elevated at the sign of the wound and its aggregation: but the future will be better.
The ancient Ataxmir taught this method of healing.
However, there is concern for the weak one, and it is from good operation, and there is no fear in it.
And another method is in Ataxmir also: and it is to make a mark on the eyelid in the shape of a figure, which is like the shape of a myrtle leaf, as we have narrated.
Then elevate the eyelid with three separate hooks, or gathered together, according to this shape that follows, then cut away what is superfluous with small forceps, according to this shape, with equality of incision.
But if it is not possible for you to hold the hook, and it does not conform to that: then take a needle in which there is a thread, and insert it in the middle of the figure: and insert one thread near the larger lacrimal duct, and another thread near the smaller one: and gather the threads together between your fingers with equality.
Then elevate your hand in elevation and make the elevation equal: and elevate the skin above what is marked on the scalp, as we have narrated.
Then bring together the two lips of the wound with a suture: and take care of it, until it heals.
If an abscess should occur at your incision, or your fissure: then treat that abscess with a poultice, and similar things, from soothing ointments.
And when it happens to the eyelids as well, so that their hairs may be turned away.
It is necessary therefore that you use in this what we have said about the incision: but a suture is more artificial for both. On the treatment of ataxmy with canes.
And it is, that you turn away the eyelid, and separate the fissure that is within, according to what I have narrated. Then skillfully make two canes, or two thin sticks: whose length is according to the length of the eyelid, and the width of them is less than the width of the spatula: and you have now incised at the extremities of both, from both sides where you hold the threads.
Then bring together each one with subtlety above what is overflowing from the eyelid of the eye, and bind the two canes from both sides with a strong stricture, and leave it for some days. For the skin will be constricted, and will become black, and will putrefy, until it falls off by itself.
If therefore it is delayed, then cut into it with forceps. Then treat it, until it heals.
When therefore it is consolidated, the eyelid is elevated: and the hairs do not prick.
And this is the form of two canes, which you make according to this figure, and quantity in length and width.
Chapter 12.
On the elevation of pricking hairs in the eye with a needle.
The operation is to receive a subtle needle and insert into it a thread from a subtle silk, fine. Then you bring together the extremities of it, and tie them with a subtle knot, so that the length of the threads is one palm.
Then you place another subtle thread beneath it in a brief space, and tie its extremities if necessary.
Then the patient places his head on your lap, and it should be near a window so that the operation is illuminated: because this is a subtle operation, or minute.
Then you insert the needle with the thread into the root of the eyelash, and make it penetrate the eyelid firmly, until you extract it above the natural hair.
Then pull out the hair up to the thread: and insert that hair into the thread: if it is one, or two, or three, no more.
Then pull your hand with it, until the hair emerges with the thread in the eyelid with the natural hair.
If the thread is pulled and the hair does not emerge with it: pull the thread downwards, with the thread that you composed in it, until the thread emerges from the superior opening, and you see it with the vision of the eye: then indeed pull the thread, and the thread: and extract both, and close the eye: and keep it closed for two days, or three, until the hair adheres to its place, and grows over it.
If the hair is short, then associate with it a long hair from the natural hairs, and elevate it with it: or leave it, until it elongates after a space, and then elevate it.
Chapter 13.
When this laceration occurs in the eye, it is called Leporina.
And this Alxatrati is either innate or accidental.
Therefore, it is accidental, resulting from the consolidation of a wound, or from a cut, or from cautery, and similar things.
And the method of operating on it is to find that consolidation, and to separate its lips, and to put between them a linen bandage, and to tie it, until it heals.
And it is not suitable to use on its cure things that dry and constrict; for if you do that, the Alxatrati will return worse than it was. Instead, use on it things that soften, such as fenugreek: and apply with water in which there is cooked alum, flaxseed of linen; and anoint with dyapallon, which has been liquefied with some oil; and wrap with a linen bandage, and take care with it.
And the treasure of your cure is to strive with all ingenuity, that it not be consolidated, according to the form that it had at first.
And this operation which we mentioned is not anything but a certain rectification of the Alxatrati, so that it does not return to the form of the place according to what it was altogether.
Concerning the cure of the Alxatrati that occurs on the lower eyelid, and is a wrinkling or contraction upwards to the right and left.
Chapter 13.
This Alxatrati that occurs below is what is truly called Alxatrati. And it is innate, and it is accidental.
And the accidental one occurs from a wound, or a crack, or a cautery, and similar things.
And the method of operating on it is to receive a hook, in which there is a double thread, and to insert it into the flesh, and make it penetrate from the left lacrimal to the right lacrimal, until the thread passes through both extremities of the flesh.
Then stretch the flesh upwards with a hook, and cut it with a spatula-shaped instrument. If then the shape of the eyelid returns to what is fitting, it is good.
And if not, take a rod, and place it in the fissure, and turn the eyelid with it: and make two fissures on the inner side of the eyelid, and let the extremities of the two fissures be from two angles of the incision, until they converge and an angle is formed: until when they come together, this figure is formed, and it is a praiseworthy Greek letter.
Then remove that flesh in proportion to what is the sharp edge below it, from what follows the eyelid. Then bring together the separated parts: sew them with a thread of wool.
Then treat them with what we have said, with softening medications and bandages, until they heal.
And if a scar forms from the fissure and suture, or cautery: then it is necessary to make a flat fissure under the hairs of the eyelids, also according to what has preceded. Then separate between the two lips with a bandage, according to what we have said.
And the summary of the sermon on the treatment of Alxatrati, when it is above or below, is that one should proceed with the operation according to what is prepared in the form of Alxatrati.
This indeed is of many diverse forms: and the skilled craftsman prepares his ingenuity with whatever method is possible for him, until he makes it return to its natural form, or near it, and himself, infirm, according to what is convenient for him from the operation and instruments in many arrangements.
Chapter 15.
Concerning the adhesion of the eyelid to the eye with conjunctiva or cornea.
When this consolidation happens to many people, so that the upper eyelid becomes consolidated with the whiteness of the eye, and prevents it from its natural operations.
Therefore, you should introduce the edge of the scalpel under the eyelid and elevate it upwards; or extend it with a hook. Then make an incision with a fine spatula, which is not acute at the point of the incision, but rather obtuse for a short while: so that the weak patient may not be disturbed during the operation, and the spatula may be removed, and the eye may be freed from its acuteness. And let your incision be as if you were scraping off that adhesion with ease, until the eyelid returns to its natural form, and the entire adhesion is healed.
Then pour salty water into the eye, washing it with water; or distill into it a concoction made from zinc oxide dissolved in water.
Then separate the eyelid from the eye with a linen thread; and place on the eye a wool soaked in egg white: and after three days use zinc oxide, and with solids, until it is healed.
Concerning the Incision of the Nail-like Projection and Elevation of Flesh around the Lacrimal Glands.
Chapter 16.
You should know that the nail-like projection is to be treated in two ways. Either it is nerve-based: and it is similar to a hard, fine callus. Or it is not nerve-based, similar to a congealed white humidity: which when touched with iron, or attempted to be grasped with a hook, becomes detached, and the hook does not stick into it.
And both types do not begin unless from the larger lacrimal gland, until it grows gradually, until it covers the sight and prohibits light, and disturbs the motion of the eye.
And the method of operation for its incision is: that the patient should place their head on your lap. Then open their eyes, and elevate the eyelid with your hand. Then collect the nail with a few teeth of a scalpel, and extend it to the upper parts. Then take a needle and insert the horsehair thread through it, or that of a goat: and let the thread be strong, and double back the extremity of the instrument, and fix it in the middle of the nail: and penetrate it with the instrument, and tie it with a thread to the nail, and extend it to the upper parts: and clear away with the horsehair thread the side of the nail that follows the pupil, as if you were to sew it with the thread up to the posterior part of the eye.
Then cut the remainder in the root of the tear duct with a subtle spatula, or with small forceps: and leave the natural flesh of the tear duct, so that the flow of tears is not impeded by the incision.
And when the nail is extended with a scalpel alone: or with a thread, as we have said. Then it is scraped out with a gentle spatula, which has this shape.
And beware, lest the spatula touches the corneal tunic, and a rupture occurs in it, and the pupil is perforated.
Then after the incision, apply to the eye some ground salt, or made from zinc, and leave it until another day. Then treat it with what is necessary, until it is healed.
What if the nail is not nerveless, and you cannot insert a needle into it, nor is it fixed with a hook, then this type of nail is often treated with medications, and healed as I described in the division.
What if you want to cut it, then open the eye of the weak one, and take a subtle, gentle, and slightly sharp spatula, according to this shape. And scrape the nail from above with a subtle scraping. If you see that it is rarefied and congealed, and an impression is made on it with a red or yellow or salty poultice, then distill it from hour to hour in the eye, whether made from sifted [powder] or rubied, or trito salt: and apply it to the eye until another day.
Then repeat the same operation over it, until everything is removed from it. Unless there is a hot aposteme in your eye: then indeed leave it alone and treat the aposteme until it heals.
Then repeat the operation over it with a poultice, until it heals.
The prominence of the tear-producing flesh, if it hurts in the eye with great annoyance, should be suspended with a hook, and a portion of it should be cut out: and not a final incision, lest the flow of tears be disturbed.
Then apply to the tear-producing [area] a red poultice, or one made from sifted [powder], until it heals.
On the Incision of Al-Guardenic and Flesh Born in the Eye.
Chapter 17.
A red fleshy growth is born in certain eyes of men, composed or superimposed, until it covers the pupil, or approaches, or presses on the eyelids, and perhaps turns them outward: and it resembles a rose-like pimple.
And the operation for this is also such that he places his weakened head on your lap. Then open his eyes, and gather all that flesh with suitable hooks for that purpose: and hold it with one forceps, or a handle.
Then cut the flesh first, until everything is finished with an incision. And be careful not to hurt the eye during the operation: and let your incision be such that you cut with it, or with a spatula, which we described in the incision of the nail: or with small forceps, with which one gathers the asperity, according to what its form will be after this chapter.
When your incision is complete and the entire algardi nerve is removed, then fill the eye with a contrary salty powder; or distill into it a reddish powder, and similar things from corroding medicines; and place over the eye a cotton pad soaked in cooling albumen: so that it may be secure from a hot aposteme.
If something remains from the algardi nerve and a hot bloody flux dominates you, and a hot aposteme threatens: then abandon the eye, and take care of it with what soothes the aposteme.
Then repeat over it with the operation, until it is healed.
And do similarly with the flesh that has grown in the eye from this same kind.
However, it is necessary to avoid strange cures for all weak eyes, either from natural weakness or accidental injury, operating with iron: and do not introduce your hand into any of these operations, until you see that the member is tolerant of that operation.
On collecting pus from the eye.
Chapter 18.
Pus is a reddish vein that forms on the eye, and prevents the power of vision from operating: and weakens the eye over time.
It is necessary for you first to consider whether the eye in which there is pus is strong and has no other ailment except the pus: then collect its pus.
And it is, that you should advise the weak patient to put his head on your lap.
Then suspend those veins with one hook, or two according to your prudence: and let the hook be subtle and doubled, according to this form, or let there be two graduated hooks on one body, according to this form.
Then collect with subtle forceps those veins subtly, and drain the blood hour after hour, until you see those veins removed from the eye, and are resolved: and beware not to harm the eye with excessive spatula-like extensions.
And let your operation be in the morning, before the sun is high, and you should be firm in your operation always: so that you do not cut unless it is those veins.
And when you have made an incision, then pour into the eye a mixture of green or red: so that its sharpness corrodes what remains from the pus.
If however it is not possible for you to gather all of that at that hour, then apply a plaster to the eye with what soothes the pain of the eye: and leave it there for some days, until the pain subsides: and protect it from a warm aposteme; then treat it again in the same way, until it is healed.
And this is the method of forehead operations.
On the reduction of a nose fracture.
Chapter 19.
The doctor calls a nose fracture an Arissat, which is treated with cauterization or with sharp, burning medicine, according to what was previously mentioned in his account.
And if it does not heal, then there is no cleverness in that: unless you make an incision over the aposteme at its birthplace, and extract all the moisture which is in it and pus, until the bone is exposed.
When therefore the bone is exposed, and you see in it decay or blackness, then scrape it with an instrument, whose shape is this.
And it is called a scalp scraper.
Let it be made from Indian iron, and its head should be round like a file, which is marked with the marking of a lime file or the subtle marking of an alkilferi file: and put it on the corrupted bone area.
Then turn it around between your fingers, and you press your hand firmly for a while, until you know that the corruption has been scraped away: and do this several times.
Then restore the area with drying, astringent medicines.
If therefore the area consolidates, and flesh is born in it, and the flow of blood is cut off: and it remains for forty days, and does not break open again, and does not become inflamed, and no accident occurs in it: then know that it has already been healed.
And if not, then there is no ingenuity in it, unless one reduces the fistula to the nostril opening, according to this form.
And it is thus, that you detach from the bone with an iron instrument, or with a sharp medicine; and when the bone is detached, then take the trephine according to this form, let it be an iron extremity, triangular: and its wood should be a pyramid extended to the extremity, as you see.
Then place that on the bone itself: and let it be near the tear duct: and extend your hand a little from the eye. Then turn your hand with the trephine until it penetrates the bone, and let the patient feel that; through this, he finds a way to exhale out of it, when he holds his hand over his nose.
Therefore then restore the place with drying, astringent medicines, as I instructed you.
When therefore flesh grows, and the place hardens: then the matter that was poured out to the outside returns to the nose: it is therefore lighter on the patient.
Of the Reduction of the Prominence of the Eye.
Chapter 20.
When the eye bulges out with its entirety, and no harm occurs in the sight, nor diminution: then it is necessary to soothe the patient: then let blood be taken from him: afterwards, apply cupping glasses on the nape of the neck without scarification, but with suction.
Then place on the eye an ointment made from acacia, and aloe, and olive oil, and sarcocolle. Then bind the eye above with a plaster containing many powders.
And the method of powders is: that you take soft cloths, many, and each cloth is doubled over four times; make many from them: then place one on top of another, according to the quantity which the eye needs: then bind them together with a strong, tight wrapping.
And he should make gentle suction without scratching.
Then apply gentle suction, and loosen the constricted eye by day and night.
If, however, the ligament is again softened, then it is necessary that it be tightened much: then loosen the ligament by day and night, as we have said.
If, therefore, you see that the eye has already returned to its own tissue, it is good: and if not, then apply a plaster, and poultices, and a constricting bandage, and suction, until it is healed.
On the Incision of the Tunicles.
Chapter 21.
When a disruption occurs in the tunic of the Vein, then it protrudes and proceeds outside the eyelids like a grain of the Vein, and its shape is deformed on account of that, and it is necessary to incise it: then the operation is, according to what I relate: and it is, as if you insert a needle at the root of the Vein from the lower to the upper part.
Then insert another needle where there is a double thread on the part of the lacrimal, and make it penetrate: and loosen the first needle according to its own arrangement.
Then incise the place of the double thread, and tie with it the part of the Vein around the needle: and tighten it much.
Then extract the needle, and place on the eye a soaked cotton pad on the white of the eye: and loosen it, until the thread falls with the Vein.
Then treat the eye with that which comforts it, until the wound is healed.
And when the Vein is tightened from all sides with a circle of cloth, until the eye adds great prominence.
Then it should be pierced with a subtle spatula, which reaches to the depth of the eye, and the moisture of the white is drained, and the eye subsides, and it immediately enters: then tighten it, until it is healed.
On the Treatment of Ulcers.
Chapter 22.
This disease which is called Alcomnati is not, unless it be a humor that accumulates in the eye, similar to descending water, and it is not itself.
And the method of operating on it is, that you should make the weakened part sit upon a prepared or directed seat.
Then take his head with your hands from both sides, and move it until you feel the humor passing to the lower parts of his eyes. Then it is treated, and does not descend, and the light is freed: and the weakened part appears as it appeared: and if it does not descend below, know that it is water.
But if the descent of the humor is not prepared with what we have said, then make the weakened part sit between your hands. Then take a subtle spatula, and find with it above the cornual pannicle for a short time at the continuation of the conjunctiva with the corneal tunic in the crown, until the humor exits.
When it exits, then pour warm water into the eye in which you have mixed honey; or water in which you have already boiled fenugreek and honey; then it should be treated with the remaining treatment, until it is healed.
On the Treatment of Water that Descends into the Eye, or Cataracts.
Chapter 23.
We have already discussed the types of water in the division, and what is suitable for piercing with a declaration and exposition of the sermon; then take that same thing according to health.
Then therefore it is necessary to make the weakened part sit between your hands, squared, opposite the light, near the sun; and bind the healthy eye, and hold it firmly; then touch the eyelid of his eye with your right hand, if the eye in which there is water is the left eye; or with your left hand, if the eye is the right one.
Then take with your right hand Almagda, if the eye is left; or with your left hand, if the eye is right.
Then place the Almagda next to the crown by the thickness of the radius in the same whiteness of the eye's apparent smaller lachrymal canal: then push the Almagda with force: and you will revolve it with your hand, until it penetrates into the whiteness of the eye: and you will feel that the Almagda has now reached the empty space.
And it is necessary that the measurement of the journey of the Almagda be to the depth, the measurement of the space that is from the pupil up to the end of the blackness: and this is the crown of the eye. You will see them in the same pupil vision of the eye, because of the clarity of the corneal tunic.
Then put the Almagda up to the place where there is water. Then press it downwards with one vein after another.
If therefore the water descends immediately, then the weak one will see that above what has opened its vein immediately, and the Almagda in its eye.
Then rest a little while. If therefore the water descends, then put it down a second time, except that the Almagda goes out.
When therefore it is fixed, and does not ascend: then extract the Almagda with ease: and you will revolve your hand little by little.
Then dissolve something in water from the clear salt of a gem: and wash the eye within with it. Then put outside the entire eye a cotton pad, or a wool infused with rose oil, and of the whiteness of the eye: and bind it with the healthy eye.
We, however, and those who are of our time, put on top a triturated cumin with the whiteness of the eye.
What if the alumga (eye salve) does not obey you at its entrance into the eye because of its hardness, since it is from a man whose eye is hard and strong: then it is necessary to receive the spatula, which is called Alberid, whose shape is this.
You should therefore join it (the spatula) to the conjunction itself, and not put your hand ultimately in the orifice; and it is only that you may make a way to the alumga place subtly.
Then introduce the alumga, according to what we have said.
And at the completion of your work, prepare a comfortable dormitory for the patient, well-made and situated in a dark room, where they can sleep on their back; and prohibit them from all movements and coughing; and place their food, that which soothes their nature; and let them not move their head to the right or left at all.
And let the bandage be according to its own arrangement until the third day.
Then release him in that dark room, and experience his strength: and make him see things clearly. Then reduce the bandage until the seventh day.
And it is not fitting to do that at the time of curing, or immediately after the incision; on the contrary, it is necessary to delay it: because water ascends quickly through a violent aspect.
But if a hot aposteme occurs: then it is necessary to release the eye before the seventh day; and correct it with what soothes the aposteme until it is soothed: then restore his sight completely, and place an oral application on his face which regulates his sight under those days, he himself being in that dark room.
Then let him gradually go out of the house, and take care of himself at home.
And know that in this matter the student is not exempt from seeing many times: then indeed he will rely on the operation.
And now it reaches us from one of those who are from Alayrach, who said that a perforated wound was made in Alayrach, which is treated with water.
Therefore I did not see anyone in our land who had done that: nor did I read about it in any of the ancient books; and it is possible that it is new.
And these are the forms of surgical treatments for wounds, so that they may stand above those who are ignorant of them.
They should be made from copper properly: and their extremities should be with the same subtlety triangular, and the extremities acute.
Chapter 24.
On the treatment of a flesh-born growth in the nose.
When various fleshy growths are born in the nose, among which there is something that resembles a scorpion with many feet; and from these is the cancerous flesh, stony, of dark color; and from these is the soft flesh, not of dark color.
In this case, therefore, where the soft flesh from these growths is not deceitful, nor cancerous, it is necessary that you place the weakened patient between your hands opposing the ground, and open their nostrils, and insert a hook into those growths: then draw them outwards, and incise what you have comprehended from them with a subtle, acute spatula on one side, until you know that the entire flesh has now been removed.
If something remains of it from which the excision is not possible: then scrape that off with one of the subtle instruments with ease, until nothing remains of it. If, however, the blood dominates you, or a hot aposteme occurs: then oppose it with what is necessary: or if it is one of the malignant apostemes, then cauterize it promptly, until the blood is separated and all the growths are removed.
Then there is poured into the nose after the incision vinegar and water, or wine. If, however, the nose is opened and humidity proceeds from it to the palate, then you will know that he is already healthy.
If, however, the humidity does not penetrate, according to what is fitting, then you will know that there is a carnal birth within the upper nasal bones, which did not come forth with the incision of the instrument.
Then therefore it is fitting that you introduce a thread of linen with some thickness, and knot many knots on it: and place between each knot the quantity of a finger or less: and the weak one will ingeniously send one end of the thread into the nose with a rod, or as much as possible after he has made it similar to a silver rod: and draw out its odor until it reaches the guttural region, and emerges above his throat.
And many times indeed, boys in schools make something similar to this, Atomi's device; and it is an easy thing for him who wants it.
Then place two ends of the thread, one end that emerges above the nose, and another that remains in the nose. Then the minister is shut off from the flesh with knots which are on the thread. Do that until you know that the flesh is already gathered with the knots of the thread.
Then extract the thread: and put into the nose after the blood has been purged, a licinium that you have steeped in Egyptian unguent; do this for three days or more, until the unguent corrodes all that remains of the flesh.
Then put into the nose at the end of the matter a tube of lead for some days, until it is healed.
If however it needs drying treatment, use that.
For making a head-cleansing device, with which oils are distilled, and other medicines into the nose, make it from silver or copper: something like a small lamp, open like a shell: and its passage similarly.
And if you want to make a closed canal, like a reed.
And you should make an instrument for cleansing the head, full and detected: which has a handle at its end, with which you hold it, when you heat it in oil or what you want to extract from juices, and fluid matters.
Chapter 25.
A polyp often grows at the tip of the nose, and it gets bigger and increases with time, until its foul appearance becomes evident.
And because of that, it is necessary to remove it at the beginning of its appearance, and to eradicate it entirely. Then apply to the place either a cautery or a burning medicine that stands in its stead.
If therefore the cutting of it is delayed, until it grows, then consider if it is stony, hard, dark-colored, with little sensation: then do not touch it with iron: because it is a cancerous aposteme.
For I have often seen those who cut into an aposteme, and great evil befell them because of it to the one who had it.
And if the aposteme is of soft touch, not dark-colored, and you see that cutting into it entirely is possible, then evacuate the weak part, and cut into it without fear, without trembling: and treat the place with what draws out and constricts, until it heals.
Chapter 26.
On the suture of the nose, and lip, and ear.
You should know that when a solution of continuity occurs in one of these cartilages, it hardly helps in the operation, unless in certain men.
Therefore, when something happens to someone from that, you should consider if it is a fresh wound with its own blood: and then apply double-layered bandages to the wound with a suture: then treat it, until it heals.
And if the lips of a continuous wound are already separated and each part is healthy, then it is necessary to remove every part from its own apparent cut, until it bleeds. Then bring the two lips together with a suture, and tie them, and sprinkle dragon's blood powder on top of it, and triturated olibanum; and place a fragment of diafinicon emplaster above the powders, and another consolidating emplaster; and leave it tied for two days, or three. Then dissolve it, and change the medicine; and leave it, until the threads separate by themselves. Then treat it with an ointment, until it heals.
The method of suturing is to bring together a continuous wound, or with thread, as we narrated in the suturing of the belly; or bring together the wound with a thread, as I made you know.
Chapter 27.
On the extraction of lip tumors.
Many people indeed suffer from hard, grain-like swellings on the inside of their lips, similar to knots or seeds; and some of them are smaller, and others larger.
Therefore it is necessary to invert the lip, and place a thread above each tumor, and tie it with a hook, and cut it away from every side.
Then fill the place after the incision with tragacanth powder, until the blood stops.
Then it is washed with vinegar, and the place is treated with it, where there is a sting, until the wounds heal.
Chapter 28.
On the incision of flesh born on the gum.
A flesh growth often appears above the gum, which the ancients call "abuluss".
Therefore it is necessary to tie it with a hook; or grasp it with forceps, and cut it at its root, and let the blood flow, or the serum.
Then put on top of the affected area a ground powder, or other powdered styptics, evacuating.
What if the flesh returns after the cure, for it often returns, then cut into it a second time and cauterize it: for it will not return after the cauterization.
Chapter 29.
On the scraping of teeth with iron.
When they [tartar etc.] accumulate on the surface of teeth from the inner and outer part, and between the gums and rough, bitter cortices, and when they become black, and turn yellowish, and greenish, until corruption reaches the gum, and the teeth become foul through that.
It is necessary therefore that you make the weak person sit between your hands, and their head in your lap, and scrape gently with a file and a tooth, where you see the rough cortices, and similar to sand: until nothing remains of them, and similarly do for blackness, and greenishness, and yellowness, and others until they are cleaned.
If therefore what is in them from the beginning of scraping is good: and if not, then repeat the scraping on them another day, a second time, and a third time, until finally the desired goal is reached.
And know that a tooth needs various forms of scrapings, many figures: according to what your operation is prepared for: therefore, the scraper with which a tooth is scraped from below is different from the scraper with which it is scraped between the teeth, according to other forms.
And let these forms of scrapers be prepared by you, which you will need.
Chapter 30.
On the extraction of pain from teeth.
It is necessary that you cure the tooth of its pain with all ingenuity, and be slow in its eradication. For it is not that the juice of the tooth is replenished when it is eradicated: because it is a sublime substance: until when there is no excuse for its eradication, then it is necessary to eradicate it when it is considered weak, so that it may be strengthened and certified by you as a painful tooth.
For often indeed deceives the weak pain, and it seems that it is in the tooth's root and eradicates it; then the pain does not recede until the rotten tooth is eradicated.
For we have already seen that from the operation of bloodletting.
When therefore the aching tooth itself is certified to you, then it is necessary to scarify around the tooth with a spatula, in which there is some virtue, until the gum is loosened on every side; then move it with your finger or with subtle forceps, first gradually, until you shake it.
Then place the large forceps in a good position on it, and hold the head of the rotten tooth between your knees: what you have held well, so that it does not move; then pull the tooth straight out, so as not to break it.
If therefore it does not come out, then take one of those instruments and insert it beneath it on every side with ease, and try its movement, as you did at first.
If the tooth is perforated or corroded: then it is necessary to fill that hole with cotton; and tie it with a subtle radian extremity, so as not to be broken in the hour of your constriction on it with forceps.
And it is necessary to thoroughly clean with scraping around the gum on every side many times.
And preserve your strength, so that you do not break it, and a part of it remains, and returns to the rotten tooth from that greater evil which is in its first pain.
And beware, lest you do what ignorant bloodletting practitioners do in their haste, and the boldness of theirs in eradicating it, beyond what we have described.
For often they cause great infirmities to happen to men, which are more difficult to break, and all their roots remain, or some of them; or so that they extract it with certain bones of the jaw: as we have often testified to that.
Then it is washed out after the excision with wine, or with vinegar and salt.
What if a flow of blood occurs from the places (for it often happens), then scrape off something from the zegi, and fill the place with it: and if not, cauterize it if it does not conform to the zegi.
The forms of subtle forceps which are moved inward at the beginning should be long in the extremities, brief in the handle, thick so that they are not doubled when pressed with them on a tooth: they should be like you see thick handles, until when you squeeze with them, they do not slip, nor are doubled: brief in the extremity and made of iron or forged from a straight center, direct extremities: and in their extremities there should be teeth which some insert into others and constrict with decent constriction, strongly.
And sometimes they are made in the form of a bird's beak, which is called a ciconia, and they are strong in constriction.
Chapter 31.
On the eradication of teeth and the extraction of jawbone fragments.
When something remains in the eradication of a tooth which is broken, then it is necessary to put a cotton pad on the spot with butter for one day or two days, until the place softens: then introduce an instrument, or forceps: whose extremities are assimilated to a bird's beak, which is called a ciconia. The form of this is that of forceps.
Their extremities are made like a file inside, or like an aleuskilfegi.
If therefore it does not obey you in the exit with these forceps, then it is necessary to hollow out above the root, and to detach the entire flesh, and to introduce an instrument which is called a small palate, whose form is this.
It should be brief in its extremity, somewhat thick: and it should not be soaked, so that it does not break.
If therefore the root comes out through that, it is good; and if not, it is necessary to help with these instruments, others of which have the same forms.
The form of the first triangular extremity, in which there is a certain roughness.
The form of the triangular extremity, subtle.
And with other instruments and iron tools which preceded in the filing of teeth.
It is also a help with this instrument that is similar to a large hook, of this form, a triangular twisted extremity, in which there is a certain roughness, so that it does not break; and let it not be soaked.
And know that there are many instruments for teeth; and likewise the remaining instruments are not counted, and the skilled craftsman, subtle in his art, finds by himself the instrument, according to what the operation and the very difficulties signify to him.
For they are from the troubles which are for those things that the ancients did not speak of as an instrument, on account of the diversity of their forms.
But if the bone breaks from the jaw, or from other bones of the mouth, or putrefies: then probe deeply into its place with what is suitable to it from the instruments and forceps that I mentioned in the extraction of roots, and help with gestures, whose form is this.
Let there be in it a certain roughness gradually, so that it may be grasped or held with the bone, and not escape and slip away, until the bone emerges; and restore the place with suitable medicines for that purpose.
But if there is a small decay in the bone, then scrape it of its decay, and cure it, until it is healed.
Chapter 32.
On the serration of prominent teeth above others.
When teeth do not follow their natural course, they become deformed in that shape; and especially when it happens to women and girls, namely those who are weak.
It is therefore necessary to consider. For if a tooth is born after another tooth and does not occupy its place, or if it is possible for its serration or polishing: then extract it; and if it is connected with another tooth, then cut it with that instrument, whose shape is this.
It is similar to a small file, made from iron, with a sharp point, strongly fixed.
And let your cutting be such that you cut it on many days, and because of the hardness of the tooth, so that another tooth is not disturbed.
If, however, it is prominent and exposed to its polishing: then polish it with a file made of iron, whose shape is this.
It is entirely made of iron, and its handle has many small punctures, just like a file with which awls are made: with which the tooth is polished gradually on many days with ease, so that the tooth is not disturbed and falls out: then smooth it, finally scrape it with certain rasps.
Since if it is a tooth from which a part breaks off and hurts the tongue: then it is necessary to polish it also, until the roughness of that broken part is removed, and it is made smooth: and it is flattened, and does not hurt the tongue, nor corrupts speech.
Chapter 33.
On the retention of teeth with golden wires.
When the front teeth receive a concussion and commotion from a blow or fall: and the weak cannot hold onto what they chew so that it does not fall out: and you treated them with styptic medicines, and the treatment did not help: then the idea is to fasten them with a golden wire: because silver turns greenish and decays after days; but gold never changes.
And let the middle thread be subtle and thick according to the quantity that it takes between the teeth.
And the form of retention is such that you take a thread and pass its double between two healthy teeth: then you weave with both extremities of the thread between the moving teeth, whether there is one or several, until you reach the fabric up to the healthy tooth of the other side. Then repeat the weaving until you reach the part from which you started: and tighten your hand with subtlety and wisdom, so that it is not dislodged forthwith: and let your constriction be where you tighten the thread, at the roots of the teeth, so that it does not come loose.
Then cut the superfluous extremities of the thread with scissors: and gather both, and turn them with gestures: and hide them between the healthy tooth and the moving tooth, so that they do not harm the tongue: then let it be tightened thus until it remains.
If however it becomes loosened or is cut, tighten them with another thread, and let it stand firm with that for the entire time.
And this is the form of Teeth, and the figure of retention of two healthy teeth, and two moving teeth, as you see.
And when it happens that one tooth or two return to their place after a fall or other accident, and are retained as we have described, and remain: and no one does this unless he is a skilled craftsman, prudent, and experienced.
And when something is prepared from the bones of small animals: and it is made into the form of a tooth, and placed in the location, where it is strengthened and tightened, as we have said: and it remains, and is preserved with it for a long time.
Chapter 34.
When the ligament that occurs under the tongue is either natural, with which man is born, or accidental, from a wound that has already consolidated.
And the operation is to open the weak bone in its head in your sinus, and lift up its tongue; then cut through that nerve ligament along its width, until the tongue is freed from its retention.
If there is something hard and knotted in it, and it comes from the consolidation of a wound, then push in that hook, and feel it along its width, until you cut through the ligament, and the knot is freed.
And beware, lest there be a fissure in the deep flesh, and you cut through an artery there, and a flow of blood occurs.
Then let it be washed with rose water in the wound's incision, or with vinegar, or cold water.
Then put under the tongue a linen pledget, which holds the weak part during every night: so that it does not consolidate again.
If a flow of blood occurs, then put crushed zinc on the spot. If the blood overflows you, then cauterize the spot with a gentle cautery, which is suitable for it; then treat it with the remaining treatment, until it is healed.
Chapter 35.
When an abscess occurs under the tongue that resembles a small frog, preventing the tongue from its natural operation: and perhaps it grows so much that it fills the mouth.
And the operation for it is to open the weak bone before you, and examine the abscess.
If you see that it is of a dark or black color, hard, and has no weak sensation: then do not touch it, because it is a cancer.
And if it is inclined to whiteness, in which there is moisture, then push into it a hook, and cut it with a subtle spatula, and free it from every part. If blood flows out during your operation, then apply a compress of crushed ice on it until the bleeding stops; afterwards return to your operation until you extract it with its surrounding tissue.
Then let it be washed out with vinegar and salt; and take care to treat the rest of the wound in a suitable manner, until it heals.
On the treatment of two abscesses of the gums.
Chapter 36.
When two lumps occur in the throat, that is, glands, which resemble almonds, which occur before: and they are called two Tonsils: which when you treat with what we said earlier in the division, and do not heal, then consider.
If it is a hard, dry abscess, of a foul color, with little sensitivity: then do not touch it with iron.
And if it is of a red color, and its root is thick: then do not touch it with iron either, fearing a flow of blood, or rather leave it alone until it ripens. And then you will either pierce it: or it will burst open by itself.
And if it is of a white color, round, and its root is subtle: then it is necessary to cut into it.
And the operation on it is, that you should consider beforehand your own operation, if the abscess is warm and quiet, or if it is diminished by some reduction: then thus make the patient sit comfortably in front of a sunbeam, and his head should be in your lap: and open his mouth, and receive carefully between your hands, and press his tongue down below with an instrument, whose shape is this.
Let it be made from silver, or copper, which should be as subtle as a scalpel.
When you press with it the tongue, and the abscess is shown to you, and your gaze falls upon it: then take a hook, and fix it in the tonsil, and extract it as much as possible outward, except that you draw out something from the tunics with it.
Then cut into it with an instrument, whose shape is as follows. It is made similar to forceps: however the extremities of these are curved, so that the opening of each one is directed towards the other acute angle: therefore take care that it be made from iron or tempered steel.
If this instrument is not available, then cut into it with a spatula, whose shape is as follows. It is sharp on one side, not sharp on the other side.
And after you have cut into one tonsil, cut into the other according to the same pattern of cutting.
Then afterwards gargle with cold water, or with vinegar and water.
If a flow of blood occurs, gargle with water in which the bark of granate trees has been boiled: or myrtle leaves, and similar things from astringent remedies, until the flow of blood stops: then take care of it, until it heals.
And sometimes other abscesses will form in the throat, besides the two tonsils. Cut them therefore equally according to what I said about the cutting of the two tonsils.
And I have indeed already treated a woman who had an abscess, which was born in her throat, which was pulling her towards phlegmon, with little sense, which had almost closed off her throat: and the woman was breathing through a narrow passage, and it had already prohibited her from eating, and drinking water: and she had already come close to death, if it had remained for one day or two days.
And the abscess had only risen so far that it had sent out two branches, until they issued forth through two openings of the nose.
I seized them quickly and fixed one of them with a hook. Then I pulled it out, and a large portion was drawn out with it.
Then I cut it off, where I grasped it through the nostrils.
Then I did to it what was protruding from the nostril of the other one.
Then I opened its bone, and pressed its tongue: and afterwards I fixed a hook into the aposteme itself: then I cut off from it a part of it, and hardly any blood flowed from it: thus the throat of the woman was freed, and she began to drink water immediately, and then took some food.
I did not cease to cut into that aposteme many times over a long period: and the aposteme succeeded in taking the place of what I was cutting, until it was prolonged excessively and with it.
I then applied heat, and cauterized the aposteme in the throat.
It stood firm therefore from the application: then I walked away from there, and did not know what God did with it afterwards.
On the Incision of a Aposteme on the Uvula.
Chapter 37.
When the catarrh descends to the uvula and becomes an aposteme, and it is long: then it is called perpendicular: and if it is in the lower part thick and round, then it is called a uuva.
When it is treated with what we said in the division, and the treatment does not help: and you see that the hot aposteme quiets down from it, and it is subtle: then it is necessary to cut into it.
And what is gathered from it is round, and it has no length, and it is bloody, or of a dark color, or black, and it has no sensation: then it is necessary to make an incision in it. For there is fear about the patient's condition.
It is necessary therefore, when you see it according to the method which I described, and its length, to make the patient sit in front of a sunbeam: and press his tongue with an instrument, whose description preceded: then fix a hook into the uuva, and draw it downwards: and cut into it with one of the two instruments which I described in the incision of the two amigdale.
And it is necessary that you do not cut except from that which is added above the natural termination without addition.
For if you cut more than that, you will cause pain and inflammation.
Then after the incision, use what we have described in the incision of the two almond-shaped [parts], and care for it until it heals.
If, however, the patient is weakened by the incision, then it is necessary to use caution in cauterizing it without fear and trembling.
And the method of cauterization in this case is not with sharp water, but rather you should place the patient's head on your lap. Then press their tongue with the instrument that we mentioned. Then take the water that I mentioned to you in the chapter on cauterization, and mix it with a non-extinguished lime, and place it not too thick, nor too subtle, and fill with it the concavity of this instrument, whose shape is this.
Let the extremities of it be where the medicine is placed, concave like the concavity of a spoon's handle.
And place the instrument with the medicine on the same ulcer: and let the patient lie on their side, so that saliva flows out of their mouth from the inwardly administered medicine, so that nothing descends from it into their throat, and hurts them.
Then hold your hand with the medicine. And you should apply it to the ulcer in a moderate quantity for a half hour, until you see it already blackened and calmed down by the biting of the medicine.
And if you wish to receive the crust, and wrap it around the extremity of the handle, and pour the crust with medicine, and insert the handle with the crust into a tube from above, until the crust adheres to the ulcer.
Do that many times, until you achieve what you want from the cauterization of your ulcer. Then leave it: it will wither and fall off after three days, or four.
What if you need to administer medicine, administer it thus: and after cauterization, wipe the area around the wound with a cloth soaked in butter, and clean it with what is around it from the medicine; and cool it with cold water.
And let it be treated externally with poultices, and internally with gargles, until it is healed.
This therefore is a more healthy and longer-lasting method of treatment, free from fear.
And sometimes it is treated with what is more subtle than cauterization and incision: for it is treated with fumigation, according to this method. Take calament, and hyssop, and origan, and rue, and sseah, and chamomile, and abrotanum, and similar herbs: and gather all of them together, or some of them in a pot, and soak them in vinegar, and boil: and let the pot be well-covered with clay: and let there be an opening in the middle of the pot, over which an instrument concave according to this method is placed.
Let it be made of silver, or of copper: and let the extremities be introduced, in which there is a grain, into the mouth of the patient, until the vapor rises to the wound through a canal, until the wound is greatly obscured.
Then repeat it many times over it, until it withers.
And beware, lest you perform this treatment at the beginning of an acute abscess. For it increases in the abscess: and it is not proper to do that unless at the decline of the abscess's heat.
If you do not have this instrument at hand, then take a reed, and place a layer of sheep's cortex on its extremity: so that the mouth of the patient is not burned: for the cortex of the sheep prevents the vapor from burning the mouth: and this is good treatment with safety.
On the extraction of spinal marrow and bones from the throat.
Chapter 38.
Many times a bone sticks in the gullet, or a fishbone, or something else.
It is necessary therefore to extract what appears above what has fallen by the sense of sight, after you press the tongue with an instrument at the root, and it is revealed to you what is in the gullet.
And what does not appear to you and is hidden in the gullet, it is necessary that you make a weak vomit before food is digested in the stomach. Perhaps indeed the attached thing will come out through vomiting.
Or swallow a weak piece of turnip, or the root of lettuce, or swallow a small piece of dry bread: or take a piece of dried seaweed sponge and tie it with thread, then swallow it. When therefore it reaches the place where the bones or the bone are, and it is extracted, then it comes out.
If therefore it does not come out with what we have said: then use an instrument made of lead according to this form.
Let it be thicker than a radius of a finger, and at its extremity let there be a curvature, which easily introduces itself into the throat, and let it have its head elevated upwards.
And let it be cautious of the touch of its epiglottis, so that a cough does not occur to it, and it drives out with it the bone, or spine, or the physician introduces it with their hand.
Indeed what the weak person introduces is better: on account of their knowledge of the place of the attached thing: and they drive downwards, or pull with their hand and instrument upwards, all that according to the quantity which is prepared for them, until it comes out.
On the extraction of leeches.
Chapter 39.
When a leech is treated with what I said earlier in the section on cures with medicines, and it does not succeed, then examine the gullet of the weak person in front of the sun, or at the root after you press their tongue with the instrument that I described to you.
If then your sight falls on the blood vessel, extract it with a small hook, or with delicate instruments that are well-divided.
What if it is not possible with these: then take a curved cannula, and insert it into the throat of the injured person up to the throat; then insert into the curve of the cannula a fiery iron heated with fire. Do that many times: and let the injured person abstain from water for the whole day.
Then let him receive a full treatment of cold water, and open his mouth in it: and let him gargle with it, and not swallow anything from it: and let him move the water for one hour after another with his hand. For the blood vessel falls down at that place when it feels the water.
If it does not come out with what we have narrated, then fumigate the injured person with bug-like things, or with a reed with an instrument that I have narrated in the fumigation of wounds.
Do that many times, until it falls out.
And the method of operation in fumigation is, that you take a pot, in which are live coals with fire: and let the pot be covered with a lid, in the middle of which is a hole: and let the extremity of the instrument be composed in that hole.
Then pour out the fumigation, and let the injured person put his mouth at the extremity of the cannula, and close his mouth, so that the fumigation does not escape, until you know that the fumigation has already reached the blood vessel. For the blood vessel will immediately fall out.
What if it does not fall out, then repeat the fumigation many times.
And let the injured person endure hunger, and eat salty things, and garlic, and not drink water.
It is necessary therefore that it comes out with this regimen.
And this is the shape of the instrument with which a bloodsucker is extracted from the throat, when it falls upon its own force.
It is similar to forceps, as you see: except that it has this curvature which is introduced into the throat. And its extremity is similar to the beak of a bird called a stork, in which there is roughness of a file: when it grasps something, it does not release it at all.
On the opening of abscesses, and their section, and care in general.
Chapter 40.
There are many types of abscesses, of many modes, according to what comes to mind about them, namely one, and one in this book: and they differ in their perforation and sectioning from two modes.
Of which one is of the type of abscess that is in itself, and that which comprehends from humidities.
And the second mode is on account of places, in which it happens through the body.
Because an abscess occurring on the head is different from an abscess occurring on the anus: and an abscess occurring in a fleshy place is different from an abscess occurring in a joint: and each of them has its own judgment from the operation.
And among the abscesses there are those which ought not to be perforated, unless after maturation of the pus in them, and its completion: and among them are those which ought to be perforated, while they are raw, and do not mature according to their completion.
Like abscesses that are near the joints.
Because an abscess, when it occurs near a joint and prolongs its being, until the putrid matter that is around it perhaps corrupts the ligaments or nerves of that joint; therefore it is a cause of more proximate contraction of that limb.
Or it is an abscess near a principal member: because if you delay the perforation of it until it matures, it will harm either that member or through that principal member.
It is near the anus, and therefore it is not mature: and it is not suitable, as if you make perforations, a crude apostema, which does not complete digestion, unless it is near the anus, so that it does not putrefy deeply, and extends to the interior of the bowel, and becomes a fistula, or becomes in its termination what is not healthy.
It is suitable that you know the time of perforation of the apostema, which has matured according to its complement: and it is at the sedation of pain, recession of fever, and diminution of redness, and pulsation, and acuteness of the head of the apostema: and the remaining signs.
And it is suitable that you make the perforation in the inferior place of the apostema, and of the more prominent elevation: and let the perforation be made along the length of the body, if the apostemata are in the parts of the hands and feet, and in the places of the muscles, and tendons, and nerves, and arteries, and finally in all equal places where there is no reflex.
In those however that are reflected, let the perforation be made according to that membrane.
When indeed the apostema is in fleshy places: then it is better to delay its perforation, until its digestion is confirmed, as we said according to its complement.
Because if you perforate it before that, the course of the virus is prolonged from it, and there are many filth and foulness, and perhaps its lips will harden, and its depth.
And some apostemata are perforated according to the width of the body, according to necessity: or according to that membrane which it needs.
And it is suitable that you administer in small apostemata a small perforation, and in large apostemata an ample perforation: or many sections according to the similarity of the magnitude of the apostema.
And there are those from apostemata, in which it is suitable that the skin be sewn together: and an incision should be made when it has already been made like a cloth, and has been made at the termination, which is now dead: just as it happens in many cases, such as ulcers, and buboes.
And there are those which are cut with a section having three angles. And one of them is that which is incised in the shape of a myrtle leaf figure.
Like an inguinal abscess.
And there are those in which a round section is administered, and a lunar section; and similar to them from these sections.
That one indeed which has no head, such as are superficial lenient abscesses, it is fitting to pierce it with a superficial perforation, or merely a flat one.
And it is fitting, when the abscess is large, and has already gathered much matter, and you pierce it, so that you do not press and extract all the pus at that hour; rather, extract from it a portion of its own. Then apply a poultice to the abscess until another day. Then extract some of the pus again.
Do that many times according to the gradation, until it goes out; especially if the patient is weak in strength, or a pregnant woman, or a small child, or a decrepit old person: for the animal spirit is often resolved with the exit of sanies; and perhaps the weak person will die, and you do not perceive.
Therefore, this chapter requires great caution.
And after your perforation, by which you pierce the abscesses, it is fitting to cleanse the wound; and consider. If therefore the wound of the abscess is small, or it is a flat section, then administer a dressing made of linen, or an old cloth. And if it is a large abscess, and there are many perforations of the fissure, then it is fitting to introduce a dressing into every fissure, until they reach the bottom.
And if you have cut away a part of the skin in the abscess, or have hollowed it out around it: then it is fitting to fill it with an old cloth, or as when a cloth is woven, or wrapped with a layer of linen without moisture: and bind it up until the third day.
Then apply it, and take care of it with what is necessary from the ointment, until it heals.
If, however, a flow of blood occurs during your operation, then administer cold water and vinegar, after it has been soaked into those rags; and apply it repeatedly to the place where the flow of blood is.
If, however, the flow of blood persists, then it is necessary to administer a regimen and treatment, and powders, which I have described in many places in this our book, and from division.
If, however, it is in winter time, and the place of the abscess is of many nerves: then it is necessary to pour poultices with wine, and hot oil; and apply them to the places.
And if it is in summer, and the places are fleshy: then it is necessary to apply poultices soaked in water, and oil, or with wine and oil, and all of that is cold. Until when it will be the third day, as we have said, then it is necessary to dissolve the abscess, and clean it, and administer in its treatment what is suitable for it, until it heals.
This is therefore what is necessary from the knowledge of universal treatment of abscesses.
According to the path of distinction, I have already spoken about every abscess, how it is a way to its treatment, individually and in chapters.
Head 41.
Concerning the section on abscesses that occur on the skin of the head.
Abscesses occur on the skin of the head, small ones, and they are from the species of Knots, which are contained by tunics, which are like little sacs: as if they were Hausolated glands.
And there are many species of them.
Among them are fatty ones; and among them are those that contain humidity similar to slime; and among them are those that contain humidity similar to frost and pus; and similar to these, and among them are those that are hard and stony.
And in the cutting of all and their extraction there is no fear, as long as at their cutting he does not make the arterial counter-flow.
And the operation in their cutting is, that you may try it with an instrument, whose form comes after this, which is called Intromissum, until you know what it contains.
For if it is that which contains moisture, then dry it in the cutting according to the length of the superficial cutting: according to this form.
And begin with the cutting from line b to line g. When therefore the moisture is evacuated, then scrape out the cyst which contains that moisture, and do not allow anything to penetrate deeply from it.
For it often returns, if something remains from it.
Then submerge the wound in Egyptian unguent, if it is present: and if not, in water and salt: and fill with it a dressing, and leave it until another day. For it corrodes what remains from the cyst.
Then apply the Egyptian ointment to the wound a second time and a third time, and if you desire it, until you are confident that nothing remains from the cyst, then treat the wound with an ointment until it is healed.
What if the apostema contains a fatty node: then dry it according to this form, with a cutting having the form of a cross: and apply olive oil between the lips of the cutting, and scrape it out from every part: and test your skill in the extraction of the skin which contains it.
If, however, the artery makes a counter-flow against you, then do what I will tell you afterwards.
And similarly do in the case of a stone-like apostema, from the cutting and curing, according to what we have said.
And the cutting above a stone-like apostema is easier: because it has little blood and moisture. And when there are certain abscesses that are on the head in which some people have, with which there is not deep humidity.
That is: because I cut above an abscess on the head of a little old woman, and I found the abscess like a hard and solid stone, rough, white, which could not be broken: and if someone were to strike it with something projecting, they would wound themselves.
In other abscesses, however, which occur on the head, apart from these, namely the abscesses that occur on the heads of children and at the roots of the ears, the section of all of them should be a superficial section.
Or make the perforation always from the lower part of them, so that the flow of the discharge may be directed downwards.
Then treat them with what is suitable for their cure.
Concerning the surgical incision of scrofulous swellings on the neck.
Chapter 42.
These abscesses often occur on the neck, and under the armpits, and in the groin area: and sometimes they occur on other parts of the body.
And above those that occur on the neck, there are one and many: and they are generated from inward corruption: and every scrofulous swelling is within its own proper tunic, just as it is in nodes and abscesses of the head, as we have narrated.
And there are many types of these scrofulous swellings. And among them are stone-like ones: and among them are those that contain humidity: and among them are malignant ones, which do not respond to treatment.
Therefore, when you find one of them in good condition on touch, whose color is close to that of the skin, and it moves to every part, and is not connected with the nerves of the neck, nor with the tendons, nor with the arteries, nor is it deep: it is necessary to cut it out by a superficial incision from the upper part to the lower part of the body in a straight line, and to remove it from every side: and stretch the two edges of the skin with forceps or with many hooks, if you need them, as we have said concerning abscesses on the head, and extract it gradually.
And it is above the caution, lest a vein or nerve be cut.
And let the instrument not be sharp: lest you add to yourself a hand with the incision, or disturb the weak, and cut what is not necessary.
If you cut a vein or an artery, and it prevents you from operating, then apply to the wound a triple bandage, or certain powders that absorb blood, and bind the wound, and leave it until the acute inflammation subsides, and the wound softens: or it begins to suppurate.
For blood is absorbed by a two-layered bandage; therefore return to your operation, until you complete it.
Then examine with your index finger, if anything remains from the small curved hooks; therefore cut them, and cleanse them.
What if there is in the root of the Strophula a large vein: then it is necessary that you do not cut that Strophula at its root; rather it is necessary to tie it with a double thread, and leave it until it falls off by itself without harm.
Then fill the wound with old cotton, which you had already soaked in Egyptian ointment. Then treat it.
If the entire Strophula is cut, then it is necessary to bring together the two lips of the wound: and sew them themselves immediately, after you see that no excess remains.
If you see that excess remains because of the size of the Strophula, then it is necessary to proceed to cut its root, and extract it: and administer the suture as we mentioned.
And what contains moisture from the Strophula, pierce it with a superficial piercing: so that you may see the place of its maturity: and put the piercing from what follows below in the body, as we mentioned.
Then apply a dressing with ointment after the perforation, and similarly to those things, so that it corrodes what remains from the corruption, until when you see the wound is already clean: then treat it with a generating ointment of flesh, until it heals.
Chapter 43.
About the section of the epiglottis from an abscess that occurs inside the throat.
The ancients mentioned this section of the epiglottis, and I have not seen anyone in our land who has performed it: and this is the writing of their sermon.
However, in those having a severe cough, it is necessary to remove the section of the epiglottis: since no benefit comes through that: because all the veins and lungs are weak.
In those indeed who have a hot abscess in the mouth, or throat, or two tonsils, when there is no sickness in the canal, it is necessary to perform the section of the epiglottis, to flee from the destruction which occurs due to suffocation.
Therefore, when we want to do it, it is necessary to cut the epiglottis under three or four circular rings of the epiglottis, with a small section in width, in that which is between two circular rings in quantity, so that the section is in the sifa, not in the cartilage: and this place is convenient for the section, since it is deprived of flesh, and the blood vessels are distant from it.
If the surgeon is timid, then it is necessary to stretch out the skin of the throat with a hook. Then he should open the skin, until when he reaches the canal: he should look for a blood vessel, if he sees something from them.
Then he should cut the sifa that we have described: and it is indicated above the section of the canal from the phlegm which flows out from it, with that which is disrupted, and by the removal of the voice.
And let the open wound be diminished at some time.
When therefore the time arrives in which suppuration is feared, bring together the two lips of the wound's skin, and separate it itself alone without cartilage.
Then administer medicines that cause flesh to grow, until it is healed.
Said Albucasis. The sum of this sermon which we have narrated is not an exposition, unless when they see that some apostematum has already affected the throat of the infirm person; and the infirm person has been elevated above death, and wishes to intercept his breath: they hasten to cut off the Epiglottis, so that the infirm person may breathe over the place of the wound with a certain respiration, and be saved from death: and for this reason they have ordered to diminish the open wound, until the evil of the disease is consumed, and it is an evil of three days, and as if itself: then therefore they have ordered to sew up the wound, and to cure it, until it is healed.
And that which I have seen through myself is, that a certain girl seized a knife, and sent it with her own hand into her throat, and cut with it a part of the windpipe canal.
And I was called to her cure, and I found her groaning, as is the groaning of the dying.
I therefore examined the wound, and I found blood that had flowed out from the small wound. I was therefore confused, because she had not cut a vein, nor an artery: and air was escaping from the wound.
I therefore treated the wound, and I cured it, until it was healthy: and nothing happened to the girl, except hoarseness in her voice: and she returned after days to a better condition of her own.
Therefore I say: that in the cutting of the Epiglottis there is no fear.
On the surgical section of the hernia in the throat.
Chapter 44.
This abscess is called a hernia of the throat, it is a large swelling, according to the natural color of the body; and it occurs frequently in women.
And it is in two modes: for it is either natural or accidental.
In the natural one, certainly there is no ingenuity.
The accidental one, indeed, is according to two modes: of which one is similar to fatty nodes. And the other mode is similar to an abscess that occurs from the nodule of the artery. And in this case there is fear, and it is not fitting that a premature assumption be made about it with iron, unless it is small; and you should try it, and investigate it with a gentle touch. If you find it similar to a fatty node, and it is not suspended with any of the veins: then cut it off, just as nodes are cut off; and remove it with what it contains from the cyst, if it is in a cyst: and if not, then thoroughly examine the entire area. Then treat the place with what is fitting for its cure, until it heals.
Chapter 45.
On the surgical section on the types of Nodes.
There are many types of nodes, and I have already mentioned all their types in the division; and it is necessary to narrate here the difference between a Node and an Exitus, since it causes doubt.
I say therefore, that when there is an Exitus, there is heat, and fever, and violent pains, until the swelling subsides due to the abundance of matter, and the putrefaction is completed: then indeed the fever and heat cease.
But with a Node, there is no heat, nor fever, nor pains, and it contains them in a cyst-like sac, which is their own proper bag, and it is according to the natural color of the body: and their reception is like that of a chickpea, and they are formed like a swelling, and they are larger and smaller.
And there are two secondary types: either fatty: or containing moisture. And the colors of moisture are many, according to what I said in the division.
Therefore, when you come to the treatment of a node, you should test it and examine it first with an instrument called Intromissum, according to what its form will be in the chapter that comes after this.
And the method of examining abscesses and all nodes is that you take this instrument and insert it into the moist place which you find in the abscess: and you turn your fingers with it slowly, until you know that the instrument has already penetrated the skin. Then, finally, you measure the size of the abscess with your hand according to its magnitude.
Then, extract the Intromissum, and examine what comes out in its track.
If, therefore, a flowing moisture comes out, whatever the color may be: then dry it with a superficial incision, according to what I said about the remaining abscesses.
And if no moisture comes out in the track of the Intromissum, then know that it is fatty: therefore dry it with a cross-shaped incision, according to this form, as I taught you: and suspend it with hooks, and scrape off the skin from all sides with ease: and keep it still if you can above it, so that you may extract the healthy part along with the node.
But if the kernel is dislodged during the operation and it is not possible to extract the healthy part, for this often happens, then remove it fragment by fragment, until nothing remains of it.
For if some small or large part of it remains, the node returns according to its fullness.
If it overcomes you and some part of it remains: then fill the wound at your completion with certain corrosive powders that are sharp: and bind the wound, and put above it what sits as a warm abscess, and treat it with the remaining treatment, until it heals.
If then there is a large knot, then dissect its two lips, and cure it with that which incarnates.
If however there is a contrary pulsating vein, or not pulsating: then prepare, and fill the place of the trito with triturated (material), and leave it tightly bound for two days, or three, until the ulcer putsrefies, and the ebullition of the blood subsides: then return to incising that which remains from the Knot.
Chapter 46.
Concerning the forms of instruments for section and perforation.
These are the forms of Intromissors, and they are of three species.
For one of them is large, and one of them is medium, and one of them is small.
Let them be made from iron with a square, angled extremity, so that they may firmly enter into the affected part.
And these are the forms of Explorers, and yes, that is, perforators: and one of them is named "bers", that is, a perforator: and they are of three species.
For one of them is large, and medium, and small.
They are suitable, so that they may investigate through those affected parts, and ulcers, and fistulas, and abscesses from what is between them, which is among the bones.
And others are made round, smooth, slender, like large needles which are used for subsellions, namely from citrus wood, or from copper, or iron, or silver.
And the better ones of them are those that are made from citrus wood.
And Explorers are also made from black lead, which are suitable so that they may explore through those fistulas, whose concavities are reflections, so that they may reflect with their own gentleness along with those reflections.
And they are again of three species. Since there are some that are long, some that are medium, and some that are short, according to the quantity of the amplitude of the fistula and its constriction.
The forms of wounds, and they are of many species.
Because some of them are simple, namely those with a single cure; and they are of three species, as you see, large, medium, and small.
And some of them are stagnant wounds; and they are of three species.
And some of them are wounds having two curvatures, and they are of three species; and some of them are wounds having three curvatures, and they are of three species; and all these are necessary in their own place.
And these are the forms of scalpels, with which they cut and scrape away knobs and abscesses; and they are of three species: because some of them are large, medium, and small.
Their extremities with which a section is made are acute, other extremities are not acute; and they are not placed thus, unless so that with them there may be relief in scraping away knobs with fear of incision into the vein or nerve: and so that the weak one may be healed through them, and find tranquility for a short time, which he finds with the scraping away of abscesses.
They are made of copper, and they are similar to a file, with which an alkaline substance is made: and at the broad extremity there is a hidden, pointed spatula; and it runs inward and outward when desired, as you see.
The forms of spatulas which are hidden between the fingers for piercing an abscess; and they do not perceive them, the weak ones: and they are of three species, large, medium, and small.
The forms of bleeding cups with which the flow of blood is stopped; and they are of three species, large, medium, and small.
They are made of copper or brass, rounded, somewhat long, as you see; and they should be to subtlety.
And it is necessary that these types of bleedings are great and small with you: so that you may cut off the blood quickly in case of necessity, and then when medical help is not present for you.
However, you should not make use of these blood-lettings in every part of the body, and you should not use them except in fleshy places: such as the muscles of the legs, and hips, and muscles of the arms, and breasts, and belly, and groin, and similar fleshy places.
And sometimes they are made into small instruments similar to those of the fisticules, according to their shape: with which blood is cut off when it flows from the place of phlebotomy, or at the incision of a vein, or artery: and sometimes they are made round according to this shape.
Chapter 47.
Concerning the treatment of breasts in men that resemble those of women.
Sometimes the breasts of certain men become inflamed as a result of excessive sleep (that is, when they begin to be defiled in their sleep) until they resemble those of women: and they remain foully discolored.
Whoever therefore abhors that, it is necessary to make an incision above the breasts in a lunar shape, according to this form from line to line, b. to line, g. Then scrape away the entire whitish skin. Afterwards fill up the wound with medicine of flesh incrustation. Then bring together the two lips of the wound with a suture, and take care of it, until it heals.
But if the breast declines to the lower parts and becomes soft due to its size, as happens in women: then it is necessary to make two sections on each side, similar to a lunar shape, which are connected to each other at the edges of both sides, so that one line contains the smaller, according to this form from line to line, b. to line, g. Afterwards scrape away the skin that is between the two lips, and remove the whitish skin, and administer what we have said about suture and powders, which is necessary for healing, until it heals.
If you do not complete the incision as it is necessary to make, on account of the patient's anxiety or because of a flow of blood, then it is necessary to fill up the wound with a submerging corrosive ointment and leave it, until it corrodes away what remains from the suppuration. Then treat it, until it heals.
Concerning the perforation of an abscess that occurs under the arm pit.
Chapter 48.
These abscesses that occur under the arm pit are of the type of hard Strophuli, which contain cysts, and among them are those that contain fluids.
Those therefore that are among them which contain fluids, it is necessary to section them with a lunar incision, according to this form, from line b to line g, when thus the entire fluid in the abscess is evacuated, then fill it up with an old dressing, and leave it until another day.
Then the dressing is removed, and it is treated with a suitable ointment for that, until it heals.
If the abscess was of the type of nodular Strophuli, then split it open above, as we described in the section on Strophuli, equally.
If, however, the wound extends to this point so as to emit pus, then apply a cautery to it, according to what we have said previously.
Chapter 49.
Concerning the incision of an abscess that occurs because of an Artery and a Vein.
When an artery is broken and the skin that is above it becomes consolidated, then often an abscess occurs there; and similarly it happens with veins as well, so that an abscess and inflammation occur in them.
And the signs by which it is recognized that an abscess and inflammation are due to an artery and a vein are: because when an abscess is due to an artery, it is long and aggregated deep in the body; and when you press on the abscess with your fingers, you feel as if there is a grating sensation.
And that which is because of the Veins, is rounded in the manifest body.
And the section above this abscess is an error, and especially that which is under the armpits, and in the groins, and in the neck, and in many places of the body: and it is a great fault. It is necessary therefore that its treatment should be undertaken with an iron instrument, and since it is also in the extremities or in the head, it is necessary that it should be treated.
Above this therefore, which is from the inflammation of the arterial orifice, find in a gentle section in length. Then open the section with hooks, afterwards the artery: and free it from its coats, until it is exposed.
Then introduce a needle underneath it, and make it penetrate until it reaches the other side, and tie the artery with a double thread at two places, according to what I have taught you in the extraction of the two arteries that are in the temples.
Then prick the place, which is between the two ligaments with a spatula, until all the blood that is in it comes out, and the abscess is dissolved.
Then administer a treatment that generates pus, until the ligaments fall off: afterwards treat it with suitable ointments, until it is healed.
If there was an abscess because of the section of the Vein, then it is necessary that you hold with your hand what is possible from the abscess with the skin. Then introduce a needle underneath the place which you held with your hand, and make it penetrate: and let there be a double thread in it, until you extract it from the other side. Then tie it with the same abscess with a good ligature: according to what I said to you about the ligature of the vein, from two parts with two extremities of the thread.
If however you extract the thread, then introduce another needle with another thread under the entire abscess at the incision of the instrument: press, and tie your threads in four places.
Then dry the apostem in its middle until when it goes out what is in it; then cut into the redundant skin and release what is tied from it.
Then put on top of it a poultice which you have soaked in wine, and oil. Then administer treatment, which is done with bandages and ointments, until it heals.
Chapter 50.
Concerning the apostem that occurs from twisting of the tendons.
As it happens that an apostem occurs in the Artery and Vein, similarly an apostem occurs in the Tendons: which occurs from a blow, or occurs from excessive labor, and similar things: and it most often affects those places of joints, or ankles, and every place where the joints are moved: and it is a serious apostem.
Its color is similar to that of the rest of the body, and it is in many dispositional states without pain: and when it is tightly bound with a bandage, one feels in it a weakness similar to numbness.
And it is not an accumulated apostem deep within the body, but rather it is under the skin, and it moves towards every part, and does not spread to the front, nor forward, nor backward to the rear.
Therefore, since it is in the joints, it is not necessary that it be opened with an iron instrument. Perhaps a contraction will occur instead.
In that case, because it is in the head or in the forehead, make an incision with a spatula-shaped instrument. If therefore it is a small apostem, then hold it with forceps, and cut it off at the root.
And if it is large, then suspend it with a hook, and excavate it: then raise it, and gather the wound together with a suture: and treat it, until it heals.
Chapter 51.
Concerning the surgical removal of an apostem that occurs in the belly.
It happens to certain men that many times in their entrails and in other parts of their bodies, there are growths which are called Fungalia, by similarity with mushrooms.
Whose root is subtle, and their head is large, and their lips are turned inward. And it is small among them: and it is magnificent among them indeed.
And I have seen a man, and in his belly there were two growths, which were more similar to mushrooms than anything else: there was no difference between them, white, with minute roots, and their lips were turned inward, and they were rounded, and moisture always flowed from them.
I cut into them, and I found that one weighed almost 10 ounces and the other almost 8 ounces. And the operation for cutting into them is, as you consider then, if the patient is moist and humid, and the color of the growth is white, moist, with a subtle root: then cut into it with a broad scalpel, and let your cauterizations be present in the fire.
For often a lot of blood is expelled at its cutting: therefore be quick if the blood overcomes you, then cauterize it.
If you see a patient who is faint and timid after the incision with iron, then take a thread made from lead, carefully prepared, and tie it on with a stick: this method is what we have mentioned, and leave it for two days.
Then add to the constriction of lead. Do not cease to tighten the lead, as often as it is impressed on the growth, until it is cut off, and falls away by itself without effort.
If, however, the growth is large and rooted, then at its cutting there is something to fear and be afraid of: especially because it is in the belly.
Truly, it is possible to cut into half of it. Then cauterize it, so that it does not return.
Then treat it, until the wound is healed.
And beware lest you suppose that a certain hard, dark-colored, insensitive, foul-smelling tumor is not a cancerous aposteme; for I have named it with the memory of Cancer after this.
Chapter 52.
On the treatment of umbilical eminences.
Umbilical eminences occur from multiple causes. Or they come from fissures of the sifac, which is above the navel: and there emerges from it either a gut or an intestine, according to what happens in other ruptures. Or they come from blood that flows from a vein, or from an artery, according to what has been mentioned before. Or they come from a constricted flatulence in it.
If it is because of a fissure of the sifac and an emergence of a thinbi (tumor), then it has a color similar to that of the body, and is smooth, without pain; and it appears in different locations. And if it is because of an emergence of the intestine, then its location is with what we have narrated, of a more vehement diversity. When you press it with your fingers, it is hidden; then it returns, and perhaps there is a noise with it; and it is greatly magnified upon entering the bath, and a vehement labor.
If indeed it is because of humidity, it is smooth, then it is not hidden when you press it with your hand, nor does it contract, nor is it added to.
What if it is because of blood, then it appears as a dark-colored aposteme with these signs from the gland.
If indeed it is because of born flesh: then it is a grave, thick, hard, and shaped according to one quantity.
If indeed it is because of flatulence, then its touch is smooth.
And the operation in that case is such that you should consider then, if the prominence of the navel is due to blood from an artery, or vein, or flatulence: then it is necessary to prevent it from being cured by its treatment. For there is fear and anxiety, as I taught you in the chapter where I spoke about abscesses due to an artery and a vein.
Because if the prominence of the navel is due to the intestine or a tumor, then it is necessary to prescribe for the patient, so that he may hold his breath, and stand upright with extended limbs. Then apply signs with a cautery around the entire circumference of the navel. Next, instruct him to lean back between your hands on his back. Then encircle with a broad spatula around the circumference of the navel over the place which you marked with a cautery. Next, extend the middle of the abscess upwards with a large hook. Then tie him around with a strong thread or with a silk cord, and let the knot of the ligature be away from the abscess.
Then open the middle of the abscess extended above the ligature. If you have found it already caught by the ligature: then extract it away from the ligature, and insert your index finger into it, and push the intestine towards the interior of the belly: and if you find a tumor, then take it with a hook, and cut above its excess.
If, however, the opposite is true for you, an artery or a vein: then encircle it many times. Then return to your operation. And take two needles, and insert into them two strong threads: and insert two needles around the circumference which you made around the abscess in the form of a cross, which you make penetrate.
Then tie the abscess in four places above the needles: and if you wish, remove the needles, and leave the place until the extended flesh putsrefies: and it falls away by itself: or cut it out when it is subtle and putrefied.
Then treat it with what is suitable from ointments until it heals.
What if the swelling of the navel is from thick flesh in it, or from moisture: then it is necessary to reduce the abscess, as we have said. And extract the blood, or moisture, which you find in it.
Then treat it with what soothes the place.
Chapter 53.
Of the treatment of cancer.
Now we have spoken in the division of the species of cancer, and how it is a way to its cure with medicines: and beware of it with its cure by iron, lest it ulcerate: and we have spoken of cancer generated in the matrix, and caution from its cure.
And the ancients said that when cancer is in a place where its eradication is possible: such as cancer which is in the breasts, or in the hip, and similar members located for extraction of the whole thing: especially when it is beginning small.
But when it has grown old and is large, it is not suitable to approach it.
For I myself was not able to heal anyone of them: nor did I see another before me who had ventured to attempt that.
And the operation on it, when it is located as we have said, is to amputate, and to release the weak part from black bile many times. Then bleed it if you find it with obvious fullness.
Then prepare the weak part for preparation, in which place it is located with the operation.
Then apply to the cancer unguents that are suitable for it. Then scarify it on every side with a knife, according to the investigation, until nothing remains of its roots: and let the blood flow, and do not cut it quickly, but press out the place, and wipe away all the gross blood with your hand, or with an instrument if possible.
If, however, you cause a countermovement of the flow of thick blood from the incision of the artery or vein, then cauterize the vein until the blood is stopped. Then treat it with the remaining treatment, until it is healed.
Of the treatment of Dropsy.
Chapter 54. We will now discuss the division of the species of Dropsy, and how the collection of water occurs: and the signs of each species, and its treatment with medicines.
And that which is treated with iron is not only a single species of ascites: and it does not closely approach the species of tympanic dropsy with iron: nor the deeply seated species of hypochondriac dropsy: for that is mortal.
When you have already treated this species of Tympanic Dropsy with medicines and your treatment has not been successful: then consider. For if the patient is already weakened by debility, or has another infirmity besides Dropsy: such as if they have a cough, or looseness of the stomach, and similar things: then beware of treating them with iron: for that is dangerous.
If, however, you see a patient overflowing with vitality, and there is no other sickness besides Dropsy alone: and it is not a child, nor an old person: then the method of operation for this case is that you place the patient standing between your hands, and after that, press their belly with your hand, forcing water down to the lower part of the chest.
Then take a sharp pointed instrument, according to this form. It is of two acute parts, long, with an acute extremity like a spatula. However, let there be something of moderation in it, lest you should penetrate too deeply with it during the operation and injure the intestines.
Then consider. For if there is a generation of hydropsy from the part of the intestines, then it is necessary to elongate with a section from the navel at a quantity of three fingers, down to the lower direct part above the pubic bone.
If indeed the generation of hydropsy is due to a disease of the liver, then let your left section be from the navel at three fingers.
And if the generation of it is due to the spleen, then let the section be on the right side: and it is not necessary for a section to be above where the patient lies, so that superfluities do not flow back to that weak place.
Then pierce with an instrument through the entire skin. Then insert into that section, and raise your hand with a spatula between the skin, and scrape, as if you were excavating it: and let the quantity that is excavated be the quantity of a fingernail, or around that.
Then pierce deeply until the spatula reaches the empty place: and it is the place of water. Then extract it, and insert into the opening an instrument, which has this shape. And it is similar to a cannula: let it be made of silver, or copper, or gold, smooth and polished: which has a small opening at its lower part, and on its sides are three openings, two on one side and one on the other side: and its extremity is incised, according to the manner of incising a reed, as you see: and on its upper extremity is a ring.
For when the instrument reaches the water, then it immediately descends onto the instrument, and thus evacuates from the water at that hour a moderate quantity.
Since if you evacuate from it more than is necessary, at that hour perhaps the patient dies through a failure of his vital spirit: or a syncope occurs which approaches death.
But evacuate from it according to the quantity of its strength, and according to what is indicated to you by the disposition of the patient from the virtue of his pulse, and from his goodness.
Then extract the instrument and retain the water.
That which is, because it is retained immediately on account of the skin that retains the opening that is above the wound: concerning which I spoke, so that you may perforate it in accordance with that method.
Then try the instrument on the other day, if you see that the patient can tolerate that: and extract also from the water a small quantity.
Do that for some days without fear, and guard yourself against error: until there remains only a little from the water.
If however the time is upon the patient, and you allow much water to flow out: then treat him with warm sand baths, and with much sweat in a hot bath and sun, and wait above the wound: and treat him with drying medicines, until he is healed: and cauterize above the stomach, and liver, and spleen, after the extraction of water: according to what I described beforehand.
Concerning the treatment of infants who are born with their urine passages not perforated.
Head 55.
When some infants emerge from their mother's womb, and the head of their penis is not perforated, or the opening is narrow, or is not in its proper place.
It is necessary therefore to provide assistance with the perforation of it immediately after birth with a very subtle spatula, according to this method.
Then put a small metal hook made of lead into the opening, and tie it: and hold it for three days, or four.
When therefore he wants to pass urine, it is removed, and he urinates. Then reduce it again.
And if you do not put lead, now it is possible, that the urine which flows onto the place does not allow it to close.
He, however, whose opening is narrow, is treated with lead, as we said, for many days, until it is enlarged.
Those in which there is an opening not in its proper place are lacerated. That which is, because it is born from those who are born with a opening at the end of the virgin head: therefore it cannot be mixed with the front ones, unless it elevates its virga with its own hand to the upper ones. Nor is it generation for it, therefore, because the sperm cannot reach the womb according to rectitude: and it is a foul and loathsome disease.
And the method of operation in that case is, that the weak patient is placed on his back. Then extend the head of the virga with your left hand by a vigorous extension, and cut the head of the virga from its proper place, with a pointed instrument, or a sharp spatula: just like an incision of a reed, or as if you were scraping off something, so that the middle of it may resemble the head of the virga: and so that the opening falls in the middle according to what is fitting.
And beware lest you have a flow of blood during your operation. For it has often happened that way. Therefore oppose it with what has cut off the blood, and cure the wound, until it is healed.
Concerning the ulcers that occur on the foreskin and head of the virga, and the corruption, blackening, and adhesions.
Chapter 56.
These ulcers often occur on the virga, and are a foul prominence of corrupted flesh.
And among them, some are malignant, and others not malignant.
You should therefore suspend the non-malignant one with a subtle hook, and cut it off, until you clean the whole thing. Then put on top of it a covered cotton pad soaked in Egyptian unguent. Then treat it afterwards with the dyaphynicon ointment, until it is healed.
What if the albather is malignant, foul-colored? Then it is necessary to apply a cautery to it after the incision and its own reasoning.
If the albather is caught in the foreskin and not circumcised, and part of the albather is inside the foreskin and part outside: then it is necessary to remove the albather that is inside first, until it consolidates, then cure the outer part: for when you cure both at once, the foreskin does not heal unless it is prefabricated.
And now they also occur on the testicles, and a blackening and corruption of the foreskin. Therefore it is necessary to cauterize the entire area that has already blackened and what wants to corrupt or is already corrupted.
Then apply a liniment over it after that with honey which has been mixed with powder of granulated cortex and herbs of Tritor's cribellated powders.
Then treat it with the remaining treatment until it is healed.
If, however, a flow of blood occurs, then apply a cautery with a lunar cautery, according to this method.
For the cautery is helpful for two purposes at once, namely for a flow of blood and for a wound when it becomes corrupted.
If the head of the virga is corroded and destroyed entirely in an hour, then it is necessary to insert into the passage a small tube made of lead, so that the weakened area may be strengthened over it.
In the adhesion of the foreskin to the head of the virga, and this adhesion does not occur unless in one whose foreskin is healthy and does not require circumcision over it: and when adhesion occurs due to a wound or apostema, it is necessary therefore to excoriate it with a dull Spatumili, until the ligament is dissolved and the head of the virga is freed from every part.
What if it is difficult to discern those exquisite things, then it is necessary to remove something from the head of the veins and from the foreskin. What is, because the foreskin, when it is subtle, perhaps it is quickly pierced on account of its own subtlety.
Then separate the foreskin and the head of the veins with a subtle linen cloth, which has already been soaked in cold water, so that they do not stick together again.
Then it should be treated with a stitching wine, until it becomes consolidated.
Chapter 57.
Concerning the purification of infants and the treatment of their accidental injuries.
Circumcision is not a solution for continuity, just like other wounds; however, since it arises from our operation, our will, and its use is especially in boys, it is necessary that we mark out a better operation and a lighter way leading to health.
I say therefore that the ancients did not mention circumcision in any of their books, because they did not use it in their laws, and it is nothing except what we have acquired through experience.
What is, because I have found the greater part of craftsmen and phlebotomators use purification, circumcising with a razor, and with forceps; and they use applying poultices, and ligating with a thread, and making an incision with a nail.
And I have indeed already tested all those methods, and did not find a better purification with forceps and ligating with a thread.
Because in purification with a razor, the skin often escapes cutting. Because the skin of the foreskin has two tunics; therefore, perhaps the outer skin is cut, and the inner tunic remains: hence it is necessary to make an incision to cut the other, and future pain. And with the purification that is done through poultices, that is, digitalis, which surgeons use, they do not take care of the incision at the extremity of the virile member: because perhaps it enters into its orifice.
In cleansing with an ointment, perhaps it will remove the iron and corrupt your operation; and indeed the skin of a child is brief in nature, and often they are born in such a way that they do not need cleansing; and now I have seen that.
Cleansing with a sharp instrument and binding with a thread has given me good experience; because the edges are proportionate to the incision: therefore, what is above is like what is below. When you press your hand, the two edges are proportionate, and they meet according to one operation at one time; and a compression is made in a similar figure, containing the skin of the wound on all sides, with which there falls no error whatsoever.
And the method of your own operation is to make the child, especially if he is one of those who understand a little, do only what you bind with a thread on his wound itself; and leave it until another day.
Then make him rejoice and be happy in every way possible to you, because he receives his own understanding. Then make him stand between your prepared hands, and let him not sit; and hide the sharp instruments in your sleeve or under your foot, so that the boy does not see them at all, nor anything of the instruments.
Then insert your hand into his wound, and blow on the skin, and pull it upwards, until the head of the wound comes out. Then cleanse it from what has accumulated in that foulness.
Then bind the marked place with a double thread. Afterwards, bind below it a little ligature following. Then hold with your index finger and thumb the place of the lower ligature's good retention, and cut between the two ligatures. Then lift the skin upwards quickly, and extract the head of the wound. Then let the blood flow gradually (for it is better) and apply a poultice on top: and above the poultice place a piece of cloth in which the yolk of an egg has been expanded, decocted in rose-water, mixed with fresh rose oil of good quality; and let it stay on until another day: and take care to treat the remainder with healing, until it is healthy.
This indeed is a formula for purification, this is it.
Let the two extremities be numb and let them be inclined: so that no branch of a stake goes out from them: and let the length of the two be equal, just like the length of the two arms is equal.
The error indeed falls in purification: because perhaps the entire internal skin has fled, or a part of it at the incision.
Therefore it is necessary to stretch it out from that hour with your finger before the apostema of the place, and to cut it according to equality.
But if you cannot hold it with your finger, then extract it with a hook, and cut it.
But if three days have passed and what is under the rod remains swollen and apostematous, then let it be until the hot apostema settles, and scrape it off with ease, and cut it according to what is prepared for you: and beware of the head of the rod. For it will not harm him.
Heal it therefore with what consolidates the wound from powders, which we described in the treatise on powders: and if it is cut from the skin beyond measure, and evacuates to the upper parts, it will not harm him either.
Heal it therefore with what we have said, until it is healthy.
Chapter 58.
Concerning the extraction of a retained urine in the bladder.
The retention of urine in the bladder occurs from an obstruction made from a stone, or congealed blood, or pus, or born flesh, and similar things from those which we mentioned in the modes of treatment in the division.
And if the urine is not discharged, and you see that its retention is due to a stone, which is already in the neck of the bladder: then it is necessary for him to be bent over his knees. Then his feet should be placed on his back, and he should stretch out his abdomen from the upper part of his back, and he should hold his breath as much as possible. Thus it is contrived with the neck of the bladder to expel the stone towards the back: whereupon the urine is discharged.
If it is not discharged with what we have said, and the situation is severe for the patient: then it is necessary to administer its extraction with an instrument, which is called a syringe, whose shape should be of silver, and it should be subtle, smooth, concave as the quill of a bird's feather in subtlety of radius, long in similarity to half a palm: and there should be a subtle cannula at its head.
And the method of urine passage through it is, that you take a doubled thread, and tie at its extremity a wool or a tuft, with a good ligature: and you insert the extremity of the thread into the lower part of the Syringe: and cut with forceps if something overflows from the wool, but introduce it into the cannula with violence, as an emetic.
Then anoint the syringe with oil, or with butter, and with albumen of egg: and make the patient sit on a seat, and embrace the bladder, and his rod with oily humidity, and oil of olives, and warm water.
Then insert the syringe into the rod with ease, until it reaches the root of the rod.
Then double it over the upper part of the navel.
Then push the syringe into it, until it reaches the bladder, and the patient feels that it has already reached the empty space: and this does not happen according to this order, unless the passage, through which it goes, is one where there is a twisting.
Then extend the thread with a little wool gradually. For the wool will follow the vein.
Then extract it, and make the vein flow through the passage of urine; and repeat the siring, and do not cease to do that until the bladder is evacuated, and finds an alleviation of the inflammation.
Concerning the quality of the cleansing of the bladder with a Clyster.
Chapter 59.
When an ulcer occurs in the bladder, or blood congeals in it, or pus is confined in it, and there is a desire to distill waters and medicines into it: then let it be done with the instrument called a Clyster, and this is its form.
It is deaf, that is, closed. And in it there are three openings, two on one side and one on the other side, as you see.
And the concave place, in which is that which drives it, should be according to the quantity that it needs without addition, until when something is pulled out with it, it attracts from humidities: and when it is driven, it expels with it to a distance: according to what the Clyster does, by which naphta, that is, Greek fire, is projected in the praetorian plains of Mars.
When therefore you wish to project humidities into the bladder, introduce the extremity of the Clyster into the humidity, and pull with it that which drives upwards, for the humidity is pulled out into the concavity of the Clyster.
Then introduce its extremity into the rod, according to what we have described in the siring. Then drive the humidity with that which drives it, for indeed the humidity immediately reaches the bladder, so that the patient feels it.
The form of a subtle Clyster by which the bladder is clysterized.
Let it be made from silver or gold alloy: a head which is higher and similar to a small hook, and underneath it a curve on which the ligament falls.
Then take a razor of the ram, and put humidity in it, by which you can cleanse the razor. Then bind it between two knots of strong ligature with a double thread: and heat that humidity moderately over the fire.
Then insert the extremity of the instrument into the vein, afterwards press your hand over the razor with humidity and tightening structure, until you feel weakness, because that humidity has now reached the razor.
But if you do not have a razor present, then take a piece of papyrus, and make a circle from it, and pierce it with a complete roundness. Then insert a strong thread into those holes, as they revolve. Then gather the circle, just as it is gathered into a compound: afterwards you put on it what you want from humectants, and oils, and waters.
Then bind it on the instrument: and do with it as you did with the razor from the expression with your hand, until humidity reaches the razor.
Chapter 60.
On the extraction of a stone.
We have already discussed in the division of the species of stone, and its treatment with medicines: and I have said the difference between a stone generated in the kidneys, and the razor, and the signs of all of it: and I have said the stone on which the operation falls with hand and section: and there is a stone properly generated in the razor: and that one which is figured in the vein: and I am narrating this with clear exposition and abbreviation.
I say therefore, that a stone generated in the razor, occurs most frequently in boys.
And among its signs is that the urine emerges from the razor similar to water in its subtlety: and it appears in the white sand, and rubs weakly against its vein, and labors with it, and often hangs. Then it is erected, and goes out with it anus in many of them.
And the healing of children is easy, because they recover until fourteen years. And it is difficult in old people. In young people, however, it is medium, because it is between that: and its stone (lith) which is larger, the treatment is easier; and if small, the care of its reversal.
When we approach the cure, it is necessary first to cleanse the patient with clysters, which extracts all the feces that are in their intestines; for this is what hinders the detection of the stone during the examination.
Then the patient is taken by the feet, and shaken, and moved to the lower parts: so that the stone descends to the bottom of the bladder, or jumps from a high place many times.
Then make him sit between your hands prepared, and his hands are under his hips, so that the whole bladder is inclined downwards.
Then press on him and touch him externally.
If you feel the stone in the space, then quickly prepare to make an incision over it at once.
What if it does not fall under your touch at all, then it is necessary to anoint the index finger with oil from your left hand, if the patient is a boy: or the middle finger if he is a young adult: and you insert it into his anus, and press on the stone until it stands under your finger: and turn him slowly towards the neck of the bladder.
Then press on it with your finger, and push it outwards towards the place where you want to make an incision: and instruct one assistant to press on the bladder with his hand, and instruct another assistant to stretch out the testicles with his right hand upwards: and with his other hand, to remove the skin which is beneath the testicles in the part of the place where the incision is.
Then insert the spatula-shaped instrument, whose shape is this. And find in it what is between the anus and testicles, not in the middle, but towards the left side of the buttocks: and let the section be above that stone, and your finger should be in the anus: and let the section be transverse, so that the external section is wide and the internal one is narrow, according to the quantity that is possible for the stone to exit from it, no larger.
Perhaps indeed the finger compresses, which is in the anus, the stone at the section, and it exits without difficulty.
And know that the stone which has angles and edges makes its exit difficult because of that.
And it is smooth, similar to a gland, and round: and its exit becomes easy.
Therefore, add to the fissure those which have angles and edges.
What if it does not exit thus, then it is necessary to devise something over it: or to bind over it with a decent gesture, whose extremity is like the Moon, which binds over the stone and does not depart from it: or to insert under it an instrument of subtle curvature.
If you cannot get above it, then enlarge the opening a little more. What if something of the blood overcomes you, then cut it off with a zigzag.
If there is more than one stone, then push first the large one towards the opening of the bladder. Then make an incision over it. Afterwards, push the small one after that: and do similarly if there are more than two.
What if it is very large, then ignorance is to make a large incision over it. Since it happens to the weak one of two things, either that he dies, or there occurs a frequent dripping of urine: therefore, because the place is not completely consolidated.
Indeed, administer the expulsion of it, until it emerges: or if there is a fracture in it with splinters, until you extract it from the crushed part.
When you have completed the operation, then fill the wound with powder of thure, and aloe, and dragon's blood: and bind it, and put over it a cloth soaked in oil and wine, or rose oil, and cold water: so that a warm apostemum may be formed.
Then put the injured person to bed with their neck raised, and do not loosen the bandage until the third day. When you have loosened it, bathe the place with water and much oil.
Then treat it with dyaphonic ointment and royal ointment, until it heals.
But if there happens to be a warm apostemum added to the wound, and it corrodes, and similar things: as if blood congeals in the bladder, and urine is prohibited from it: and that is recognized by the flow of blood with urine. Therefore, insert your finger into the wound and extract the blood. For if it remains, it provokes corruption of the bladder, and its putrefaction.
Then wash the wound with vinegar and water and salt: and apply all sorts of things that are suitable for its cure, until it heals.
And it is necessary during the entire period of treatment to bind two hipbones together and to assemble the medicinal causes that are applied to the place.
If the stone is small and it is in the midst of the vein, and it is fixed there, and the flow of urine is prohibited: then treat it with what I have narrated before you reach the section. For many times indeed one is excused from the section through this treatment, for I have already proved it.
And it is, that you should receive a Perforator made of iron from Al-feric, whose form is this, a triangular pointed extremity, fixed on a wooden handle.
Then take a thread and tie it with a twig under the stone so that it does not return to the vein.
Then insert the piercing iron into the twig with ease, until it reaches the stone; and turn the piercer by hand in that same stone little by little; and observe its piercing, until you make it penetrate from the other side.
The urine is immediately freed.
Then press your hand on what remains of the stone from the outer part of the twig. It is broken off, and it comes out with the urine, and the sick person is healed.
But if this treatment does not prepare itself for you, because of something that prevents it from that: then tie a thread under the stone, and another thread above the stone. Then cut above the stone on that same twig between the two ties. Then extract it. Afterwards, loosen the tie, and clean the clotted blood that forms in the wound.
And it is not necessary to tie the thread under the stone, except that it does not return to the vein: and another tie above, except that when the thread is loosened after the removal of the stone, the skin returns to its place, and closes the wound: and for this reason it is necessary for you to do so when you tie the thread above, that you elevate the skin upwards, so that it returns to its complement, and closes the wound, as we have said.
Chapter 61.
On the extraction of a stone in women.
A stone is rarely generated in women.
But if it happens to any of them that a stone forms, then the treatment is difficult and is prohibited because of many methods.
One of their kinds is: since a woman perhaps is a virgin.
And the second reason is that you do not find a woman who reveals herself to a doctor, when she is chaste, or among those having husbands.
The third is, because you will not find a woman who knows this art well, especially the operation with the hand.
And the fourth is remoteness from the location of the stone: therefore it requires a deep incision, and there is fear in that.
What if necessity provokes to that, then it is necessary to take a female doctor, well skilled: and she is hardly found.
If you do indeed have those things, then seek a chaste doctor, subtle and present a well-taught female obstetrician in women's matters, or a woman who has gained part of the art in this skill: make her present, and especially entrust it to her, that she may do all that you prescribe to her from the inquiry about the stone.
Firstly, it is necessary that she examine if the woman is a virgin: then it is necessary that she inserts her finger into her anus, and seeks the stone.
If she has found it, she grasps it under her finger, and then instructs the midwife to insert her finger into the vagina of the woman, and inquires about the stone, after placing her left hand on the bladder, and presses with a good compression.
If she has found the stone, then it is necessary that she gradually moves it from the opening of the bladder to the lower parts with all her strength, until she reaches it at the root of the hip.
Then she presses upon it at the opposition of the middle of the vagina at the root of the hip, from whichever part it is prepared for her, and she feels the stone in that part: and her finger does not move away from the stone, grasping under it: and let there be a small incision first. Then she inserts a scalpel above that incision.
Then she inserts a scalpel above that incision. If she has felt the stone, then she adds to the second incision a quantity proportional to what the stone emerges from it.
And you should know that there are many types of stones. For it is small and large, smooth and rough, long and round with branching [veins].
Know therefore its types, so that it may be signified to you through this above what you have seen.
If therefore the blood overcomes you, then add to the place of the wound a powdered remedy, and hold it for one hour, until the blood is stanched.
Then return to your operation, until the stone comes out: and prepare yourself with the instruments that I mentioned in the extraction of stones from the veins, so that you may be assisted by them in your operation.
What if the flow of blood overcomes you, and you know that the expulsion of blood is from the artery which has been cut: then put a powder on the place, and tie it with a suitable stricture of bandages: and do not move it: and leave the stone, and do not extract it. Perhaps indeed the weak woman will die. Then treat the wound.
When therefore the acuteness of the blood has settled after some days, and the place has become putrid, then return to your operation, until the stone comes out.
Chapter 62.
On the surgical removal of a hernia in a watery place.
A watery hernia is not, unless it is an aggregation of humidity in the white membrane which is beneath the skin of the testicle containing a egg: and it is named a hernia.
And sometimes it is in its own proper membrane, which nature has prepared for it in the part of the egg, until it is felt: which is another egg, and it is the skin of the testicle between the white hernia, which we mentioned: and this does not happen unless rarely.
And the generation of this hernia is indeed from the weakness that occurs in the testicles: therefore this matter flows out to them. And when it happens from a blow above the testicles.
And this humidity is having many colors. Or indeed its color is declining to yellowish, or it is bloody red, or foul, black, or it is watery white, and it is that which is in excess.
And the signs by which it is known where the accumulation of water is, are these. For if it is in the white skin that we mentioned, then the abscess is round in length for a short time, like an egg figure; and the testicle does not appear, since the humidity surrounds it on all sides.
And if there is humidity in its own skin fold, then the abscess is round with an egg-like part, and for this reason a man thinks it is another egg.
And if the humidity is between the skin of the testicles and the white skin, then it falls under the sense.
When therefore you make a cognitive effort concerning the color of humidity, then experience the color of humidity in the abscess with an inserted quadrilateral, whose form precedes. According to that which emerges in the investigation of the inserted quadrilateral, judge concerning that which is between itself.
When therefore we come to the treatment with iron, then it is necessary that you should caution the weak, so that they may be bled if possible, and you will see their body full.
Then let it rest on its back on a high place, and put many cloths under it.
Then sit on its left side, and instruct the assistant to sit on its right side, who should stretch out his arm to one of the two sides of the skin of the testicles, and towards the wondrous part of the belly.
Then take a broad spatula, and separate the skin of the testicles from the middle along the length, up to the perineum; and make an incision according to the straightness of the equidistant line that divides the skin of the testicles, until you reach the white skin that surrounds it; and scrape it off and observe, or be cautious about this, so that you may separate it: and your scraping should be such as you scrape it off, from the part that is suspended with an egg more; and scrutinize subtly with the scraping according to the quantity that is possible for you.
Then pierce a full water-perforating siphac with a broad perforation, and extract all the water.
Then separate the two labia of the section with hooks, and extend the siphac to the superior areas, and do not touch the skin covering the testicles: and make an incision in the siphac however it is possible for you to make the incision, either totally or partially, especially on its subtle side. For if you do not carefully examine it, there will be no security in the incision, lest the water returns.
If however the matter proceeds outward from its skin during the time of your operation: then when you have completed the section of the siphac, reduce it. Then bring together the two labia of the skin of the testicles with a suture.
Then treat it as you would other wounds, until it heals.
If you find a corrupted matter from the blackness of another, then it is necessary to bind the vessels, which are the suspenders, fearing the flow of blood.
Then cut off the testicle with its suspender, and extract the matter: afterwards treat it as we have said.
If water has collected in two parts, then know that there are two branches: therefore dry up the other part equally, according to what you did in the other.
And if it is equal to you, so that there may be one operation, then do it: afterwards stop the bleeding. And introduce into the sections a wool soaked in oil, or in rose oil: and place before a wool which you have soaked in wine and oil, and spread it over both testicles, and soften the belly: and place above double cloths, and they are poultices: and bind them above with a ligature, which has six threads according to this form.
Then two cloths are applied, and they are soaked, and filled with a warming powder, according to this likeness: and let the extremities be pressed with a hot cloth or damp wool: and they are gathered together with a binding in the loin of the arms: and one extremity receives above the anus up to the back, and the second receives towards the pubic area: and two extremities above the two hips below, and two other extremities above the two groin areas, and all are gathered together with a binding in the loin of the arms.
And when you treat this ramex artificially with a cautery at the site of the section with iron; and it is, as if you were to receive a subtle cautery instrument, and cut through the skin of the testicles: and it is ignited, according to what we have narrated: until when it is detected that the white album containing water appears: then take the cautery, according to this method.
The Greek letters are assimilated.
Then pierce with it that album, and it is ignited, until all the moisture emerges.
Then stretch out the album with hooks, and scrape it with a subtle, ignited cautery, and cut into it as much as possible for you, until you eradicate all of it.
And beware lest you touch it with fire.
And know that this operation is more beneficial and farther from the flow of blood, and better than an operation with a section.
If however it causes a contrary effect in the hour of section, or in the hour of cautery, or apostema warm, or flow of blood, or something else: then it is necessary to cure what causes a contrary effect for you from that with the treatment which suits it, according to what has been mentioned.
If however the patient is faint-hearted and does not expect to survive this operation, due to its own horror: then administer the piercing according to what I have narrated; and it is.
When it is certified to you, through what we have said about the signs, that the ramex is watery: then it is necessary for you to make the patient sit on an elevated seat.
Then pierce the apostema in its lower part with a broad spatula: and put the piercing according to the length of the body, and let the opening be wide, until all the water flows out.
Then put it on a cotton pad, and bind it, and leave it until the remaining water flows out: then treat it, until the wound is healed.
If however the contrary happens with the flow of water at the time when it perforates it, and it does not happen unless for this reason, because a white membrane creates a contrary flow in the orifice of the wound, and prohibits the exit of water: then it is necessary to introduce a feather into the wound, or an instrument by which the hydropic water is extracted, whose form has been mentioned beforehand; or add in the operation of the wound for a short time.
And know that the water returns and accumulates after six months, or around them. When therefore it accumulates, then it is treated according to the same method, and it passes through its own weak days.
Chapter 63.
On the treatment of fleshy wounds.
Know that in the incision above this wound, it is from a fear of causing harm in many dispositions. Wherefore it seems to me that its dismissal is to be saved from those things.
And I am mindful of the operation on it, and the type of abscess.
I say therefore that many abscesses occur in the bodies, from which the swellings are composed: and it happens for many causes, namely.
Or from acute or sharp superfluities which flow out to the swellings. Or from blows.
And the color of the abscess is according to the color of the body, and no pain is found in it: and it is a grave abscess.
And perhaps it is a stony abscess, whose color is dark, and there is no sensation in it.
And when it happens from the nodulation of arteries, and their inflammation: as I have already mentioned its remembrance: or from the inflammation of veins.
Which therefore is from them due to the inflammation of arteries, is recognized by the arrangement of the abscess, when you press it with your fingers. And it is not suitable that you touch it immediately.
That which occurs from the swelling of veins is not dispersed by pressure with the fingers.
And now it is possible that a section is made on this species, and on the remaining flesh; and it is to cut through the skin of the testicles. Then stretch the egg upwards, and extract it with a white cloth: and free the suspensory ligament from the vessels, and tie the vessels: and cut the suspensory ligament after you have freed it on all sides from the parts of the egg.
If therefore the egg is consolidated with those naturally born flesh, then it is suitable that you should pull out the egg, and cut into it.
And if there is an adhesion between something from the sipakhah, or in what is between the vessels: then it is suitable that you free the entire adhesion, and cut into it with a rounded incision.
If, however, there is a nativity of flesh at the place of adhesion which is behind: then it is suitable that you cut through the whole of it, and extract the egg, as we have said.
When therefore your operation is complete, then fill the wound with a piece of cloth soaked in rose oil and wine: thereafter treat it with the remaining treatment, until it heals.
Chapter 63.
Concerning the treatment of Varicose veins, which is with a Vein.
Ulcer is a hidden aposteme, which is an inward gathering, similar to a swelling, with softening of the testicles: and it becomes difficult upon weak movement and exercise, and walking.
And in the treatment of this disease is from fear, because of that which precedes, namely remembrance.
But it is necessary that we describe the operation on it according to what the first ones did.
I say therefore, that it is suitable for you to make the weak person sit on a raised seat. Then apply the supporting bandage to the lower testicles. Then hold the skin of the testicles with your fingers, along with the nearby veins: and let another assistant hold them in place with a vigorous extension.
Then make an incision with a broad, sharp scalpel in a crosswise section directly on the veins, until they are exposed.
Then scrape away from every part, as we have instructed you in the extraction of the Arteries that are in the temples.
Next, place a thread in them where there is a double filament, and tie it at the first places to which the veins are attached: and tie it again at their ends. Then cut them off in a straight section in the middle, according to the length of the body, and extract what is gathered from the foul, corrupted humors.
Then treat the wound with the treatment of other wounds, in which it is customary to generate a healthy scab, so that the veins that nourish one of the testicles may fall away. For it is not an evil through that.
But if all the veins are affected, then it is necessary to extract the testicles along with their veins: so that they may not be deprived of nourishment, and wither away, or become putrid, and may not be a source of trouble with them.
Chapter 65.
On the treatment of an intestinal hernia.
The cause of this hernia is from a rupture, which occurs in the extended suture above the navel on the inguinal part of the belly.
Because the intestines descend from that rupture to one of the testicles. And this rupture is either from the suture or its extension.
And these two types occur from many causes: either from a blow, or a fall, or a shout, or the lifting of a heavy object, and similar things.
And the symptom, when it is from an extension of a sifach. It is what happens gradually over a long period of time and does not happen suddenly; and it is an equal aposteme compared to a deep one; therefore, because the sifach compresses the intestine.
And the symptom of it is when it is from a section of sifach, because it causes to happen from the beginning of its vehement sudden pain; and it is a diverse aposteme, appearing near the skin surface; and that is on account of the exit of the intestine, and its course to the exterior of the sifach.
And when it goes out with the intestine a zirb; and it is called this Ramex intestinalis, and zirbia; and when it happens with flatulence.
And when it flows into the intestine with feces, and is retained there; and it is with that a most grievous affliction of the infirm; because it causes to happen a bad pain, and especially when it is pressed.
And in the treatment of this type of illness with iron, there is fear; therefore it is necessary to be cautious in that case.
And the method of operation is, to press on the infirm person, so that they reduce their intestine with their own hand to the internal concavity, if it obeys and returns. Then it is supported above its neck between your hands; and elevate its knees.
Then stretch the skin that follows the skin to the upper parts, and separate the entire skin of the testicles along its length. Then place on both lips of the section a curved needle, according to what is necessary to open the section with them; and let the section be according to quantity, as much as is possible, so that an egg can come out from it.
Then remove the skin, and what is beneath the skin of the testicles, until when the white sifach is discovered, hard on every side; then introduce your index finger into that which follows the testicle, into that which is between the white siphach, which is beneath the skin of the egg, and between the sifach secondly, and separate it completely from the adhesion which is in the posterior part of the egg.
Then place the right hand inside the scrotum to support the testicles; and with this hand, extend the suture upwards, with the left hand; and elevate the opening with the suture to the part of the section; and order the assistant to extend the opening upwards; and you will release the adhesion which is behind the complete solution.
And search with your fingers, so that there may not be something hidden from the intestine in the hard white suture. If you find something from it: then push it down to the lower abdomen.
Then take a needle, in which there is a thick thread, made into a licinium of ten threads; and insert it at the back of the suture, that is, the sheath, which is under the skin of the testicles following the section; then cut the ends that emerge from the thread, until there are four threads. Then arrange some of them over others in the shape of a cross; and tie with those sutures, which we mentioned earlier, because it is under the skin of the testicles with a strong ligament, until nothing can pass through, which nourishes them, to send something to them: so that hot aposteme does not occur there. And place the second ligature outside the first ligature, at a distance of less than two fingers from it. And after these two ligatures, leave the suture that is under the skin of the testicles a quantity equal to the size of a finger; and cut the remaining whole part according to its roundness, and remove the opening from it.
Then cauterize the lower part of the incision of the testicles, from which blood and serum flow, as we have narrated in what has been mentioned before.
Then apply a soft cotton pad soaked in oil, and put it on the wound; and apply the ligature that we have narrated. And when you cauterize the white suture that we mentioned, after the incision, fearing a flow of blood. For it often happens that. And release the bandage, until it falls off by itself.
If, however, its fall is delayed, then it should be soaked with warm water; and place on top of it what we mentioned earlier, until it falls off.
Then treat the wound with the remaining treatment for wounds, until it is cured.
Chapter 66.
Concerning the windy vein.
In this windy vein, I have not seen anyone who has dared to attempt its cure with an iron instrument.
And the first ones indeed said that it should be done as we described in the windy vein that is with a splint. Which is to bind the splints above it with a facilitating bandage: then sew in the middle, and treat afterwards with what opens it, until the splints fall off: and treat the wound, according to what we said, until it is healed.
Chapter 67.
Concerning the rupture that occurs in the groin.
When a rupture occurs in the groin, as we said, and the place protrudes, but nothing from the intestines descends to the testicles: and if it does descend, it is small, and returns at all hours: truly, if it is prolonged with that time, a fissure is added in the perineum, until the intestines descend into the perineum.
And it happens from the extension of the perineum, which is in the groin, as we said. Which is because the perineum is extended: then it becomes soft and putrid, and the place protrudes.
And its treatment is with a cautery, as its previous narrative has mentioned.
And sometimes it is treated with an iron instrument, in this manner: and it is, as if the weak one lies on his back between your hands. Then sew the place of the putrid and protruding rupture, making an incision across its width, according to the size of three fingers.
Then you should stitch alsifak and those that are under the skin, until when it is touched, a white album appears, which is under the skin and follows it.
Then take a scalpel, and place it on the prominent area of the alsifak, and press it deeply into the wound.
Then you should have two prominent areas on the extremity of the radius from the alsifak, and connect one of them with a suture to the other; then withdraw the extremity of the radius.
And do not cut the entire alsifak, nor stretch a vein, nor anything else, just as I taught you to know in the treatment of an intestinal obstruction.
Then take care of that wound's treatment. When you have made the incision, clean it, and restore the wound, until it becomes consolidated.
For it is constricted, and not adding to the prominence of the Rupture.
And cauterization is better in this place: because it is closer to health.
Chapter 68.
On the softening of the skin of the testicles.
The skin of the testicles often becomes soft in certain men, because the flesh that is between them becomes softened and their appearance becomes foul.
Therefore it is necessary for the one who is seeking treatment for this condition to make the weak part rest on its back, and to incise the entire softened skin over the natural skin.
Then bring together the two lips with a suture: and if you wish, you should first remove the excess of softened skin with three sutures, or four, and make a firm suture.
Then incise between the sutures.
Then take care of the treatment of the remaining wounds, until they heal, and the threads fall out.
Chapter 69.
On Castration.
You should know that Castration is forbidden by our law: and because of this it was permitted to me not to mention it in my book: and there is no need for a mention of it, unless for two reasons.
One of them is that it should be in the knowledge of a physician when he is questioned about it, and so that he knows the treatment for which it occurs.
And another method is that we often need to castrate certain animals because of our injuries through them, such asrams, goats, and cats, and similar ones from animals.
Therefore, I say that Castration is done according to two methods. Or by subtraction. Or by incision and cutting.
In that one which is done by subtraction, the method of operation is this: we make the animal sit in warm water until its testicles become soft and relaxed, and hang down; then you rub them with your hand until they dissolve and do not appear to the touch.
In castration by incision and cutting, it is necessary to hold the animal, and press down on the cord of its testicles with your left hand.
Then tie the suspensor, and cut above each one with a single section, until two testicles proceed: then incise after you have removed both, and do not leave anything on them except a subtle sifa, which is above the vessels.
And this method of castration is better than the one done by subtraction: because subtraction perhaps leaves something in the testicles, for which reason the animal desires mating.
Then treat the wound, until it heals.
Chapter 70.
 On the treatment of Hermaphrodites of two modes.
A Hermaphrodite is treated from the urine in two modes. One of them is because it appears in the following space, or in the hollow of the testicles, in what is between the two testicles, a figure like a woman's vulva, in which there are hairs; and sometimes urine flows out from what is in the hollow of the testicles.
In women, there is one species, and it is the vulva of a woman situated above the pubic bone, like small testicles of a man, protruding externally; of which one is like the penis of a man, and two are like two testicles.
And the treatment of these three species, two from men and one from women, is: because it is necessary to cut away the added flesh, until their impression is eliminated. Then heal them with the healing of remaining wounds.
In the second species of men, from which urine exits, which is in the skin of the testicles, there is no operation, nor is there any treatment at all.
Chapter 71.
On the Incision of the Tentigen and the Eminent Flesh in the Vulvae of Women.
The Tentigen is perhaps added above the natural thing, until it becomes disgusting and its appearance is repulsive; and sometimes it grows so much in some women that it expands like in men, and reaches all the way to sexual intercourse.
It is necessary therefore to hold back the excess of the Tentigen with your hand or with a hook, and to cut it away; and not to stop in the incision, especially in the deep root: so that there may not be a flow of blood.
Then heal the wound itself with treatment, until it is healed.
A carnosity arises, which is born in the orifice of the womb, until it fills it; and perhaps it protrudes externally resembling a tail; and because of that some people call it a "tail-like" disease. It is necessary therefore to cut away the carnosity as we cut away the Tentigen, and to treat it, until it is healed.
On the treatment of the Alratica, which is a woman's vulva not pierced.
Chapter 72.
The Alratica is when the vulva of a woman is not pierced, or has a small opening. It is either natural or accidental.
It is accidental, resulting from an illness that preceded it; and indeed it occurs either from flesh born with it, or from subtle thinness, or from being compact; and it happens either in the depths of the womb, or in its sides, or at the top or bottom of it; and it prevents coitus and impregnation, and childbirth, and perhaps prevents menstruation.
And the recognition of it is by the obstetrician's observation, if the obstruction is apparently close at hand.
If, however, it is not apparent, then you should examine it with your fingers, or with a rod.
If, however, the obstruction is from subtle thinness and is close to the two lips: then you should probe and dissect it.
And it is, as you place above the two labial mounds.
Then place your index fingers of both hands simultaneously, and let the woman sit on her back with her knees spread apart. Then stretch out the two lips with force, until the subtle thinness is dissected and the obstruction is opened up.
Then take a piece of wool, and soak it in oil, and place it on the location; and let the woman apply it every day, so that the area does not consolidate into another scar.
If, however, the thinness is thick and compact: then it is necessary to cut it with a broad spatula-like instrument similar to a myrtle leaf.
If, however, the obstruction is from flesh born with it, then suspend it with hooks, and incise it: and let there be with you medicines that suppress the flux of blood without biting, such as acacia, and dragon's blood, and thus aggregated with white albumen.
Then administer a cannula made of broad lead, so that the wound does not consolidate quickly, hold it for some days: and administer a dry linen dressing, then proceed with the remaining treatment, until it is healed.
And when a swelling appears in the matrix of a born flesh wound: it is necessary therefore to make an incision according to this method: since there is no cancerous abscess, for it does not become contrary with iron at all.
Chapter 73.
On the treatment of hemorrhoids, Athelil, and the red swelling on the vulva of women.
Hemorrhoids are indeed the openings of the veins, from which much blood flows out continuously.
Since hemorrhoids are old and established, they become thelil; and I have already spoken about the division of their types and signs in the same chapter, and I will say here which ones receive a cure and which ones do not.
I say therefore that hemorrhoids which are in the opening of the womb and do not appear to the senses, then there is no cure for them with iron.
But those which are in the opening of the womb and are perceived by the senses, are those that can be cured.
It is necessary therefore to introduce the woman into a cold house. Then extend Athelil with forceps, or with a rough cloth, and cut them out from their roots.
Then powder over them against the flow of blood from one powder of incisions without causing harm: such as acacia, and dragon's blood, and frankincense, and similar things.
Then apply her feet to the wall for an hour. Afterwards, put her in cold water.
If the flow of blood has persisted: then make her sit in a decoction of sumach, and cortex of granates, and gall, and similar things.
Then take barley flour, and mix it with honey and vinegar, and make a plaster with it over her back.
If therefore the blood is staunched with it, it is good: and if not, apply cups to her back and breasts without making incisions.
Then take a linen cloth and dip it into the juice of tarantula, or the juice of wild pomegranate, or the juice of leaves of aloe, that is to say, of galangal, with a certain Pontic wine, and make it adhere to the place.
When therefore the aposteme subsides, then treat the place with ointments, until it is healed.
The Albarth ulcer is similar to a red pustule on the heads of alhaz, and its appearance is rough.
It is necessary therefore that you cut what appears from it, according to what I said about the lil equalizing: and treat it, until it is healed.
Chapter 83.
Concerning the perforation of the uterus which occurs in the womb.
There occur in the womb many species of apostemes, such as cancer, and stone-like aposteme, and ulcers, and adubelations, and alekilations, that is to say, herpes, aestiomemus, and fistulae, and hemorrhoids, and ragadiae, and thelil, and hot aposteme.
And I have already said all these diseases and their species, and their signs, and their cures in the division: it is necessary that I speak about the hot aposteme which occurs in the womb, when it arises from the apostemes that collect blood, and you should know how to perform its opening with an iron instrument.
It is necessary therefore that you consider. Then if the pain of the aposteme in its incision is acute with percussion and flame and fever: and you see it red: if sense falls upon it, then do not press with its perforation: and treat it with that which helps above maturation, until when the acute accidents subside.
Then it is necessary that you make the woman sit on a seat which has two footstools, and recline or lie on her back, and join her feet to the lower part of the belly: and let her hips be expanded, and place her arms under her thighs, and bind them with a convenient ligature to that.
Then the obstetrician sits on the right side and administers an instrument by which the opening of the womb is revealed.
And it is necessary when you administer this instrument, to fix it with the deep root of the woman's womb: so that what enters from the instrument is not more than the depth of the womb, and harms the weak woman.
But if the instrument is more than the depth, then it is necessary to place pads on the covering of the deep womb: so that the entrance of the entire instrument into the depth of the womb is prohibited: and it is necessary to place a curl, which runs in the instrument, from the upper side: and to hold the instrument, and to revolve the minister's curl, until the depth of the womb is revealed.
When therefore the exit appears, and is touched by hand, and it is gentle and soft: then it is necessary to separate it at its head with a spatula.
When therefore the blood is evacuated, then it is necessary to place the wounded lip submerged in rose oil: or green oil, in which there is some astringency: and place the lip, and extract the section from the depth of the womb.
And place it outside on the womb, and on the pubic area a clean woolen cloth submerged in water, in which there are boiled mallow roots.
Then it should be treated after two days with an ointment that is suitable for that, until it heals.
And when the womb and wound are washed, so that it is cleaned with water and honey: then with water in which the root of lily or long aristolochia has been boiled: then return to the ointment.
What if the wound was hidden inside the womb, then it is necessary to refrain from curing it with iron, rather cure it with what we said in the division.
Chapter 70.
The teachings on obstetrics, how they treat embryos that have emerged in a shape not natural.
It is necessary for the obstetrician to recognize first the shape of a naturally formed fetus.
From these signs, therefore, it is clear that when you see a woman pressed down to the lower parts, and she desires to smell the air, and becomes relieved over what is on her from the fetus, and hastens the exit of the embryo: then know that this fetus is according to its natural shape, and its exit is through its own head, and the afterbirth with it: or hanging, or suspended from the navel.
When you see these signs, then it is necessary that her womb be compressed, so that the embryo may come down quickly.
For when it comes down through its own head, the afterbirth comes down with it, and is cleansed of those excessive impurities by a good cleansing.
But one that is beyond this fetus is unnatural, inadvisable.
Because sometimes the fetus comes out on its feet, and its body comes out before its head, and one of its hands or one of its feet: or its head and one of its hands come out: or its belly comes out: and perhaps it turns over onto its neck, and similar things from unnatural shapes.
It is necessary therefore for the obstetrician to be prudent and subtle in all these things, and to beware of error and deception: and I am showing every shape from them, and how the ingenuity is in it, and is signified by that, and stands upon it.
When the fetus comes out through its own natural exit, and it is difficult for the woman, and the childbirth is hard for her, and you see that her strength is already debilitated: then make her sit on a chair, or let other women hold her: and apply warm vapors to her womb with decoction of fenugreek, and with humid olive oil.
Then the midwife inserts a small spatula between her fingers and finds the second one with it, and separates it from her nail, until she feels what is in it from the moisture: and presses on the woman's abdomen, until the fetus descends.
If it does not descend, then it is necessary that the woman be anointed with a clyster of fenugreek, with sesame oil.
Then advise her to compress herself after the clyster, and make her sneeze with the conditions, and hold her mouth and nose for one hour. For the fetus will come out immediately.
If two hands of the fetus come out first, then it is necessary to reduce them with gentle facilitation little by little. If it does not obey at the entrance, then put the woman on a chair, and elevate her feet upwards; then strike the chair on the ground; and let the woman be held, so that she does not fall at the shock.
If therefore the hands do not come out, and the fetus dies: then cut them, and extract the remaining part of the fetus: and bind her hand with a cloth, and extract it with equality: for it itself will come out.
The extraction of the embryo from its feet. When the fetus comes out onto its feet, then it is necessary to push them upwards; afterwards, convert the fetus little by little; subsequently, straighten it.
Then take one of its feet and extend it little by little.
When they come out as far as the hips, then advise her to compress herself, and make her sneeze with the conditions; for it will come out, if God wishes.
And if it does not come out with what we have narrated, then reduce the fetus little by little, until you place it according to its natural figure. For it itself will come out then with an easy delivery.
If it is prohibited with all that we have narrated: then take from the mucilage of the altea, and oil of sisamin, and dissolved gum: and strike everything in a mortar with good percussion. Then apply it to the wound of the woman's vulva, and beneath her belly. Then have her sit in warm water, until she feels the hypochondrium.
When you see that the lower parts are already warmed up, then have her receive a suffumigation of myrrh: and apply it. When she holds the suffumigation for one hour, then have her sit on a seat. Then have her sniff it out: and clear her nose and mouth: and press the lower part of the belly with easy compression. For the fetus will come out immediately.
The delivery of the fetus on knees and hands. When it comes out according to this method, then she should introduce her hands little by little. Then the woman should be raised to her neck, and her feet should hang down below: and she herself should sit on a bed, and fold her hands. Then press above her belly little by little. Then extract what is under her feet from the pillows, until it is prepared in the lower part. If the fetus does not come out, then take her feet and move them with a vigorous motion. Then press what is above the hypochondrium little by little, until the fetus ascends to the upper parts. Then introduce her hands and adjust the fetus little by little: and instruct the woman to press, until the fetus comes out.
The delivery of the fetus, hanging sideways from the hands. It is introduced in the reduction of her hands. If she cannot reduce it, then raise the woman up, and have her walk around.
If indeed he cannot walk, then make him lie on a bed and shake his hips with a vigorous concussion.
Then administer the liniment you prepared from mucilages.
What if he receives that potion, then make him sit on a seat. Then study the reduction of the hand, and equalize the foetus according to the natural figure: and make the woman sneeze, and order her to compress herself until it comes out.
The exit of the foetus is over its neck, with hands extended, and its face is towards the back of its mother. It is necessary that the midwife holds the hand of the foetus, then turns it around slowly, and adjusts it with ease.
When it is adjusted, then put on its belly what we have prepared from oil and mucilages.
Then order her to move slowly. When you have done that, then make her sit on a seat, and order her to lean towards the right side. Then order her to compress herself: and make her sneeze with a condition.
The exit of the prepared foetus is on its side. When it descends to the maternal orifice in this manner with the afterbirth, then separate the afterbirth with your finger, until it is evacuated from the moisture.
If it is suspended over the face of the foetus and its neck, then cut it from the navel: so that it is not retained, and does not die.
Then push the foetus towards the interior, until you place it according to what is proper: and order the woman to compress herself several times: for indeed it will come out with a gentle exit.
The exit of twins, or many foetuses. You know that twins are often born: and sometimes three, and four. However, that external thing is rare and rarely happens.
There are five things beyond nature, and they do not penetrate deeply; and they bind them, however much they multiply, with a secondary one; and they are separated by a suture, distinguishing between them the tied part in each of their navels.
And when they emerge, just as one fetus emerges by a natural outlet, easily; and they emerge by an unnatural outlet, as we have narrated.
If they are difficult when some of them are at the part, and they reach that which we said from unnatural figures, then treat them as we have narrated; and let there be a subtle and precise treatment, and let it do what it does with facility and slowness, and let it be adapted according to every figure with what is prepared for it by a leading ingenuity for health.
The reminder of that which is formed in the womb from embryos and are aborted.
When one is formed in the womb, and two, and three, and four, and five, and six, and seven, and more than ten; and it has already been verified by me, that a woman aborting has expelled seven, and another fifteen, all fully formed.
That which was done by the measurement of the glorious wise one.
Therefore, this whole thing is necessary for it to be in the science of Obstetrics. Perhaps indeed it will reach that similar thing: therefore let it be opposed to it with what is fitting.
Chapter 76.
On the extraction of a dead fetus.
When you treat a dead fetus with what I said in the division from medication, and it does not emerge, and you are forced to use manual operation, then it is necessary to consider.
If the woman is of healthy virtue, and she does not have any of the accidents from which loss is feared on her behalf: then it is necessary for the woman to be placed on a bed, on her back, with her head inclined downwards, and her thighs elevated; and an assistant should hold her from both sides, or bind her to the bed, so that her body does not move during the extraction of the fetus.
Then moisten the wound of the matrix with humid oils, along with mucus from the flax plant, and fenugreek, and linseed.
Then anoint the midwife's hand with these oils and mucus; then insert it into the womb with ease. Then feel with it the place where the fetus is stuck, and find a convenient position for that.
Consider therefore then, if the fetus is prepared to descend onto its own head: then fix hooks in its eyes, or in its neck, or in its mouth, or on its palate, or under its beard, or in its armpits, and near its ribs, and under its hip bones.
But if the descent is onto its feet, then in its pubic area, and its middle ribs.
And it is necessary to hold the hook with the right hand, and place its curvature in what is between the fingers of the left hand: and insert it with ease, and fix the hook in one of those places that we mentioned, until it reaches the empty space.
Then fix another hook opposite it, or a third if necessary: so that there is equal traction, and it does not lean to one side.
Then it is extended with equal extension, and not only stretched in a straight line, but rather moved to every side, so that the outcome of its extraction may be alleviated: just as it is done with a tooth during its removal.
And it is necessary in what is between them, to soften the extension. If a part of it is retained, then it is necessary for the midwife to anoint certain fingers with oil and insert them from one side, so that she may revolve what is retained with them.
If a part of the fetus emerges, then the hooks are changed to another place that is higher: do this until the entire fetus emerges.
If therefore the hand protrudes before the others, and it is not possible to reduce it, on account of its contraction: then it is necessary to wrap a bandage around it. Then extract it thus when it protrudes entirely, either by cutting into the joint of the sole or in the elbow; and thus it is necessary to do likewise on the other hand, and on both feet.
If however the head of the fetus is large, or there happens to be a contraction at the outlet, or there is water accumulated in its head: then it is necessary to introduce between the fingers a spatula with a pointed end, and to find the head with it, and to extract the water: or to dislodge it with an instrument called Almisdac, whose form comes with the forms of other instruments in the chapter that follows this one.
Likewise, if the fetus is of a large-headed nature, then it is necessary to sever the shoulder joint; or to extract it with a misdach, as we have said. Then hook out the bones with forceps.
What if the head protrudes and is constricted at the waist: then it is necessary to feel around until the moisture that is in the chest is discharged.
If however it does not progress and does not come out at the outlet: then cut the head a little, according to what is possible for you.
What if the lower part of the abdomen is inflamed, or there is dropsy in it: then it is necessary to perforate it, until the moisture flows out from it.
If however the fetus is on its feet, then its extraction is easy, and its direction towards the womb's mouth is light.
If however it is constricted at the abdomen or chest: then it is necessary to extract it with a cloth that you have wrapped around your hand; and feel the abdomen or chest, until what is in them flows out.
If however the remaining limbs are exhausted and the head returns: then the Obstetrician inserts their left hand. If therefore the womb is open, then they insert their hand deeply into the womb and feel with it the head, and draw it out with their fingers up to the mouth of the womb: then they insert one hook or two hooks, and draw it out with them.
If the womb is constricted, because of the warm apostema that has happened to it: then it is not fitting to struggle over it, but rather to administer an effusion of humid and greasy things, and apply an emollient plaster: and sit in waters that soften and moisten.
If the fetus is on its side, then it is possible to straighten it: then administer what we said regarding the living fetus.
If it is not possible, then it should be dissected piece by piece and extracted.
And it is necessary that you do not leave anything of the secondine inside at all.
When you have completed your operation, then administer what we said regarding the warm apostemas that occur in the wombs.
If a flow of blood occurs, then sit in astringent waters and administer the remaining treatment.
And I have indeed already seen a woman, in whose womb a dead fetus was: then she became pregnant again with another, afterwards that other fetus also died. So it happened to her after a long time an apostema in her navel, and it became swollen, until it opened: and began to discharge pus.
I was therefore called to her treatment, and I treated her for a long time: but the wound did not heal.
I then applied to it certain strong attractive plasters: and it came out from its place, the bone. Then several days passed, and another bone came out. I was amazed therefore, since there is no bone in the belly.
I thought therefore that they were from the bones of a dead fetus.
I examined the wound, and I extracted many bones, while the woman was in her best dispositions: and already she had lived a long time, and a little pus came out from the place.
And I did not confirm this external thing, unless there is science in it, and help for that which the skilled physician administers with his hand from the healing.
Chapter 77.
On the forms of necessary instruments for extracting a fetus.
The form of the Forceps which opens the womb.
Here is described the form of the Forceps, which are equalized to books, which have two equal arms at the extremities of two wooden handles. However, this vertigo ought to be more subtle than the forceps: and that it may be so, whether made from ebony or from boxwood.
And the width of all the wood is almost two fingers: and the edge of each of the two is almost one finger, and their length is a palm and a half: and in the middle of the two wooden pieces are two additions of the same kind of wood, which are already fixed to both, whose length is a half-palm plus a little: and the width of each is almost two fingers, or a little more.
And these two additions are inserted into the maternal passage, so that they open with them when you turn the two Forceps.
Another form similar to that one, more subtle and lighter.
Let it be made from ebony wood or boxwood, according to the similarity of the forceps. However, at its extremity there are two additions, as you see here above: and the length of each addition is almost a palm: and the width of each is two fingers.
When you are about to dissect a corpse with it, then make the woman sit on a couch, with her feet hanging down, opening what is between her thighs. Then insert these two connected additions into the corpse, and you holding the instrument's extremity below between her hips. Then open your hand with the instrument, just as you do with forceps, equally according to the quantity that you wish to open in the mouth of the corpse, until the midwife does what she wants.
The shape of a Turning alternative to what the ancients said, the Shape of an Expeller by which the fetus is expelled.
The shape of Almisdac, where the large head is constrained: and it is similar to forceps, which have teeth at the extremity, as you see.
And when it is made oval, like forceps according to this shape, as you see, which have teeth like serrated teeth, by which it is cut and constrained.
The shape of a Ring having one spine.
The shape of a Ring having two spines.
The shape of a Spoon-like instrument having two extremities for cutting off the head.
The shape of two Spoon-like instruments, also wider ones.
All these instruments are exercised, and the more their species are multiplied, and they are prepared by the craftsman, the swifter is their operation, and the more esteemed they are among men, due to their quantity.
Do not despise any of these instruments, as long as it is prepared by you. For the necessity of them is inexcusable.
Head 78.
 On the extraction of the Afterbirth.
When the second ligature is retained at the wound, then it is necessary to apply a compress to the weakened area, so that it may retain its breath. Then make her sternutate with concoctions; and bind your hand over her bone, and her nostrils. If therefore it goes out through this, it is good.
If not: then take a pot, and perforate it in the covering hole: and put in it herbs opening up the womb, such as marjoram, rue, and anise, and chamomile, and senna, and lignified cassia, and centaury: take all these herbs, or some of them, and submerge them with water, and put them over the fire.
Then put an embryo of a certain bush over the hole of the covering pot, and another extremity into the womb: and hold it until the vapour reaches the concavity of the womb.
Then make her sternutate, as we said. For the second ligature will go out with ease.
If however it remains after this cure, and does not go out: then instruct the Midwife to submerge her hand in sesame oil or muck of altaea. Then she should insert it into the womb and seek the second ligature with it. When therefore she has found it, then she should receive it and pull it out little by little.
If however it has been attached deep in the womb, then she should insert her hand according to what we have narrated, until when she finds the second ligature, and pulls it out little by little according to rectitude, so that the womb does not fall apart at the vehement attraction: indeed it is necessary, so that it may be turned with ease to the right and left sides: then it should be added to the quantity of attraction. For it has obeyed then, and is preserved, and is freed from adherence.
If the maternal bone is constricted, as we have already narrated: treat it with sternutatio, and from medicine of the ollea with herbs.
If however it does not come out with all that we have narrated, then beware lest you weary yourself over it in the repetition of the extraction.
It is necessary, so that what comes out from the maternal bone, binds to the hip joint of the woman. Then anoint it with a tetrapharmacon ointment. For it will putrefy itself after days, and dissolve, and come out.
But when it putrefies, a bad smell rises from it to the stomach and head, and hurts that weak woman. It is necessary therefore that suitable fumigations be administered to her.
Some of the ancients have already experienced the fumigation of nasturtium and dried figs.
The form of the instrument with which the woman is fumigated at the retention of the Secondina and menses.
Let it be made from a similar glass or from zere: and let a broad extremity be placed over the fire: and let the fumigation be placed over the woman's thighs: let it hold her, until that fumigation is consumed: and then another.
Chapter 79.
Concerning the treatment of an unperforated anus.
Many boys are born, and their anus is not perforated, which has already been obstructed by a subtle sip of milk. It is necessary therefore that the midwife should perforate it with her finger: and if not, she should perforate it with a sharp spatula: and let her beware lest she hurts him.
Then put on it a woolen cloth infused with wine and oil. Then treat him with ointments, until he is healed.
If however it is blocked, then put a cannula of lead in the orifice for many days, and it will be digested when the boy wants to expel.
And now there occurs a blockage of the anus also from the consolidation of the wound or from an abscess. It is necessary therefore that the consolidation be cut, then treated with what we mentioned regarding treatment and lead.
Chapter 80.
Of the treatment of fistulas which occur in the lower part.
Fistulas which occur in the lower part are a swelling and a hardness which occur near the anus outwardly: or in a single part of the body: and it is one fistula, or several.
When therefore that swelling becomes old, it opens, and there flows out from it a watery white fluid, or subtle pus.
And sometimes they are penetrating fistulas from these. Therefore the penetrating ones are recognized by that which comes out from straining and flatulence, when the weak person is straining, and perhaps worms come out from them.
And they are fistulas when they are penetrating in the body up to the bladder, and up to the root of the penis. And they are penetrating ones up to the joint of the hip, and up to the knot of the tailbone.
From this it is recognized that the penetrating fistula reaches up to the anus, and also from the non-penetrating one, by inserting your index finger into the anus: and you insert a subtle probe into the fistula through a tube or iron, when there is no twisting.
If there is twisting in it, then insert into it a subtle probe of lead, or a pin from horsehair pillows, until you feel the probe, or pin on your finger.
If you do not feel it deeply, nor does anything proceed from the orifice during straining, nor flatulence, nor worms as I said: then know that it is not penetrating: therefore hasten to treatment.
And when a fistula is penetrating to the bladder or to the urinary meatus: then its indication is the outflow of urine from it, and its prohibition from this so that the place may be consolidated with medicines.
If it is penetrating to the joint of the hip, or to the mouth of the hip: then its sign is that it reaches the tendons up to that place, if there is no twisting up to the mouth: and the discovery of pain in the surrounding area, and that pus always flows out from it: and that medicine is not effective for it, nor is it consolidated with an ointment.
And in all these penetrating fistulas there is no complete cure: and the treatment of them is labor and vanity to him, by foolish doctors, who are deceived about it.
In that one, however, which is not penetrating and not chronic, healing can be hoped for with a serum: according to what I tell you, and I have already proven it: and it is so that the patient lies between your hands on his back: and lift his legs up above his hips, and his hips are inclined towards his abdomen. Then a lead or copper probe is inserted, if there is twisting in the fistula, until you know where it reaches the tendons.
If however the patient feels it around the anus, then it is necessary to insert your index finger into the anus.
If therefore you feel with your finger the tendons already penetrated by themselves detected, besides what you feel between your finger and the skin, or flesh: then therefore you know for certain that it is penetrating: so do not labor in it, because there is no healing of it, as we have said.
They have said, however, that it can be healed in certain men with flesh, and from the medication by which they hope for a benefit, it is to apply a subtle cauterizing fire according to the width of the fistula, as previously mentioned, and insert the ignited thing into the fistula, until it reaches around the anus. Then repeat that twice or three times, so that you know, because those added fleshy growths are already purified, which are similar to the quill pen of a bird.
Then treat it with liniments wrapped in butter, until those fleshy growths emerge, which are purified: then treat it with salves that generate and consolidate flesh.
If therefore it heals, it is good.
And if not, then it does not heal with any other treatment ever.
And if it emerges as a point, and has not penetrated up to your finger, which is in the anus, and there is a thick or fleshy or scabby obstacle between it and the point, or scab: and you see a Fistula in that which follows the surface of the skin, then you cut the skin from the beginning of the Fistula, and you guide the cutting with the point that is in the fistula, until the cutting reaches where the point of the fistula ends, and the point is freed and falls out.
Then cleanse those fleshy growths purified, which are similar to the quill pen of a bird, so that nothing remains in them.
If however blood overcomes you, and flows between you and your operation, separating those fleshy growths: then it is better to do what is done, and for the sake of swift healing, to cauterize it with fire, or with acute medicine.
Since cauterizing with fire gathers good habits, to the purification of those added fleshy growths, and to the stopping of blood, and to the drying of moistures.
Then treat it with liniments wrapped in butter, or with triturated onions, until the place emits pus, and those purified fleshy growths emerge in the pus.
Then treat the wound with consolidating salves, generating hard flesh: and there are medicines in which there are astringents and drying.
For when you restore, then already it will be healed; and not in vain repetition.
If, however, the fistula has already reached deep into the anus and is prolonged by the excess of the body: then insert your finger into the anus and examine it with that.
If you feel a tension, and between you and it there is a thin layer of sifac or flesh, and it is close to penetrating: then it is not an operation on that, unless according to the way of trust and hope.
That is, because one of the three methods is administered in it: either you cauterize it, as we said: or you dissect it, until you arrive at its concavity, so that it is possible for you to introduce a license and a cure from what is nearest. And you do not proceed much with the cutting, so that you do not injure the surrounding tissue of the anus, and there is no harm to the weak exit of the evacuation without control. Then treat it with what we have said.
Perhaps it will be healed: or you will prolong it with a thin layer, and cleanse it after you have cut it up to the anus, as we said, or with a tent or with another instrument of the acute extremity. Then cleanse those filtered flesh wounds which are in the cutting, until where you are able to do so with careful examination.
Then try to restore the whole wound with the cutting, and the upper orifice where it is consolidated: and a open fistula will remain in the inner part of the anus, and it will be lighter on the weak.
And sometimes the fistula follows this method: and it is when you insert a tent into the fistula: and it is on the side of the anus near the surface of the body with the skin and edge of the anus: then receive the perforated extremity of the tent, which is like a needle, that is, preparing the leather, according to this form. And insert into it a twisted thread made from five threads, and wrap around it. Then insert the probe with the thread into the fistula, until it reaches its concavity.
If it is penetrating to the margin of the anus internally near, then extract the thread from that orifice: just as you insert your finger into the anus and extract the end of the thread, and join the two ends together: and tie them both, and leave it for one day or two days: and the more the thread penetrates into the flesh, tighten it well, until those fleshes which are between the two ends of the thread meet and fall away: then cure the wound, until it consolidates and heals.
But if the orifice of the fistula does not penetrate: then make it penetrate by whatever means are prepared for you, unless it is deeply situated. For it is not fitting for you to do that on account of the ligature, lest you injure it.
Then do with it as we have said, until it heals.
You should make a spoon-shaped instrument for the spiny fistula, whose curvature is acute and very sharp, and the other part is not acute, so that it does not injure what is not necessary, as you see.
Chapter 81.
Concerning the suturing of hemorrhoids, from which blood flows out from the incision of these: and the treatment of fissures.
There are hemorrhoids in two modes. Or they are inside the anus, like small bladders of carbon, or pomegranates: or as if they were grains of a grape. And among them there are small ones and large ones: and blood flows out from them always, and it is one, and they are many. And they are outside the anus, and on its extremities.
However, those that are outside the anus are, for the most part, of scanty humidity, from which a watery discharge flows, or a little blood in a steady flow: and they are according to the color of the body.
And the treatment of that which is within the anus is to press on the weakened area so that it may be felt: and it should be pressed until it comes out of the anus, and the stringy fibers of the thigh appear. Therefore, you should hang it with hooks: or hold them with your fingernail. Then cut them off at their roots.
If however they are not retained by the hooks, due to their moisture and softness: then seize them with rough cloth, or with a double-layered linen bandage, and extract them with your fingers. Then cut them off, and sprinkle some hot powders over them after the incision, so that they may take the place of a cautery. Or cauterize them according to what was previously mentioned in the chapter on cauterization. Then treat them with the remaining treatment, until they are healed.
If the anus does not obey the evacuation, then inject a weak enema into the rectum, where there is a small bite, so that it may be washed out with what is in the anus, and it may quickly obey the evacuation, when the weakened area expresses itself.
If however the stringy fibers are external to the anus, then their removal is easy, effortless: and it is as if you grasp them with your fingernail, or grasp them with a hook, and cut them off. Then treat them with what we have said, until they are healed.
And for those who shy away from the incision with iron, then it is necessary to administer their suture according to this method. Take a twisted thread, and insert it into the point. Then draw out the stringy fibers upwards, and make it penetrate with the needle at its root on the other side: and twist the two ends of the thread at the lower part of the needle, and let them be transverse: and constrict the stringy fibers with a strong binding. Then tie a knot in the thread, and extract the needle.
Make an incision with all the athletic (muscular) strength, and let out one of them: nor press it yourself, so that it flows out with a surplus of blood.
Then put on the wound a piece of cloth soaked in rose oil or cerate, and place it on the wound: and apply pressure to the weak area, so that it quiets. Then let it fall off by itself, until it drops away.
When therefore the athletic (muscular) strength falls away, treat them with ointments and the remaining treatment, until they are healed.
On the treatment of fissures. For they often occur due to dryness of the feces and constriction of nature.
When therefore they become old and medicine is of no avail in them: then it is necessary to scrape them with the point of a spatula or with your finger, until they become moist, and the outer cortex which prevents their consolidation is removed. Then treat them, until they consolidate according to what is fitting.
If they do not consolidate: then treat them again with a more vigorous scraping than before, until they bleed much and are cleansed; then treat them until they are healed.
On the treatment of inverted hernias and not of inverted ones: and of muscular ruptures and of wounds caused by friction.
Chapter 82.
You know that a hernia is nothing but a rounded knot according to the color of the body, similar to the head of a nail: and it occurs throughout the entire body, especially in the lower parts of the feet and toes: and it causes pain when walking.
It is necessary therefore to cut what is around the nail, and to hold it with forceps or with a hook, and to eradicate it from its root.
Then treat that: and if you want to cauterize that according to what was mentioned previously in its chapter.
One of them is a small, rough, flaky, rounded elevation on the surface of the body. And they often occur on the hands of children.
And its treatment is to stretch out the elevation, and to cut into it, or to tie it with a silk thread, or with a hair, until it falls off. And if you wish, cauterize it according to what has been previously mentioned with fire, or with a sharp medicine, and now the inverted elevations are eradicated, and not the inverted ones with the instrument that I will describe.
A small flaky elevation is also a rough, superficial growth on the body, eating deeply into the skin; and when it finds cold, it feels like the sting of an ant, and it causes pain throughout the whole body; and mostly it occurs on the hands.
And its treatment is to take a small tube made from the feather of a goose or a strong vulture's feather, and place that tube over the ant-like growth, until it encircles with the parts of the tube. Then revolve your hand with the tube, until you squeeze out what is around the ant-like growth; and put it deep into the flesh, and eradicate the ant-like growth from its root.
And if you wish, make that with a tube of copper or iron, according to this method.
Let the upper part of the tube be applied to the limit of the swelling, drawing out what is beneath, so that it may be alleviated above the finger and its own rotation.
And if you wish, cauterize the ant-like growth according to what has been previously mentioned in the chapter on cauterization of Elevation.
Chapter 83.
Concerning the forms of instruments which are administered for enemas in ailments of the anus, and solutions of the belly, and colic.
Sometimes the enema instrument is made of silver, or of gold alloy, or of fused copper, or of hammered metal.
And when it is made small from these instruments, and large, according to those in which they are administered.
Therefore, that which is administered in the treatment of small children, let it be small: and for those whose veins are weak or painful, thus also their enemas.
A large enema.
The tube of it, that is, the upper part where the ligature is tied, should be large according to this method: and let there be a distinction so that the ligature is tied as you see, and the lower end which is inserted into the anus, should be blunt, that is, not open, gentle, indeed, drawing towards subtlety: and on one side of it there should be two openings, and on the other side an opening.
And let the width of the openings be according to the thickness of the radices, and let it be thicker for a small one, and let there be an intestine in which medicines are placed from the bladder of an animal: or from the paper of an owl, which should be according to the form of a small asafoetida: whose root is one palm.
And let it be pierced with many openings as it revolves, and let there be a space that is between all the openings the thickness of a finger. Then insert into those openings a strong thread made from raw thread, which should be of ten threads, or around that, and tie it with the intestine like an asafoetida. When therefore the intestine is placed in it, let it be tied at the head of the enema between two distinct constrictions with a strong binding. Then inject the enema with it.
And this is the form of a circle as depicted here, and of the openings.
The quality of injecting with it, however, is: that you should fill the intestine, or bladder, with a medicine which is warmed according to the quantity of the tolerance of the sick person: and take care that it not be too hot, nor too cold.
Then the weak patient is placed on his back, and his thighs are elevated to a higher position: and a soft cloth, that is, a cushion, is put underneath him, on which the men who are performing the operation sit.
Then anoint the extremities with a cluster of olives, or with album gypsum, or with foeniculi of galbanum, or similar. Then introduce it into the anus with ease. Then the assistant should take the uterus with both his hands at once, and press it out with great force, until everything that is in the Cluster (enema) goes into the intestine.
Then withdraw the cluster, and elevate the patient's thighs to the wall.
What if the medicine thinks it is going to an exit, then he should hold on as much as he can. And if he sleeps with it the whole night, it is more useful in the treatment.
If, however, you cluster him in the solutions of the belly's agitations, and hasten his evacuation: then repeat the clustering until he is healed.
What if there are hemorrhoids in the anus, or painful apostemes, then let the clustering be gentle, mild, from the clusterings with which children are clustered.
And this should be the form of gentle clustering upon a constricted skin.
Head 83.
Now I have spoken in the division on the treatment of wounds that it was fitting for the book, and I will say here their treatment with manual handling, and with medicines according to their completion.
I say therefore that wounds are diversified according to the thing by which they are made, and according to the place upon which the wound falls.
There are therefore many ways in which wounds are made, such as a blow of a stone, or a cut of a sword, or a stab of a dagger, or a strike with a lance, or a wood, or an arrow: and similar things from many other causes.
Wounds that are inflicted according to the location of the body are, such as a wound that falls on the head, or neck, or chest, or belly, or liver: and similar ones from these members.
And I am describing the treatments of certain wounds, so that I may establish a reasoning and rule about the remaining wounds.
And I begin with simple head wounds, because the recollection of the composite wounds will come at the beginning of the third chapter.
I say therefore. When a simple wound occurs on the head, and there is no fracture of the bone: consider then if it is from a blow of a stone or similar things, and has only bruised the skin: and it is a great wound, and there is a tendency to inflame the weak aposteme with hot swelling: then hasten, and perform phlebotomy on the head immediately: and do not delay: and extract from him as much blood as his strength allows, according to the quantity of his virtue: if nothing prohibits phlebotomy, especially if the blood that flows out of the wound is scant. And let the phlebotomy be from the opposite part of the wounded area.
And let the phlebotomy be from the opposite part of the wounded area. And let the weak person beware of repletion, and wine, and coarse foods.
If something prohibits moderation, then let it be diminished from food, and not approach flesh, nor wine.
And apply to the wound if it happens to have a hot aposteme, a cloth soaked in rose oil alone, or with wine in which there is stipation.
If you have been free from the hot aposteme, then apply to the wound, if it is fresh with its own blood, and has not changed the air, a powder which I will describe shortly: and if it has already changed the air, then apply to it certain ointments, until it is healed.
If the wound is large, or it is from an incised wound, and similar: and its lips do not adhere through granulations, then they are joined together with a suture, according to what I will describe about the sutures of wounds in the belly.
If the wound is already opened up to the bone, and it is hanging, and there is no retention of it, except in a small suspension: then incise it. Then treat the wound with medications, and restore to it hard flesh in place of skin, and prescribe to the weak person, that they take nourishing foods in which there is richness, such as are heads, and cooked wheat, until it be like a pulse: and similar things.
If you find putrefaction in the skin, and it does not adhere to the bone: then incise the entire putrefied area, and cast it away: then treat what remains.
If however in these wounds there is an artery, or a vein from which blood flows: and it does not stop by means of medications, then make a ligature above the artery. If therefore you find it is not cut, then dry it with a cautery, or tie it off. If necessity demands when what we have said does not help, then cauterize it, until the blood is staunched.
If however the wounds are small, simple, then their treatment is easy, light: so that you dust them with this powder: because it consolidates them before they suppurate.
The method of applying the incarnative powder. Take one part of olibanum, and two parts of dragon's blood, and three parts of unextinguished lime: grind everything into a fine powder, and sift it: and fill the wound with it, and constrict it with a good bandage, until it adheres well to the wound, and coagulates with the blood.
Then tie it above with a compress and leave it, and do not loosen it as long as it remains, so that it does not become inflamed. For it is not eradicated by medicine, until it is healed.
And when it makes a hard crust alone, when you do not have olive oil present, and dragon's blood also performs the same operation in many large wounds, when it is suitable to apply it to them and bind them, and they are fresh wounds with their own blood, which has not changed in the air.
For if the air has already changed them through some alteration, especially when it is in the summer season, then there is no purpose in applying this powder: therefore take care of it with what we have said, so that you apply to them certain digestive ointments: or apply to them poultices made from barley flour, prepared with water and honey, until they discharge pus. Then take care of the remaining treatment, until they are healed.
If it happens to be a fracture of the bone with a wound, and it is small, then extract it with gestures; and I will now describe the treatment of head fractures in what follows.
On wounds of the neck.
If a wound occurs on the neck, then there is no difference between it and head wounds when they are simple.
If the nerve of the neck is injured, or an artery: then if it is a nerve, there is no ingenuity in it, unless one tries to heal it with what causes strong stitching, such as zinc, and zeig, and similar things. Because they harm the nerves and constrict them.
And do not apply anything cold to the wound at all: because the substance of the nerves is cold, and its continuation is with the brain, which is the most sublime of the membranes: and it is thus that it should be treated with gentle medicines, such as lota calcium dissolved in sweet water many times infused with oil, or with rose oil, and tuthia, when washing also with sweet water: and other mineral stones, according to this method, and humid ointments.
If the wound is large, then apply a suture: or bind the lips of it with small pillows. Then take care of it, until it heals.
If the wound is deep, or if a sinus has formed in its lower part, where pus has already gathered, then pierce it in a more depressed place.
If an artery has been cut in the wound and its blood flow has followed: then separate or ligate it, and bind it: or cauterize it, if necessity demands it.
If the vertebrae of the neck or all of them are broken, and the wound is safe: then gather the lips of the skin with a suture above the cane of the neck, and do not touch the neck, but equalize it, and reduce it to its natural shape. Then bind it with a suitable bandage, and leave it for several days. Then take care of it with ointments in which there is strengthening and drying, until it heals.
If the wound has already made an impression on the bone, then investigate it: then if there are fragments of bone in it, extract all of them, or as many as you can: and what cannot be prepared, leave that until the wound putrefies, and separates and alleviates its discharge.
If the wound is fresh, then powder over it with the powder that I described. If a hole is seen in the bone of the wound, and it becomes a fistula: then take care of it with that which was mentioned in its chapter.
On wounds on the shoulder blade.
If it is a wound from a lance or a knife: and you see its depth, then consider it. If therefore bad air comes out of the wound, when the weak person exhales from it, then know that the wound is mortal.
What if there is no depth to it and it is fresh with its own blood? Then you should not apply powder to it at the first hour, nor bind it tightly, so that the blood is not retained in its depth and returns to the heart, and kills the weak person. But put an attracting ointment on it, and loosen it during the day twice.
If you do not have an ointment at hand, then put a clean cloth on the opening of the wound, so that it absorbs what flows out from the humidity. And let the weak person sleep on the wound, so that what accumulates in it runs clear.
If already three days or more have passed since the wound, and no spasm has occurred to the weak person, nor evil tremor of the heart, nor constriction in breathing, and you see the other good dispositions of it: then know that the wound is healthy. Therefore treat it with liniments and the rest of the treatment, until it is healed.
If indeed the healing of it is hindered, and it always opens up, then know that a fistula has been made. Therefore treat it from its head.
And if the wound is from a thrusting injury or a knife, and it is simple on the surface of the chest or back: then treat it with what was mentioned before about suturing, if it is large: or with powder, if it is small.
If however it has made an impression on the bone, and a fragment has broken off from it: then probe the wound, and prepare to extract that fragment, if they are separate. If however they are not separate, then leave them alone, until the wound putrefies, for their extraction is of no benefit.
The judgment of the other accidental wounds in the remaining limbs in treatment is the same as what we have said.
Concerning wounds of the abdomen and the exit of the intestines, and their treatment.
The disruptions that occur in the belly are great, moderate, and small.
From the great ones, it happens when the intestine protrudes or a number of intestines.
Therefore their insertion is more violent and difficult, and their suture.
And a small disruption also becomes difficult in another way. It follows, therefore, that their reduction is more difficult, if you do not promptly return them to their place during the introduction itself: because they become swollen, open up, and enlarge; hence their entry becomes difficult.
On account of this, therefore, a moderate disruption is better: because when there is no difficult reduction of the intestine, as it is dissimilar in these two species.
You know that the suture of the belly is according to four modes.
Two common sutures are suitable for the suture of the belly and for the suture of other wounds of the body; and two other sutures specifically communicate with remaining wounds. However, they are more proper for the suture of the belly; and I will tell you each one with explanation and declaration.
I say therefore, because when the wound is small and something protrudes from it out of the intestine, and it becomes difficult to reduce it; then that is on account of one of two modes. Or because of the smallness of the disruption, as we have said; or because there is inflammation in the intestine on account of the coldness of the air.
When therefore it is so, then it is necessary to warm it up, by applying a sponge or a moist cloth soaked in lukewarm water alone. Or you boil it in water with cyperus grass, and spikenard, and embrocations, until the inflammation of the intestine is resolved.
When you make a wine in which there is astringency; and it is better than water alone in resolving the inflammation.
When you see the swelling has already resolved, then moisten the intestine with water in which the altaea or mallow has been decocted. For through that alleyway of his, an entrance is made with a small bandage.
If, however, the return of it is excavated after this cure, then find a small opening in the disruption, with an instrument with which hemorrhoids are cut.
And the first cure is better when it is prepared, than cutting: and there is no need for forced cutting after necessity and failure of the instrument.
One part of it is twisted, acute, and the other part is not acute, and the extremity should not be with the subtlety of a Spatumilis, but rather more obtuse for a short time: and that is what resembles a reed, as you see.
When therefore the wound is enlarged and the intestine is ingressed, then it is necessary that its reduction be according to its natural form in its own proper place, if possible, because it is better.
When the disruption is wide in the lower part of the belly: then it is necessary to make the weak patient lie on his back, and place his legs higher than his head. And if it is in the upper part of the belly, then place his head, and his chest higher than his lower parts.
And similarly if there is a disruption in one of the two parts of the belly, then place your attention and your consideration always in this, that the part where the wound is may be higher than the other part.
And so it is necessary to administer it thus in great wounds and in medium-sized wounds.
In small wounds, however, place it according to what is prepared for you.
Then make sure that the pious minister is present among your hands, who holds the entire disruption with his hand: and brings together its lips. Then he should touch those who follow after the suture with something after something: and this is the common method of a single suture.
And it is, that you should receive a needle, or a number of needles secondly according to the quantity of the width of the wound. Then let fall from the extremity of the disruption the quantity of the ring finger, that is, of the doctor: and fix a needle beyond what you introduce into it a thread in two extremities of the skin, with two extremities of the suture which is beneath the skin from the inside, until you make it penetrate from another part, and now you have added two extremities of the skin, and two extremities of the suture: and they become four orders.
Then bind with a double thread around the instrument several times from two parts together, until they are added, the two lips of the wound, an aggregate gathering decently.
Then let fall the thickness of the finger also, and fix in them another needle: afterwards tie it with a thread, as you did with the first instrument. Do not cease to do that with what you are skilled from instruments, until you complete the constriction of the entire wound.
And let the instruments be medium between thickness and subtlety: because subtle instruments indeed quickly fall into the flesh: and thick ones are difficult to introduce into the skin: on account of that it is necessary that they be medium in subtlety and thickness.
And it is not necessary that the instrument be fixed in two extremities of the skin close together much: so that the flesh does not quickly fall into a wound, and the wound does not open before its consolidation, and they are not elongated also with the suture, so that the wound is not prevented from consolidation.
Then cut the extremity of the instrument, so that they do not harm the weak part during their sleep: and put pillows from cloths on every side, which hold the extremities of the instrument: and let them be, until you know that the wound is already consolidated.
And this type of suture with acupuncture is more convenient in small wounds. Because a single thread, or two, or about that many are sufficient for their suture.
The second common suture is, as it were, to combine four extremities: two skin extremities and two superficial ones in one vein, with a thread that has an equal winding in subtlety and thickness.
Then when you penetrate with the thread to these four extremities, reduce the thread from the part where you inserted it, so that the returned thread falls on the upper part of the wound: so that it is a suture, just as a suture of cloth which strings together cloths, and put in all the sutures the amount of thickness of the little finger.
Men know this suture.
And with this suture I myself sewed up a wound that had occurred to a man in his belly, who had been wounded with a knife, and there was a major disruption of the wound the size of one palm: and about two palms of intestine had come out of the middle of the intestines, and there was a disruption in the middle of the belly.
I restored it afterwards, after his intestine had stood outside the wound for 23 hours.
The wound was therefore consolidated in a period of about 15 days: and I treated it, and he was healed: and he lived many years after that, enjoying his own dispositions.
And the physicians had judged that it could not be healed.
And it was a miracle, because I did not treat it with an ointment. Because I was in a place where no ointment could be found, nor anything from medicines. I applied therefore an old cotton cloth over the wound twice a day, and I continually cleansed it with honey water, until it was healed.
I will describe two special types of suture according to the narrative of my speech.
And it is, as you begin with an acute suture, and you insert a needle from the outer to the inner part.
When the needle penetrates into the skin, and into the flesh along the length and width of the entire body: leave the extremity of the suture on the side where you inserted the needle, and make it penetrate from the inner part to the outer part in another extremity, mirroring.
When you have made it penetrate, then make it penetrate according to this in the same extremity, mirroring from the outer part to the inner part: and leave the extremity of the suture, which is on that side, and make the needle penetrate into another extremity from the inner part to the outer part: and make it penetrate with your penetration, as you make it penetrate in the extremity mirroring, which is on that part, until it penetrates into the entire thing.
Then begin also from the same side, and sew it with the extremity that is on the other side of the suture, which is in another side, and extract the needle from the skin where it penetrated.
Then bring it back into the skin, and sew the extremity of the suture that is on another side, with this mirroring extremity: and extract it from the skin which is on that part, and make it one thing, and another: and make it one thing after the seam, until you have restored the entire surface according to that example.
And the sum of this suture is that you sew the skin like those who sew pelles: so that you make one thing from one part of an extremity of the skin: and that you leave it as another thing on another side, until you complete.
The second type of proper suture, which Galen mentioned.
This his sermon is narrated, that you sew it according to similarity, as some physicians sew them, so that they gather all the parts together to compare their natural convenience: and apply the extremity of the suture to its other extremity, and the mirroring extremity to its other extremity. And that is secondary because I will narrate it to you.
It is necessary to place the scalpel's point near the extremity of the Mirach propinquum to you from the outer side, and make it penetrate to the inner part alone; and let two extremities of the skin be relaxed. Then turn the scalpel around, and make it penetrate from the outer side to the inner part in the two extremities of the skin, namely on both sides.
Then turn them both around, and also make them penetrate both from the inner to the outer, in the two extremities of the Mirach, which are on the opposite side.
And this method of suture is better than the common easy suture, and it is a suture which precedes reminiscence.
This is therefore the discourse of Galen also.
And some have said. The suture of the belly is straightened with two hooks. That is, to introduce into them both a single thread: and begin with the introduction of the hook, from that which is at your hand, and make it penetrate up to the other side, according to the suture of those who sew leather evenly.
And know that when there is a disruption in the middle of the belly, then its suture is more difficult than those of other places of the belly.
The judgment of the medicine for wounds is the judgment of the rest of the wounds.
That is, because when you treat a fresh wound with its own blood, before it changes to air: and you reduce the intestine, and sew it up, and adapt it: then put it on a fleshy powder.
If the air has already changed the wound: then put on it certain ointments which are present to you, until they make pus: and the threads fall away, and the skin is consoled, and the Mirach. Then treat it as it is the treatment of other wounds, until it heals.
But if you do not have medicines present, then put on it immediately, from which it starts to discharge pus, an old poultice: and change it twice a day, as I instructed you, until it heals.
For you do not need other medications in various preparations, when wounds are simple.
But if the wound is situated on principal members in a lesion, then it is necessary to immerse a soft woolen cloth in tempered warm oil, or in rose oil: and put it around the area between the thighs, and under the armpits.
If you feel pain, or stitches, or putrefaction in your intestines (for it often happens thus) then give a clyster with wine, sharp, warm and black: especially if the putrefaction has already penetrated into the intestine, and a penetrating evacuation has been made up to its concavity.
And know that what is from the thick intestine is of easier healing: and what is from the subtle ones is of more difficult healing.
The intestine which is called the Jejunum does not receive healing from a wound that occurs in it at all: and this is because of its multitude, which is from its veins, and their greatness, and because of the subtlety of its body, and because of the proximity of its natural nerves.
If however what proceeds from the wound is serous matter, and you collect it freshly: reduce it according to your reduction, by which you reduce the intestines equally.
If indeed the space has passed for it, and it has already become green or black: then it is necessary to bind it with a thread above the place that has been denigrated by it, so that there does not occur a flow of blood. For in serous matter there are veins and arteries.
Then cut what is beyond that ligament, and place two hanging threads from the lower part of the wound outside it: so that the attraction to it may be alleviated, and the extraction of the pus from the wound may occur, and the emission of the pus from the wound.
The remembering of a wound that occurs in the intestine.
When there occurs a disruption in the intestine and it is small, then it is possible that it can be restored in certain men; therefore, because I have seen one who was wounded in his belly with a blow of a lance, and it was a wound on the right side of the stomach, and an old wound: and it became a fistula, and there came out from it a discharge, and flatulence.
I applied a treatment, until I was not confident in his healing: nor did I cease to carefully tend to it, until he was healed and the location was consolidated.
After I saw the location already consolidated, I feared for the weak person, lest a bad accident should occur in his belly: and it did not happen to him from that bad accident. And he remained in his better physical condition, eating and drinking, and evacuating, and he took a bath, and was exercised in his diets.
And now some experimenters have said that when a wound occurs in the intestine and it is small, then it is necessary to bind it together according to this method. And it is, as if you receive forms of great heads. Then bring together the two lips of the wound, and place a formica (ant) one of those which have their mouth open upon the two lips of the wound. When it therefore takes hold on them, and closes its mouth, cut off its head, for it adheres and does not come loose.
Then place another ant near the first, and do not cease to do that with an ant following an ant according to the quantity of the entire wound.
Then reduce it, and sew up the wound. For those things that remain attached to the intestines, as long as the intestine is being healed and not receiving a continuous flow of noxious material.
And now it is possible to tie off the intestine also with a subtle thread: which is taken from the intestine of an animal, and attached to it after it has been inserted into a narrow point.
And it is that you should take the end of this thread from the intestine and remove much flesh. Then tie the linen thread, subtly wrapped around the end. Then insert that thread into a narrow point, and sew the intestine to it. Then reduce it into a fissure.
And this method of suture with twigs and intestine is not reliable except through the way of faith and hope.
You know that a wound which is large and wide, especially if it is in one of the slender intestines, is not curable except by subtlety, nor is its healing complete.
On the treatment of wounds and fistulas.
You know that every wound or abscess, when it becomes old and chronic, and becomes an ulcer, and does not close up, and always discharges pus, and is not separated: then it is universally called a fistula in whatever member it may be, and we call it Zuchemen.
And indeed a fistula is a hardened, white, filtering node, with no pain, which has a concavity like the wing of a bird: and because of that some people call it Risati, that is, a wing.
And it is in certain hours humid, which discharges pus. And perhaps the humidity is separated at certain hours. And sometimes this humidity is abundant, and sometimes it is scarce: and it is thick, and it is subtle.
And I have previously mentioned in the division, then when I spoke of wounds, that every wound which is not treated, nor does flesh grow in it, is not that except on account of a single new cause.
There are some which are, either because of the scarcity of blood in the body; or because of its malice; or because within it and above its lips is hard, dense flesh, preventing the growth of new flesh; or because there is much filth and foulness; or because the wound itself is putrid, and the matter that is applied to it is of bad quality; or because the medicine is unsuitable for its cure; or because a corrupting cadence falls upon the region, or through the property of the region, as happens in Caesaraugusta; in which there occurs difficult digestion of diseases, and the healing of apostemes is delayed by nature; or because there is one bone, or a number of bones.
And I have already shown all these causes and signs of them, and their cures with medicines in the division; and it is necessary here that I make you know the cure of Fistulas and Ulcers, which is done through an operation with the hand.
Know therefore, that a Fistula occurs in all parts of the body. For there are Fistulas that extend to large veins and arteries, or nerves, or skin; or to the intestine, or to the bladder, or to some of the ribs; or to some of the vertebrae of the back, or to some of the compound joints of the limbs: such as the hands and feet; and there are those that wander near the principal member and its similars.
Those therefore among these Fistulas that are of this kind, are from diseases of difficult healing, and do not receive a cure, and the occupation with them is labor and ignorance.
But if it is from Fistulas of a certain profundity that does not extend to those places which I mentioned; and you hope and trust in its cure, and wish to penetrate to the knowledge of it, then take a probe made of copper or iron, if the Fistula tends according to straightness, and explore it with the same.
If there is a twisting in the fistula, then probe it with a thread of lead that has been subtly divided. Because the lead, with its own slight softness, adapts to the body and curves around the twisting.
What if the fistula has many openings, it is not possible for you to mark it out with a thread. Therefore, probe through one of its openings, from its own openings.
For the moisture where you probe it, leads towards other openings, and flows out through them.
Then, you should carefully inquire according to which method is possible for you: so that you may know what is there, whether it is a bone, or a nerve, and the fistula is concave and far off, or near; or if it is a fistula with many openings, and stands throughout all of it, with the greatest strength of yours; with your questioning, in which you question the weak, and in the discovery of pain upon compression with your hand over the place, and similar signs and accidental causes are apparent.
When you stand therefore over all those true stations, then proceed to curation according to confidence: and it is, that you may consider then, if the fistula appears near, or in a healthy place far from a junction, or from a nerve, or artery, or vein, or one of the places which I have told you about: then cut the fistula according to what has been previously mentioned in my narrative, and remove what is in it through filtration, and corrupt flesh, which is born in its opening from the flesh, or thelul, and similar things: and heal it, until it becomes healthy.
If the fistula is of great depth and is according to straightness: then it is necessary that you cut it as deeply as possible. Then cleanse it of all its corrupted flesh.
Then administer enwrapped licinia in sharp medicines: and introduce them up to the concavity of the fistula which you comprehended with the iron: do it several times, until the sharp medicine corrodes all that remains in the concavity of the fistula from the corruption.
Then restore it with ointments that generate healthy flesh, until it is healed.
If, however, it does not heal through that, then cauterize it according to what we have narrated.
If, therefore, the cause of the fistula is bone, and it is certified by you in that respect: then investigate it, and dissect it according to what I have narrated to you: if nothing prohibits you from a vein, or nerve, or principal member, as we have said.
If, therefore, the bone is disclosed to you, and there is something of decay in it, and blackness: then scrape it, until all the corruption is removed. Then treat it with that which puts flesh on it, until it is healed.
What if it does not heal, and emits pus as it was doing: then know that you did not reach total eradication of the corruption.
Therefore, uncover again on top of it a second time, and make a precise examination of its reasoning, and cleansing of the same with your utmost strength.
Then restore it. If, therefore, it is healed, that is good: and if not, then know that the corruption is deep within the body, which you have not reached. There is no ingenuity for you in this case, unless you abandon it to nature.
What if the small bone is corrupted, and it is possible for you, extract it with subtle forceps that are suitable for that.
If, however, there are many bones, then make an exact extraction of all of them, and do not leave anything out with your strength.
If, however, something opposes you from the moistures, and there is no fear of cutting into them, or error: then cut into those moistures and flesh, if they are there, and free the bones.
If, however, you do not have the preparation to remove the bones at that time, then put on the wound what will putrefy it: and leave it, until what is around those bones putrefies from the flesh and moistures.
And take care that the wound is not consolidated. And let the incision be constricted as you have divided in your operation. Apply to the same place, if there is pain, a burnt coton soaked in sulfur mixed with oil; or a burnt coton soaked in Egyptian ointment, or some other green ointments.
For when those parts putrefy, namely the moistures, and the bones are separated from them, their removal is alleviated, and their attraction.
If there is a large bone, such as the thigh bone or hip bone, and similar ones, and what has become corrupted from it is a great part: then scrape that very bone with a final scraping, until that blackness and corruption are removed. Then restore the wound.
If what is corrupted in it is a great part, and the corruption has already reached the marrow of the bone, then it is necessary to saw it, and cut into the whole thing up to the place where the corruption reaches: then treat it, until it is consolidated.
And I relate to you a case that happened to a man on his thigh: so that you may put it as an example and aid on your operation.
There was a young man of about thirty years of age, to whom a pain occurred in his thigh, from a cause that was moved upon it within the body, that is, from the interior, until the matters reached the thigh and became an abscess with a large swelling: and there was no external cause for him.
It was extended therefore with him for a long time with the error of the doctors, until the abscess opened, and many matters flowed together with it. And his treatment was put off, until the thigh became fistulous, and many openings were made in it: which all emitted pus, and bodily moistures.
Therefore many doctors treated him for about two years, and there was no one skilled in the art of healing, until I was called, and I saw his thigh, and the matters that were flowing out from those openings in a great stream: also the whole body of the man was already weakened, and his color was citrine.
I will introduce a probe through one of the openings and it will reach the bone.
Then I carefully examined all the openings, and I found that they reached the wound from every part of the leg.
I made an incision, and I cut above one of the openings, until I reached a part of the bone: and I found it corrupted; for it was already decayed, blackened, putrid, and perforated, until it had penetrated to the marrow.
I removed what I had discovered, and prepared it from the corrupted bone.
And I put aside what was not in the bone except that corruption which I had cut away and removed. And I had now eradicated it.
Then I applied a dressing to the wound with consolidating medicines for a long period of time. And it was not consolidated.
Then I probed again, and I reached above the bone a second time, above the first discovery: and I found a continuous corruption with the bone; and I removed what appeared to me also from that corruption.
Then I attempted to restore it. And it was not restored.
I reached above it again, and I did not cease to cut into the bone in parts, and to try to restore it: and it was not restored, until I cut out about a handful from the bone, and extracted it with its marrow.
Then I restored it with medicines, and it was consolidated quickly, and healed: and this iteration was not necessary in the operation, and section of itself, except due to the disposition of debilitated infirmity, and scarcity of its tolerance, and my fear concerning its death: because there was a risk to it at all times from an excess of bad evacuation of syncopic flux.
It was therefore fully healed: and a hard, fleshy growth was born in the place of the bone, and a good arrangement was made in its body, and its strength returned: and it was established in its dispositions: and it did not cause any impediment to its walking.
If the prominent bone in the body part is already fractured, then it is necessary to treat it in this way: take a bandage and bind it around the extremity of the prominent bone; and place a pad, which extends it upwards; and put another bandage over the first one made of thicker wool. Then bind it over the flesh that is above the bone; and extend its extremity so that you draw the flesh downwards; and take care to detect the flesh in the place where you want to make an incision, so that the incision does not harm the flesh.
Put a splint or a plate under the bone below, because when you do that, it does not prevent the corrupted flesh from being cut.
And it is necessary for the incision to be above the corrupted place for a short time, so that the corruption of the bone does not spread; and it does not appear in its appearance, and it will not lead to another incision.
If the bone is corrupted and not prominent, but rather continues as a whole with its part, and the corruption is in the middle of it or in its own part, then remove the flesh from all sides completely. Then put a splint below.
After that, make an incision from the first part where the corruption is, until the incision continues from the other part; and let the incision be according to the length of the corruption for a short time, as we have said.
If the corruption is in the joint, cut through the corrupted joint, and make an incision in the bone where it continues from the other part.
If indeed the corruption is in the continuation of two joints, then there is no remedy for it except scraping away.
If the corruption is in the comb-like structure of the hand or in the comb-like structure of the foot, then the treatment for it is very difficult indeed. However, it is necessary to investigate the corruption as it appears to you. And you should anoint it and cleanse it according to whatever possible disposition is for you, and with whatever craft is rightly directed towards you, when it does not cause opposition from the Vein or Nerve.
And you should know that the incisions and saws for cutting into these bones are many, according to the position of the bones, and their preparation, and their thickness, and their subtlety, and their size, and their smallness, and their hardness, and their rarity. Wherefore it is necessary that you prepare an instrument of every species of operation convenient to that operation.
And you should know that these operations signify to you the type of instrument which you need, when there is a prolonged study with you. And knowledge of the methods of this art is a testimony to the methods of health; for then you will already have found through yourself that which is convenient to him from the instruments for every infirmity.
And I am setting forth to you at the end of this chapter a number of instruments, which you will put as examples on those which you cut into, and a test which you experience on others.
The form of another Saw.
The form of the Razor for joints. Let the head of this Razor be according to the form of a star-shaped key: and its points be according to the form of Elschotz's fleam.
And it is not suitable unless the heads of the joints are rubbed with it, when they become corrupted, or the bone is large and massive.
The shape of the larger rasp.
The shape of the broad rasp.
The shape of the rasp in which there is a concavity.
The shape of the other subtle rasp.
The shape of the rasp of the curved extremity.
The shape of the small rasp, subtle for stretching.
This is similar to a file, and the extremity is like a saw: it is shown in many places for filing bones.
The shape of the rasp that is suitable for filing what is perforated from bones.
Its extremity is triangular, and it has a sharp point.
It was made in India. And similarly it is necessary that all things which we have spoken about are made from rasps, and incisors, and saws.
Concerning the cutting of extremities and the sawing of bones.
The extremities putrefy, either from an external cause or an internal one.
When therefore you have treated that corruption with medicinal cures and it does not respond to treatment: and you see the corruption spreading in the limb, which does not allow anything to penetrate: then it is necessary to cut into that limb up to where the corruption reaches, so that the patient may be freed from death or from the evil which is a greater defect of the limb.
And the sign that it has reached this point is that the limb turns black, until it becomes putrid: as if fire had burned it, or it had rotted after turning black: until the putrefaction is cut away up to what follows in the limb, and spreads into the whole body.
Therefore it is necessary to make an incision with that, and similarly if the cause of the corruption is from the bite of certain venomous animals: such as the marine scorpion, and the viper, and the rutella, and similar ones.
If therefore there is a corruption or bruise on the extremity of the finger, then cut into the finger, and do not leave space for the corrupted part to spread to the rest of the hand.
And similarly if it happens in the hand, then cut into it from the root of the affected part, and do not leave space for the corrupted part to spread to the forearm.
And if it has invaded that, then cut into the arm at the elbow in its joint.
If however the corruption has spread, and you see it surrounding the elbow: then there is certain death for the patient. And to administer beyond that from the treatment, is a quantity of strength.
And similarly do with the foot, when corruption has invaded the toe, then cut into it at one of its nodes: and if it takes hold in the arch of the foot, then cut off the entire foot. If however it ascends to the knee, then cut into the leg at the joint of the knee.
Since if the corruption has already reached above the knee, then there is no ingenuity in that, unless abandonment and leaving the patient to death.
And the method of cutting into a limb or sawing it is to tighten a ligature below, which you wish to cut: and tighten another ligature above the location. And the assistant stretches one ligature downwards to the lower parts: and the assistant stretches another ligature upwards to the upper parts. And you separate the flesh that is between the two ligatures, with a spatula laid flat, until the entire flesh is exposed. Then it should be cut, or sawn.
And it is necessary to put a linen cloth around all parts, and the saw should not touch the healthy place: and the patient may suffer additional harm, and a hot aposteme.
If however a flow of blood occurs internally while operating, then cauterize the place quickly: or apply some powders that absorb the blood to it. Then return to your medication, until it is complete.
Then bind the wounded member with a suitable bandage, and care for it, until it heals.
And I will tell you what happened to a certain man with his foot, this very thing that I am telling you.
What happened was that his foot became blackened, with a kind of burning that resembled fire: and the corruption first occurred on his toe, until it took over the entire foot.
Therefore, the man was freed from himself, after he saw that the corruption was spreading to his limb with its ugliness, which he found from the pain and burning: and it ceased at the joint, and he was healed.
And after a long time had passed for him, that same corruption happened to him again on the index finger of his hand.
He came to me, and I tried to remove that excess with what I had placed on his hand from my medicines after purifying his body: but the excess did not recede, and began to spread to another finger: until the corruption began on his hand.
He called upon me to cut off his hand: and I was unwilling to do that, hoping for a retraction of that excess from me: and I also feared death itself at the cutting of his hand. Because the man's strength was superior in the case.
After he despaired of me, he returned to his own land: and he came back to me about it, because he was freed, and his whole hand was cut off: and he was healed.
And I did not add this narrative, unless it should be an aid concerning that which falls out from this kind of illness: and so that it might be a signification by which it is signified, and according to what is done.
Of the treatment of wounds, and the quality of cleansing with medicines.
When an abscess forms in certain fleshy members and the space of the abscess is prolonged, until it collects pus: then it bursts or perforates, and what was in it exits, leaving a vacant space as if it were a vessel; and the skin that is above it is like a thin membrane that has been stretched out; and it does not reach its ultimate corruption, neither in the mouth nor in the nerve, nor in the ligament: it deserves to be called a Sinus; and it is not called a Fistula. However, if its space is prolonged until it impresses corruption on one of these members, then it is called a Fistula or zuken.
And its treatment is to cut away the entire skin as it revolves; and especially when it has been stretched out and made like a thin membrane; and you should be confident that it will not adhere to the place, on account of its own corruption.
But if you think that the skin will adhere and the ultimate corruption does not follow from it as a consequence; and if there is thickness in the skin from the flesh, then treat it with suppositories; and it is, as if you were treating a Sinus.
Then if it is large and the pus that is emitted from it has a foul odor; then inject it with an Egyptian medicine, which is made of acetum (vinegar), oil, and zuinar (a type of resin), taking equal parts, mixed together in a vase; and they are decocted over fire until the medicine becomes red-hot; and it penetrates into the thickness of the honey.
Then take from it what is necessary for you; and dissolve it with water and honey, and inject it into the Sinus; and close its opening, and leave the medicine in it for a period of two hours.
Then extract it with pressure: do this for several days, until the Sinus is cleansed and the foul odor is removed.
And when you inject with water of ashes, when this medicine is not present to you: and it is, that you should take the ash of vine wood or the ash of holm oak wood; and you pour it over the water. Then strain it, and inject with it, until you are confident that the sinus is already cleansed.
What if the patient is not tolerating the Egyptian medicine, nor the water of ashes, then inject it with water and honey, to which something has already been mixed from crushed zuinar. Or inject it with honey and mixed wine, because of the property of honey that cleanses and washes; and the wine makes the sinus adhere, especially when there is an excess of dryness and roughness in the wine.
When you do that several times, and are confident that the corruption of the sinus is already removed: then inject it with what causes flesh to grow in it.
And it is, that you take from the emplaster dyafinicon; and dissolve it with rose oil and wine of astringency; or inject it with certain medicines and other ointments, whose properties I wrote about in the treatise on ointments.
What if the orifice of the sinus is narrow, in which the cannula of the injection does not fit: then enlarge it with an iron instrument for a short time; or put in that same licinium wrapped in Egyptian ointment, or in basilicon ointment, until it is enlarged.
And similarly if the orifice is also wide, then bring together its lips with a suture: and allow from it a quantity in which it can be injected without addition.
And similarly if the orifice from which pus flows is elevated to the upper parts: then dry it in the depressed place that is in it, so that the pus flows out of it downwards: because when pus is confined in the depth of the sinus, it prevents flesh from being generated in it.
What if it is not possible for you to dissect the sinus around the lower part of it according to your judgment: then try, so that you prepare the member with a preparation by which pus flows out easily, as it is prepared for you. Try, so that nothing of the pus remains in it at all: and take consolidating medications which are applied to the wound, suitable for what you want. And spread them out over a linen cloth. And let the cloth be of such quantity that it makes contact with the entire sinus. Then cut with forceps directly into the opening of the sinus's foramen, a little more widely than the opening of the sinus itself. Then spread out a gentle ointment on another cloth, according to the size of the foramen: and place it over it in a position far from the opening of the sinus, so that the flow of pus is eased out of it: and do not remove the large cloth unless after several days, or about one.
That one, however, which is over the opening of the sinus, is the one that you remove at every hour, so that what has accumulated in it from pus may come out: and so you may know, whether what flows out of it is a great deal, or a little: or digested, or undigested.
And when you do this repeatedly, consider the place of the sinus itself, whether the master of it feels pain in it, or if there is no pain in it, and whether there is an abscess in it, or if there is not an abscess in it.
When therefore your medication is extended in this way, and you see the material that flows out over the opening of the sinus, then you know that the sinus is already adhering, or approximating to adhesion: then therefore dissolve it in the morning, or on the third day: and when you dissolve the wound, then change the cloth to another, and renew the ointment.
If, however, a subtle and thin pus flows out of the sinus after a long time, then do not despair of its adhesion, for its healing is approaching, because there are people who slow down the generation of flesh in their wounds, and among them are those who act contrary to that.
If, however, a foul pus emerges from the wound after many days, then you will know that the sinus does not adhere.
If, therefore, the adhesion of the sinus is delayed and its process is prolonged, then add in the desiccation of medicines, which make physicians truly effective, so that they may be medicines in their humid substance and in their dry virtue: such as the dyafinicon ointment, when an excessive addition from zegi is added to it.
And from the most ultimate goal of treatment, it is to receive the dyafinicon ointment and dissolve it with rose oil, and then apply it to the old wine equal in substance.
Then mix it with that, and use it thusly.
And now make something similar to this action, when you do not have the dyafinicon ointment at hand, but rather, when you prepare it, until it thickens, and use it thus. Or take myrrh, and aloe, and galbanum: grind all of it, and powder it over the honey while it is over the flame. Then spread it over the linen cloth, and bind it over the sinus: and mix with honey which you have prepared, until it thickens: and powder over it the spices, and put it on the linen cloth, and bind it.
And when it is administered with aristolochia longa, and the roots of heavenly lily, and it is a lily: and flour of herb, and centaury. Use them as simples, or aggregates, grind them, and strain them: and powder over the honey which I have narrated, and use it thus.
What if the process of the sinus is prolonged, and it does not heal with this treatment: then you will know that there is corruption deep within it: or now it makes an impression on the bones, or in the remaining hard members, or in the ligaments: then treat it with a fistula treatment, according to what has been previously mentioned.
About the treatment of wounds on the fingers and toenails, and the cutting into of a digit.
A panaritium is an abscess that grows under the toenail of the hand or foot, and perhaps it grows on the other fingers.
When therefore its matter is prolonged and neglected in its treatment, and it becomes an abscess with a hot apostema; or it becomes corrupted and discharges pus, until it corrodes the root of the nail: and perhaps it corrupts the whole finger, and perhaps the corruption reaches the bone, until there is a foul smell: and the extremity of the finger becomes thick, and its color becomes dark.
When therefore you treat it, with what we said earlier in the division, and your treatment is not effective; then it is necessary to cut away with an iron all the excess flesh that remains from the nail. Then cauterize the wound afterwards. For cauterization is a very helpful remedy indeed.
If indeed the bone is healthy, and the nail is also healthy, and the empty spaces of the nail are pressing on the flesh inside, and they start to sting it, and hurt it: then it is necessary to put a subtle file under the angle of the nail that stings the flesh, and push it upwards; and cut away the flesh with ease, and apply what remains of the flesh from burning medicines, corroding, until everything is removed. Then treat it with ointments, until it is healed.
If however the corruption has already spread to the bone, then it is necessary to cut into that bone and extract it: for it will never be healed as long as the corrupted bone remains.
What if you see corrosion and corruption advancing on the finger, then cut it off at one of the nodes, according to what has been mentioned above. Then treat him, until he is healed.
If, however, a nail injury or a blow occurs, and there is intense pain in that case, then it is necessary to bleed the patient at the beginning. Then cut the nail with a sharp Scalpel's edge, crossing from above to below.
And beware, lest the cutting reaches the flesh that is beneath the nail, for you will cause a severe pain to occur through that to the patient, and it will be a cause of inflammation of the added flesh at that place.
Then treat the area with what alleviates pains.
However, an extra finger which is born on some people's hands is entirely fleshy: and perhaps there are bones in some of them, and perhaps there is a nail on it: and some of them grow from the root of the joint, or its growth is in certain knots of the finger. Therefore, that which grows on certain knots of the finger does not move: and that which grows near the joint of the finger perhaps moves.
Therefore, that which is fleshy from those, its cutting is easy. That is, to cut it off at its root with a broad Scalpel.
But that whose growth is at the root of the joint, its treatment is difficult. Therefore, refrain from cutting it.
On the other hand, that which grows on the finger near the last knots, then it is necessary to cut into the flesh first with a round incision up to the bone. Then saw through the bone with one of those suitable saws for that purpose. Then treat him, until he is healed.
Moreover, the consolidation that occurs on the fingers is often due to an innate defect of man, that is, born with it, or from the consolidation of a wound, or burning by fire, and similar things.
It is necessary therefore that you divide that consolidation, until the digits return to their natural shape. Then place between them a strip of cloth soaked in rose oil, so that they do not consolidate too quickly and separate from each other; or place between them a thin sheet of lead, until the location is consolidated as needed.
And similarly if a consolidation occurs on certain digits with the palm, then divide that consolidation, according to what is prepared and suitable for the shape of the limb.
On the Incision of Veins.
Veins are twisted, thick, full of superfluous melancholic fluids which occur in many parts of the body; and their most frequent occurrence is in the legs, especially in the legs of those who travel, labor, and carry heavy loads.
It is necessary therefore to administer a purging of the body from black bile many times with strong purging.
Then perform bloodletting on the patient's basilic vein.
The treatment of them is indeed with iron, and it is according to two methods. One method is that they be cut, and black blood be extracted. And the other method is to evacuate the vein, and extract everything.
The section of it is indeed according to this method. First, bathe the leg with hot water abundantly, until the thick, foul blood is dissolved. Then bind the weak leg from the upper part of its hip to the lower part of the knee with a bandage. Then divide the vein at one place, or two, or three sections widely.
Then evacuate, that is, extract the blood with your hand from the lower part of the leg upwards, and it is necessary to perform bloodletting on the weak one first. Then dry the nail with a fire until it draws out a sufficient quantity of blood which you see is enough and which the virtue of the weak part can tolerate.
Then bind it: and order him to abstain from foods that generate black bile; and repeat the evacuation and bloodletting when the veins are full, and it does not harm the weak part.
The evacuation of it is according to this method. Scrape the affected area, if there are many hairs on it. Then put it in a bath: or immerse it in its own basin with hot water, until it becomes red and the veins overflow: or exercise strong massage, if there is no present bath, until the member becomes warm.
Then dry the skin directly over the vein's section along its length: or at the end of it near the knee, or in its lower part near the heel.
Then open the skin with hooks, and excavate the vein from every part, until it becomes apparent to the sense: and it is at its appearance, that you see it turn from redness to blackness. When therefore it emerges from the skin, you see it white as if it were a cord.
Then introduce the scalpel underneath it, until when it is elevated and emerges from the skin: suspend it with a blunt hook, gently.
Then dry another section near that section, three fingers' breadth away. Then excavate the skin from the upper part of the vein, until it becomes apparent. Then elevate it with scalpels as you did, and suspend it with another hook, as you did at first.
Then dry another section, or several sections, if it is necessary for that. Then elevate and incise the same at the last section near the heel.
Then extract it to the section that is above it.
And do that, until you extract it from the section which is superior, or higher than all sections, until when it emerges whole; then cut it.
If it does not obey you to extract and elevate, then insert a strong double thread, and tie it, and extract it; or insert under the Radius; and revolve your hand to every part, until it emerges. And be careful, lest it is cut. For if it is cut, it will be difficult for you to elevate it greatly, and it will become inflamed above the weak part from that injury.
When you have extracted it whole, then put on the wounded place a soaked linen cloth in wine and rose oil, or oil; and take care of it, until it is healed.
If the vein is contracted, having a twisted condition where there is an involution to the parts, and it is not as we have said according to rectitude: then it is necessary to find it on every part of its twistedness, and the place of its involution.
Then suspend it with hooks, until you elevate it whole; and be careful at your section above it lest you cut the vein, or wound; for it will be difficult for you to elevate, or extract it. Preserve therefore your prudence.
The method of treating a wounded vein so that it heals.
The method of hooks for the blind.
It is not curved like the other hooks, nor is it of acute extremity, so as not to wound the vein; and it is of coarse flexibility, gentle: because if it were subtle, it would cut the vein by its subtlety; indeed, there is a superfluous coarseness in it, as we have said.
On the extraction of the femoral vein.
This vein is generated in the legs in hot and dry lands, such as those of Alizegi, and the land of the Arabs, and in dry and hot lands with little tenderness, that is, in which neither herb nor tree grows.
And perhaps it is generated in other places of the body besides the thighs.
And its generation indeed is from the putrefaction that occurs under the skin, just as it happens within the bodies of snakes and worms called ascarides, and worms generated between the skin and flesh.
And a sign of the inception of this vein is that which occurs in the thigh as an intense inflammation. Then the place is sewn up. Then the vein begins to emerge from that place of sewing, as if it were the root of a plant, or an animal.
When therefore the extremity of it appears from there, then it is necessary to apply a wrapping of plaster over that fragment of lead, whose weight is one dirham and two nodules; and suspend the lead from the thigh.
Whenever something emerges from there to the outside, wrap it in lead, and nodulate it. If it is prolonged too much, then cut off a part of it, and wrap up the remainder. And do not cut it at the root until it has emerged completely. For if you cut it, it becomes constricted, and grows into the flesh; and it causes an abscess to occur, and putrefaction in the place, and a bad ulcer.
Therefore it is necessary to handle it gently and extract it gradually, until it emerges from its very end, and nothing of it remains in the body; and indeed this vein emerges in some people which is five palms and ten units long. And now it has reached me, for it had gone out from a man twenty palms long.
But if it is cut off during the time of your treatment: then introduce a radish into its opening, and perforate it with a long opening, along with the body, until everything that is in it from the material is evacuated; and administer putrefaction to the place with medicines for several days. Then treat the post-operative swelling.
And this vein indeed has many branches, especially when it appears at the junction of the foot, or in the foot itself; and many openings belong to it, and a branch emerges from every opening.
Treat it therefore, as we have said in the division, and with what has been mentioned beforehand.
About the excision of worms generated under the skin, and it is called "Cow's Disease".
This disease is named "Cow's Disease" in certain lands among us; because it often affects cows, and it is a small worm that is born between the skin and flesh.
And it wanders throughout the entire body, ascending and descending; and it is perceived by sensation during its movement from limb to limb, until it bursts out wherever it bursts out on the skin's surface, and emerges.
And its generation is from the putridity of certain humors. As worms and snakes occur, that is, earthworms, and roundworms in the belly.
And they are feared because of their evil nature. Because when it wanders in the body and rises to the head, and reaches a certain place: then perhaps it appears there, and emerges, and destroys the eye; and this happens many times.
When, therefore, you want to cure it, and extract it, then it does not happen unless through its movement and the appearance of its sensation.
It is necessary, therefore, to bind what is above it, and what is beneath it with a strong constricting bandage. Then sew above it, and extract it.
If it is deeply rooted in the flesh, and you do not find it: then apply a cautery with fire to the place, until it dies.
And what is feared more is the corruption of it, which corrupts the eye, as we have said.
If you see that it has already spread to the head near the eye, then tighten a good stricture under it above the eyebrow. Then cut above it, and extract it.
And it is necessary that the sick person should be purified of his bodily corruption with medicines that dissolve bad putrid humors.
And he should beware of foods that generate putrefaction.
On the surgical treatment for Nakir disease.
This disease is called Nakir in our land, and it is a pain that occurs in certain members, then it moves from member to member.
And I have indeed seen it myself, according to what I relate to you. I was called to a sick woman in certain villages. And she showed me her arm, and I saw a small swelling on the vein of the arm's cord.
And after I remained for one hour, I saw a swelling increase with a tender movement, as if it were an ascending worm, going up to her shoulder more quickly than possible: so that it was like living silver, when it flowed from place to place.
Then the pain receded from that place, and settled in the shoulder.
Then I sat for an hour, and it flowed into the rest of the body, until it reached another arm.
Then she told me that it had returned throughout her whole body, according to what I saw.
I was amazed therefore at the swiftness of its change from member to member. And I had indeed never seen this disease with my own eyes in this manner before. However, I had seen many who experienced pain moving from member to member, and I did not see it with my own eyes, as I saw it in the woman.
And I do not think that it is anything other than what is because of that, which a woman was among those who are affected by the dryness of their bodily vessels, from which it appears that the change in her veins has been perceived.
And it is necessary, so that they do not appear according to this reasoning in those who are delicate and have humid bodies, of hidden veins.
When therefore you apply treatment to it, and the patient feels that pain: then if it appears to your eye as we have said, then press above it, and below it quickly: and cut above it, until the confined veins are released: and cauterize the place.
If you do not see it with your eyes: then treat it with bodily exercise, and with what expels the veins' windiness, and cleanse them with foul-smelling pills, and pills of serpent's root, and similar things.
On the extraction of arrowheads.
Arrowheads are differentiated according to their own kinds and according to the places in which they fall from the body.
Their diversity is indeed such that some of them have large points, and small ones; and are concave, and rough. And some of them have three angles. And some of them have tongues (or flanges). And some of them have stars (or star-shaped tips).
Those indeed which are according to the limbs in which they fall, are according to two modes. Or indeed the limbs are from principal concave members, such as the brain, and heart, and liver, and lung, and kidneys, and intestines, and bladder, and similar ones. When therefore it falls in one of these members, and death signs appear to you, which I will narrate to you afterwards, then it is necessary that you hasten the extraction of that arrowhead from them, for death follows him in whom it is, in many dispositions. And when these bad signs are not apparent to you, and the arrow is not hidden deep within the limb, then extract it, and cure the wound.
For when an arrow falls on the brain, and penetrates the bone, and exits with a hiss that is above the brain, it is because bad accidents occur from it, such as swooning, and darkness, and dizziness, and redness in the eyes, and swelling, and redness of the tongue, and spasms, and confusion of the intellect, and vomiting of bile. And perhaps blood flows out from the nostrils or ears. And perhaps speech is cut off, and the voice is destroyed. And a white, cloudy fluid similar to pus flows out from the place of the wound. And there emerges from it something like the decay of flesh.
If therefore these signs appear to you, then desist from treatment, and extract the arrow if it does not emerge.
The signs of an arrow when it falls on the heart are: that it is near the left nipple; and one feels as if it were fixed in a hard thing, not in a empty thing. And perhaps the arrow makes a movement similar to the pulse's movement; and black blood flows out from the wound. And there follows that numbness of the extremities, and cold sweat, and fainting. Know therefore that death is approaching without doubt.
And the sign of an arrow when it wounds the lung is the ejection of foamy blood from the wound; and the parts that follow the neck become inflamed, and the color of the patient changes. And he breathes out a great, high-pitched spirit; and he seeks to attract cold air.
For if the arrow falls on the diaphragm, which is in the chest; then it is near the small ribs; and there occurs a great shortness of breath with vehement pain, with sighing; and all the members of the shoulders are moved.
And if a dart falls into the stomach, then perhaps something undigested will come out of the wound along with food.
And if a dart falls into the belly and is stuck in it: something foul comes out of the wound, or pus, or intestine which is already disrupted. There is no hope therefore of curing it, nor of extracting the dart.
If a dart falls into the bladder and urine comes out: and something proceeds from it to the outside, and there is strong pain over the weak spot: then you should know that it is mortal.
The remaining limbs, such as the face, and neck, and throat, and shoulder blade, and upper arm bone, and vertebrae of the back, and shoulder, and hip, and leg, and similar parts from the limbs are saved according to many different arrangements: when a dart does not find an artery or nerve: and it is not a poisonous dart.
And I tell you what I have seen about the nature of these darts, so that you may understand it through this about your treatment.
What is, because a certain man's dart fell into the tear duct of his eye, at the root of his nose. I therefore extracted it from the other side, beneath the fat of his ear: and he was healed, and no harm came to his eye.
And I extracted another dart from a Jew, which had fallen into the fat of his eye beneath the lower eyelid: and the dart was already hidden, and I did not succeed in getting it out except for its small end, with which it adhered to his eyelid: and it was a large dart from the Turkish bows, with a smooth iron, on which there were no notches.
The Jew was therefore healed, and no evil accident occurred to his eye.
And I extracted another dart from the throat of a Christian.
And there was an Arab arrow, and it is that which has its points. I cut above it between the two ribs, and it had already sunk into his throat. I operated skilfully with it, until I extracted it: and the Christian was healed.
And I extracted another arrow which had fallen into his belly: and we thought that he would die from it.
After thirty days had passed for him, and nothing of his symptoms had changed, I operated on the arrow; and I applied my ingenuity to it, and extracted it: and he was healed, and no bad accident befell him.
And I saw a man on whom an arrow had fallen into his back, and the wound was consolidated around it. After seven years, the arrow came out at the root of his hip.
And I saw a woman on whom an arrow had fallen into her belly, and the wound was consolidated around it, and the arrow remained inside: and nothing of her symptoms changed, and the woman did not find any harm in any of her natural functions.
And I saw another man, on whom an arrow had fallen into his face: and the wound was consolidated, and it remained, not causing him much pain: and there were many similar cases like these.
And I extracted an arrow from the Prince's forehead, which had fallen into his nose, and had already deviated to the right side for a short time: and the entire arrow was hidden.
I was called therefore to his cure after the accident of the arrow for three days. I found the wound of the arrow strongly constricted.
I probed it therefore with a subtle instrument, and I did not feel it: and indeed he was finding a puncture and pain under his right armpit. So I spare what was that point of exit from the extremity of the arrow.
I applied a plaster to the place with a plaster in which there was an attractive and digestive power, trusting in myself that the place would apostematize and show me the sign of the arrow, so I might touch it: and nothing happened at the place, indicating that the arrow had not touched the spot.
I treated it continuously with a plaster for many days, and nothing happened, and the wound healed in the meantime. And he remained weak from the extraction of that splinter for some days, until he felt the arrow on a certain day inside his nose. And he told me that.
And he told me that. I therefore put a sharp corrosive medicine on the wound for many days, until it was opened up: and when I probed it, I felt the subtle extremity of the arrowhead that was stuck in the wood.
Then I added to the opening of the wound through that sharp medicine, until the extremity of the arrowhead appeared visibly to us: and it passed with me for a space of time around four months.
Then after the wound had grown larger, and it was possible for me to insert forceps into it, and move them, and it did not obey to come out: then I did not cease to cleverly try and contrive over it with various contrivances, until I succeeded in extracting it on a certain day with well-made forceps, according to the shape of their ends, as described in the chapter, until I extracted it. Then I restored the wound.
And indeed, physicians judge that the cartilage of the nose is not restored. I therefore restored it, and the wound was consolidated, and he was healed to full health: and nothing at all harmed him.
And I tell you the quality of extracting a certain arrowhead, so that you may put that rule and significance on what I did not say.
Since the parts of this art and their distinctions are not understood with narration, nor does the book comprehend it, and the skilled craftsman compares a little over much; and with what is present, over what is absent; and he finds a new operation and a new instrument among the extraneous descriptions of this art when they occur.
I say therefore, that arrowheads do not come out from the members in which they are fixed, unless according to two modes. Or by attraction from the place into which it entered. Or by the opposite part of another.
And that which comes out from where it entered, or is an arrowhead proceeding into a fleshy place: and it is attracted, and comes out.
What if it does not obey at the time of exit from the hour in which it falls: then it is necessary that you leave it for some days, until the flesh that is around it putrefies, and its attraction is alleviated, and its exit.
And similarly if it is fixed in a bone, and does not obey you at the time of exit, then leave it for some days as well; and try it with attraction and motion every day, until it comes out.
What if it does not obey you at the time of exit after days, then it is necessary that you perforate around the arrowhead in that bone on every side with a subtle trephine, until the arrowheads are amplified. Then attract it, and extract it.
If the arrowhead has already been hidden in a place of the body and is concealed and hidden from the senses, then probe it with a tent. If you feel it, then attract it with certain instruments that are suitable for its attraction.
If you cannot get above it, due to the constriction of the wound, and due to the length of the arrowhead in the depth; and there is no bone, nor nerve, nor vein: then probe above it until the wound is enlarged, and it becomes possible to extract the arrow.
What if there are auricles that hold it, then liberate the fixed flesh from them on every side, with all the ingenuity you can, and devices, if you cannot get above the eversion of the flesh in the fracture of the auricles, and their contortion, until it is freed.
And when you administer the extraction of the arrowhead, in whatever place it is, then use the contortion of your hand, with forceps on all parts, until you make it emerge: and be subtle with utmost subtlety, lest the arrowhead breaks, and its attraction becomes difficult for you, and its very extraction.
What if you cannot get above it at one hour, then leave it for some days, until what is around it putrefies. Then touch it again: for the tumor will be alleviated; if indeed the counterflow of blood makes an opposition to you, then administer what we said about the treatment in its chapter: and preserve your strength from incision of the vein, or nerve, or cord.
And administer ingenuity in every way possible to extract the arrowhead: and let it be with facility, and tranquility, or slowness, and firmness, as I have described to you.
And it is necessary that you operate with the arrow-shaped instrument, so that the wounded person may be secondarily shaped according to the figure which he had at the time of the wound inflicted by the arrow. Because it is more beneficial. If however it is not possible for you to do that, then administer what is possible for you according to the figures.
The arrow which emerges from the opposite part of the other, or already proceeds from it to the exterior; or it makes a gibbosity on the extremity of the wound through the sense of the superior part of the adjacent skin, and you see it prominent: therefore cut above it, and let the incision be according to the quantity which the forceps can grasp.
Then draw it out: for it will be easy to extract it afterwards.
If it is retained in the bone, then twist your hand according to the roundness, until the arrow head becomes fixed in the bone and enlarges itself; then draw it out.
And if not, leave it for some days: then try again, until it comes out.
If the wooden part of the arrow is in it, then push it out with that.
If the wooden part has fallen off, and you are unable to administer an impulse: then introduce into it a concave instrument, so that its concavity may enter into the tail of the arrow: then push it out with that.
If the arrow head is concave, then push it out with an instrument entering into it. For the arrow head is extracted through that.
If the arrow is poisoned, then it is necessary to concave the entire flesh where the venom is, if that is possible for you. Then treat it with what is suitable for that.
If the arrow is lodged in the chest, or in the belly, or in the bladder, or in the side; and it is near to what you touch with your finger, and it is possible for you to cut above it: then cut, and be careful about the incision of a vein, or nerve, and extract it.
Then the wound, if you see it, and treat it, until it heals.
And this is the method of forceps, with which arrows are extracted.
They are like bird's beaks, made as if iron: when they grasp the arrow, they do not release it.
And they are made from them into many kinds, large, small, and medium, according to the quantity of the arrow's magnitude, and its smallness, and the width of the wound, and its constriction.
The shape of a pushing forceps.
And the shape of a pushing straight forceps.
This is a straight extremity like a rod, so that its entrance is alleviated into the concave arrow, and it is pushed with it.
Of the venous bloodletting.
The veins to be bled, whose course is customary in the body, are thirty.
Out of them, in the head there are sixteen: two pulse veins, which are behind the ears, called the two Herbae; and two arteries, which appear in the two temples; and two veins which are in the two lacrimal ducts of the eyes, called the Aspicientes; and a vein prepared in the middle of the forehead; and a vein which is at the extremity of the nose. And two Gudgeons, which are in the neck. And two veins which are in the upper lip of the mouth. And two veins which are in the lower lip. And these are the veins that are called Algecherich. And two veins which are under the tongue.
The veins that are cut for bloodletting in the arms are five veins in each arm.
One of them is the Cephalic vein, and it is from the lateral forested (or wooded) region: and the common people call it the vein of the head. And the Brown one. And it is the Middle vein, and it is composed from the branch of the Basilic vein and the branch of the Cephalic vein: and the common people call it the vein of the body. And the Basilic vein, and it is placed on the domestic side: and it is also called the Titillating vein. And the common people call it the vein of the belly. And the Vein of the arm, and it is placed above the bend: and it is the one that is cut for bloodletting, and it is the one that appears above the thumb with a clear manifestation.
And the Salvatella: and it is the vein which is between the ring-shaped (or annular) one and the smallest: and there are two branches to it.
And in the leg and in the foot there are three veins. One of them is the vein which is under the curvature of the thumb, from the wooded (or lateral) region. And the second one is the Saphena: and its place is at the heel, on the domestic side. And the vein Nessus: and its place is at the heel, from the wooded (or lateral) region.
And in the other leg there are three veins similar to those.
 On bloodletting of two veins behind the Ears.
Bloodletting of the two veins which are behind the Ears is beneficial for old catarrhs, and hemigraine, and sahafatia, and evil ancient head ulcers.
And the quality of bloodletting it is according to what I narrate. And it is, that the head of the sick person should be shaved: and their occiput should be rubbed in the place of the two veins with a rough cloth, using good friction. Then the weakened neck is constricted with a bandage, until two veins appear. And the places of the ears are behind the aureus (temples) in two depressed areas of the head. Feel therefore with your finger, and where you feel a pulse under your finger, mark it there with a cautery.
Then take a surgical scalpel, which is called an Incider. Then insert it under the vein in the skin, until the scalpel reaches the bone. Then elevate your hand with the vein and skin upwards, and make an incision into the vein with a cutting motion. And let the length of the incision be about two fingers' width, or approximately that: and make it so that blood flows out in abundance.
Then bind it with poultices, and leave it, until it heals.
And now the incision of the ears, and their cauterization, has preceded at the beginning of this book.
The bloodletting of the two Arteries that are in the temples is beneficial for ancient hemigraine: and for worn-out headaches, and persistent eye troubles: and for excessive flow of sharp humors to the eyes.
And the quality of bloodletting them is according to what I will tell you now. The weakened neck is constricted strongly, until two veins appear in a clear and manifest sensation: and the pulse of them is demonstrated under your finger. Then mark it with a cautery.
Then elevate the skin above the vein upwards with your index finger, and insert the scalpel incidentally from below, and elevate the vein upwards. And make an incision, just as you did on the two other veins: and let blood flow out according to the quantity of your need.
Then loosen the bandage of the injured person and put your finger on the vein for an hour. Next, put a poultice on it and soft pads, and bind it strongly with a tight bandage: and leave it, until it heals.
And now the description of these things precedes, and their incision, and their extraction at the beginning of the book.
The benefit of bloodletting from the forehead vein is after bloodletting of the cephalic veins, for old facial weaknesses: and for hemigraine, and redness: and foul ulcers.
And the quality of this bloodletting is, according to what I narrate to you. The injured person should bind his neck with a cloth, until the vein appears. Then take the instrument that is called a Fossorium.
Place the sharp point that is on the head of the Fossorium on the vein, and prick it with a comb or with another instrument in its manner: and let the blood flow according to the quantity you wish. Then loosen the perforation of the injured person, and bind it, until it heals.
And when it is opened with a broad scalpel. However, it is not suitable that the bloodletter should be of acute extremity, like the remaining bloodletters, but rather of broad extremity. And the bloodletter should be according to the transverse section: because the bone is nearby: and perhaps the bloodletter will be broken when it is subtle.
The benefit of the two Veins which are in the two Lacrimal veins of the two eyes, is for an eye affected by itch and redness: and also for filth in the eye, and for facial weaknesses.
And the quality of phlebotomy is such that it constricts the weak neck with its thread. Then the phlebotomist stands: and you stand over his head.
And let the phlebotomy be done crosswise along a short length, with a small phlebotomy instrument, slightly broad, for there is no vein in that place. If the phlebotomy is subtle at the extremity, it will perhaps be fractured.
Then let blood flow out as much as is necessary for you. And put a bandage over them, and constrict them at night with one thread, and loosen them.
The phlebotomy of the veins of the nose is beneficial for acute fever and violent headache, and facial diseases such as hemicrania and redness that occurs on the face: especially when it is chronic.
And the quality of its phlebotomy is such that it constricts its weak neck. Then hold its nose with your left hand, and take a subtle, long phlebotomy instrument: and fix it in the middle of the nostril itself, between that which distinguishes the nose according to straightness. Since the vein does not appear to the sense there, and because the blood begins to flow immediately.
And it is necessary that you apply your hand with a small phlebotomy instrument: and let blood flow out according to your need. Then bind it at night with one thread. For it is quickly restored.
The benefit of phlebotomy of the veins of the Gizzard is for constriction of asthma, and detention of leprosy, and melancholic diseases, and evil ulcers and corrosive sores, that is, herpes of the gullet.
And the quality of the phlebotomy is that it should tightly constrict the weakened vein under the collarbone with a ligature: and the surgeon should stand above the patient's head, and the patient should be seated on a seat.
Then the phlebotomy vein is opened along the length of the phlebotomy incision with an ample but moderate opening. Then extract from the blood a tempered quantity, or according to what you see is necessary for that which is at hand. Then do similarly with another vein.
Afterwards release the ligature, and constrict the two veins in the middle of the stricture: so that the patient is not harmed. And leave it until morning. The wound should heal.
On the phlebotomy of veins by Algeberich. The veins, according to Algeberich's phlebotomy, are a help: because they bring about an alleviation of bad breath from the mouth, and gum corruption: and evil ulcers: and labial fissures, and evil ulcers, even those that are in the nose, and around it.
And the quality of their phlebotomy is that you make the patient sit in front of you: and constrict his neck with a bandage. Then turn back his lip, and look at the two veins: one of which is on the right side of the lip, and the second on the left side of it: and the demonstration of each is through the blackness of the veins. And that is true: because around them are small, black veins. Make the incision therefore on both sides with an oblique incision.
If however there is doubt in you, and you do not know which of them is: then turn to the incision of the larger one, and that will be more evident.
And do similarly with the two veins that are in the upper lip: and indeed custom has carried it out with him: and make an incision on the two veins that are in the lower lip.
About the venesection of the vein under the tongue after the cephalic venesection. There are two veins under the tongue that require venesection: it is because the cephalic venesection is for prefactions that are in the throat and for the weakness of the uvula, and the weaknesses of the mouth.
And the quality of the one to be venesected is that he should sit weakly between your hands in front of you: and you should lift up his tongue, and look under his tongue on one side for one vein, and on the other side for another vein: and the color of both veins declines towards blackness.
Therefore, venesect one or the other: and be careful, lest your last hand movement in venesecting him causes harm. For under them are arteries, and perhaps a flow of blood may occur from those arteries.
The three veins that are venesected in the elbow are those in which the practice of venesection has been established in all men.
And the venesection of them is done according to two methods. Either by pricking with a broad and blunt phlebotome, or by shaving to a subtle decline, or by cutting with a razor-like phlebotome, and this is the method of Al-NSR. And this is its form.
And of them there are broad and subtle species according to the amplitude of the veins and their stricture. The form of the myrtle-shaped phlebotome is broad, as you see. And it is suitable for opening concave, full, protruding, apparent, and thick veins, and those that contain gross, turbid blood.
And this phlebotome is of lesser width and more subtle at the extremities.
And it is suitable for phlebotomy of fine veins, which contain subtle, citrus-colored blood.
The royal one, however, which is one of these three veins for phlebotomy, is a help. Because it extracts blood from the diseased parts, which are under the jaw and neck, following the chest, and stomach; and it is suitable for the phlebotomist with his phlebotomy, so that he may beware, and be anxious about the fear of it, because under it there is an artery. If therefore he errs, and adds to the piercing of the phlebotomy, he will cut into that artery, and there will be a flow of blood. Wherefore it is necessary not to perform phlebotomy with a piercing phlebotomist; rather, he should be gentle with the Al-nesil (scalpel).
Because if the royal vein does not appear in a clear and manifest way, then it is necessary to seek another, and to transfer to another, or to explore some other branch of it; or to perform phlebotomy in place of it, the Funem (vein) of the arm. For that is clear, and he should cut it with the Al-nesil phlebotomy, as we have said.
But if you wish to perform phlebotomy on the same one, then it is necessary before the constriction of the arm, that you should touch the place, until you know the place of the pulse. Then mark the spot with a cautery, afterwards the arm, and cut the vein at the curved section with the Al-nesil phlebotomy, as we have said. And beware that the puncture does not slip through the space to the place of the artery.
And when you see that, as you bind the ligature, an inflammation appears at the place which you marked with a cautery, then that inflammation is an inflammation of the artery: therefore, it is necessary to avoid it.
If you see blood in a phlebotomy that is salty, like the urine of a child, and it is subtle, red, then you will know that it is from an arterial bleeding. Then press down firmly, and place your finger on the lengthy space, then lift your finger. If the blood is then let out (for it is often let out), then bind the arm, and loosen it: and beware lest the weak person be moved by its motion: and let it be above his fear.
And do not move it for some days, until it heals.
But if the blood does not flow out, and it overcomes you: and there is no present remedy for you at that moment, then cut into the artery, if it appears to you. For the extremities are constricted, and the blood flows out.
Or take a piece of cloth, and bind it: take one half, and tie it over the place of the stricture of the vein, with a ligature and cotton wool until another day.
Then if the blood flows out, it is good. And if not: then treat it with that which preceded the memory of the place of the powder of blood flow: and the cutting off of its blood is not difficult in many dispositions, because of the small place of the wound and the possibility of a ligature from the arm.
The phlebotomy of the Dark Vein is beneficial, because it draws blood from the superior part of the head and the inferior part of the body: therefore, since it is composed of the branch of the Basilic vein and the branch of the Cephalic vein, as we have said.
And it is fitting for the phlebotomist to be above fear from his phlebotomy, for beneath it is a nerve. If therefore an addition is made to the puncture of phlebotomy, and a nerve is found, there occurs in it numbness, and difficult is its healing, and perhaps it will not be fully healed.
And this nerve often appears to the senses. If however it is hidden in certain men, and is subtle, and does not show itself: then it is necessary that you place your phlebotomy where the phlebotomists make an incision with Al Nesil, and divide the nerve with your strength.
What if a vein is between two nerves, then find the vein in its length.
Concerning the cephalic vein. The phlebotomy of the cephalic vein is beneficial, because it attracts blood from the head and brings relief to the sufferings of the eyes.
And it is necessary in this vein particularly, if you wish, to phlebotomize it by pricking with an oily phlebotome or a myrtle phlebotome: because it is the most healthy of all veins, since there is no underlying artery, nor nerve.
However it is fitting for you to proceed with phlebotomy, so that you divide only the skin of the head with a gentle touch, and seek a smoother spot: and it does not harm if it is not found with the first strike, so that it may be repeated over it several times with phlebotomy.
However perhaps an abscess forms in certain men when they are not phlebotomized at the first strike, but that abscess does not harm them in any way.
Concerning the usefulness of Phlebotomy and the precautions to be observed in it. The quality of Phlebotomy, and its accidents resulting from it, in whose correction it is necessary for you to think.
Firstly, it is of this that you ought to know, that phlebotomy is not administered unless for the conservation of health, and its perseverance, and caution against the advent of diseases.
And let there be bloodletting on one of the three veins that are in the elbow, namely the Cephalic, and the Fusca, and the Basilic. And let there be bloodletting at the beginning of spring, on a fast day, in the morning, and in summer, and autumn, and winter after digestion, when signs of repletion appear.
And let there be bloodletting on the first day or on the third day, after three hours have passed.
Bloodletting that is administered to the sick, does not have a determined hour: but when convenience and necessity call for it, at night, or day, and in every hour, and in every time.
And it is not fitting that bloodletting should be performed on children, until they are fourteen years old. Nor should pregnant women be bloodletted, unless from the fourth month to the seventh. Nor should the old be bloodletted, who have already passed sixty years.
When therefore someone wishes to be bloodletted for any reason whatsoever: it is fitting that they should cleanse their intestines beforehand with a gentle clyster, if there is much retained dung in them: so that the veins may not draw out noxious putridities from the intestines during bloodletting, which are harmful to the principal members.
Nor should the patient be full of loathsome nausea, nor drunk, nor evacuating from a hangover, until that is removed from them. Nor one who is weak with dropsy.
And bloodletting is to be avoided after colic passion, and vomiting, and flux of the stomach, and excessive intercourse, and labor, and exercise, and wakefulness, and fasting, and everything that dissolves the virtue from the bodily or animal strength.
Then consider the subtlety of the humors beforehand, if the blood is thick from food and drinks, and medicines: if it is possible for him.
Then a warm bath is introduced, if it does not prohibit something else; or some exercise is used, so that the blood is subtly loosened.
And apply phlebotomy to his chest, around the third day, as we have said; and take care that his chest is freed from all bad animal influences on that day: such as anxiety, and anger, and fear: and from all bodily accidents, such as labor, and pain, and excessive flow, and similar things.
And let his own people make present the things that are useful with the customary use of aromatics, and perfumes, and tripping and similar things in proportion to possibility.
Then let the phlebotomist sit on a cushion, which is higher than the cushion of the one to be phlebotomized: afterwards he draws out his arm, and rubs it with his hand twice or three times. Then he tightens the ligament with a bandage, and wraps it around twice.
And let the binding be moderate, because when the binding is unequal, or excessive in the binding, then it prevents the flow of blood: or if it is too loose, then it also prevents the flow of blood.
Then after the binding it is necessary to rub the hands of the one to be phlebotomized together gently, until the veins become inflated and are declared to the sense.
Then the phlebotomist wipes the phlebotomy site with a little oil, in the ancient proper way.
Then let him place his index finger of the left hand on that vein under the spot where he wants to perform phlebotomy, gently: so that the vein does not flee and is struck with percussion. Because it is like a fleeing cord when you find it, as if at phlebotomy: and of them there is one that is full of windiness: and when you place the phlebotomy on it, it contracts under the phlebotomy, and the phlebotomist is deceived, and does not open the vein: and if he opens it, it is tight: therefore for this reason it is necessary to make the phlebotomist firm, and to be solicitous in all these things.
Then the scalpel is placed. If therefore a vein is opened from one side, then it is good. And if not, then the other vein under that place is tried a little, or above it with haste: if the place does not become inflamed.
What if it becomes inflamed, or the patient grows weak, then leave him for a day, or two days: and do not bind the dressing tightly. Perhaps indeed it will attract a warm abscess. Nor should a bath be entered.
Then the scalpel is repeated, if it is loved.
What if the opening is small, or the blood flows subtly: and then as not to let out from the blood a quantity that you wish: then repeat the scalpel in the same opening, following the straightness, and add a little in the operation.
And do that with haste, before the place becomes inflamed, for an inflamed place is in many men a small operation.
If therefore you see it already inflamed, then do not repeat anything on top of it at all, for nothing excuses something in your regard. And put on top of it something from the sediment of oil: because it alleviates the flow of blood. And it is better in this place than the oil itself, and than other oils.
And similarly administer the sediment of oil in all your bloodlettings, where the bloodletters prohibit the flow of blood: and they make it, that is, the tyrical and sagzenical treatments, when it is put on one of them over the place.
For the blood is subtly purified and resolved, when it is thick.
What if a great abscess happens at the place of the bloodletting, for it often happens, especially to those who are not bloodletted except on that side, or is the opening of the vein small, then prepare and put on the place a sponge infused in water and salt, warmed for a little while: and bind it for one hour: because it dissolves.
And it is suitable to make that opening after the blood has flowed out from the same vein, with its own covering, or from another vein.
If something black or greenish remains in the place after several days, it does not harm: and if you wish, apply to it a solution of aloe, or myrrh, or something from the juice of mint, that is, of calendula or similar.
And indeed it often happens that abscesses and swellings occur at the site of bloodletting according to the method of Basil.
Put your hand therefore upon it, and then if you find softness under your pressure upon it, then that swelling is bad. Take heed therefore, to apply to it something from what we have mentioned. For perhaps blood flows out from the artery.
But make a plaster for it with that in which there is astringency, so that the place may be tightened up. Then treat it with the rest of the treatment, until it is healed.
And it is suitable to extract from each person a certain amount of blood according to the quantity of his strength. And what appears from the color-changing above the blood.
For if the blood is black, then let it flow out until it becomes red, and similarly if you see it as thick, then let it be thinned out until it is refined. And similarly if it is acute, until its acuteness is relieved.
And it is suitable for one who is full, strong, and needs the extraction of blood twice, to amplify the bloodletting of the vein, and let the phlebotomist be skilled. And in one who is weak, let it be the opposite of that.
And it is suitable to extract it in the veins, and that the opening be narrow. And what is better administered in the bloodletting of the vein is a transverse section, not a puncture.
And this method of bloodletting is healthy for the flow of blood, and from an incision in the vein: and it is more praiseworthy, and healthier than bloodletting by width and length.
And to whom it is customary to arrive at syncopis through bloodletting, it is necessary that they eat before bloodletting a moderate amount of food infused with pomegranate water or rose water, if they are overheated: and let them extract from the blood in three or four veins.
And if they have a cold complexion, then let them take before bloodletting bread infused with warm syrup of honey, or in syrup made from honey and aromatic spices, or in syrup fragrant with aromatics.
Because if syncopis occurs through bloodletting, and it is the cause of much blood flowing out: then it is necessary that they take in drink water of meat, and subtle fragrant syrup: and let them use aromatics with galangal, and anoint their chest with those: and let them use the remaining things we mentioned in the division on syncopis from evacuation.
Whoever wants to evacuate their arm and release their blood a second time: it is necessary for him whose bloodletting is due to much evacuation, and his strength is weak, that he releases blood little by little according to the quantity of his strength on continuous days.
Whoever wants to evacuate their arm and release their blood a second time, and his body is strong: then let him do that after seven hours or nine hours from his first bloodletting.
Whoever wants to attract blood from their body to the opposite part to which it declines: it is necessary that they be evacuated on the second day or the third.
In whom there is already much heated blood in their body, and it becomes sharp, and causes fever to occur: it is necessary that blood exit from them in one vein, and a great quantity be extracted from them: and the opening is widened until syncopis occurs: after you have observed all the conditions of bloodletting: and put your hand on their pulse at the course of the blood, so that death does not occur in place of syncopis. For many times it happens that, when the phlebotomist is ignorant and becomes neglectful.
And it is not suitable when you want to release the arm, and release the second blood, since the opening of the vein is already closed, and the exit of blood becomes difficult, so that it bursts out upon it with vehemence, and the curvature extends quickly. For that is a bad thing, indeed to omit it, until it is phlebotomized for the second time.
Or remove it with the acuteness of phlebotomy that which is coagulated from the blood in the opening of the vein, and place upon it something salty dissolved in water. And place upon it something from tyriaca alfaroch or sagzenea, and apply gentle pressure, until the blood flows out.
If indeed the vein has become apostematous, then omit it, and do not touch it, until the apostema settles.
What if necessity provokes the need to release blood a second time, and there is no excuse, then either phlebotomize it at that place, or in another arm in another vein.
The veins of the arm are phlebotomized at the place of the Fuscae and Basilicae, when they are not found, and are hidden, because it is composed from them.
And the quality of that phlebotomy is, that it inserts a weak hand into warm water, until it becomes red-hot, and the veins appear manifestly.
Then bind above it with a ligature of moderate constriction. Then make a second phlebotomy across the width gradually, not latitudinally, nor along the length; and let the opening be wide, and let your phlebotomy be one that you make above the joint of the hand, just for a short time.
What if the exit of blood is prohibited, then put your hand in warm water, and let the blood flow into the water, until you achieve your necessity.
If you are operating during the summer days, then you should wash your hands repeatedly in warm water. And indeed the flow of blood is greatly promoted by warm water at the time of winter.
And bleeding from this vein is healthier for all veins, since there is no pulsating artery beneath it, nor a nerve.
Bleeding from the vein of the right hand at the salvation of the wrist is beneficial for liver diseases.
And the quality of that bleeding is such that you should bind the wrist with a ligature or your hand, after you have inserted it into warm water, until the vein becomes swollen and is plainly felt. Then you should open the vein by making a transverse incision. And if you cut it completely, it will not harm him in any way.
And be careful, lest you ultimately harm your hand with the bleeding instrument. For beneath it are the naked nerves of the fingers, stripped of their flesh.
Then return your hand to warm water, and allow the blood to flow out in it. For if you do not return it to warm water, the blood will clot in the opening of the vein, and its flow will be blocked.
When you have extracted the necessary amount from the blood, then apply oil and salt to the vein: so that it does not congeal too quickly.
And similarly, it is necessary to do the same with every constricted branch.
The benefit of bleeding from the left hand is that it is beneficial for diseases of the spleen; and do the same in this bleeding as you did in the second, equally.
The benefit of bleeding from the Saphena vein is that it is for diseases which are in the lower part of the body, such as diseases of the womb, and retention of menstruation, and kidney weaknesses, and old sores on the hips and thighs, and similar afflictions.
And the quality of his phlebotomy is that he inserts his ailing foot into warm water and makes friction on it until the veins overflow, and then binds above the joint of the foot with a bandage. And indeed the place of the veins is at the heel, appearing opposite the thumb, and they branch out from it into many ramifications on the surface of the foot.
Therefore, phlebotomy is performed on its larger branch, or at the heel in its collection, because it is better and more healthful.
Because if phlebotomy is performed on the surface of the foot, then it should be cautious of the nerves that are beneath it on the surface of the foot.
And put your phlebotomy there where you phlebotomize it crosswise, as if you want to cut into it, and let the phlebotomist be skilled.
But if the flow of blood is prohibited, then soak his foot in warm water and let the blood flow into it until it is evacuated.
Because if the phlebotomist makes an error in the first instance, then he should repeat it with phlebotomy at the upper parts for a short time, for the place is healthy and you do not fear evil from it when you are cautious of the nerves, as we said.
And similarly with the Saphenous vein of the other foot equally.
The place of the Sciatic veins, as we said, is at the heel on the outer side of the ankle.
And the benefit of his phlebotomy is to alleviate pain in the ankle, when it is due to warm blood.
And the quality of his phlebotomy is that he enters into a warm bath, and fasts; and binds his leg from the side of the ankle up to the heel with four fingers, with a subtle and long thread: for it does not appear except on account of that.
When it appears, then the phlebotomy is performed according to whatever method is possible for you, or crosswise; and it is better, either to cut into it with an incision, or to separate it with a section. The location of it is more hidden, and it itself is deeply concealed in many people.
The location of it is more hidden, and it itself is deeply concealed in many people. If you do not find it, and it does not appear to the sense at all; then make an incision on some branch of it, and it is that which appears on the back of the foot, and towards the ankle; and be cautious of the nerve, and make flow from the blood a quantity as you wish.
Then loosen the constriction, and place a linen cloth over the site of the incision, and bind the area tightly. You will heal quickly.
Of the treatment by cupping, and the quality of its use.
Cupping glasses are made from horns, and from copper, and from glass.
And cupping is done in two ways indeed. With scarification and bloodletting; and the other is cupping without scarification.
And this cupping which is without scarification, is in two modes. Or it is with fire. Or it is without fire.
And the cuppings which are administered with scarification and bloodletting are fourteen places of the body. Of which one is the cupping of Alnocrati, and it is at the back of the head; and Alkehel, and it is in the middle of the neck; and the cuppings of Alhagdahim, and they are two layers of the neck from both sides together; and the cupping of the mind, and it is under the jawbone in the lower jaw; and the cupping of the two spatulas; and the cupping of Alachosos above the end of the tailbone; and the cupping of the two fossae, and they are in the middle of the two arms; and the cupping of the two thighs; and the cupping of the two hips.
And indeed the cupping does not extract blood from you through the small scattered veins in the flesh, and because of that, no virtue falls out from them, just as it is the case with phlebotomy. It is not fitting to administer a treatment with fire or without fire for any ailment that arises from excess, until the whole body is evacuated.
Because if necessity provokes ventilation due to ailment or because of habit, we administer it at every hour, at the beginning of the month, at its end, and in the middle, and whenever the time may be.
Because it is so, since there are people who, when the blood increases in them, need its extraction through ventilation, and find heaviness in their head, and swoon.
And there are those who find fullness and redness in their face, head, and neck. And there are those who find itchiness on their face and forehead, and darkness, and dullness in their eyes.
And there are those who scratch the place of their ventilation. And there are those whose laughter increases. And there are those who find the taste of blood in their mouth, or their tongue becomes putrid and spits out blood. And there are those whose sleep increases. And there are those who see in their sleep blood and redness, and wounds, and sores, and things similar to these.
When therefore we see something of these, and it is specifically in the middle third of the month, we prescribe then that ventilation should be done, after two or three hours have passed.
The instrument of ventilation of the neck is this: because it contributes to heaviness in the head and what is poured out to the eyes. But it is fitting that it should be after the evacuation of the whole body.
And this indeed is ventilation in place of cephalic phlebotomy.
And it is not permitted that one should use it who is of a cold complexion, or in whom there is a fluxion. For it brings him great harm.
And because of that, it is not suitable for those old people to be treated with those cold afflictions on their heads.
Whoever, however, makes a persistent effort over it, will generate upon himself oblivion.
And because of that, it is suitable to warn the Surgeon, so that he may put his hand with a gentle touch at first towards the lower areas, fearing the generation of oblivion.
Ventosatio or Alkehel is the place of phlebotomy of Fuscae and phlebotomy of Basilicae, and because of that it brings about shortness of breath and constriction of the windpipe, and fissure of the instrument of breathing, and coughing, and repletion.
And it is suitable to apply the Ventosa Alkehel gently, because if it is placed below, it generates debility in the heart and stomach.
Ventosatio indeed is alhagdahim, which brings about painful accidental injuries to the head, and obtalmia, and hemicrania, and perforation, and pain in the roots of the teeth: and it is the place of phlebotomy of Basilicae.
And it is suitable to warn the Surgeon, not to press his hand with a scarification: so that he may not cut an artery and cause a flow of blood.
Ventosatio under the chin, however, brings about ulcers in the mouth, and corruption of the gums, and similar afflictions from those diseases which are in the mouth: and it stands in place of phlebotomy of alieherich, which are on both lips.
Ventosatio of the spatula shape brings about a tendency to alchafacham, which is caused by the accumulation and heat.
Ventosatio indeed of the internal parts of two veins, brings about an aid to phlebotomy of three veins, Basilicae, Fuscae, and Cephalicae: because it itself attracts blood from all those tiny veins which are in the flesh; and those tiny veins attract from other thicker veins until the attraction reaches the three veins.
And it is necessary to be cautious with the scalpel, lest it proceed too far in the incision: because the location is deprived of flesh, and beneath it are nerves and arteries.
The scalpel, however, which is used to make incisions on the anus, is useful for hemorrhoids of the anus and lower ulcers.
And it is necessary to be cautious with the scalpel, that it should be large and made of iron: because the location needs a strong incision, and perhaps the subtle veins would be torn apart; and a large scarification would be made by the large incision.
The scalpel, however, diminishes the thighs by a manifest diminution: because they attract blood from the entire body, and contribute to old pains in the kidneys, bladder, and uterus; they provoke menstrual flow, and contribute to bothor, and to ademenul; and they take the place of phlebotomy of the two saphena veins, and of the crab-like [veins].
However, they greatly weaken the body, and cause fainting to occur in many people.
And the phlebotomy of the crab-like veins is closely related to the phlebotomy of the two thighs.
The quality of the position of the scalpel is, that you should place the scalpel in the first empty space, and apply a tempered suction: and do not prolong the position of the scalpel, but place it quickly, and remove it quickly, so that the humors flow to the place of arrival equally: and do not cease to repeat this and continue, until you see the location now red and inflamed, and appears with a reddening of blood: then therefore incise, and apply suction gradually. Then consider the disposition of the body.
For one who has a tender flesh, with rare pores, it is necessary to incise him only once, no more: so that the location does not become ulcerated.
And beware of the scalpel, lest it amplify the incision, and make it too deep: and moderate the suction with ease, and quickness, and gentle movement.
What if there is a thickness in the blood, then it is necessary to scarify it twice. In the first instance, indeed, the way is opened up by subtle refinement of the blood, and its purification; and in the second instance, a thorough and exquisite extraction of thick blood.
If the blood is very foul, then let there be a third scarification: that the ultimate may follow.
And finally, when we wish to extract blood gradually, or for a short time, one scarification is sufficient for us. What if we wish to extract much blood, we perform multiple scarifications with numerous scarifications.
And if we measure that the blood is thick, then it is necessary to perform a deep scarification; and the boundary of equal measurement in scarification is the depth of the skin.
What is that which needs to be administered from oils at the position of Veins, and what is cautious in vein treatment.
In that case where the skin is thick, hard, dark, and its pores are constricted, it is necessary to anoint the Veins with open, softening, resolving oils: if it is in summer time, such as oil of almonds, or violet oil, or oil from sweet almonds, or oil from cucumber seed.
And if it is in winter time, then oil of narcissus, or oil from lily, or oil of chamomile, or sarpatonin; and similar to these.
If the surplus is thick and cold, then let the oil be bitter, or oil from balsamite, or oil of almonds, or oil of anetine; and similar to these.
If the vein treatment is of large pores, tender flesh: then it is necessary to prohibit the use of oil, and it is necessary for them to wash the Veins with rose water after the vein treatment, or with cold water, or with sun-heated water, or with cucumber water, or with portulaca water; and similarly to these.
That person whose blood is of much humidity, should be purged with vinegar and myrtle water, and sumac: and similarly to them.
But those whose excesses are thick, should be purged with their vinegar and old wine, or with samascus water, or anethum decoction, or chamomile: and similarly to them.
And it is fitting that purging should be done in a bath, or in the steam of a bath, or it is fitting that it should be administered after exiting the bath for an hour, or for two hours.
And it is not fitting that someone should sleep after purging.
What is it that one who is to be purged or blood-letted beforehand should be governed?
And after that it is fitting to consider first: then if one who is to be purged or blood-letted is choleric, and they overcome their blood with bitterness and inflammation: then it is fitting to receive cooling things, such as granated unguent: and also endivia with vinegar and lettuce, and secaniabin, and juleb: and similar things.
And let his food be chicken, and old beef or goat meat, and seasoned dishes with wild herbs: and similar things.
And he whose constitution is cold, it is fitting to take in a drink a syrup of honey, or of elm, or alsecaniabin made from seeds: and let him take a fragrant wine, which is between old and new: and let him be advised to use a small amount of food. And let his food be chicken, and cane berries: and sparrows, that is, small birds: and young pigeons should be sufficient for him.
And it is fitting that the drink of the day of purging and blood-letting be more than food: and it is fitting that there should be given in a drink to certain people at tyriaca hour alfaroch, or medicine from musk, that is, muscat, or alexithe before purging: and before blood-letting, or after: so that the principal members may be comforted, and the blood may be subtly purified. And it is not suitable that they take it in a warm potion.
About wounds without scarification. Wounds which are without scarification are those that are situated on the chest, and spleen, and hip, and on the navel, and kidney area, and groin: because these members do not tolerate scarification upon themselves.
And there is no search through them, unless an attraction occurs from a bloody member to a member: just as we set a wound on the breasts in an abundance of flux of bloody discharge. And we use them, so that we may dissolve the cold wound infection from the member: just as we set a wound on the navel and umbilicus. For it rarefies the member, and warms it, and removes the pain on that account, because it resolves that wound infection.
And also it is applied on the kidneys, when there occurs in them a blockage or stone. For the virtue of its attraction perhaps opens up the blockage, or eradicates the stone from its place.
And it does similarly when applied on the chest and spleen to remove wound infection from both of them.
And these wounds are treated with an ointment alone, without incision. And sometimes they are treated with fire.
And sometimes they are treated with full warm water in abundant fluxes: and that is, so that the wound may be filled, and it be large, with hot water alone, or with water in which herbs that are suitable have been decocted.
The form of wounds treated with fire.
The width of its opening should be two fingers open, according to what we have formed: and the amount of it in depth should be half a palm: and there should be on its side, in the place which is around its middle, a small hole, according to the quantity that enters into the acus: let it be made from copper or tin, with a thick margin, smooth, equal, polished: so that it does not hurt the member at its position upon it: and there should be in its middle a transverse rod of copper or iron, where the candle is placed with fire.
And now this large wound is made, greater than we described, and a little smaller than the other, according to the weakness and age of the one who uses it.
For there are different (wounds) for boys and thin people, which are not the same as those for men and stout bodies.
The quality of placing this wound with fire on the member is such that you should apply a linen cloth with fire to it decently, or a small candle made from wax; and place it over the middle of the transverse vein which is in the middle of the wound: so that the ignited fire may be around the lower part of the wound, so as not to burn the weak body.
Then it should be placed on the member; and the finger should be on the opening which I mentioned, until when we hold the wound: while we are in need, we remove the finger, and the vapor exits through that opening, and the wound is immediately resolved.
Then apply a linen cloth to the fire according to its own method, and repeat this if you need it.
But in the wound which is treated with water on a weak lung, there is no transverse vein, nor an opening; and it is not administered unless it is filled with water, and placed only on the member.
And this is its form.
And this wound, the larger it is, so that it may hold a lot of water, is better.
Of the suspension of blood-suckers.
Blood-suckers are not administered in many cases, unless in those members where it is not possible to position wounds, due to their smallness, such as the lip, and gums, and similar ones. Or in a member denuded of flesh, such as the finger, and nose, and similar ones.
And the quality of using them is: that you should choose those Blood-suckers which are in sweet waters, clean and free from putridity.
Then they are left overnight in fresh water, until they become soft, and nothing remains in their belly. Then the body is evacuated at first with bloodletting, and with vomiting. Then the membrane of the affected part is cleaned, until it becomes red. Thereafter, they are applied above it.
When therefore they are filled, and fall, and it is possible to suck the location with vomiting, then it is almost the last resort in healing: and if not, then wash the location with vinegar. Then with much water, and they are rubbed, and pressed out.
What if the flow of blood is prolonged after the injury of the blood vessels, and it is that which is to be washed out: then soak a linen cloth in cold water, and put it above, until the washing out is completed.
What if the blood increases, then powder above it with powdered zeolite or gallic, and similar things from astringent powders: until the blood is stemmed.
Or medio-persing beans are applied above the location, and they are left, until the beans adhere to the location, for the blood is stemmed.
And it is necessary, if repeated bleeding is needed, when possible, to change them.
But if the blood vessels are prohibited from suspending, then the location is cleaned with fresh blood. Or a fig is applied to the locations, until something goes out of the blood. Then they are applied, for they themselves, when they feel something from the blood, adhere immediately.
When therefore they are about to fall, powder above them something from triturated aloe, or salt, or ashes: and they fall immediately.
This chapter is often necessary in the art of Medicine, and it is the restoration of fractures and dislocations occurring in bones.
Know, O sons, that many stupid doctors and the common people boast of this chapter, who have never examined an ancient book, nor read a letter from it.
And because of this cause, it happens that this method is deprived of sciences in our land. And I did not obtain anything good from it at all, and I did not acquire what I acquired except through the length of reading ancient books, and study above their intellect, until I extracted the knowledge from them.
Then I adhered to experience and long study throughout my life.
And now I have described to you from that, in this Chapter, all that contains my science: and about what has passed through my experience, since I abbreviated it for you, and freed it from the occupation of lengthiness, and abbreviated it with a fine abbreviation, and showed it with a fine declension: and I formed in it many forms from the forms of instruments which are administered in it, as it is by addition of declension, just as I did in the two preceding Chapters.
Chapter II.
It is fitting, as we say in the prologue of this Chapter, to summarize the discourse and chapters, towards which understanding the artist is first moved to station himself over their truth: namely that you, and those who are prompt, may know or learn this noble art, and others from you.
I say, therefore, that when a fracture or dislocation or torsion or fall occurs, then it is necessary to phlebotomize him first and to loosen him, or both at the same time: if nothing prohibits it, such as debility of virtue; or if he is one who has experienced something from those things in childhood, or an elderly decrepit person; or if it is a time of vehement heat or vehement cold.
Then let him be content with his usual food, cold dishes, and birds' meat, and game; and prohibit wine, and gross meats, and refrain from foods that fill the veins full of blood. Until when he is secure from the aposteme of heat, and does not at that time have an effusion of matter to a limb; then the sick person returns to his first regime with which his custom had been accustomed.
When therefore the fractured bone begins to be restored, then it is necessary that the sick person be fed with nourishing foods of much nutriment, thick, heavy, in which there is viscosity; such as dishes made from cooked wheat with water, and rice, and heads, and feet, and entrails of goats, and eggs, and fresh fish: and thick wine, and similar things. For with this regimen the consolidation of the fracture happens more quickly and better.
And know that fractured bones, when they are in people who are in early old age and decrepit, it is not possible for them to be consolidated and consoled according to their natural order forever, on account of the dryness of their members; and they are consolidated and continued which are from them in the end of lenity, such as the bones of small children.
But truly nature adds to the fractured bone from all sides something similar to glue, in which there is thickness, by which it adheres and binds, until they cohere and are tied together, until they come to a state of strength and firmness, as they were at first, so that nothing prohibits them from their operations: and for this reason it is necessary, that you put nourishing food before the sick person, in which there are heaviness, viscosity, and thickness, as we have said.
And know that the species of fractures are diverse, according to the diversity of members; for a fracture of the thigh is different from a fracture of the skull bone, and a fracture of the chest bone is different from a fracture of the back bone; and similarly all remaining members have distinct differences in their fracture species; and I will come with remembrance of each species of fracture exhibited distinctly in its own chapter. And the species of bone fractures are also differentiated even within themselves.
Because there is an arched fracture, besides what happens to it in its ridges. And when there is a fracture of it according to the length of the bone; and its fractures are jagged, that is, ridges, and additions proceeding, just as they are in a reed, when it is fitted with a knife for writing. And not proceeding; and it is a fracture with a wound and disruption in the head; and it is a small fissure fracture.
And every species has its own ingenuity, or proper instrument in its restoration, according to what comes to mind about it, distinctly in its own places.
And from that by which the fracture of the bone is known, is its tortuousness, and its own eminences; and its appearance to the senses, and its sound when you press it with your hand.
When therefore there is no tortuousness appearing in the place, nor sound upon touch with your agitation, nor does the weak one feel great pain: then there is no fracture there, or it is possible that there is a tortuousness, or small fissure; and so it is not necessary to move it with your hand and compression altogether, but rather put medicine on it, whose remembrance comes at the moment, after the opportune time arrives in that place: then let the subtle strictura be tightened.
And know that the place when it is arched and divided into two, besides what happens to it in its ridges, indeed all parts are removed from their comparison: then it is necessary for you to begin from your hour to rectify it, making it equal before a hot aposteme occurs.
If a warm abscess occurs in it, then leave it for some days, until the apostema quiets down. Then treat it equally according to whatever method he can from gentleness and skill.
And know that its restoration and its equalization are easier than of bones, in which splints are applied.
Then bind it, according to what will seem to you a reminder of it.
If indeed there are splints on the bone, then extension of this fractured member is necessary from two parts, if it is a hand or foot: or with your hand, if it is a small member: or with two ropes, or with a rope and hand.
And let your position be where you place the member above an equal place, according to its natural figure, until when the parts of the fractured member are extended: then strive, that you may restore those additions with all skill, and according to whatever method you can in their places: and beware according to your strength, lest pain or injury occur on the weakened part through your operation: and strive according to your strength, that you may apply one of the two bones with its companion, according to the better forms.
And it is necessary at that time, that you should touch and feel it with your hand. If therefore you see something different there, correct it, and equalize it according to the quantity of your strength.
And beware of vehement extension and strong compression, as many of the foolish do. For they often cause a warm abscess to occur through their operation, or a contraction in the member: as we have already seen that from their operations many times.
Then connect after equalization, and a decent operation, and the stricture of that member, and quiet, and tranquility: and warn the weakened part about it. And make it cautious, lest it moves in its hour of watchfulness, and its own sleep at its revolution, and its agitation, and at its evacuation, and all its movements with its ultimate strength. And take care, lest the position of the member be a position that follows pain. What is, because when it feels pain in the positioning of the member or injury: then it is necessary, that you change it to another positioning where it does not feel pain.
And take care with that, so its position is equal and straight: so that no crookedness occurs in the member when it is restored.
And the quality of the structure of the broken member is, according to what I relate.
You should know that fractured members are differentiated in their smallness, and their magnitude, and their own form.
Those therefore which are small among them, such as the arm, and finger, and neck, and similar to them, then it is necessary that there be a wrapping of soft, fine cloth. Those however which are large among them, such as the hip, and leg, it is necessary that there be a wrapping of broad, hard cloth.
Because the wide bandage connects the large member and binds it from every side with equal tension, so that it does not gird it with a constriction.
Then begin to put a suitable plaster next to the equality of your evacuation, on a soft cushion above the place of the fracture itself. Then begin to wrap the bandage above the place of the fracture itself with three or four wrappings, according to what the member deserves: and bind your hand briefly with the bandage.
Then go with it to the upper part above the place of the fracture, and bind less than was your previous tension, by which you bound the fractured place. Then stretch yourself with the wrapping above the place of the fracture briefly, and gradually loosen the tension, until you grasp from the healthy place a great thing.
Then take another wrapping, and wrap it again above the fractured place with wrappings. Then look with attention to the inferior part at the fracture. And let your operation be in the tightening of the involution, and its softening, according to what we said in the first upper involution.
Then put between the involutions a clean linen cloth or a piece of cloth with which the twistedness of the fracture is equalized, if there is twistedness in it; and if not, do not put anything on it.
Then envelop above that same wound another. Then place equalizing splints on these involutions, made to fit exactly, if there is no swelling in the location, nor hot aposteme.
If there is swelling or an aposteme in it: then place on it what will settle that aposteme and reduce the swelling; and leave it for some days. Then bind above it those splints.
And let the splints be made from mid-ribs of broad cane, smoothed, skillfully shaped: or let them be made from wood where cribra are made, which are made from pine, or cedar, that is, palm branches, or walnut: and let the width of all the splints be according to this form and this same shape.
However, it is necessary that the splint which is placed above the wound be somewhat thicker and broader than the other splints: and the length of the splint should be according to what is permitted by the member in terms of size and smallness.
Then bind above the splints with another cloth, according to the first strictura, the same. Then tie above with threads exactly, according to what we said about the strictura: and it is, that your strictura should be more over the place of the fracture: and as much as the fracture is longer, the strictura is smaller.
And it is necessary, that the threads be moderate in thickness and fineness, and let them be made from soft flax.
Since the threads are thick, as is seen from the operation of stupid surgeons who place their own threads twisted like a linen rope, it is a great mistake: because the structure collapses with them beyond its quality.
And fine threads do not fit again: because you do not achieve through the structure with them that which you wish.
And it is not suitable, so that it is between the star-shaped (formation) and the star-shaped (formation) less than a finger.
What if the weak place is injured through the extremities of the star-shaped (formations) after the structure in healthy places: then put under them a piece of clean linen or Carmanian wool, until nothing is injured by that.
When, however, there is a fracture with an ulcer, and disruption occurs in the skin, I describe it with remembrance of its singularity in the second chapter.
And know that not every fractured member needs to be bound with star-shaped (formations) from the first day. What is, that because the member is large, it does not need to be bound with star-shaped (formations) unless after five days, or seven, or more, according to your security from the occurrence of a hot aposteme.
And this is the method of plasterings, which the ancients used to restore, which are placed upon fractures and dislocations.
The method of common plastering, abbreviated, restoring fractures, suitable for many complexions, especially for women and children: because it is based on that which neither heat nor cold overcomes.
And it is, that you take from the dust of the mill, and it is the marrow of the flour which clings to the walls of the mill at the movement of the millstone: and you mix it as it is, except that you sieve it with a fine sieve: and you put its confection not thick, nor subtle. Then use it.
Another method of applying a plaster for restoring a fracture, and a dislocation, and a twisting. Take mess, and laudanum, and acacia, and enula, and mugath; and juice of all, a tenth X of myrrh, and aloe of both, a fifth V, and alethil, twenty times, they grind everything, and sieve, and mix with water, or with white wax, if the injured part is inflamed. Then apply this plaster. For it is of good composition, and quickly restores a fractured bone, and helps many people.
Another method of applying a plaster, which also helps fractures and twistings. Take mugath, and mess, and white plantain, of all a tenth X of myrrh, and aloe of both a fifth V, acacia a sixth VI, Armenian bole twenty times, they grind everything in many contritions, and sieve, and mix with water, or with white wax; and administer.
Another method of applying a plaster for joints and separated bones in their places; and it soothes the accidental pain, and division of bone, and fracture. Take a layer of suet, and soak it in vinegar, and oil decoction; and place it on the affected area.
And in this plaster there is no power of restoration, but it is good for soothing hot apostemes; and it drives out pains properly.
Another method of applying a plaster that restores a fractured bone. Take leaves of figs of the forest, and leaves of silvan papyrus; and grind everything, and make a plaster from both.
A method of applying a shortened plaster for administering at the restoration of a fractured bone; and when you want to resolve the remaining inflammation. Take roots of plantain, and chamomile, and flowers of violet, and herb powder, all in one part; they grind everything, and mix with wine, if there is no inflamed member.
If it is inflamed, then apply it with water of coriander in a humid state, or with water, and use it thus.
Another mode of plastering for a stronger resolution, which is the first one, when there occurs a hard aposteme during the restoration of a limb. Recipe of roots of altea, and seeds of flax, and balaustiae, and melliloti, and samsuci, and violet flowers, and chamomile, all equal parts, they are ground into a powder, and mixed with water of willow, or sweet water, or wine. All that is applied according to the warmth of the limb, and the tranquility of its heat.
Hippocrates indeed did not say in his book that anything should be applied to a fractured limb for its restoration, unless it is made with cerates and oil; nothing else; and he narrated that it should be a medium between thickness and subtlety.
But to Galen it seemed best that those things should be applied to a fractured limb for its restoration, in which there is an extraction of warmth, such as myrrh, and aloe, and frankincense, and similar things from those which we have narrated.
A mode of plastering that is suitable for a wound and pain. Recipe of mugwort, and cicers, and hair of human incisors, or bird's feather, and altea, equal parts; they are ground into a powder, and sieved, and mixed together; and let an plaster be made from it.
The quantity however is according to what is fitting, so that the bandage remains, then it is dissolved, it is, as you should consider then, if there does not occur weakness of pain, nor itching, nor the fractured bone is moved from its place; then it is not resolved for many days. But if there occurs to it in its place a severe itching, or disturbing pain, or inflammation: then remove quickly, and dissolve it at that hour, and take away the plaster from it: and take a soft cloth, or a gentle marine sponge, humid; and submerge it in lukewarm water, and wash the area with it, until the itching is quieted, and the pain is assuaged.
But if there occurs to it in its place a severe itching, or disturbing pain, or inflammation: then remove quickly, and dissolve it at that hour, and take away the plaster from it: and take a soft cloth, or a gentle marine sponge, humid; and submerge it in lukewarm water, and wash the area with it, until the itching is quieted, and the pain is assuaged. Then let the member rest for an hour. Then put on it a compress of succidum, soaked in vinegar and oil, or rose oil: and bind it on at night for one day, until the member is free from inflammation, and the pain is relieved.
Then apply a subtle stricture to it, and a small plaster: and do not bind it with your first constraint, but subtly, until it is healed.
If you see that the abscess, and redness, and pain, and inflammation, and all the accidents are now completely removed, and you have applied plaster and stricture, then apply it just as you did at first, equally.
If something from what we have said does not happen to the member, then do not release it, unless after three days, or four, or five, or seven. And when it is left for twenty days altogether, according to what appears to you from the solution of the member, as we have said, until the fracture adheres and the coagulation of flesh approaches upon it: add also then in the stricture more than your first entire stricture: and add also in the thickening of food for the infirm, according to what the previous remembrance of it was.
If you see that the place of the fracture is already drying out and thinning more than it should: then know that nourishment is prevented from reaching it. Bathe it therefore with lukewarm water at every opportunity where you release it, and let it be so for three days, and loosen the stricture a little.
Through this operation, nourishment is brought to the member, and it is healed quickly.
That which foolish restorers do from a fracture of the member at another time, when it is not restored at first, according to what is proper, and is restored according to their twistedness, is an error in their operation, and great fear: and if it were right, the ancients would have written that in their books, and would have operated with it.
And I have not seen any of their signs in that entire thing, and it is more correct, so that it does not become that.
Concerning the fracture of an accidental wound on the head.
The species of fractures are diverse, and its figures are many: and their causes are distinct.
For there is a fracture that occurs from a blow with a tool, and the blow carries through the whole bone until it reaches the siphac, which is under the bone, just as an axis does in wood; and on account of this, this species of fracture is called Axial.
Or the tool strikes something of the bone, and strikes its surface, and does not penetrate to the very end of it: and this species of fracture is called Kalaan, that is, Absolute Elevation.
And it is a wound of two fractures, either large or small.
And there is a fracture that is a compression, or an abrasion: and its cause is a blow with a stone, or a fall on a stone, or similar things.
And this fracture is also either penetrating, which already approaches the membrane, which is under the bone: or it is on the surface of the bone: and it is a wound of these two fractures, also either small or large.
And there is a fracture that is hidden in the bone in the subtlety of a hair: and it is a small fissure, and on account of this, this species of fracture is called Capillary.
And there is a fracture that occurs from a fall or a blow with a stone, and similar things, which cause the lamina of the bone to ingress inward, and it becomes concave: just as it happens to copper vessels when they are struck and a part of them ingresses inward.
And it very often occurs in the moist bones of the head, such as are the heads of children.
And there are fractures of all these kinds, separated and distinct, and I describe them with a reminder of the entire thing in its proper place.
And we recognize all these kinds of fracture through examination on it, and inquiry into them with stretched-out parts, and removal of corrupted flesh which is upon them.
The hairy species is recognized by this, that it is detected on the bone, and is scraped off, and is anointed over it with a warm poultice: for the fracture appears black.
In the treatment of a fracture, consider first the accidents of the injured person: then if you see from the accidents what they signify by manifest signs on the fear, such as vomiting of bile, and extension, and loss of intellect, and interruption of speech, and fainting, and acute fever, and protrusion of the eyes, and redness of them, and similar things from the accidents in many dispositions, it is doubtful that it will not be cured: and if you see non-threatening accidents, and hope for health: then begin its treatment.
What is, if the wounded person comes to you at first with a wound: and it is during the winter days, then it is necessary that you should focus on removing the bone splinters before the fourteenth day according to every disposition.
And if it is during the summer days, then it is necessary that you should hasten to remove the bone before the seventh day, lest it becomes corrupted by the pus under the bone, and those accidents occur which we have described.
What if the fracture of the bone has now reached the membrane touching the brain, and it is with smallness, and attraction: then it is necessary that you should cut into the comminuted part, and the attracted part, according to what I relate to you.
And it is, that you should shave the head of the wounded person: and detect the bone according to whatever method is possible for you: and according to the shape of the wound, and what is lightly upon the injured part.
If it happens to you during the dissection of a bone flux with bloody discharge, or a warm aposteme: then apply to it what is appropriate. And it is, that you fill the place with cloths infused in wine and rose oil: and make the wound rest, until the aposteme is settled, and you are secure from the bloody discharge. Then begin with the cure of the bone, and its ablution.
And that is done according to one of two modes.
One mode indeed is, that you cut the bone with a strict incision of the acie: and this is its form.
Then administer another instrument after the incision, wider than it previously: and this is its form.
Then administer also another instrument, even wider also than the second.
And the second mode is, that you have a number of diverse incision instruments: some of which are wider than others, and some of which are shorter than others: and they should be at the end of their sharpened extremities, and they should be made of iron, or forged: and use facility in percussion on the incision instrument, so that it does not strike the head, and hurts itself.
If the bone is strong and hard: then it is necessary, that you perforate around it, before you administer incision instruments, with drills which are called non-penetrating Drills: and they are not called thus, unless because they themselves do not transcend the boundary of the fleshy bone to that which is behind it: for this reason, because the Drill is a round extremity above that which is under its sharp head, similar to an edge, and a small circle prevents submersion, and transgresses the thickness of the bone.
And it is fitting for you to take from these drills a large number, each of which is suited to the quantity of the bone's thickness, until there is present to you an entire set of drills: whose sharp extremity's quantity in length and breadth is, according to the quantity of the thickness of that skull.
And this is the form of three species of skull saws, or trephines.
The quality of piercing around the broken bone is such that you place the trephine on the bone and rotate it with your fingers until you know the bone has been penetrated. Then move the trephine to another location, and put what is in every hole the quantity of the thickness of the radius, or around that.
Then cut with incisors what is in every hole from the bone: and make it as subtle as you can on that from the fineness of the levity, as we said, until you eradicate the bone, or with your hand, or with some other instrument, which you prepared for that: such as forceps, and subtle pincers.
And it is necessary to beware with all caution, lest you touch the trephine or incisors with anything of the syphon.
When you are circumcising the bone by piercing, and it has been separated from the syphon, if it was continuous with it, and you extract it, it is necessary to scrape, and equally smooth out what remains of it in the bone with another instrument similar to an incisor. However, it is necessary that it be thin and more subtle than other incisors.
What remains of small bone fragments and sawdust: then take them with ease, along with what is at hand among your instruments. Then treat the wound after that with bandages and ointments which we mentioned.
And another method of operation is easy, far removed from fear: which Galen said and praised with great praise: and this is his statement. It is necessary for you first to begin to uncover the part of the bone from the place where the fracture is most vehement and manifest: until when you have uncovered that part, and placed underneath it the extremity of this lenticular incisor, whose form this is.
And the concave part does not cut anything, and its acute part on both sides of it descends in length, as you see; so that the concave part is inclined to the siphach, with its acute part falling onto the bone of the face.
Then strike above the Incisor with one side of a small hammer, until you cut through the whole bone with ease, as it is revolved: and you should be careful with the panniculus, lest something happens to it, which you fear may occur.
And if the surgeon were not more stupid than men, and more ignorant of it, nor asleep, then if something remained attached to the bone from the panniculus in certain places, he would cut it away from there with the extremity of the lenticular incisor, and release it from there with ease. For it is released from there without harm, and without fear.
And if the fracture of the bone does not penetrate to the panniculum, and that which is cut away from the bone is its surface, and roughnesses and subtle projections remain in it: then it is necessary, so that you scrape off that roughness, and eradicate those projections with subtle rasps which you have prepared in a diverse quantity of numbers, so that it may be possible for you to administer them in every convenient place, and more direct ones, according to that to which the operation leads you, and the fractured bone, and its shape. And it is necessary, that you administer in your rasping, where first you scrape the bone, more broadly with those rasps. Then use afterwards a more subtle one.
And it is necessary, that you administer in your rasping, where first you scrape the bone, more broadly with those rasps. Then use afterwards a more subtle one. And do not cease to do that according to continuity, until you arrive at administering the most subtle and fine of all.
In each of the remaining small cracks and subtle fractures, it is necessary to administer care, according to that which leads to its rectification.
And it is a thing that is not hidden from everyone, to whom there is any study in this art, and he stands upon what we have written, and shows in great fractures.
If, however, a piece of cloth is detected and retained, when you extract the bone: then it is necessary to take a linen cloth, according to the size of the wound, and soak it in rose oil, and put it on the opening of the wound. Then take another cloth, doubled or tripled, and soak it in wine and rose oil, and put it on top of the first cloth: and do that which you can most easily do to it, so that it does not become swollen.
Then apply a wide bandage on top of it: and do not tighten it, unless by the amount that holds the wound together just so; and leave it with this care for one day, or two days, until you are secure from a cold aposteme. Then dissolve it, and apply afterwards medicines with which there is excessive dryness: such as the roots of lily, and herb flour, and powder of frankincense, and aristolochia, and similar things: and it is, that you make from these medicines a powder, which is powdered over the wound as they are dry.
And universally apply to it all medicine from its property that is to cleanse and not to bite. And beware according to your skill, that the wound in your treatment is clear: neither should there be foulness of ointment in it, nor foulness.
And beware according to your skill, that the wound in your treatment is clear: neither should there be foulness of ointment in it, nor foulness. Nor should you allow pus to collect in it at all: because when pus collects on the surface of the brain, it corrupts it, and putrefies it, and a great evil happens to the weak person after that; and now it happens in the siphac of the head, when the bone is cleaned from it, especially when the care of it is neglected, blackness appears on its surface.
Consider therefore, at that time, if an infirmity occurs which we have described, know that it is a perilous and dubious outcome.
And if blackening does not occur, unless from the medicine that is applied to it, and it is in the virtue of that medicine, so as to bring about that blackening: then it is necessary to take one part from honey, three parts from rose oil, and to apply a linen cloth with them. Then put it on the wound; afterwards treat it with the remedies of healing that are suitable, until it is healed.
On the restoration of the nose when it is fractured.
Know that the nose is not fractured except for its two upper parts together, or one of them: because they are two bones; since its lower part is cartilaginous, it is not fractured, and does not happen to it unless there is attrition, and tortuousness, and similitude.
If one of its two parts is fractured, then it is necessary to introduce a small finger into the nostril and adjust that fracture with your index finger and thumb, until the nose returns to its natural shape: and let this be done skillfully, with ease. And take care, lest it happens through your operation that the wounded part suffers pain.
If the fracture is in the upper part of the nose and does not reach to the finger: then it is necessary to adjust the extremity of the radius, where there is a small swelling.
If indeed the fracture is in two parts, then do similarly to that: and take care with its restoration on the first day of the fracture, if it is possible. And if not, then after the seventh or tenth day, at the time of quiet and warm application.
Then introduce into the extremity of the nose a swathe of linen cloth, if the fracture is in one part: or introduce two swathes if the fracture is in two parts: and let there be in the swathe a swelling of such quantity as to fill the nostril.
And some of the ancient restorers said that they should be soaked in butter and changed every day. But it does not seem to me, rather it is fitting, that the ligature be soaked in a decoction of egg white, mixed with powder of millet. Then release the ligature until the bone is strengthened, and the cartilage is induced.
And when a feather of a goose is inserted into the nostril in place of the ligature, after it has been wrapped with a soft cloth: and it happens that it holds the fracture of the nose more strongly, and so that it does not prevent the patient from breathing.
And this is not a necessary thing. If you wish, do that; and if you wish, do the ligatures.
What if the nose becomes irritated again while you are operating with a warm apostemum, apply to the nose a plaster made with cedar, or with wax infused in rose oil, or a moderate amount of dyaulion.
If the warm apostemum does not irritate, then it is fitting to apply a plaster made with flour of fenugreek, and powder of frankincense mixed with egg white. Then put a soft padding over it, and do not bind the nose with anything at all.
If the bones of the nose are broken into small fragments, or are crushed, then it is fitting to separate them from each other, and to extract them with instruments that are suitable for this. Then sew it up, and care for it with what promotes flesh growth, and consolidate it with suitable plasters or ointments.
What if a wound occurs between the nose, then it is fitting to care for it with ligatures: and apply a tube of lead, until it heals.
Concerning the restoration of the lower jaw, when it is dislocated.
When the lower jawbone is dislocated and its fracture is not accompanied by a wound: then consider if its fracture is only external, and it does not break into two pieces, but curves inwardly; then its recognition is easy.
It is necessary, therefore, if the fracture is on the right side, to insert the index finger of your left hand into the mouth of the injured person; similarly, if the fracture is on the left jawbone, then insert the index finger of your right hand: and push with it the curvature of the fracture from inside outwards with ease, using your other hand on the inner side of the bone to guide it.
When the fracture of the jawbone has already separated into two pieces, then it is necessary to administer extension from both parts, according to straightness, until its alignment becomes possible.
If there has been a concussion or disruption of the teeth, then bind them with a thread of gold, silver, or silk. Then place a compress over the fractured jawbone. Then place over it a doubled cloth, and place over the cloth a large star-shaped fixture made to fit; or an equal piece of leather from the sole of a shoe, along the length of the jawbone.
Then bind it above, according to the preparation of the ligature that is made for you, and its application is suitable, so that it does not come apart; and advise the injured person to be calm and quiet; and give their food in soft, easy-to-swallow bits.
If you think that something has already changed in the shape of the jawbone in some way, then wait and release it on the third day. Then correct what has been altered from it, and apply a plaster made of flour mill dust, with egg white, or with wheat flour, after you have removed the compress; and place a soft wool over the plaster.
Therefore, when that plaster remains applied over it and the bone's disposition is not altered, leave it, lest you disturb the healing; or it may exacerbate the fracture. For this fracture is often exacerbated during the seven days of treatment.
What if during that time a hot abscess should occur, then administer what we have mentioned many times in its treatment, until that abscess is removed.
And if the fracture is with an open wound, be careful. For now the bone fragment is separated from the ossicle, or from a splinter; then be subtle in this, so that you may remove those splinters with what is convenient to you in their removal by instruments.
If the orifice of the wound is constricted, then dilate it with a fleam according to the quantity of your necessity.
Then when you have removed the splinters, and none of them remain, thus then the orifice of the wound, if it is wide: and if not, place over it from plasters that are suitable for that, and they will heal it, until it is healed.
On the restoration of the Crural bone, when it is fractured.
The Crural bone is indeed frequently fractured from the front part of the humerus, and its fracture occurs in one of three ways.
Or it is fractured and separated into two, apart from what happens with those splinters: and it is easier to restore it.
Or it happens as with the bone splinters: and it is more difficult to restore.
Or it is a fracture with an open wound.
And the operation in this case when the fracture is without an open wound is, to have two assistants present, one of whom holds the instrument that follows the fractured Crural bone, and the other extends the neck towards the part.
Then make an equal fracture of your fingers, so that its shape is formed according to what is needed, and it does not have prominence in it, nor concavities.
What if you need more extension, then it is necessary to place a small sphere under the cloth or wool: and its size should be according to your necessity: and extend and elevate the forearm, and bind the sphere with your hand, so that it makes an equal fracture, according to what is needed.
What if you cannot draw out the forearm to the exterior: because it penetrates to the deep: then it is necessary to rest the weak one on his neck: and place a medium-sized cushion under his shoulder, and press the ministering shoulder downwards, so that the bone of the forearm which is in the depths rises upwards: and then rectify the fracture, and make it equal with your fingers.
If you feel a crepitus coming from the forearm and it moves: then it is necessary to fix above that, and extract it as a dislocated thing with ease.
If it is retained in the bone, then cleverly make an incision with one of the incisors you prepared for that, after you have placed under the forearm an instrument that holds a splint: and the instrument is made of wood or iron. And this is its shape.
It is similar to a spoon which has no concavities.
And its width should be according to what you need for it from the size of the bone and its smallness. Its length, indeed, is also according to what is possible for you in the operation.
And it should have two extremities, as you see: and one extremity should be wide, and the other narrow.
If the disruption of the wound which you made when you extracted the dislocated bone is wide, and it is secure from the hot aposteme: then join the two lips of the wound with a suture.
And if the disruption is small, or a warm poultice is applied: then fill the wound with lint and soft cloths according to the quantity of the wound's separation.
What if a warm poultice is applied, then soak a cloth in rose oil and vinegar and wine, and put it on top of it.
A stiffness of the bone occurs when there is no wound and no fracture, it is, that you should put on the bone a plaster made from flour of millet with albumen of egg. And put a soft padding over it. Then put a bandage under the armpit, if it is needed there. Then take a bandage, that is, a strap which the Saracens hold, which should be long indeed: and its width should be one palm, or about that. Then put a double layer of soft cloth over the padding and plaster. Then take a splint from a thin board, whose width is three fingers, and similarly in length. Then wrap it in a cloth. Then wrap the cloth with the splint in the place of the bandage that falls on the fracture and location. Then put the bandage on the fracture as it is wrapped, and wrap it around the neck, and under the healthy armpit, and under the diseased armpit: and reduce it over every part, and in such a way that you see that the bandage holds the fracture in place decently: and it is thus, that it is not hidden from you, and all, so that the splint does not move away from the fractured bone. And because of this, it is necessary to examine the diseased part every day. As often as the bandage becomes loosened, and you see the splint is already being removed: then straighten it out, and tighten the bandage.
Then put the patient to sleep on their back, and place a small pillow under their side near their hip at night, so that it may be raised as an aid to their lateral region. It is elevated therefore the fracture of the elbow through the elevation of the shoulder.
Or bind his arm to his neck: and do not loosen the binding, unless it becomes irritated at the site of the irritation, or from an abscess, until twelve days.
Then renew the dressing, if you see his face is turning to that. And add a tightening, and leave it, until it is restored and coagulated.
And indeed the fracture of the elbow is tightened and comforted according to the greatest extent in twenty-eight days; and sometimes it happens in certain men in a shorter time.
On the restoration of a fracture of the shoulder blade.
The shoulder blade is rarely fractured, and it is broken in its broad part: and they are not broken except at their edges.
When therefore it is fractured at that place, and it is broken in the middle of it, and it is not recognized except by touch; then according to the shape of the fracture prepare its treatment. And reduce it to its natural shape in every way of ingenuity, as much as is possible for you.
Then put on the spot a powder of millet with egg white, and a gentle plaster, and put above it a small pillow made from folded cloth. Then put on it a broad star-shaped [bandage] from a subtle tablecloth according to the quantity of the whole shoulder blade, or slightly larger.
If indeed under the star-shaped [bandage] there is a concavity at some place of the shoulder blade, then equalize that concavity with a gentle plaster, until the star-shaped [bandage] descends according to equality.
Then the suture is placed above with a long thread, making a decent tightening, and firmness of the stars, until it does not move from its place.
And consider the ligature in every way. As often as the ligature is loosened, tighten it, and make the star equal if it moves from its place; and let it be weakened over its healthy side.
And indeed the splint is restored in twenty days, or in twenty-five days.
When therefore this number is complete, then loosen the ligature; and you will be in security. For it is from bones whose joining is not feared, nor their separation.
If a fragment proceeds from the bone and pierces under the skin: then split above it, and remove it. And do what we said about the fracture of the ankle joint from the treatment of a hot aposteme, if something happens to it.
Concerning the restoration of a fractured rib.
The breastbone when it is broken in its middle, and that rarely happens. Its extremities are indeed frequently broken, and are dislocated from accidents to it.
When its middle is broken, which declines to the lower parts, and a severe pain happens to it, and difficulty in breathing, and coughing; and perhaps it vomits blood, and the fracture in the bone is declared, and does not hide from the senses. Its restoration is, that the weakened part should be raised above its back: and place among splints of its mattress.
Then press its shoulders, and bring together the ribs from both sides or flanks with hands: and adjust it in its equilibrium, according to every method by which it is possible and convenient, until the shape of the bone returns, according to what is necessary.
Then put on top of it a plaster and a compress, and place above it a thin plate made from willow or tamarisk, or similar things in a gentle manner, after you have wrapped it in a cloth. Then bind it gently over the fractured bone, so that it is not dislocated: and take care with the binding according to the roundness of the back several times, and constrict it with a suitable strapping.
Then consider the binding at every hour, and as often as it becomes soft, constrict it: and if the necessity of it provokes a solution for its itching, or the corrosion that occurs in the place, or pain, or abscess: then be ready, and release it, and remove the plaster, and correct what has happened with the method of its cure.
Then reduce the plaster, if you see that it is returning to its former condition: and apply a bandage to it, until it is healed.
On the restoration of ribs, when they are fractured.
Know that a fracture of the ribs does not occur, unless in thick places which follow the back, and from the extremities of these from the front part. And it does not happen to them with bruising, unless because they are cartilaginous. And the knowledge of the same is not hidden from the sense during examination with the fingers.
And its restoration is done in this way, that you equalize the fracture with your fingers according to the possible method, until it becomes equal in shape, according to what is necessary. Then apply a plaster, and constrict the fractured bone with a thin plate, if it needs that.
And if the fracture of the ribs is inclined towards the interior: then it happens that a severe and vehement pain occurs, and punctures, like the puncture that happens to one who has pleurisy: because, since the bone pierces inwardly, and also difficulty in breathing, and coughing, and vomiting of much blood occurs: and this is difficult to cure.
And now the ancients were ingenious in this with many ingenuities: and among them are those who say that you should place foods that generate inflammation and flatulence, so that the stomach may become inflamed and extended, and the fracture is driven outward.
We indeed reject this, lest it not make a bad cause for creating a hot abscess, if it does not happen. But if it has already happened, then he adds to it there.
And some of them said: let a poultice be applied to the windy place, then it should be pressed with force, and this is more like a rational treatment. However, it is feared that the poultice attracts windy superfluities to the location, on account of a debilitating disposition.
And some of them said: it is fitting that the location be covered with wool that has already been steeped in hot oil: and poultices are applied between the ribs, until it is full: so that there may be an equal ligature when it is wrapped around according to its roundness.
Then the patient should be treated with a treatment of pleurisy from food and medicine.
Since the severe disease oppresses the patient, which he does not tolerate, and the sharp pain of the pointed puncture wounds, and we fear for the patient: then it is necessary to dissect above the location, and to separate from the broken rib. Then we should place on it an instrument that preserves the suture, whose memory has preceded: and we should make an incision with ease, and we should cut into it.
Then we should bring together the two lips of the wound, if it is large with a suture: and we should treat it with plasters, until it heals.
Since if a hot abscess happens in the meantime, then it is fitting, and inject poultices soaked in rose oil, and apply them to the location: and the patient should be treated with what is suitable for the abscess.
In the meantime, let him be positioned on his side where he slept, until he is healed.
On the restoration of fractures of the vertebral column of the back and neck.
When a fracture occurs in the neck bones, and it rarely happens to them with attrition, and similarly to the vertebral column of the back. When that happens to someone, and you want to know whether he will be healed or not, then consider it. For if you see his hands already softened, and numb, and dead: and he cannot move them, nor extend them, nor constrict them: and when you constrict them with your fingers, and prick them with a needle, he does not feel it, and he does not feel pain in them: then know that he will not be healed, and in many cases it is mortal.
But if he moves them, and feels the constriction with your fingers and the prick: then know that the vertebra is sound, and that the patient will be healed with treatment.
But if it happens to the vertebral column of the back similarly, and you want to know whether he will be healed or not: then consider his feet: then if you see that they are softened, and the same thing happens to them as happened to the hands: next when he lies on his back, wind and excretion come out without his will: and when he is positioned on his belly, excretion comes out without his will: and when he is positioned on his back, and he wants to urinate, but cannot: then know that it is mortal. Do not therefore labor in his treatment.
If nothing happens to him from that, the case is lighter.
And the treatment for what happened to him from that is, that you should try a gentle sedative application: thus, that you place rose oil alone on the affected vertebral column: or with egg yolks boiled in water.
Place it on the affected area several times a day, until when the aposteme is warm: then place one of the comforting, drying, and constricting plasters over the area, and bind it with a ligature: and especially for the weakened person, so that they may use quiet and tranquility. Let them not sleep on the affected part with which they find pain, until they are healed.
If it happens to be a bone worn away by friction, or something that is already separated from it: then it is necessary to sew up the skin, and remove that. Then bring together the two lips of the wound, if it is large, with a suture. Then treat it with some incarnative ointment, until it heals.
If indeed the end of the bone is fractured and it is the end of the tail: then it is necessary to insert the thumb of the left hand into the anus, and with the other hand grasp the broken bone, according to what is possible, and in a secondary adjustment.
Then place it on top, and remove it: and treat the wound with the treatment that preceded, until it heals.
On the restoration of the ankle.
Chapter 11.
The bones of the ankle are rarely fractured. When they are fractured, then the fracture of them is not without a comminution at their extremities: and they split along their length, and decline towards the interior: and there occurs weakness, pain in the place, and numbness: and the leg that is fractured becomes numb.
And its restoration indeed is, to extend your hand over it, until you stand on the fracture in whatever shape it is.
If the fracture is only at its extremities, then equalize that fracture, according to what is prepared for you from the adjustment, until it is assimilated to its natural shape.
If the fracture is longitudinal or already declined inward, then make the injured person lie on their belly until the restoration of that fracture is prepared for you. When you have aligned it, put a plaster on it; then place a wooden or leather splint on it, and tighten the bandage over it so that you do not fear a change in the fracture or a removal of the splint.
And adjust the concavity of those with what fills it, until it takes hold of it according to its equality; and order the injured person to sleep on their back or on their healthy side.
If a hot abscess occurs to him: then cease from extending it and its restoration, until the hot abscess settles; and put on it what settles it, according to what has preceded, then return to its restoration; and bind it as is necessary.
If a fragment occurs in the bone, or becomes detached, extract it.
Concerning the restoration of fractures of the helpers.
The helper is that which is between the elbow and the head of the Spatula (a type of surgical instrument).
If it is therefore fractured, then its restoration is according to one of two methods.
One of which is: to take a flat piece of wood of medium thickness, according to this shape that follows.
And two ligatures are tied at both ends.
Then it is suspended from an elevated place: and the injured person sits on a seat. Then he places his fractured arm over the wood, until it reaches the tender part of it, in the middle of which there is a curved attachment of the wood.
Then hang something heavy above it, so that it stretches it out downwards to the lower parts. Then the physician adjusts the fracture with his hands, until the fracture is rearranged, according to what is necessary.
And another method is to place the injured person on their back, and hang their hand from their neck with a bandage. Then instruct two assistants, one to hold what is above the fracture with their hands, and the other to hold below it, each extending to their respective side.
And if you wish to make the extension stronger, then tie below the fracture with a bandage, and above it with another bandage; and each of the two assistants should extend to their respective sides.
If the fracture is near the articulation of the humerus, then it is necessary to put one bandage below the nipple and another beneath the fracture towards the elbow.
And similarly if the fracture is near the elbow, then it is necessary to put a bandage above that place and above the elbow itself.
Then equalize the fracture with ease and without effort, until when the fracture is aligned according to what is necessary, and a good application is made: then tie it, if not an hot abscess occurs.
If a hot abscess occurs, then loosen the bandage until the seventh day. And put on it a piece of clean cloth soaked in vinegar and rose oil, until the abscess quiets down: then tie it: and the method of tying is to apply a plaster over the fracture.
Then put a wrapping of new cloth over the plaster. Then add the arm to the support, and place his hand open on his shoulder.
And put on a cloth, and tie around the support arm, so that the arm stands in its place like a star: if nothing prevents you from it, nor is anything altered concerning you because of the fractured bone.
But if something is altered concerning you because of the fractured bone, then use a star-shaped bandage: and it is, that you put on the fracture itself a star-shaped bandage which is wider and stronger than other bandages. And you should place between every width of the finger's breadth: and let the length of the stellae be according to the fracture with the addition of three fingers' breadth on every side.
Then tie above the stellae a constriction as I described at the beginning of the chapter.
And it is, that your constriction above the place of the fracture should be stricter. And as much as the fracture is more elongated, let the constriction be less.
If you see the position of the stellae and the constriction, as we have said, at the hour when you restore the member at once, then do it: and if you apply a warm apostema, then release the constriction and stellae until the seventh day, as we have said.
Then consider the ligament for three days altogether, so that there may not occur itching at the site, or inflammation, or be prohibited by food from reaching the member, on account of the excessive tightness of the constriction. Correct it therefore entirely, according to what we have said.
If you are confident that nothing will happen from it: then do not loosen the ligature until after three days, or more.
And let the patient sleep on his back, and his hand on his stomach: and place under the supporting cushion a full layer of wool, evenly.
And consider at every hour of night or day, that the shape of the fractured member is not loosened, or the ligature softened. Correct it therefore entirely by your virtue.
And give the patient food according to the order which we have mentioned, so that the food is subtle at first, until the wound begins to consolidate: then it is necessary to increase his food.
For it is the custom of the helper and the knee to be constricted for forty days: then therefore it is necessary to loosen, and to administer a bath, and to be treated with ointments that correct it.
If the fracture was dirty and crushed, then do not release the bandage from it for 50 days, and up to two months.
On the restoration of a fracture of the arm.
The arm is composed of two bones, which are called two hollows.
One of them is small and it is the one that follows the thumb. And the other is large, and it is the one that is placed below the small one on the lower part.
Perhaps therefore only the larger hollow bone is fractured, or the smaller one; and perhaps they are both fractured at the same time.
When therefore the smaller hollow bone is fractured above, then its restoration is easy, and its healing is easier.
And when the lower hollow bone is fractured, its fracture is bad, and its healing is difficult.
And it is worse when both bones are fractured at the same time.
If therefore the bone that is fractured is the smaller hollow one above, then it is fitting for the physician, in its restoration, to apply a small extension with ease, until it is equal to itself.
If indeed the larger hollow bone is the one that is fractured: then it is necessary to apply a stronger binding force.
And it is necessary to apply the shape of the hand at its restoration, and also an extended extension above the pillow. And let the thumb of the hand be higher than all the fingers above: and let it be lower at the joint of all the fingers, or the remaining ones: and let the weak person sit squarely on himself, and let the pillow be in front of him, or directly above him, at a height, so that the weak person does not incur labor.
Then the assistant extends the arm from the lower part, or with their hand, or with a bandage. And another assistant extends it from above similarly.
Then the physician should reduce the bone, so that he restores it to a better shape as much as possible.
What if there are splinters in the fracture of the bone, then try to reduce every fragment into its own place with your strength.
If indeed there appears a separated splinter in it, and it pierces the skin, and there is no hope of restoring it: then put something over it, and remove it according to the method that we mentioned in the previous cases.
If, however, the fracture is with a wound, I have already dealt with that in a separate chapter, so receive the treatment of it from there.
What if at the beginning of your restoration a hot aposteme occurs, then apply a linen cloth with a cerate made from rose oil and white wax, and let it be a medium between thickness and subtlety: and tie the cloth over it with a subtle strapping, until the aposteme settles down: then remove the cerate, and put on a plaster prepared from flour of millet with egg white. Then put on splints, and let the splint that is put on the fracture itself be a little broader and stronger.
And know that the number of splints on the arm is six in most arrangements: whether the fracture is in one forearm or in two forearms at once.
Then put your strapping over the place of the fracture stronger and more vehement, and a little more with the strapping above the fracture or below it: or put a softer strapping, slightly, according to what was mentioned at the beginning of the chapter.
And let the cloths that are wrapped over the fracture be soft, humid cloths: and not rough, harsh ones. And let the thread with which it is bound be made from linen, medium between subtle and thick, as we narrated.
And consider the member and ligament after a few days. If something happens that requires rectification, such as itching that occurs in a limb, then it is necessary to bathe the affected limb with warm water until the itching subsides and release the limb without constriction, until it subsides; then tighten it again.
If the constriction is already softened and the bone is already removed, and similar things: then rectify the whole thing with your strength, and consider it again.
For if the nourishment is prevented from reaching the limb because of the excess constriction, then it is necessary to soften it a little, and release it for some days, until it runs to that nourishment, then constrict it.
But if none of the things we mentioned happen to the patient, then it is not necessary to loosen it, unless after twenty days or around that time.
Then the hand of the patient should be suspended at his neck. And let his neck be equal, and it should be protected with its strength from agitated movements. And make him sleep on his back.
And know that this fracture is restored in thirty days, or in thirty-two days: and perhaps it will be restored in twenty-eight days. All of that is according to the dispositions of the complexions, and the dispositions of strength.
Of the restoration of fractures of the hand.
Know that fracture rarely occurs in the pelvis of the hand and the nodes of the fingers. And it does not occur to it, unless there is much repeated rubbing.
When therefore a fracture of the sole occurs, or rubbing: then it is necessary that the patient should sit squarely: and let his seat be before him according to equality. Then put his hand on it extended.
Then the attending physician extends the broken bone, and adjusts it until they join with a good joint.
Then it is fitting to apply a poultice and a compress, if there does not occur a warm aposteme. Then put a star-shaped dressing on top according to the size of the place, and you have already wrapped it in a linen cloth.
If the fracture is around the lower part of the sole of the foot, then make a spherical shape out of cloth; and bind it to the injured person, so that it holds with the foot in its fractured state; then tie it up with a long cloth.
And let the dressing be of leather, in which there is gentleness, so that the leather may be applied to the body of the foot; and tie it up, according to what is fitting.
If the fracture is on the outer side, then it is fitting to put a dressing on top and another dressing below on the sole of the foot; and let the hand be open and straight. Then put a bandage, as the hand revolves; and extend it between the toes with a binding.
If there occurs a fracture of some nodes of the fingers, then if it is the thumb, it should be straightened according to what is fitting. Then tie it up with the sole of the foot; and if you wish, put a straight, small dressing on it, so that the fracture may be elevated, and not moved.
If the fracture is of the remaining fingers, such as the middle finger, and the index finger, or the ring finger, then it should be straightened, and tied with a healthy finger that follows it; or they should all be tied together according to their continuity; and this is better. Or put a small dressing on top of it, as we said about the thumb.
And consider in your restoration, and after the disposition of a warm aposteme; and oppose with it what is fitting, when something happens from that, according to how its story is repeated.
On the Restoration of a Fracture of the Hip.
The hip joint is frequently dislocated and is made manifest to the senses, because it turns inward and outward to the front and back parts.
And its restoration is done thus, that a ligament is tightened above the fracture, and another ligament below the fracture. And the weakened part is stretched out over its own surface.
Then every ligament is extended to its own part according to equality: and this, when the fracture is in the middle of the bone.
But if the fracture is near the root of the hip, then the ligament should be towards the part of the pubis, so that the extension falls upwards: and another ligament below the fracture.
And thus similarly if the fracture is near the knee, then the ligament should be near the knee, so that the extension is towards the lower parts.
Then the physician equalizes the bone with both his hands, until he reduces it according to the similarity of the natural figure: and he joins the bone with a good conjunction.
Then it is necessary to apply an emplaster and a bandage, if there does not occur an abscess in the limb. But if an abscess occurs in it: then leave it for some days, until the warm abscess settles, and then return to your treatment.
The bandage should be thus tight. It is necessary to put a soft involution over the fracture, that is, a binding: and double or triple it: and let the excess remain above. Then bind the leg, until the heel bone reaches the root of the hip.
And insert a long thread between the hip and the leg near the knee towards the lower parts, and let the extremities of the threads be tied at the upper part of the two joints. Then roll over the leg and hip what is left over from the involution.
Then put on the hip at the place of the fracture a stellar bandage, and put one of them as a stellar bandage over the knee joint.
Then fill in the empty spaces between the thigh and hip with soft linen cloths, so that the structure is equalized.
Then start with a strong bandage from the middle over the place of the fracture, with three or four envelopings. And as you extend it more with a bandage at the place of the fracture, let your bandaging be lesser and softer, and more gentle.
Then apply two extremities of a thread, which you had inserted between the hip and thigh. Bind it therefore with three stellar bandages that are above. Then weave with the two extremities of a thread downwards, until you reach the heel of the foot. And tie with each string, also the extremities of the stellar bandages on the other side: so that the bandage is not removed from its place.
Then leave the bandaging on that, while it remains, so that there occurs no corrosion of the limb, nor abscess, nor inflammation, and similar things. If anything happens from that. Provide therefore with its treatment, and correct what has happened there entirely, according to what we have said many times.
If indeed there is a splinter of bone that pierces: then it is necessary to equalize that, if it is possible for you. And if not, find over that, and remove that: and care for it with the treatment that preceded, until it is healed.
And when this fracture of the hip is bound, besides what stellar bandages are added to it, as we said in the case of the arm and forearm.
However, in the restoration of a fracture of this kind, there does not occur a lame limping. And if it is restored alone, apart from what is applied to another wound, then it is necessary that the one who is lame should always limp.
And you should know that the hip is strained for fifty days, or a little more or less: all of that is according to the diversity of complexions and the remaining dispositions.
On the restoration of a fractured knee joint.
You should know that fracture of the knee joint rarely occurs, but it often suffers from sprains.
If a fracture does occur to it, then it is not unless there is either a crack or an opening in its parts. And that is with a wound and without a wound. And it stands upon all of that with sense.
And its restoration is thus, that what has been disrupted from its parts with fingers, until it aggregates and is joined according to what is possible from equality and facility, and construction.
Then put a plaster made from flour of sesame or millet, with egg whites: and place on it a rounded stave, if you need it: and bind above it a convenient strapping suitable to that.
Then consider all the dispositions that we have narrated about other fractures: such as a warm poultice, and similar to that: thus, so that you may oppose every accident with what is convenient for it, until it is healed.
On the restoration of a fractured shin.
You should know that there are two bones in the shin, of which one is thick and is called by the name of the shin: and the other is subtle and is called the ankle bone.
And it happens to both of them from types of fracture that happen to the two bones of the arm: and because of that its restoration is made, just like the restoration of the arm equally, and the operation is one.
When two bones are fractured together, the leg is bent towards all parts.
And if a thinner bone is fractured, the leg is bent towards the front part.
And if a thicker bone is fractured, it protrudes downwards; and it is one of those things that do not hide from the thigh.
Then administer extension, and alignment, and binding of the stars according to what is equal.
However, it is necessary, if the fracture of the leg is a foul fracture, having many complications: so that the extension should be minor, and your alleviation should be gentle.
And in the leg indeed there is something extra from the operation above the arm; and it is, when you align the stars, and complete your entire operation, then take two bands of pine wood, which are administered in the fabrication of splints that are placed under the tables: and they are made from hand spats: and choose from those which have a small thickness, and not from the minute ones: and let their length be according to the length of the leg from the knee down to the bottom.
Then wrap above each band with two wrappings according to its length. And place one part of the leg on one side, and another on the other side: and let them be from the knee down to the bottom of the foot.
Then bind two bands at three places with two extremities and the middle. For when the stricture is prohibited, the leg declines to the right and left, and stands in a good position.
And now indeed the splint is administered from wood according to the length of the leg, and the leg is placed in it, so that it may preserve it from motion.
And it is most necessary to do this in a fracture when the wound is properly clean.
Then examine the leg every day, and strive with utmost care to avoid aposteme, or inflammation, or other things. If therefore something happens from those things, then oppose it with what is suitable until he is healed, if God wills.
On the fracture of foot bones and toes.
Indeed, a fracture of the heel bone does not penetrate deeply.
A fracture of the foot bones sometimes occurs, and a slight fracture also occurs to the toes; and it does not occur to them unless there is grinding in many settings.
What if a fracture of the foot bones occurs, and you see those bones raised above each other upon meeting, then the injured person should put their foot on the prepared ground, as one walking.
Then stand there, and put your foot on what is elevated from those bones; afterwards press or tread on it, and make it equal, until it returns to its places.
Then put on a plaster, and padding above; and place under the sole of the foot a small board, which has two flat heads.
Then bind it with the foot by a suitable strapping, after you have wrapped it with cloths and other things which it needs.
When therefore three days or four have passed, then loosen the bandage. For you will find the bones equal, whether they were fractured or displaced. The treatment therefore is in these things, as you see.
If some toes are broken, then restore them, and make them equal according to what I told you about the restoration of fingers on the hand. Then put a small stick on the toe according to the length of the toe, and let it be slightly wider; then place under the foot the board that I told you about, and bind it with a suitable strapping.
If however what is broken from the bones is two, or three, or more, then put on each toe a small stick of its own quantity, wrapped in a linen cloth: and bind the board to the lower foot; and let it stand on one head of the board outside the belly of the foot, so that it holds with good retention.
And it is fitting for you, lest you should overlook, to consider all that I have told you about the remaining fractures from the accidents that we have mentioned; and to oppose each accident with what is suitable.
About the fracture of a woman's pubic bone, and the ossicle of the quadriceps muscle, and the rod of a man.
When the pubic bone of a woman is fractured, then have her sit squarely. Then incline her towards the dorsal part of her own hip, and let it be held back.
Then fill the cavity of her pubic bone with lint, until it fills it; and let it become spherical in shape within the pubic bone.
Then the woman is shaken, and her back is elevated gradually. For that cavity emerges, until it becomes a sphere before the gate of the pubic bone, and the broken bone returns to its place.
Then put a small cushion on her back. When therefore she wants to urinate, remove the cushion with ease, then let her urinate; and reduce it according to the method by which you first introduced it; then let it return to its original small cushion.
Let her do that for seven days, or around that time, for the bone itself is restored.
And if you wish, take a bladder of a goat, and tie above its opening a tube of reed, and introduce the whole bladder into her pubic bone. Then blow into the tube with strength, until the bladder is inflated within the pubic bone, for the fracture returns to its place.
Then fill it with lint, and let it stand for several days, according to what we have narrated, until she is healed.
And when the quadriceps bone of a man or woman is fractured, then administer in its restoration, and adjust it according to what we have narrated for the ankle bone.
And it is not hidden that there are fractures nearby which touch hardly anything, especially when there is something of a study or use.
And understand my book thoroughly, because the fracture itself shows you the right way in many arrangements for its restoration and alignment; therefore, understand.
When a branch of a man is fractured, take the gullet of a goose: and insert the rod into it. Then put a dressing made of cloth over it, and it is dressed, and left for three days or around that time, and it will heal, if God wills it.
On the restoration of fractures of bones, when there is a wound.
It is fitting for one who has suffered a fracture with a wound, especially if it is large, such as the hip bone or the adjacent ones, that prompt and phlebotomists attend to him immediately: if the conditions of phlebotomy are suitable, as we have previously mentioned.
If the wound flows with blood, then it is necessary to apply a poultice of crushed zegi powder on it immediately; if you do not have another remedy present.
Then begin to restore the fracture on that same day: and do not put it off, unless an abscess occurs.
If a hot abscess occurs, then cease the restoration until the ninth day, until the abscess subsides. And do not approach him on the third and fourth days at all, lest you cause bad accidents to happen to him.
If the fractured bone is prominent above the detected skin: then it is necessary to try to reduce it, and to adjust it with your hands using gentle and slight extension.
If the extension of it is not prepared, and its adjustment with your hands: then reduce it with that instrument. And there is an instrument made of iron, whose length is the measure of seven fingers, or eight; and its width is according to the size of the wound. And therefore it is necessary for the doctor to take three or four of these according to the size that is needed for that cure in every type of fracture.
And let it be round; and let there be a small thickness in it, so that it is not doubled over itself during compression at the time of operation; and let it have an acute extremity, which has an edge at its extremities. And let its upper part be thickened from the middle of it to the lower parts.
And this is its form.
It is necessary in this operation that the acute curved extremity of it be placed over the prominent bone extremity; and press it with it so unitedly until, when the bone returns and is adjusted by a certain adjustment.
Therefore, adjust the extremities of the fracture to each other.
If the extremity of the fracture is subtle and does not receive the instrument with good reception, then it is necessary to cut into the extremity of that bone until the instrument has power over it.
If indeed you are not able to reduce them with what we have narrated altogether, then cut into it with what is convenient for it from the incisions that we have mentioned; or saw it with one of the saws in whatever way possible for you.
Then rasp what remains in the bone from roughness and small cortical layers.
When therefore the bone is reduced and finds weakness after its reduction, then know that the bone has not returned to its natural place.
Do it therefore. For you bring great relief to the weak, when you complete the restoration that you make for the bone.
Then soak a piece of cloth in wine, black. And it is especially so in summer. And do not apply it to an ulcerated wound, nor anything in which there is oil, so that it does not cause putrefaction and corruption.
Then administer the remedies at the hour of your complete restoration of the bone. And reveal the detected wound: thus, that you may cut with forceps a hole in the bandages according to the size of the wound.
And take every precaution, lest you constrict the wound with a fracture. For many times foolish physicians have done this: and they have caused to happen to their weak patients either death or decay, or ulcers, that is, sanies. And let your constriction be soft, gentle, and diverse from the constrictions of remaining fractures.
For if the wound is bad or it is a large wound and there are certain evil accidents that we have narrated, and you find pain in the suspended place: then it is not suitable to apply remedies to it. And make bandages for them out of rough cloths in the place of remedies, and constrict it with them.
When, however, it is after one day or two days, and you see the wound has already begun to generate pus: then remove from above the cloth that you had applied with wine. Then administer the liniments, and ointments with which it is our custom to heal wounds: such as the four-drug ointment, and similar to that.
And it is fitting for you to loosen the bandage. And examine the wound every morning and evening until it is consolidated and healed.
And it is necessary to prepare the limb in such a way that pus flows out of it easily downwards with ease.
For if many days have passed over the wound and it is not consolidated, nor is the pus separated from it: then know that there are small particles of bone remaining. It is necessary to examine the wound with a probe. What truly belongs to those separated things, remove them, and extract their own. And what of those is not separated, and pierces the member, and makes the pain happen, try to cut them away, and remove them in every way that is possible to you at that time.
What if it happens that the wound becomes infected, or festering, that is, foul-smelling, or another type of corruption and putrefaction: then it is necessary to apply a unique remedy for each of them, which suits its cure, whose preceding narration is in its own chapter.
And from this point on, it is necessary for my speech to stand, and you should have a present mind when the bone is fractured, and it protrudes above the member, such as the hip bone, and the surrounding ones, and similar ones from the large members, that is, so you do not assume an attraction of it, for many times it happens because of that death, or rather, abandon it, until it putrefies.
Perhaps it will fall off by itself after twenty days, or thirty.
Then, therefore, treat the wound, if it seems good to you: and if not, abandon it.
On the treatment of a swelling on a fracture of the thigh bone.
This swelling often occurs during the healing of a fracture of the thigh bone. Especially when it is near the joints, and it becomes deformed from the shape of the member. And perhaps it prevents the member from its natural function.
Therefore consider then, if the swelling is recent: administer to it medicines that have a drying quality, such as aloe, and olibanum, and myrrh, and sarcocolla, and acacia, and similar ones.
Thus, take some of these, or all of them: and mix them with wine that is drying, or with egg white, or with vinegar: and apply them to the swelling in a poultice, and bind them on with a good bandage.
And release the stricture, not loosening it for many days. Then loosen it, and apply another one, until the swelling is removed.
Or wrap a layer of lead above it, not deviating from the center. For lead has the property of removing every swelling that is feared in the limbs.
But if the swelling has already turned to stone, and is hardened, and urgent necessity demands its removal: then make an incision above it from the upper part, and cut away the prominent excess: or shave it off with certain rasps, until it is removed: and treat it thus, until it is healed.
On the cure when it is restored, and a member remains after that subtle one, not according to its own nature.
When a fracture of the bone is restored, and a member remains after that subtle one, weak: then it does not happen unless due to many causes. Of which one is, the multitude of solution of the ligament and its binding not according to what is necessary: or due to the excess of stricture of the ligaments, until nourishment is prevented from flowing to the member: or due to the multitude of superfluous embrocation at an unsuitable time: or due to the scarcity of blood in the weak body, and its debility.
And the treatment of that is to nourish the weak person, and to make their body tender, until blood is multiplied in them. And administer a bath. And bring joy and cheerfulness upon him.
Then put pitch on the member: so that it attracts much nourishment to itself. And apply frequent embrocation with warm water, until nourishment flows, and it returns to its natural shape.
On the cure of fractured bones when they are restored twistedly.
When a limb, already restored after its healing, has twisted deformity and a prominent fracture or knot, and is deformed in that shape of the limb, yet the limb is not prevented from its natural operation: then it does not seem necessary to receive his speech, who thinks that the limb should be refractured anew.
And already there were many foolish doctors and restorers who did that in our land.
And this operation is indeed detestable, leading to death or great fear, as if it were mortal.
But if the lameness and knot are recent: then it is necessary to foment with warm water, in which are decoctions of softening herbs, such as the leaves of altaea, and its root, and melilot, and similar things. And let a plaster be made for him with a softening plaster, such as a well-made dyachilon.
Or let there be applied an ointment of the root of altaea, and mixed with the fat of a hen, or sesame oil: and let it be plastered on with that.
Or let there be applied rich figs, and crushed with dove's dung, and similar things which are mentioned in medicines that diminish consolidation.
And when the knot is loosened with gentle, long, and mild friction, which is done with moist hands. And let the movement of the limb be administered to every part at all hours.
But if the twisting has already preceded, and become strong, and turned into a bony hardness, and necessity has been provoked to cure it with iron: then it is necessary to section above it, and release the continuity of the bone, and cut out what is superfluous from the knot or bone with subtle incisions: and let facility be administered in that with solicitude and study.
On Speech about Dislocation.
A dislocation is an exit of a joint from its place. Because it is prevented from its motion, and the form of the limb is deformed. And it causes to happen severe pains and vehement injuries.
When therefore a dislocation happens, then it is necessary to hasten to its restoration: and not delay it at all.
For if it is delayed, the place becomes putrid, and perhaps with it the reduction of the dislocation.
Because of this, therefore, it is not suitable to move or stretch it during the hour of its putrefaction. Since it often causes spasms and painful wounds.
But when that happens, then it is necessary to hasten to bloodletting of the affected part. Then it should be left alone until the putrefaction subsides.
Then the limb should be anointed with warm water and oil. Then it should be reduced with ease.
And the whole limb should be treated so that its memory returns to its proper place.
I have now arranged the chapters on dislocations, and also according to what preceded in fractures, from the upper part of the body down to its lower part.
Concerning the treatment of a dislocated lower jawbone.
The two jaws rarely become dislocated.
And the dislocation of both occurs according to one of two modes. Or indeed they are removed from their places with a small removal, and are softened for a short time. Or they are dislocated with a complete and total dislocation, until they become soft towards the chest, until the saliva of the affected part flows, and it cannot hold it, nor can it close its mouth, and its tongue is entangled with speech.
When the dislocation of it is small, then it returns into many dispositions by itself with fewness.
If the dislocation is complete and entire, then it is necessary to administer the reduction quickly and not to delay at all: and it is as if the servant head of the injured person holds fast; and the physician inserts the thumb of his hand into the root of the jawbone at the place of the dislocation, if the dislocation is on one side. Or he inserts both thumbs simultaneously, if the dislocation is from two parts. And the remaining fingers of his hands are outside, which are equal.
And instruct the injured person to clean their jawbones and free them for chewing in every way. And the physician adjusts the jawbone and pushes the jawbone until it returns to its place.
If the reduction is difficult, especially if both jawbones are involved simultaneously; then administer a fomentation with hot water and oil, until the reduction of both becomes easy: nor delay the reduction of both at all, as we have said.
When they return and are adjusted, and the injured bone is closed, and not made soft; then place over them small pads of cotton cloth, with a cerate that is made from wax: and rose oil.
Then bind with ease using soft ligaments.
And the injured person should sleep on their back: and their head should be positioned between two pillows, so that they do not move it to the right or left; nor should they try to chew something: rather, let their food be given in a soft drink, until when the pains are removed, and the jawbone is restored: then they can eat what they want, and administer it with ease.
Let them not strain over the operation of their mouth during eating and drinking, and kissing, until the jawbone is restored, and they are healed.
If the reduction of the two jaws becomes difficult when they are dislocated at some hour and do not convert to their places, then many fevers often occur from it, and constant pains; and perhaps the weak belly is loosened, and perhaps pure yellow bile is vomited.
Since you have seen that, then know that it is a loss, and many times he dies who suffers that within ten days.
On the reduction of a dislocated elbow, and the extremity of the shoulder.
The elbow indeed is not dislocated from the inner side, on account of its continuity with the chest. And it is sometimes dislocated outwardly, and that is made clear by sensation.
And its restoration is, that the weak person lies on his back, and extends his arms. Then bind the place with your strong palm's binding force, for it will return to its position.
Then put a plaster on top of it, and poultices, and bind it tightly.
The extremities that follow the elbow and are continued with it are not dislocated, unless rarely. If it is dislocated at some time: then it is necessary that it be reduced and adjusted according to what we have said, and what has been prepared for you.
Then put a plaster on top of it, and poultices, and a tight binding. And instruct the weak person to adhere to tranquility and quiet, until they are healed.
And with this same treatment, the extremity of the shoulder is reduced when it is also separated from its place.
On the reduction of a dislocated shoulder.
Know that the shoulder is not dislocated except in three ways.
Of which one is, that it is dislocated downwards towards the armpit. The second is, so that it may be displaced towards the part of the chest. And perhaps it may be displaced towards the upper part of the shoulder: and that happens rarely.
And it does not dislocate backwards, because of the blade-like shape. And it does not dislocate forwards, because of the tendons.
And indeed it is most often displaced and protrudes downwards towards the buttock: especially in those whose flesh is scant. Because it protrudes quickly in them, and is reduced quickly.
In those, however, whose flesh is abundant, it is the opposite of that, namely because it protrudes with difficulty, and is reduced with difficulty.
And perhaps it happens to some men that they receive a blow or a fall, and the shoulder becomes inflamed with a hot abscess, and is thought to be because of that, since it was already dislocated.
Therefore, you should experience that, until you stand on certain knowledge of it, and then proceed to its cure.
And the dislocation is recognized when it is towards the buttock: and you distinguish between a dislocated shoulder and a healthy one. For you find a clear difference between them, and you find a concavity at the head of the shoulder, and under the buttock upon touch, as if it were a void: and the weak one cannot bring his hand to his ear, nor move it with all its motions.
And similarly, if it is dislocated towards the chest or upwards: then you find a clear touch, and it does not hide.
And indeed the reduction of this dislocation is easy, when it is recent, or the patient is a weak boy.
And its reduction is, that the assistant lifts his hand to the upper parts. Then you place your thumbs under the buttock, and lift the joint with strength upwards to its place: and the assistant lifts his hand, and extends it upwards. Then he should put it underneath, for he himself returns quickly.
If, however, he does not return through what we have said, and there are many days from the beginning of the dislocation: then it is necessary that the injured person be bathed in warm water, and an embrocation be administered which softens and soothes, such as if they were soaking the roots of altaea, and fenugreek, and melilot in water, and administering it.
Then the injured person should be laid down on his back: and a sphere and wool should be placed under the bandage, which is equal in softness and tightness.
Then the physician should place his heel on the sphere, and lift the head of the shoulder with strength, and draw the hand of the injured person downwards.
And if you wish, reduce him according to this method: and it is, that you should make the strong man who is longer than the injured person present, and stand at his side, and insert his shoulder under the bandage of the injured person: and lift his bandage upwards, until the injured person is suspended in the air. And another should draw the hand of the injured person downwards towards his own belly. If, however, the injured person is weak: then it is necessary that something else be suspended with him, so that it weighs him down: for the dislocation returns immediately.
And it is reduced also according to another method: and it is, that a long wooden beam is fixed in the ground, whose head has a rounded figure: like a mason's hammer: which should not be thick, nor too subtle. Then soft cloths should be placed under the injured person after they are placed on top of the head of the beam: and the injured person should stand along the length of the beam.
Then his hand is extended downwards on one side and his body is stretched out from the other side with strength: for the joint returns to its place with swiftness.
If his reduction is difficult through all that we have mentioned, then use this care: and it is to receive a stick whose length is the quantity of two arms, and its width the quantity of four fingers, and its thickness the quantity of two fingers: which has a round head, so that its entrance may be alleviated into the deep wound, according to this form.
Then fine linen cloths are tied over the round head, so that they do not hurt the weak limb.
Then it should be placed under the weak limb, so that the hand or arm is stretched out over the stick up to the bottom: and the stick is tied over the assisting limb and arm and extremity of the hand.
Then the arm should be placed on a step of a ladder in width, and the hand is stretched out downwards, and the rest of the body is suspended hanging from the other side. For the joint indeed enters immediately.
When therefore the entrance is completed according to whatever mode is possible: then it is necessary to place under the weak limb a sphere of equal quantity made of wool. Then put the prepared plaster made from mill dust with olive oil, and egg white over the entire shoulder, as it turns out to be on top.
Then bind underneath the weak limb a suitable bandage: and the ligament is turned back over the plaster on top: and his hand is attached to his neck, and left there, so that his hand is not moved for seven days.
And it is necessary to place nourishing food near the weak limb, until the member is comforted: because it is quicker for its healing.
Then a larger bandage should be placed after seven days, or five, and exercised with movement. If it has become firm and not soft, then it is already healed.
If the joint is dislocated frequently, either because of the moisture that happens to it or due to another cause: then it is necessary to apply a cautery with three probes, according to what has been previously mentioned in the chapter on cautery.
If this is done and the ligament is loosened after seven days, and the joint is not confirmed, and the plaster and bandage are applied many times over it, and it does not become firm, and falls apart, and cannot be elevated to its proper place: then know that the nerves which are at the head of the humerus have been cut or stretched or softened: and know that the joint will never be fixed in its proper position.
But dislocations which occur towards the chest and nipple, or to the back, are reduced with a push and extension using the hands; until it returns to its place, and is treated with the remaining bandage and care, until it heals.
If it happens that after healing, there is heaviness in the limb, and slowness in its movement, then let the patient use a bath many times, until that heaviness is alleviated, and it returns to its original nature.
Concerning the treatment of dislocation of the elbow.
Know that the elbow joint is dislocated with difficulty, and similarly returns with difficulty also: and it indeed dislocates to all parts, and especially to the front or to the back.
And its dislocation is not hidden from you: since it is evident to the sight and to the touch, according to whatever shape it has been dislocated. And when you compare a dislocated elbow with a healthy one, that is clearly demonstrated to you. For the joint is injured, and it cannot bend the arm, nor touch the shoulder with it.
And it is necessary, that you straighten and reduce the dislocation quickly, before a warm aposteme (abscess) forms.
For if a warm abscess forms, its reduction becomes difficult; and perhaps it will not be completely healed, especially when it is on the back. For it is worst in all kinds of dislocations, and a more violent pain accompanies them: and many times it ends with death.
And the restoration of it when it is one of those that can be reduced, is to extend his hand with both hands: and his arm should be stretched out, and the doctor's hands are above the elbow and below it, and he himself presses the joint with his thumbs or with the base of his palm, until it returns to its place.
Or if the dislocation is to the front: then he returns it thus, that he doubles his hand with his own hand, until he strikes with the base of his palm the elbow which is dislocated.
If the dislocation does not obey to reduction, then he administers a strong and forceful extension: and it is, that two assistants stretch out the arm: and two assistants hold it also, so that it does not move back during the extension.
Then the arm is revolved to its entire part after a double-layered long bandage or a wide ligature is applied above his hand.
And when the doctor touches the joint with his hand, he anoints it with oil: so that it is one of those things that help to lubricate the joint and facilitate its movement. Then he presses the joint with a forceful impulse, until it returns to its place.
And after its reduction, it is necessary to put a plaster on it, in which there is a stimulant, and an evacuation with a white ointment: and to bind with a suitable strapping. And the arm should be suspended from the neck of the injured person: and left for some days.
Then it is dissolved. If therefore it becomes firmly fixed in its place, then loosen the ligament from it, and leave it alone.
And if you see the joint is not well strung, then apply a plaster, and a bandage, and leave it alone for several days, until it becomes strong. Then loosen it.
If, however, there occurs a heaviness after the reduction of the joint, and the arrangement is in motion: then administer moistening in bathing, and subtle friction, and compression, until it becomes smooth, or place over the joint a poultice made from a rich, fatty substance, that is, a ripe, fatty poultice. Then bind it, and leave it alone on it for a day and night. Then remove it, and introduce it into a bath. When it sweats, then rub the joint with a tempered friction. Then apply to it a first application, and a second, and a third, at the time of entering the bath, until it becomes smooth.
And if you wish, place on it a warm poultice made from dung, moistened with butter, and bind over it.
Do that several times. It becomes smooth, and returns to its own arrangement.
On the treatment of a dislocation by Almahassem.
Almahassem's hand is often dislocated, that is, the joint which is between the arm and the hand.
And the reduction of its dislocation is easy. Unlike other joints. However, it is necessary that there be speed in the reduction of its dislocation at the hour when it becomes dislocated, before the place becomes inflamed; or a hot aposteme may occur in it.
And the reduction of the dislocation in it is, that you place Almahassem's weak hand on a table, and extend the serving hand; and the physician places his palm over the prominence of the joint, and pushes it, until it returns to its place.
However, it is necessary to consider if the palm has already receded to the ventral side of the hand: then the weakened back of the hand should be placed on a table at the point of extension and reduction; and if the dislocation proceeds to the back of the hand, then the position of the hand itself should be inside on the table, that is, the inner part of the hand should be placed on the table, so that the doctor's hand falls upon the same prominence of the joint.
If it returns immediately, that is good; and if not, then bind it with a plaster, applying an emollient poultice, and leave it, without repeating the treatment.
For if it does not tolerate, nor can you put it in its reduced state, after the days have passed, yet the joint remains according to its own twist; and it does not harm the weakened part, unless the hand is softened, and cannot grasp anything: then you should know that the nerves are cut or worn away.
There is no ingenuity in it, except to bind it with a caustic near the site of the injury. And perhaps it does not benefit from that either.
Since therefore it does not return to its proper alignment, then put on it the plaster that we have described. Then bind it and leave it for five days; afterwards unbind it and leave it, and exercise the hand.
If however its movement is restricted, and something serious happens to it: then soothe it with warm water, and rub it gently several times, until it becomes relaxed.
On the Treatment of Dislocations of Fingers.
When a finger is dislocated from its joint, whether it be a finger to the back of the palm or to its ventral side, then extend the finger and push the dislocation with your thumbs until it returns to its place.
Then sustain the head of the finger, and suspend it towards the part from which it was dislocated, and leave it for two days.
Then hang him upside down and stretch him out until he becomes straight on that his own day.
When therefore the night has fallen, bind him according to the same narrative; and do not cease to release him during the day; and exercise him with movement; and bind him at night.
Do that for several days, until it is strengthened.
And do similarly with him, if the hand is dislocated to the belly; and bind him to that same part, and perform your first operation with him, until he is healed.
And do similarly with him when it is dislocated to the other parts.
On the treatment of a dislocation of the dorsal vertebrae.
When there is a complete dislocation of the dorsal vertebrae, or a complete dislocation of the neck, or many vertebrae are removed from their places; then there is no treatment for it, because death quickly follows for the patient.
And the sign of this is that the patient's evacuation occurs without his will, and he cannot hold it; and often certain members of his body become weak because of it, such as one of his legs, or two arms, or one of them; or a vertebra is removed from its place.
For often it is removed, because often the removal occurs to the four parts.
Therefore, that which is removed to the back, is called Gibbosity.
The treatment of it is, that you should consider then, if Gibbosity occurs from childhood: then there is no treatment for it, nor is there any healing from it at all.
But in that which occurs from a fall, or a blow, or similar things, the ancients have already spoken of methods of treatment in a lengthy discourse. Whose benefit does not return with profit.
I have already abbreviated it from that, whose little excuse is due to much of it from my proximity to the intention: and I have exposed it in my exposition, and I have formed its instrument in a diverse way from what they showed and exposed.
I therefore say that what happens in cases of gibbosity which occur on the front side is not an ingenuity, nor a healing from it.
And similarly in those cases that are directed towards both sides as well.
And it is not treated from them, unless those cases that occur on the back properly, as I describe: and it is so that the weak one is stretched out on his face on a level pedestal near the wall; and a moist cloth is spread underneath, so that his chest is not hurt.
Then a straight stick is placed fixed in the ground at the edge of the stool, near his head: and another stick near his feet at the other edge of the stool: and the attendant holds the stick, and it is not fixed to the ground. And another attendant holds the other one.
Then a wrapping is placed over the head of the weak one, and under his eyebrows a soft bandage, firmly: and extend the limb's bandage to the stick that is near his head: and bind it in it.
Then tie another bandage above his haunches, and above his knees, and at his ankles. Then gather all the bandages together, and bind them to the other stick that is near his feet.
Then all the attendants stretch out to the part of the stick with the bandage, and the two sticks are not moved from their places where they are fixed: but they are not fixed, as we have said.
And the doctor should place his hands on the vertebrae with strength, until it returns to its place: or he should place them on a tablet. Then he should attach his feet to the tablet, until it returns to its place.
If, however, it does not return to its place through this treatment, then take a tablet whose length is approximately three arms. And let it be placed on the wall from which we spoke, which is near the weak one, the place into which the extremities of the tablet will enter. Then place the middle of the tablet on the spine. And let the doctor place his feet on the other extremity. And let him tighten well, until the spine is straightened, and returns to its own place.
Then if you wish, operate with a turning instrument that is wrapped with your hand: and it is, to fix in the ground at the head of the patient two wooden blocks, whose length is one arm; and at his head on the back of the two wooden blocks.
And let the length that is between each wooden block be one palm; and now it has been made a hole in every place where the turning instrument runs; and let all the wood be firmly fixed to the ground, so that it does not move at all.
And a round wood is inserted; and it is a turning instrument on which the ligament is wound around in the two holes of the two wooden blocks.
And on its extremity is a hole, in which the wood is fixed, whose length is one palm with that which is wound around; and in the two other wooden blocks it is similarly arranged.
Then tighten the ligaments that you have wound around on the chest of the patient with the turning instrument that is at his head; and the ligaments that you have wound around on his legs with the turning instrument that is at his feet.
Then stand at every turning instrument a servant who will twist his hand with the strap, with which the turning instrument is wound around; and the doctor straightens the spine, according to what we have said.
This is the form of the turning instrument, which follows.
Then after the spine has been straightened and the place is equalized, then it is necessary to apply an evacuating poultice with white of egg. Then a compress. Afterwards place on top of the poultice a small plate made from a tablet, whose width is three fingers, or around that. And its length is the quantity that occupies the space of gibbosity, and above the healthy part of the spine.
Then it should be tied with a ligature which we have mentioned. And let the weak person be nourished with subtle nutrition until he is healed.
What if something of the swelling remains at the site at the end of healing: then it is necessary to administer medicines that soften and soothe, with the administration of a regimen which we have described for a long time. And now let it be applied on that plate of lead.
And when a swelling occurs at the last vertebra of the back: and it is thought to be displaced by that, and it is that bone which now protrudes. Therefore it is not suitable, lest a fatal assumption be made with this medicine: for perhaps it may bring about death.
Concerning the treatment of a dislocated ankle.
You should know that the joints of the ankle and the joints of the shoulder do not occur unless there is a dislocation only: nor does it occur to them what occurs to other joints from small removals and concavities.
And indeed, the ankle joint is dislocated according to four parts. Which is, because it is dislocated forward and backward.
And indeed, it is most often dislocated inward: and it is dislocated little to the front and to the back.
And the treatment of its inward dislocation is this: because when you join the weak leg with the healthy one, it becomes longer: and its knee is more prominent than the healthy one, and the weak person cannot bend their foot at the groin: and there is a place that follows the inflamed groin, an aposteme, hot from the fact that the head of the hip joint has already arrived there.
And the sign of the one to whom a dislocation occurs outward is that they are contrary accidents to these accidents.
And the sign of one to whom a dislocation happens in the front is that it stretches out a healthy leg according to its complement; however, it does not duplicate it without pain which is in the knee. And if it is constricted for walking, it cannot step over it at the front; and urine retention is held back by it, and the groin is affected, and during walking there is bruising on the heel.
And the sign of one to whom a dislocation happens at the back is that it does not stretch out the knee, nor can it duplicate it until it duplicates the groin; and the leg is also shorter than the other: and the groin is softened, and the head of the hip is at the place of the ilium.
The reduction of this type of dislocation is thus, that you should consider then, if the dislocation is old, which has already become chronic with the one having it. Then if you administer its reduction, and it remains according to its natural disposition: then there is no cure for it at all. Therefore it is not fitting that a deep supposition should be made about it.
In that case, however, where the dislocation is recent and is one of the four species of dislocations, then it is proper to proceed thus, so that you may join the ends together, and stretch it inward and outward, and move it right and left: for perhaps it will return into place, and not require further treatment.
If, however, it does not return in this way, then it is necessary to prepare a strong assistant, and stretch out the leg from the lower part: either with his own hands, or with a bandage, which is tied above the knee of the leg: and another assistant stretches out his hand from above, so that he may insert his hands under the thighs. Then he should bind with a soft bandage around the root of the hip, and hold the end of the other bandage.
And let the extension be either from the front of the groin to the part of the flanks, or from the back to the part of the back.
And let there be one extension of all their limbs, until the weakened patient is lifted with his body from the ground, and remains hanging.
And this indeed is a type of extension that is a common type of four types.
If therefore the dislocation returns with what we have said, it is good; and if not, then it is necessary for every type of that which I shall speak of regarding proper cure.
In the reduction of this very thing, when the dislocation is inward, it is necessary that the weakened patient be placed on his healthy side. Then a bandage should be placed over the root of the hip, where it is between the head of the hip, and the place that is under the groin. Then extend the bandage upwards from the part of the groin to the higher part of the body, towards the armpit.
Then another strong assistant should take his arm, and reduce the large mass of the hip of the weakened patient, and extend it outward with a vigorous extension. Now indeed it returns to its place.
And this type is easier than the remaining types of cure, by which this limb is reduced.
If it is raised above you, and does not obey you at the entrance with this type of cure altogether: then it is necessary that both feet of the weakened patient be bound together with a strong bandage, gentle, over both heels, and over both knees: and let the length of each be compared to its own quantity of four fingers; and let the weakened leg be extended more by the quantity of two fingers.
Then the weakened patient should be suspended from the top of a beam, which is in the house: and let its length from the ground be the quantity of two arms.
Then order a strong youth to support the head of the hip: and let him be suspended with the weakened youth: and another youth should push, supporting the hip with strength, for the joint returns to its place with speed.
In the reduction of this proper part, when there is a dislocation to the outer parts, it is necessary that the weakened person lies on a couch, according to what we have described in the case of having a hump. And let the bandage be tightened above his leg, properly weakened, and above his chest.
Then two wooden splints are placed, one at his feet, and the other at his head. Then a wooden splint is placed in the middle of the stool, fixed well; on which are wrapped humid cloths, so that they do not harm the weakened person: and let the wooden splint be between his hips, so that it does not pull towards the lower parts during extension.
Then everyone assisting attends to their own part, and the physician completes the reduction with his hand.
If it then obeys to reverting, it will be good.
And if not, place on the same tablet, and press upon it, as we said in the case of hump-backedness, equally. However, it is necessary that the weakened person lies on his healthy side.
And when the dislocation is to the front, then it is necessary that the weakened person's leg is extended quickly; and this is according to the same narrative on the couch: and the physician places the palm of his right hand on the groin of the weakened person. Then he tightens it with his other hand, and with that tightening he places it extended downwards towards the knee joint.
And if the dislocation is to the back: then it is not necessary that the weakened person is extended downwards, and he should be raised above the ground: on the contrary, it is necessary that he is placed on a hard surface, as it is necessary if his ankle is dislocated outwards, according to what we said about his reclining on two anchors: and this is on his face, and the extended bandages: according to what we said recently.
And it is necessary that compression be administered with a tablet also on the place to which the joint returns, with completion of reduction according to what is necessary.
And the sign of its reduction is not hidden from you: and it is, that you stretch out the two legs of the injured person: and when you see them equal, and the injured person draws in his leg, and expands it without excuse: then you know, because the limb has already returned according to what is necessary: then join the two hips, and put on a plaster, and bind with a bandage, that is, a wheel: thus, so that it does not move to any part: and let the injured person remain quiet for three days or four.
Then loosen the bandage and plaster, and compare the leg with the other: then if you see them equal in stature, then you know that the dislocation is now firmly established: therefore dismiss the injured person to walk.
And if you see any softening: then return and plaster it, and bind it according to your first tightening: and let it go for three days also.
Then loosen it and make it walk slowly on both legs for some days, until it is well comforted.
Of Dislocations of the Knee.
The knee is dislocated in three ways. It is dislocated outward, inward, and downward, that is, backward.
And it is not dislocated forward.
And the sign of its dislocation is that you will notice the injured person applies their leg to their hip. If it does not adhere to the hip: then you know that the knee is dislocated.
And the restoration of all modes of its dislocation is to make the injured person sit upright, so that they can now stretch out their leg if they can on it, and adhere your back to their face: and put their foot between your feet.
Then adhere to its knee with your palms, and place them straight between your fingers over its knee. Then apply both sides of your palm to its knee with strength. And another person should stretch out its foot, until its knee returns to its place.
And the sign of reduction is that the leg adheres to the hip with gentleness, not painfully.
Then apply a plaster to it, and make the leg adhere to the hip. Then bind them together with a bandage for three days or four. Then release it.
And let the patient not use it for walking for several days, until it heals.
If, however, the reduction is refused to you, then administer a strong extension with ligaments, whose preceding narrative was in the treatment of dislocation, until it returns.
On the treatment of dislocation of the ankle bone.
The ankle bone is sometimes removed with a small removal, and sometimes it is dislocated according to its completeness. And its dislocation occurs either inward or outward.
And the sign of its dislocation is that you see the ankle bone swollen, proceeding to the part towards which it is dislocated.
The treatment of its removal, however, is an easy reduction: and it is, that it should be extended with ease by hand, and adjusted, until it returns.
In the treatment of it when it is dislocated according to its completeness, it is necessary that you make the patient sit upright; and another strong assistant should hold it firmly from behind, at the middle of his back.
Then you should hold with your right hand its foot from the upper part of it, and with your left hand from the lower part of its heel at the ankle's place.
Then pull the foot towards yourself with your right hand. Then with the left [hand] and two fingers.
Then stretch out with the left [hand], and strike the heel of the foot with the right [hand], turning the leg without exertion.
Do that twice, as we have narrated.
Then strike the heel of the foot towards the leg at the third stroke, and you will draw out the shaft.
If it returns to its place at the first stroke, or at the second according to this method, and you see the foot is straightened, it is good; and if not, then repeat the operation over it: for it will return itself.
If, however, the reduction of it is prohibited to you with what we have narrated: then make the weak part rest on its back on the ground, and fix a small peg firmly in the earth, so that it falls between its hips; and you have already wrapped a cloth around it, so that it does not harm the weak part.
Then a helper should take hold of its hip; afterwards another helper stretches out the foot, either with their hands or with a bandage that binds above the ankle. Then each helper stretches out against the extension of their companion; and the small peg stands between the two hips of the weak part, holding it, so that its body is not pulled downwards at the extension.
Then the physician adjusts the dislocation with his hands, and another helper holds the healthy leg downwards. For the dislocation returns with swiftness.
When therefore the dislocation returns, and the health of its reduction is declared to you: then put on a plaster and padding, and bind it firmly with ligatures, and tie the foot with a bandage to the leg.
And it is necessary to beware lest you bind the nerves which are behind the heel, so that the bandage does not press upon them violently and harms them.
Then leave it for two days, or three. What if the bandage is softened? Tighten it; then loosen it on the third or fourth day, and forbid the patient from walking for forty days. If however the patient is allowed to walk before that time, there will not be security unless the dislocation is dissolved over it, and it becomes corrupted, and does not receive a cure after that.
What if a hot abscess happens to him: then it is necessary to administer to him the treatment that we previously mentioned in another place for its cure, and fomentation, until it is removed.
On the Dislocation of Toes and their Treatment.
It is necessary that what is dislocated is adjusted with a few gentle extensions without strain, and this indeed is not difficult, but rather easy.
If the dislocation is in certain nodes of the back of the foot, then it is necessary that the patient sit with his foot on a level place on the ground or on a stool, and stand as if walking.
Then you stand, and put your foot on what protrudes from those joints. Then press it with your foot with force, until it returns to its place, and you will see that it is already adjusted, and does not appear prominent in its location.
Then put under the foot a stool that captures the whole foot, which has two heads. Then tighten it with a suitable bandage for three days. Then loosen it, and make him rest from walking for many days, until it is strengthened and secured from the dislocation.
On the types of dislocation with wound or fracture.
When something happens from that, and you strive for its cure and his restoration, many times death occurs; and because of this, it is not fitting to presume upon its cure, which is of this sort, unless one who is prudent in the art, long-experienced, merciful, pious, slow, not daring, nor presumptuous; and that he should use medicinal measures that soothe only hot abscesses; and leave the patient to divine judgment. Unless you despair, or hope for health with mildness of chronic illness, and in which something of hope appears. Take care therefore to reduce it at once from the beginning of the disease, before a warm abscess forms.
If therefore the limb returns to health, according to what you wished, then administer the regime that soothes the abscess: and treat the wound with what is suitable for it from drying ointments.
What if there is dislocation with fracture, and it occurs in separated bones, then take care to reset them, and do in that what we said in simple chronic illnesses from what preceded in their places.
And beware according to your ability, and guard yourself from the entrance into the way of fear: according to what preceded my prediction to you.
For that is better for you with your Creator, and more permanent to your glory, and more healthful to your body among those in your time.
