Oh you, my very dear sons, I have completed this book which is the last part of the science of medicine together with its fulfillment and have made the end through its explanations and by its declarations. And it came to me in a vision that I would accomplish it with this treatise, which is part of the work of hands, that is to say "surgery".
And because the work of hands is treated in our region and is foreign throughout, so the science is lost and decayed, and nothing remains of the virtues except the small descriptions in books of the ancients that the hands have moved. And from this came error and vanity, and intentions are closed off and knowledge is driven away.
It seems to me that I will revive it together with the order of this treatise according to the way of exposition and declaration and abbreviation. And I will bring together the forms of the cautery irons and the other instruments of the work with the fitting of their declaration and preparation, as it is necessary.
And for the reason that no good masters of hands are found in our time, the art of medicine is prolonged. And it is necessary for whoever undertakes this to be learned in the science of anatomy, as Galen says, so that he knows the placement of the limbs, and their forms and connections and separations, and has knowledge of the bones and nerves and veins and the number of arteries, and the movement and rest of the veins, and their place of origin.
And for this reason Hippocrates says that knowledge without practice is nothing, and with practice it is something. and the same in the art of surgery.
We say at the beginning of this book that whoever is not knowledgeable about the things previously mentioned will beware lest he fall into error and harm people.
Just as I have seen many times more than those who interfere with this science and abandon their knowledge and experience.
For I saw a foolish barber who lanced an abscess of scrofula on the neck of a woman, and cut the arteries in her neck. Because so much blood flowed out that the woman died between his hands.
And I saw another barber who treated a stone of an old man, and the stone was large; He took out with it a piece of the bladder, and the man died within three days.
And I had already been called to treat him, and saw the patient's condition and the size of the stone, and knew that if it were cut out he would die.
And I saw another barber who took in charge a duke of our land who had a broken leg, and with the break he had a wound;
and the barber, full of ignorance, removed the break above the wound with sharp tools, and did not leave the wound any dressing, and left it like that until the end.
And he commanded him not to unbind it;
and let it stay like that until the leg was all swollen and the foot, and came to ruin.
I was called to come to him, and I hurried to come untie the leg; and when I untied it, it was so easy and he did not feel any pain.
But all the way the corruption was already confirmed in the limb, and I could not heal it;
and the corruption did not cease to go through the limb until the limb was completely lost.
And see another wonder which drains the festering abscess, and then inflames through the malice of its ruler.
For a sore, when it is pure of melancholic humor, it is not fitting that one touch it with iron unless it is in a place where one can remove all that is corrupted.
And therefore, dear son, you must know that manual work is divided into two divisions: that is to say, work where there is danger in several situations;
and I will show in each place of this book where there is fear and danger.
Because it is necessary that you protect yourself, so that fools cannot speak badly of you.
If you take up your arms in defense, and undertake your patients lightly and firmly, and use the best way so that through the grace of God you come to salvation and are praised.
And leave curable diseases without sorrow.
And remove your arms from those who make you doubt, and have faith in yourself so that you may come from this world to the other of glory.
Galen said in some of his admonishments: Do not undertake a bad illness unless you are called a fool. "
I have devised this treatise according to III chapters.
The first chapters are of fire cauteries and of medicinal cauteries with water, and the chapters are ordered from the head to the feet.
and of the forms of instruments, and of the bindings for the cautery, and of all that is necessary in the work.
The second chapter is of cutting and piercing, and of cupping and wounds, and of the extraction of arrows, and of similar things;
and the chapters are ordered and the forms of instruments.
The third chapter is of restoring dislocations and sprains, and of similar things;
and it is ordered from the head down to the feet, and the forms of instruments.
Thus as we remember the work, it is fitting that I say the quality of the help and harm of each complexion.
I say that the qualities of help and harm are the longest speech and subtlest science and the most secret reply;
and of these spoke many of the wise, and agreed to this;
and their words suffice me little, for I fear the length.
I say that the cautery helps universally for all complexions where there is matter, except for two complexions. That is to say, hot complexion without matter, and dry complexion without matter.
In a hot and dry complexion together with matter, they agreed that the cautery is of great help. And others said the opposite. That the cautery is of no use for diseases that come from heat and dryness. For the nature of fire is hot, and should not be used to treat hot diseases by heat, nor by dryness.
And those who said the opposite stated that the cautery is of great help for hot and dry diseases that occur in the bodies of men. For when you compare the body of man and his moisture to the complexion of fire, you find the body cold.
And I agree to this word. For I have found it several times by experience.
And in any case, do not interfere unless those who have experienced it and who know through long usage the chapter on cauteries, the diversity of complexions of men, and their predispositions and the causes of their diseases, and the outcomes and the space of time.
We have no fear of other complexions, even cold and wet diseases. And all the mire assembled and agreed to the cautery.
And know, son, that the fire cautery together with fire is of the secrets of cures, and of greater benefit than the cautery of burning medicines.
For fire is simple, and does not come near any member but that which is cooked, and does not harm another member no matter how close it is.
Burning remedies come from one limb to another while driving away, and they bring healing diseases to the limb. And by chance they kill the sick person.
Fire because of its height and the goodness of its substance does not do this, if there is no superfluity.
And this I have found by experience and by the length of service and study that I have put into the art, and it is upon the truth of things.
And for this I excuse myself for the length of speech, because it does not please me that I should take away from you the secret which is revealed about fire and the quality of the work, how it drives away diseases from the bodies as the philosopher says in demonstrating. Or receive it in your thoughts.
And know, son, that they agreed on what times cauterizations should be done, and they drew up precepts.
And I say that cautery is suitable at all times, because the following harms are alleviated by the aid of cautery. And especially if the cautery is for necessary and urgent pains that cannot wait for a time when greater harm may come to the limb.
And never think, dear son, as foolish people do; for the disease that is cured by cautery has no return. and they say so;
and they say so; but it is not as they think, because cautery is only a medicine that changes the complexion and dries the humors that are the cause of pain, and is worth more than medicine for its swiftness of action, and for the power of its work and its mastery.
And it is possible that the illness comes at times according to the patient's complexion, the place of the illness, and its nature.
And if the superfluities are gathered in him through the acquisition of meats and similar things, then cauteries administered in the place where there is excess superfluity and moisture, such as cauteries for pain, and similar things, and the pain does not return. But this happens rarely.
And many people do not understand why cautery is called the last of medicine, and it is as follows.
But they do not believe that cautery is of value after medicine, but their intentions are false, and cautery is the last of medicine because when we administer methods of healing for any illness and they are of no value, then we administer the cautery, and it is effective.
Then understand well that cautery is the last resort of medicine, not according to the intention of foolish men.
The ancients said that cauteries of instruments of gold are milder than iron, and they say this only because of the quality of gold and the height of its substance.
And they said that the burns of a cautery do not cause putrefaction, but this is not true because I have tested it and found that it is true in some men.
And cauteries of gold are worth more than iron, as they say. And however when you heat an instrument of gold, you do not know when it is hot by the color of the gold, and it cools quickly.
And if you heat it too much. It will catch fire. And thus there are enough obstacles.
I have ordered this chapter from head to toe so that the way is easier to find.
This cautery is good for moisture and cold on the brain, and there are two ways to do it because of a disease called "soda," and because of many humors that descend from the head to the eyes, and the ears, and because of many dreams and toothache, and throat pain, and even for all diseases that come from cold such as paralysis and soda and apoplexy and similar diseases.
The form of this cautery is such that the patient should be purged by a dissolving medicine modifying the head III humors or IV, according to what the virtues and the ailment and the custom of the patient can suffer. and then make the head of the patient fall back.
And then make him sit cross-legged between your hands, and put his hands on your thighs;
then place the root of your palm on the root of his nose between his two eyes; and where your two thumbs will come, if it bleeds afterward, heat the cautery that is called "olivare", of which this is the form: And place it on the spot marked with ink, and move downwards while squeezing your hand bit by bit, turning around; then lift your hand gently, and examine the spot to see if you see a little bone below; and if you don't see it, start the cautery again until you see the bone as I told you;
After taking a piece of silk, put it in warm and soft cotton and apply it to the area and leave it for three days.
Then apply moistened cotton buttered. And leave it on until the burn is gone. Then treat the wound with the ointment called "tetrapharmacon" until it is healed.
And the ancients said that the longer a wound remains open, the more it purges. And for this reason, it is aided by movement.
And they say that one must leave the cautery on until part of the bone is burned, and then cut away what has been burned from the bone, and it should be cured.
And others say that one should leave the cautery on for as long as possible and press it so hard that it sinks into the bone as wide as the spindle that women put in their looms so that the stagnant humors are purged out.
And one should leave the wound open for a long time. afterwards one must cleanse and suture it
And these two methods of cautery do not seem to me to be good at all, except in some men where there is a way of fear;
and it seems to me that I should leave it out;
for the shoulder is weakened by continuous solutions of nature, as we witness in other limbs;
and especially when the shoulder of the patient is weak by nature, and the first appearance of cautery is more gentle and moderate for me, and I use this one in all cases to achieve salvation.
When in all the head comes chronic pain, and lasts a long time, the patient should use herbs and pills which are called "cochie," and purging of the head and oils and plasters; and if one makes the cautery as we have said before, it is of no value Take care if the head of the patient is strong and not too cold; then cauterize below that cautery a little as we have said above. Afterward make a cautery on each horn of the head down to the bone, as we have said before, and make a cautery where the place is called "vessels"; and it is these places where one applies cupping glasses; and align your hand so that you do not see the bone: the patient feels much more pain in this cautery than in others, and I will speak of it later;
and it is necessary that the cauteries of the horns be more delicate than those with which one cauters the middle of the head, and this is the form:
of the cautery of the head When sudden pain comes to one part of the head, and the illness extends as far as the eye, and the head is purged by cleansing medicines, and the other cures have been done that I have mentioned in the division of illnesses, and all this does not help at all: Then make cauteries according to two ways, that is to say with hot medicines and with fire.
Cauteries with hot medicines are such that you take a piece of alum, and remove the bark and cut it into a small piece as large as the head, and then place the temple where the pain is in half a manner so that you can put the piece of alum under the skin;
and when it is placed, bind it well and leave it like that for twelve hours; and then unbind it and apply garlic over the piece of alum, and leave the wound like that for two or three days; Then put on cotton soaked in butter as much as possible.
After the treatment of anointing until it is healed;
And if you see that this is done with any burning medicines which I have written or you may treat with burning medicines.
The iron cautery is done in this manner. Heat the cautery in the following way:
And it is called "closed" because the head is made in the shape of a bell or it has a small curve, and in the middle a small opening;
And place it on the painful spot, and hold your hand and turn the fire a little, so that half of the thickness of the kernel is burned;
And remove your hand so the artery does not burn, which is outside, and a lot of blood flows.
Afterward put cotton in oil of cedar and place it on the spot for three days; Then he puts softened cotton with butter, and then cures the place with ointment until it is healed;
And if you want to cauterize this migraine with the cautery called "cultellare", at the very tip, and beware of cutting the artery in this migraine which is not old.
from headache
When you cure migraine as we have said before in the divisions of diseases, and it does not profit, and you see that the cauteries previously mentioned of medicine and iron do not suffice, then it is necessary that you sharpen the cautery called "cultellare" until it is white;
And draw thus on the painful spot a line half an inch long, and remove your hand once, and strain so that you do not cut the artery and do not reach the bone;
and beware of the mandible that moves when one chews, and the nerves should only be concerned with the movement and that spasm does not come to the patient, and beware of blood flowing from the artery when it is cut, for cutting causes great fear even in him who knows it, and he who is not a student and experienced; and leave the work halfway done;
but I will tell you how to stop blood when the artery is cut, and I will show you where it is in this book.
And if you see that these cauteries are not sufficient for the illness, and the patient is suffering, cauterize him in the middle of the head as we have said, and heal the wound until it is healed;
and if you see it, administer the cautery that we have said or chapter of the extraction of the artery, with the cautery which has two knives; And this cautery is better than that one and more helpful.
From the pain of the ears from cold
When pain comes to the ear from cold, and one has worked on it with dissolving medicines and other cures as we have said in the division, and the pain does not cease, then heat this cautery which is called "point," of which this is the form:
After pointing all around the patient's ear, or around both where the pain is felt, and you move a little bit away from the root of the ear once you have marked the place to make the incision. And make 10 points around each ear;
Then treat the area until it is healed.
Of the torment of the mouth
Torment which must be cured by cautery is none other than those that move from phlegm, as we have said in the division of diseases.
And do not perform cautery on those that seem to come from dryness and spasms of nerves.
When you treat this kind of torment that moves from phlegm by purges and gargles, and this is not enough, then it is necessary that you cauterize the patient with three cauteries. one in the root of the ear, and another a firebrand behind the temple, and the third at the junction of the two lips;
and place the cautery on the part that appears healthy, and make a cauterization on the head of the ear above a spot below the horn of the head, and another on the temple as long as a thumb; and leave the cautery on until half of the kernel is burned;
and this is the shape of the cautery:
And it resembles the knife that we have put forward, but it is a spot more subtle, and it is fitting that the knife be a spot larger;
afterwards cure the place as I have said before, until it is healed.
When apoplexy is old and you treat it as we have said, and it does not profit, and the patient has no fever, then make four cauterizations: On the two horns of the head, and one on the head itself, and one on the vein which is called "vessels" as we have said before, and the last cautery on the mouth of the stomach.
And let it be cured as we have said before.
Of lethargy
For this illness, one should give the patient large doses of herbs and pills that modify the brain.
Afterwards raise the head of the patient altogether, and put mustard plaster on the back of the head as it is written or treated in the treatise of plasters.
And this is the manner of the cautery: If you do as I have said.
If it is healed thus, it is good; And if it is not, make him three cauteries from the top of the head descending to the neck, and have a space of two fingerbreadths between each cautery.
and the cure like the others, and if you see it added, and the patient is suffering, then make the cautery in the middle. and if needed, two others on the two horns, and the cure until it is healed;
and let the cauteries be called "olivary", as I have said before.
It is fitting that the head be cleansed of herbs and of what we have said before;
after shaving the patient's head, then make a cautery on the back of the head and on each horn, and one behind and three on the spine of the neck;
and if you need more, and the body is moist and the patient is suffering, and the illness is severe, then make four cauteries on the spine of the back; and let him leave it until the most painful part is burned, then lift your hand. After the treatment, while it heals, use the cautery called "olivary" which we have previously mentioned.
Of epilepsy
Epileptics should not use fire cautery except those who are phlegmatic, and it is necessary first to modify the brain with herbs and other remedies that we have mentioned in the division when the patient is large and suffering from a lack of medicine.
And if it is a child who cannot endure it, make him gargle and chew often while modifying the brain with good meats;
after he raises the head in the middle, and he makes the cautery as we have previously said, and the cautery on the vessel, and on each horn; and if the patient is strong and suffers, make him cauteries as I have said to one who has paralysis and softening of the body, on the spine of the back and neck, and let it be the olivary cautery according to the manner that I have said.
If the patient is feverish, do him a subtle cautery according to this method:
When by reason of melancholy are the superfluities or moist humors corrupted and gross phlegm, then the cautery of parts cauterizes as we have said to him who has paralysis.
And if because of melancholy the superfluities are declining towards melancholy, and the body of the patient is moist, then let him drink things by which the brain may be cleansed, according to what is stated before in the division.
After you examine the head of the patient; Then make a well-made linen bandage, also like a circle, and place it around the head.
And the patient should be crossed, and held firm in all directions.
Then apply a poultice made of old birch butter; And warm it gently over fire so that the patient can tolerate its heat. Then remove the circle from around the head and let it cool.
And do this for the patient once a week with good governance until they are healed.
If you see that the cauterization is burning too much, make several points with the cautery.
This method of cautery softens the brain properly.
And then apply softened cotton soaked in butter and gelatine fat.
From the eye of the eels When the ill humor first comes as the eyes by the signs that I have said in the division, then begin and make the patient drink things purifying the head, and protect it from all moisture, and make him sweat or bathe several times on an empty stomach.
After he commands the patient to turn their head back and applies a cautery around the head, making two cauteries on the two temples if the descent of the ailment is at both ears together or one if the descent is at only one.
And apply the cautery to all the veins and arteries that are below the heart, and let the cautery be long according to the width of the temple;
And beware of excessive bleeding, and if you see too much blood coming out, staunch it with a piece of cloth as you have.
And I will teach you in the extraction of arteries and in incision the caution with which you will stretch it;
And never make a cautery or haste below the two bones behind.
and we see that these are superfluous cold phlegmatic things, then make the cautery as I said at the beginning of this chapter descending to the eyes: I cauterize the head, and I cauterize on the two temples, and I cauterize where it hurts below the two bones. And if there is more need, I cauterize above the eyebrow with a small cautery.
When you treat him according to what we have said in the division, and he does not profit, then give the patient three nights' worth of boiled chicken broth. After he rinses his head, he applies a cautery with olive oil in the middle. And he makes two cauteries with a cautery called "clavilis" on the two eyebrows, a little bit below the hairs.
And be careful of the artery so that you do not cut it.
And this is the shape of the cautery which is called “clavilis”:
When the membrane of the eye is softened by sickness and moisture, then the cautery of this instrument which is called “olivare”. of which this is the form:
And if you see fit, make two cauteries on the two eyebrows as long as the eyebrows are.
And do not let go of the hand except until a third part of the paper is burned, according to the manner that I have said.
Where hair points the eye Sometimes it happens that the hair of the eyes is converted to parchedness, and pricks the eye, and one does cauteries according to two manners: That is to say, of fire, or of burning medicine.
For the fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
When they are born and are equal, then put the patient in your healthy hand; afterwards draw upon the paper of the eyes a figure which is as the leaf of myrtle, and let the beginning of the sign be near the hairs;
Then he puts softened cotton in egg white and parsley broth on the eye, then he heats the cautery which has this shape:
After cauterizing on the figure that you have marked dot and dot many times, so that the heart is burned at that spot;
And the signs of the success of the work are that you see the paper withdraw, and the hairs rise at the point of the eye;
Then lift your hand, and leave it like that for three days, then he puts softened cotton in butter until the burn is removed; After the treatment with ointment until it is healed.
And if after this the hairs come, and the paper is softened then begin the cautery on that same spot, as you did first;
And if the hairs are absent, cauterize until the paper is raised to its natural place, and it is even, and they do not prick the eye.
The cauteries of burning medicine are such that you instruct the patient to let the hairs grow large and even, then make from parchment the shape of a myrtle leaf;
Then take French soap and quicklime, of each one dram, and grind together well; and make it quickly so that it does not cool down, then spread it on the shape that you have made like a myrtle leaf, and place it on the paper over the hairs; And if the ailment resides in one eye only, then you should work on that one, and if in both also; and put under the eye moistened cotton steeped in egg white;
And the head of the patient be in your hand and put your finger showing on the medicine and press it a little and lift all the time that the patient feels a bite from the medicine for he will feel a bite as of fire.
When you have done this for a long time, then remove the medicine from your hand. And when the bite has passed, lift the place of awe and see if you see the paper lifted as it was lifted by constraint of fire or by incision; and if it is so, it is well.
If not, put more of the medicine on the place where the medicine has not worked until your works are equal and your eyes are set in place;
then put softened cotton in butter until the burning heart is gone, then heal the place of anointing which is called "dyafenis" and others until it is healed.
And if it is necessary for you to guard yourself well at your work with great care so that no part of the medicine falls into the eyes.
And if the paper becomes soft afterwards, and the hairs prick in the eye, then begin the medicine again on that place which is softened by the paper properly, just as you did before. After the cure until it is healed;
And this is the form of the cautery made of myrtle:
Know that the eyes of men are diverse in size and smallness, and according to that be your constraints;
And let not the right way be withheld from him whose study is this art.
On the healing of a fistula by cauterization
When you treat a fistula as we have said in the division of diseases, and your treatments do not help at all, then it is necessary that you burn it according to this manner.
Instruct the patient to put his head in your lap; And hold the minister's head between your hands in such a way that he does not move or turn his head;
Afterward, put softened cotton in egg white or parsley juice on the eye;
After you heat the cautery which is like this:
And it is shaped at the tip like the form of a swallow's feather, together with which is the cautery;
If you see, if it is pointed from one tip to the other, and if you see, if it is also like a tent;
But nevertheless, this which is shaped is worth more for your work.
After pressing the fistula if it is open, and drawing out the corruption, and drying it; And if it is closed, so work on it, and draw out pus from there;
After put the hot cautery on it, and hold your hand on the cautery at the part where there is no iron on top of the eye, so that your hands do not tremble; And put the cautery in the fat of oil, and corrupt it.
If you reach the beginning of the cautery to the bone, it would be good. If not, start the cautery again one more time, and another if you need it, and leave it for 3 days.
Afterward he puts it on softened cotton in butter, and cures it with a drying ointment until it is healed, and if 40 days pass and it is not healed, put an aqueous corrosive medicine on it until the bone is uncovered. And let the king rule according to what would come in his chapter.
And there is a way of cautery for fistula that none of the ancients said. Understand a fistula, and make the place; Afterward put in the fissure a subtle linen thread of which this is the form: And make it to the quantity of one third of an inch; and hold your hand or the thread firmly, and let neither the patient nor anything move so that the melted lead does not run to its oil;
And it is necessary to put moistened cotton on the patient's eye in wine or ale.
The plum tree heals the place of a fistula and the healthy one by marvelous health.
And if the fistula is healed by the cautery as we have said, it is good. If not, it is necessary to administer a poultice to the nose, and bring the fistula back into the body according to what is appropriate in its proper place.
of crevices in lips Many times cracks happen in lips which are called "hairs", and likewise in the lips of children.
When you treat these wounds of which we have spoken in divisions, and the treatment does not profit, then heat a small surgical cauterizing knife according to this form:
And put it hastily into those crevices as far as the fontanel.
After that, cure the place with wax until it is healed.
When an abscess comes in the root of the jaw or in the eye, or palate, or at the roots of teeth, after it is rotten and red and swollen and becomes a fistula; And you cure it as we have said in sections, and it profits nothing. Then it is necessary that you have the cautery according to the quantity of the fistula; After you burn or pierce the hole of the fistula, and hold your hand until the iron heats up,
And do so once or twice, after the treatment of what we have said in treatments, until it is healed.
And if it is treated thus, it is good; And if not, it is necessary to uncover the place and remove the corrupted bone, according to what you will find in its chapter.
When the gums are softened by moisture and the teeth move, and you treat it with medicine and that does not work, then put the head of the patient on your lap; afterwards heat the cautery in the manner that will be shown hereafter so that you put a cane on the tooth;
and quickly insert the hot cautery, and hold it as long as the patient feels the heat coming to the root of the tooth;
afterwards lift your hand and start the cautery again according to your will;
After the patient fills his mouth with salt water, let him hold it for an hour and then spit it out.
And in this way the tooth that was moving is made firm, and the softened gum restrained, and the corrupted moisture dried.
Of the pain of the teeth
When toothache comes from cold, or there is coldness or wind, and medicines are not effective, then it is necessary to use a cautery in two ways: and cautery with butter and cautery with fire.
Butter cautery is such that you take butter from a cow and place the end in an iron or silver spoon; then take cotton and wrap it around the point of a tent peg, soak it in boiling butter, and place it on the aching tooth quickly and hold it until it cools down.
and do this often until its power reaches the root of the tooth; and if you see that soaking wool and cotton in cold butter and placing it on the aching tooth, and then putting a hot iron on it until the fire reaches the gum of the tooth.
The cauteries with fire are such that you take a piece of iron or wood, and it is thick so the fire does not come to the mouth of the patient;
Afterward heat the cautery, from which the shape will come after, and put it on the tooth and hold your hand until the cautery is cooled;
Do this often, for the pain will be removed that same day or the next.
And it is necessary that the patient fills his mouth with good butter in the haste of that cautery, and then refresh it further;
and this is the shape of the cautery:
And make a cautery of any shape that you wish, and according to what you have power;
and this is the shape of the cane:
of scrofula When scrofula is caused by phlegm and cold moisture, and does not yield to digestion by medicines, then heat the cautery head with which the following form will come, and have two openings for the smoke to escape from the other side of the cautery.
And apply the hot cautery to the abscess once, or where it is needed, until it reaches the bottom of the abscess.
And if the abscess is small, apply the cautery according to the size of the abscess and leave it thus for three days. And place softened cotton soaked in butter on top until the burn is gone.
Afterwards, treat the area with ointments and bandages until it is healed.
When moisture overwhelms the channels of the body and also when it arises from a cold complexion, then the patient should first be purged by dissolving medicines.
After you apply the cautery to the root of the throat, and be careful not to go near the throat, and only burn where the heart is but it's a prick.
After you apply the other cautery at the juncture of the neck and head of the spine, and it is the cautery which is called "clavile" as we have the form in front.
And treat the place as we have said before until it is healed.
When all and illness of the porcupine is from cold moisture, and the patient has neither fever nor thirst, and the illness is old, then you make two cauteries on the thigh in their hollows. And the other cautery place it between the two nipples.
And let the cauteries be called "clavile" according to the form that has been said before.
And if you see it, make a cautery by pricking with the whole cautery which is called "point," whose form is shown above in the illness of the ears;
And let the points be up to XXX, or thereabouts.
After treating the place according to what has been said before, and let the cautery be three fingers long according to this form:
And because of this, the cauteries are lighter, for you make three at a time.
of the dislocation of the shoulder
When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then it is necessary that you first reset the dislocation. Afterwards have the patient lie on his back and on his side; afterwards lift the heart that is within the nipple with the two fingers of your left hand;
and if the joint is dislocated inside, then heat the cautery which has two nerves so that it is in this form:
and cauterize the heart until you pierce it as far as the side, and the figure of the cautery together with four cauteries would come;
and for this reason, it is done with the cautery which has three nerves, so that the figure of the cautery is six cauteries;
and they are nerves according to the subtlety of a tent and it is the shape of the cautery that has III nerves:
And never is it applied upon this nerve because there are eight cauteries.
After put on the cautery with bristles ground with rope; after make the patient rest and do not move the limbs for a long time until he is well comforted.
And if it is dislocated above, which rarely happens, then make a cautery on the thick part of the clavicle, or many cauteries by pricking.
For the joint is closed, and the moisture is removed, and the patient is healed.
When cold and much moisture come to the stomach so that it is drawn out of its complexion, and phlegm is multiplied in it, and accustomed cures are used and they do not profit, then it behoves that the patient be turned onto his back, and extend his legs and arms. Then make three cauteries one below the spoon of the foot for the quantity of a penny, to all the cautery pointed, and two cauteries behind the two sides so that the shape of the cauteries is at three angles, and has a half space between one and the other so that they are not joined together when they will rot;
and let the cauteries be so perfect that they pierce the two parts of the heart, and let the shape of the cauteries according to this form without adjustment:
And if you see to cauterize with a large cautery in the middle of the stomach according to this form;
And he who will fear this cautery, cauterize by pricking and marking on the stomach in one place according to the quantity that you see fitting; Then cauterize with the whole cautery which is called "points."
After the treatment of the wound we have had before, as long as it is healed.
When the liver comes to pain from cold and moisture and great flatulence, as long as it is forced out of its natural complexion by superfluities; And the patient is cured of this as we have said in divisions, and it does not profit him, then it is fitting that the patient be raised up on his backside; and sign three cauteries according to this form and figure and quantity on the liver, avoiding the hypocondria, where the sides of the stomach come;
and let there be a space between each cautery the thickness of a fingernail. And let the cauteries be as long as the body, and do not press your hand too hard on all the cauteries;
And only half of the heart should be burned, and let the patient stand upright on their feet;
and if they cannot, let them lie down, extend their legs, and lift their arms;
And if you wish, you can cauterize these cauteries with a knife blade, if you are skillful and wise in the art, and be careful not to burn the whole heart, for you would dry up the whole body; and let it not reach the bowels, for the heart is very delicate in that area, and you will know by seeing.
When there is an abscess in the liver, and you want to know if it is in the flesh of the liver or in the membrane: If it is in the flesh, the patient feels pain not too strong;
and if it is in the membrane, he feels very sharp pain.
And when this treatment requires purging, it is necessary that the patient be shaved on his head;
and then mark the place where the abscess is, and then heat a cautery that resembles a ray, of which this is the form: And cauterize with the cautery until the flesh is burned, and comes to a boil, as long as the pus is all drained out;
after the cure according to the cure for abscesses until he is healed;
And it is not fitting that anyone should use this cautery except those who have long studied in the art of medicine, and by whose hands these diseases have been cured many times.
Then he can boldly work, and all the same it seems to me that it is better to leave it.
For the cautery of pleurisy
The ancients said that one must make cauteries from the roots of aristoloche, and in this manner: Take a root of aristoloche long, the largest that you can find, and let it be dry, and as thick and as long as your arm; And steep it in oil, and hold it in the fire, and cauterize with the cautery between the collarbone and the shoulder, and two small cauteries a bit lower in the part that is below the beard;
and two cauteries between the fifth rib and the sixth, sloping back a bit; and one cautery under the breast, and another on the stomach, and one between the two shoulders, and two others on each side of the breast behind the cautery that is between the two shoulders;
And do not press your hand at all, but make it open as when smelling.
And some ancients said that no man should use a fire cautery resembling a razor, and they heat it and put it between the ribs, until it comes to the abscess; and the pain jumps, as we have said in the liver abscess.
But in this work there is fear or the patient dies now, or a fistula comes which cannot be healed.
from the mouse
When you treat the illness of the mouse according to the divisions of the cures that we have said, and it does not profit, then there are three ways of cautery that are all good.
Of which there is a way so that you make III cauteries, or IV, in a line according to the length of the mole, according to the shape of the liver cautery that we have said before;
and do not press your hand at all on the whole cautery, and let the patient often turn onto their back;
and another way of cauterizing is that you heat the cautery which has two points, as we have shown it in the dislocation of the shoulder;
and lift the heart which is placed near the mouse, where the pains of the patient come from the left side, and let the elevation from which you lift the heart be according to the length of the heart, according to the length of the body, and let the cautery be according to the width of the body
Then he puts in the two inflamed nerves until the heart is pierced on the other side, and then pulls out the cautery, and thus he will have four.
And if you see, that cauterizing with all the cautery has three nerves.
After the cure when it has had decay for a long time, this is worth more than the other cures previously mentioned.
Cauterization is not effective for dropsy, except in the manner called "asclytes."
When you cure it according to the manners that we have said in divisions, and your cure does not profit at all, then it is fitting that you make four cauteries around the shoulder, and one on the stomach, and one on the liver, and one on the mouse, and two behind the back on the spine, and one near the breast; and let the cautery be very close to the thick of the heart
Then leave the cautery uncovered for a long time to prevent rot, and do not let the wound of the patient heal after the cautery; and healing will hasten, and the two intentions will be together with the help of God.
The shape of the cautery for the belly is the one that we have shown before; and the ones for the back are olive-shaped, as it has been put forward before.
When the feet are swollen in someone who is dropsy and are full of yellow water, you must cauterize on the back of the foot between the little finger and the ring finger; and lift your hand with the cautery without turning.
And do not enter too deeply with the point, lest you burn the yellow wax, and let the cautery be of this form:
After make two cauteries on each leg at the point of the knife; And let the cauteries be long, one below the knee in front and the other behind, in the middle of the leg;
And leave the cauteries exposed for a long time without cleaning, so that it dries up;
after the treatment of the other treatments that we have mentioned.
When a stomach ailment comes from cold and moisture, as long as the retaining and digestive powers which are in the stomach and intestines are weakened, and it cannot be cured by any manner of treatments; And you see the patient suffering greatly and with strong greenness, then make a large cautery on the stomach according to what has been said before about the stomach cautery or the circular cautery; And four cauteries around the elbow, subtle to all one cautery clave subtle, and two cauteries on the thighs.
And if you see abundant moisture and the patient suffering, then cauterize him on the shoulder, and cauterize each vein, and two small cauteries on the stomach below the large one, for the cure is profitable when there is good assistance.
Of the treatment of hemorrhoids
When hemorrhoids are at the foundation, one or several, and they are old and consist of large cold and wet corrupted humors, and they are treated as we have said in divisions, and it does not profit, then make cauteries. Three on the spine of the back, those which are all beneath the scapula bit by bit in a triangle shape, and one cautery beneath the elbow two times.
And if you think that his stomach is cold and the meat does not cook, and one sees the face swell, then on the face one large cautery on the stomach as it is previously said, and another on the liver, and another on the spleen with all the subtle cauteries. and let the cautery remain open for a long time. After healing the place so that it is healthy.
When you apply the cautery, heat it until it resembles a razor, and then place it glowing hot on the cauterized area. And leave it there long enough so that both your hand and the cautery reach the beginning of the vein, where the blood will be cut.
Do this once or twice, and if there is a lot of cauterization to be done, cauterize each one as we have said. After the cure of eye ailments, take advantage while they are healthy.
And if you cauterize with a large cautery on a sore, it will be of greater help.
When the patient cannot endure cutting or incision, which we will describe in their place, then comes a certain illness that can only be healed by cautery.
When any fistula comes, and is old and has putrid decay and corrupt moisture, you must test its depth with a subtle probe, and make sure that you know the total depth of the probe.
After heating the cautery until it resembles a razor, insert it into the fistula according to the amount the pus has entered, and repeat the cauterization as many times as it takes for the dead and corrupted flesh to be burned, once or twice or thrice, depending on the amount needed.
And beware of burning the nerves that are nearby, and the large veins.
If the fistula goes to the body of the bladder and to the intestines, beware of these places, and do not make this fire except in a fleshy place, and think that it is not dangerous;
After healing the place until it is healed, and if the place is cleansed, and the materials are removed for a long time, then know that the place is completely healed;
And if the materials are not removed, know that the place is infected, and it corrupts the bones at the bottom; and as one of these that we will say in its place.
When pain from cold comes to the limbs, and from great windiness, and does not take pleasure in a woman, then it is necessary that you make a cautery on the limbs on one side and the other with the pointed cautery that we have said before;
And if we cauterize it in the middle, there will be three cauteries in a line, and they will provide greater help.
of the bladder When the bladder is soft and weak from cold and moisture, so that the patient retains urine, then make a cautery on the back part above the bladder, where the hairs of the pubic region begin, and there are right and left, and let each cautery be as long as the nail of a finger.
And make one cautery on the back, or two if you need them.
And let the cauteries be shaped according to the form previously mentioned.
When the womb is cold and moist, and does not allow conception at all, and the flowers are corrupted and their endings are delayed; and when they come, there is great pain. Then it is necessary to make three cauteries around the shoulder, as we have said in the bladder cautery, and two cauteries behind the back.
And let the cauteries be sharpened, as we have said.
When viscous humors descend to the hip socket and for this reason it moves out of place, and the signs are that the thigh is longer than the other when measured together.
And the place of the two parts is found, if it is necessary that you cauterize the patient on the hip socket with one cautery resembling a circle, and mark in front of the place around the socket as it returns so that the socket is inside the circle.
And let the cautery be such as those with which we have cauterized the stomach.
And if this cautery is not present to you, make three large olive wood cauteries, and let the cauteries be as perfect as all the hearts.
And cauterize until it is healed.
Of the pain of the hip When pain comes in the hip bone, and it is from cold and moisture, and the patient is cured of what we have said in the division and the cure is worthless, and the illness is old: then it is necessary that you purge the patient of the gross humors with foul-smelling pills or other good-seeming pills. Afterward, cauterize them;
and the manner of the cauterization is according to two manners: that is to say, together burning medicines and fire cautery.
Fire cautery is according to many ways, of which some are like this:
That you cauterize on the hip bone III triangular cauteries according to this form, and make good depth and large, and have between each cautery space the thickness of a penny, and let the cauteries be olive-colored;
Once done, one cautery is made in the middle on the head of the hip, for which there are IIII according to this form:
And if you see, if the cautery at the cautery of the circle that we have previously said in the dislocation of the hip;
But make in half a manner so that the circles contain all the hip, and all the kinds of bone are burned.
And this is the way it is done in sciatica, when the pain stays in the hip and does not reach the thigh or the leg.
And if it comes down to the thigh and leg, make II cauteries there where the patient says the pain holds him, and I cautery above the ankle IIII pennies, on the left side a peck;
And let the cautery blade be sharp, and burn the thickness of a heart.
And if the patient feels that the pain extends to two fingers or near it, then cauterize him where he feels the pain three or four times with a cautery called "points". And if necessary, do more.
And if he knows that the pain is below the knee toward the thigh, then cauterize it with a blade-shaped or circular cautery, and take great care in all your cauterizations so that you do not leave the cautery long enough to burn the nerves and large arteries, and so that you do not cause the patient greater pain and contraction.
And I myself have seen several who have performed cautery on the ankle of the foot, and left it until the leg was all swollen, and the foot also, and it was pierced and corrupted all the foot. After a solution of the belly from which he had death.
And if the pain is in two parts together, make a cautery in one and the other, according to this manner.
And the wise say of cautery of the hip, which is as follows: make a tool like a nail, as thick as a doctor's thumbnail or a little less, and with spaces between them, from one space to another the width of a thumb knot.
and let the handles be opposite each other on two sides, and also shaped like ours, and it shall have one iron handle well made.
And this is its form:
And let it be heated until it is all red and gives off sparks, and then put it on the bone of the sick hip, and turn it on the healthy side.
and let the cautery be done once the cautery iron is red hot and leave it for three days. And then make a plaster of butter, and leave the wound open for a long time. After the treatment with anointing until it is healed.
Albucasim says that we use this cautery little because of fear of its appearance, and few are seen to use it.
and nevertheless it is one of the good cauteries, which he who can endure it, and where it applies itself
The burning medical cauteries are such that you make the instrument with spaces in which the edge of the door descends, and it is made of bronze or iron with a long side, and at its height there are two grooves, and between each one there is the quantity of the thickness of a thumb; And they are open above and below, and they join together according to this form:
Afterward, put the box of the hip on the patient lying on his sound side, and press your hand very hard on the box of the hip; Then put between the two circles of the hot awl which is heated in the fire for a moment, and leave it there for an hour or so, and let the patient suffer the heat and burning.
For it brings a bite as well as fire;
and when the bites have passed, lift your hand with the instrument and raise the hip with warm water, and leave it like that for three days, and put butter on it until what is black from the burn is removed and leave it for three days so that decay is drawn out
and this would be the last help after the treatment of ointments until it is healed.
And if the pain has extended to the thigh or to the leg, make the instrument that has warm water according to what you did on the hip similarly;
and this is the way of warm water, and I have written it or treated it in the treatise of the rectification of medicine. Take alkali and hot coals, as much of one as of the other, and crush them together, and put them in a new pot. where there is a small opening where the point of a razor can enter;
where there is a small opening where the point of a razor can enter; and put then that pot or another pot well-sealed, and put alkali and lime and soft ash on top, as long as there is one to two finger widths of powder so you will have it well prepared in your hand.
and leave it like that until the ash descends and gathers or in a sealed pot, then take all that ash and pour it on lime and alkali as before.
And then it will be very caustic and is administered in many medicinal works and for cauterizing other members.
For it does the work like fire, and with other medicines with which one cauterizes well the hip thus as turpentine and honey of Anacardia and lime with soap, all these things mixed together.
And Galien tells us of a cure by which a man was cured of the pain in his hip and sciatic vein, and praised it greatly, and said that no other cure was done, and that he was healed at once when this cure was done, and he bathed himself as he teaches it here afterwards.
And say in this way that you take two parts of green vitriol fresh and dry, and grind it very much with a bit of fat, and put it on the hip and thigh and leg where the pain resides, and bind it;
And let him leave it for three hours, so that the patient no longer feels the burn.
And then put it in a bath as long as his body is warmed up a bit, and put it in bed, and the pain will go away completely and he will be healed.
And know that no one should use a cautery of such medicines unless it is after the evacuation of humors.
And Dioscorides says that when the sciatic vein is cauterized with goat droppings, it helps a lot.
And it must be done in two ways. Take linen and soak it in old oil, and put it on the joint that is between the thumb and the finger which is called the knuckle.
Afterward, take dried goat droppings and ignite them until they are charcoal, then put them on wool and leave them until they are extinguished.
And do it again in the same way and do not stop doing so until you think by feeling that it has reached the hip, and the pain has ceased.
And this method of cauterization is called "goat dropping cautery.
of the pain of the back
When pain comes to the back, whether by falling or by percussion or by excessive evacuation, or by similar spread of cold matter, none of these conditions warrant cautery except for that which comes from infusion of cold matter.
It is fitting afterwards that the patient be purged with fetid pills or other similar ones, which are applied to his back, where the pain lies, three lines marked in an inch, and in each line five cauteries or more according to the strength and quantity that the patient can endure.
and let the cautery be done according to the cautery which is called "points";
and if you see fit, make III or IV cauteries with a medium-sized clavichord cautery according to this form:
This illness often comes to small children, and the signs of its beginning are that they have a tight anal sphincter when they get up, and fear; and you will find in the last vertebra of the back and in us the appearance that comes upon the other vertebrae.
When you see this and you see it cleansed, if you cauterize it with a cautery according to this form. So that the cautery evenly scorches each part of the spine.
And if you see, that you cauterize around the spine with a pointed cautery making II or III lines, and the points are close to one another.
After healing the place until it is healed according to what we have said, and guard that you do not apply cautery in any gibbosity that is in a space of nerve.
of the pain of the joints
When joint pains are from moisture that are spread to each limb of the body, and when pain comes in the feet, which the laity properly call "gout", and when it is of a cold cause and medicines cannot cure it, then it is cured by cautery in this manner:
Make many cauteries around the joint of the foot, and let the cauteries be olive-shaped according to this form:
And if it is necessary for you to grasp the face of the foot, if you do cautery on all the cautery that we call "point". And if the pains come up to the knees and other joints, which often happens, make cauteries on each knee three or four on each side, all olive-shaped.
And if you need more, make more, but do not hold your hand still except until the thickness of a grain of wheat is burned.
And if the pains descend as far as the knees and back, apply the cautery as we have described in our chapter.
And if the pains are in the hands, make points around the wrist two lines long;
and if there remains any pain in the fingers, make points on each joint and on the hair of the hand;
and if the pains come up to the elbows or shoulders, cauterize each part and give good care to the patient and take medicine.
For if you give it good governance and purge phlegm, it will be healed with the help of God.
When a rupture comes in anger, and the bowels descend to the testicles and it is recent, it is fitting that when you see him cleaned, he does not eat anything that day. And let him use things that loosen the belly so that the phlegm descends from his belly;
Afterward, make him sit on his back between your hands, and command him to hold his breath while the bowels are being repaired, and reset them at your will, and press down below the rupture onto the bone of the hip, and make a sign like half a circle above the body;
Then heat the cautery which has this form:
as long as it is white and it oozes pus Then reset the bowels in their place. And have the assistant hold his hand so they do not return.
and work well on the patient's thighs, and put a cushion beneath him and a sergeant upon his thighs, and another upon his foot who will hold his hands;
Then place the cautery upon the sign with your whole hand, and hold it straight and hold it until you reach the bone, and if you do not reach it the first time, start again another time until you come to the bone; And be careful that the pus does not flow out when you make the cautery; that you do not burn it; and that by this the patient does not die, or other evils.
And know that when you do not reach the bone with the cautery, your work is worth nothing.
And it is fitting that the cauteries for children be small according to their size, and those for large people also large according to their size;
After three days treat the place of the cautery with butter until the burn is removed;
After the treatment of other wounds until it is healed, and let the patient lie on their back for forty days so that the wound heals well;
And it is necessary that his bandages be loosened for a long time, so that the boils do not protrude when he will get up to go into rooms.
And after forty days, when he wants to get up, give him a well-made bandage, and let him wear it for forty other days;
And have good rest, so that he does not work much and guards against too much drinking and eating, and against excessive shouting;
and when he follows these instructions he will be completely healed.
And I will say here after the cure of the tailor in his chapter.
When tumors come in other bellies and are known, and you see that they no longer grow, make a cautery with a cautery iron according to its size, and burn one-third of the tumor; after the cure according to what we have said
and none of the ancients have said that one must cauterize it with a three-angled cautery according to this form:
But first sign the place of incision and make a line across its width above the fracture, and another behind it, and hold your hand steady with all the cautery heated.
But the first cauteries are lighter and gentler.
of old pain in any limb When pain comes in any limb, whether from falling or being struck, and this pain lasts a long time, and medicine does not help it, then it should be cauterized with a cautery called "poins", and the cautery should be according to the length of the limb and its smallness and weakness and virtue and location of twists and its pain.
if it is healed by the first cautery, that is good;
if not, begin another cautery upon the first, for such custom is that it should turn to the limb which is nearest, for which it behooves you to make the cauteries until the patient is healed.
The cautery is helped sometimes by great aid, and the same disease that comes from the putrefaction of phlegm and melancholy.
When you see it cauterized, take care if the ailment is at the beginning, and if it is cured according to what we have said in the division, and does not spread nor remain, and you doubt that the corruption might spread throughout the patient, then make five cauteries upon the head: I apply one hand to the nape of the neck, and the other towards the forehead at the end of the hair. And with two hands on the temples, one behind on the shoulder blade.
And I leave my hand until the cautery reaches the bone, and until the crusts come out so that the vapors of thick humors can escape.
And I cauterize on the thigh according to what is in front.
And if the inflammation is scattered everywhere; And it is clearly losing, then you must cauterize with the cauteries we have mentioned on the head and one on the nape of the neck and two on the spine of the back, and one large one on the rump and another nearby and two on the shoulders. and on the elbows, and on the tendons of the foot, and on each joint of the hands and feet, and on the hollows of the hands;
and beware of the nerves that are on the sole of the heel, lest you burn them;
and never make a cautery on the bone of the wrist, and another on the bone of the stomach, and another on the liver.
And know that when you do more cauteries, you do more good, and increase the benefit;
and know that the sick do not feel pain from the cautery as the healthy feel it, because the body is already all corrupted.
And it is fitting that the cauteries be large and small according to the limbs and joints, according to what you will find in the manner of irons.
After curing the wound with flour of vetch mixed with honey and other cures until it is healed.
When swelling comes in any limb and is cured by medicines and oils and plasters, and it is not healed, then make cauteries on the limb according to the size and smallness of the limb;
And let the cautery be a point inserted into the thickness of the flesh. Then treat it with ointments until it is healed.
And one sometimes makes a cautery with the hand and foot and back, at the issue of the nerve that moves the limb, and thus it is removed.
And in all ways let no one interfere unless they are knowledgeable of the limbs and the issues of the nerves that move the body.
When the ailment which is called “albaras” has grown old, and the remedies of medicine are worthless, then cauterize a point with a cautery, according to the quantity of the thickness of the flesh, so that the paleness is removed and its color changes.
Then treat it with flour of vetch and lentils with rose oil and leaves of plantain, and blood of a dove and blood of an almond, of each one part. and let it be mixed all together, and let it be tied with a cloth, and let it air in the place until it is healed
The cure of ulcers by cautery
When a chancre first appears, and you see it stopping, cauterize it with a cautery that resembles a circle, all around the chancre.
And nevertheless the wise say that one should also do cautery in the middle of the ulcer;
and nevertheless it does not seem good to me, because I fear that it will be ulcerated and corrupted, and I have already seen it happen several times;
and what is more right is that it be cauterized around, with the cautery which is called a "circle," as we have said in our discussion of cauteries.
When someone has an illness that is called "adubelati," and it lingers because of the superfluity that it causes or because of the weakness of the patient when he is decrepit (that is to say, too old) and he has little blood, or because of time; and you will see hasten to die then the cautery surrounds it with many small burns by pricking. afterwards, he leaves it like that. For she will hasten to die.
And if you see it pierce all the way through with the cautery, heat the cautery so that it is this shape:
And place your hand in the middle of that ailment which is called "adubelati" until the cautery has pierced the core, and let the cautery be such that the patient feels it behind in some way so that the course of the rot is alleviated.
After the treatment as long as it is perfectly healed.
There is another kind of illness which is called "corrodens," and it is nothing other than a wasting away of the limbs, for it consumes the limbs just as fire consumes dry twigs.
If you see this illness in a place that can endure cautery with fire, then heat the cauteries very small and large, according to what suits the place where the illness is;
afterwards, cauterize on all sides until you eradicate all the corruption, and nothing of it remains, so that everything that is corrupted is removed.
Then leave it for three days, and apply cauterized softened wool with oil on top until the burns from the fire are removed, and all the corruption.
After the healing of wounds generating flesh.
And if after three days you see healthy flesh does not grow, it's good.
and if not, then start the cautery again on what remains corrupted.
And this ailment has sometimes been cured with medicinal water instead of fire cautery.
But nonetheless, fire cautery is of greater help, and I have already said the cure for the ague in the division: Take it when you need it.
of the leeches which come to the feet Many times it happens that at the feet through fire a disease arises which is called "clos" according to our understanding and is a large thing lacking which bleeds the foot.
And the cauteries for this illness are according to two manners. This is to know fire cautery, and hot iron cautery.
Fire cautery is when you heat the cautery iron as much as a raven's feather, and it should be made of good iron to the extent that it can burn the nail from all sides, and that it has subtle edges;
After you put it all hot on the nail, and turn your hand all around the nail until it comes to the bottom of the nail; and leave it like that for III days until it begins to rot. Then make a plaster of wild mallows crushed with oil, and leave the plaster on all night, and the nail will fall out and be uprooted from its roots.
Then heal the place of ointment spreading charcoal until it is healed.
And if they are converted by fire the body, and often occurs in hands and feet, it is fitting that you administer a hot cautery. and it is done in this manner: Take a cane of iron or a feather quill, and put it on the nail and the heel, that is to say for warts. And put the cane on so that it surrounds all around, then put a piece of hot coal, and hold your hand well, and press your hand turning so that the edge of the cane comes to the root of the nail, and can find the hot coal deep down to the root.
And let the patient suffer a bite from the hot coal for an hour. Then leave it like that, and it will uproot itself by all its roots.
Then do one after another, until you have pulled out all those that are in the body, then heal the inflammations which breed flesh.
When some tremble from cold of nerves, or from quartan fever or other, it is fitting that you make them four cauteries or four on the spine of the back, one cautery between each spine. And one cautery on the foot, and one on the stomach with an olive-wood cautery.
This will leave the trembling, and hasten the health from the cold illness.
Sometimes ulcers appear on the body, or stinking pustules, which come from large corrupted substances.
It is fitting at first, when they appear, that one makes a cautery on each head of the pustule: A subtle cautery from myrtle wood, with which the point is grasped in fire, or of a long aristolochia root, or to a lentil-shaped cautery.
And one cauterizes them at the beginning when they appear, according to this manner, and they cannot grow further, but are broken down from the superfluity whence they come, and are healed.
But it is necessary that this be done after the evacuation of blood.
Many times there are great discharges of blood from the artery that is cut at the wound that comes to the forefront, or in the incision of an abscess, or in the cautery of a limb, and similar things. And it is a very grievous thing to staunch.
And nevertheless when this happens to anyone, if you hurry to put your index finger on the wound of the vein, and press very hard until the blood is quieted under your finger, and no drop issues anymore.
Then put to the fire olive-wood cautery irons, small and large, until they are all red-hot;
then take one, large or small according to the wound and the place where the artery is severed, and put the cautery on that vein where you are holding your finger, and hold the cautery there until the blood is restrained.
And if it jumps out when you lift your hand from the vein, and the cautery is extinguished, then quickly take another of the cauteries that are in the fire.
And do not cease to do one after the other until the blood is drained.
And be careful that you do not burn the nerve that is nearby, and that no other harm comes upon the patient.
And know that when blood flows freely from the artery, it cannot be well cauterized, especially when the artery is large, unless it is done in one of the four ways we have described. Either by cautery, or by extraction when it is not treated, or by a strong ligature of thread, or by medicines placed upon it which have the power to staunch blood. And let it be bound and tightly restrained.
Whoever will apply ligatures tightly with bandages or put burning things on it, or other similar things, it will not be profitable and will do harm.
And if this happens to anyone and they do not have a mirror or medicine present, they should place their index finger on the wound of the vein as we have said, and press firmly until it is staunched both on the wound and on the vein. And do not move the joint, but moisten it with cold water as often as possible until the blood is frozen and thickened and rested.
And make incisions ahead of those for which he needs to cauterize and use medicine.
We have told you in the first chapter all illnesses in which it is necessary to use fire cautery or burning medicine, and the incisions, their causes, instruments, and forms of cauteries.
And I have put this chapter from the head to the feet, and I will go in this chapter by the same way so that one can more easily find what one wants.
And so as I begin this one, it is fitting, dear son, that you learn that in this chapter there is more danger and fear than the first one of the cauteries, and for this reason it requires greater caution.
For in the work of this chapter there is often the evacuation of blood when opening a vein, and incising an abscess, and in the treatment of wounds, and in the extraction of arrows, and in cutting into stones, and similar things; Where there is doubt and fear, and many die.
And I warn you that you do not undertake folly. For many kinds of people come for treatment. There are some who become so distressed by their illness that they die easily because of the intensity they feel from their illness and its severity. And one must fear these things.
And there are some who give you their sense and say: Wait, I am cured." And the illness is treacherous.
You should not consent to those who come to you in this manner, but place greater trust in your honor than in your greed, and do not act foolishly but wisely with those of whom you are certain, and from whom you can take oaths.
And use prognosis and indications in the treatment of your patients so that health may be restored;
and this will help you to acquire good renown, and glory, and long remembrance.
Very dear son, Our Lord gives you good understanding and uprightness, and if you wish to aspire to the holy inspiration of his hand, Amen.
And I have ordered this chapter in divisions by chapters, according to what it is before this chapter of cauteries, that I have divided from the head to the feet so that you may find more easily what you will need.
Know that this ailment often comes to children at birth, and when the midwife pulls the child's head too forcefully.
And sometimes it comes from a cause unknown.
And I have never seen this ailment in anyone but children, and in all those I have seen, death quickly followed. And therefore it seems to me that it is better for me to leave this work to those who can cure it.
And I saw a child whose shoulder was filled with pain, and whose head grew larger each day until it could no longer support it.
And the moisture grew so much that he died, and this moisture gathered below the bone on top of the scapula, between the heart and the bone.
and if the work is such that the moisture is between the heart and the bone, and the abscesses are small, you should cleave a wide slit between them.
and it should be as long as two fingers, so long as the moisture runs;
and see this form of the spatulate instrument:
If the moisture is thicker and the abscess larger, make two cuts in the shape of a cross like this:
And if the moisture is below the bone, and you see signs that the corners of the head are open on each side, and the sharp point springs back when you press it with your hand inside, and this does not answer to you: then you must cleave three slits between the head according to this manner:
And after the incision, extract all the moisture. After extracting the slits with cloths and powders, apply wine and oil and leave them so until the fifth day;
then loosen it and treat the wound with bandages and ointments, and let the head be extracted evenly, and have the patient eat dry meat free of moisture until the limb is strengthened and healed.
And another manner of incision is that you look where the size of the abscess appears, and the gathering of the point.
For it is not always in front. Sometimes behind. Sometimes to the right. And sometimes to the left.
Therefore make the incision where the abscess appears, and according to the gathering of the point, and let the cut be according to your power.
And beware that you do not cut an artery. And let it flow blood so that the patient does not die from loss of blood and evacuation of moisture.
When someone has a disease called "catarrh" in the eyes or breasts, and the illness is old, and medicine does not help at all, then the last resort is cautery with which one sears the two arteries.
Therefore it is fitting, when you see them cut, that the patient puts his head back. Afterward rub the area with a coarse cloth until the arteries appear, then draw the patient's neck tight with the whole cloth. Then look where the vein beats, and its strands from one and the other are after the ears, and they are filled.
Then sign the strands of its edge, then cut one and the other with a sharp spatula of two parts, as far as the vein reaches the bone, and this be by the wide space of the head.
And if you see it, put the spatula under the artery and the cup above, cutting as much as it should through.
And when the vein is cut, if the blood flows continuously upwards.
And if the artery does not appear to the touch, it is fitting that you measure the quantity of space of three fingers, then sign its edge and cut as far as the bone;
and the quantity of blood that it is fitting to let out is six ounces, and perhaps a bit more or less, according to what the patient can bear, and the fullness of the artery;
then look at the wound: if it remains on the bone pointed with pus, cut it so that no abscess follows, then dress the wound and bind it, and treat it with ointment until it is healed.
from emigration When an old migraine comes and acute catarrh, due to moisture from tears and the heat in the temples, and old head pain and similar things, and it is treated by medicinal remedies and all that does not profit him, then we should extract the arteries of the temples and cauterize them as we have told.
And the way to extract them is such that the patient makes a raised area behind the hairs of his temples, and listen for the artery that opens in the temple, for it opens well by its beating, and is little filled except in some men who are too cold;
And if it is full, the patient should tighten his neck with some cloths, then rub the area with a rough cloth, and raise the area with hot water until the artery appears clearly; Then take the speculum of which this is the form: Then scrape the skin slightly until you reach the artery, then lift it up with forceps, and separate it well from the tissues that are beneath it on each side;
And if the artery is thin, turn it to the point of the hook, then cut from that part according to the quantity of the two cheeks. For if it is not copied, so will it not jump at all without doubt altogether.
And draw blood for six ounces, down to three.
And if the artery is large, it is fitting that you tie it in two places with a strong double silk thread so that decay does not come before the suturing of the wound, and blood flows.
Then cut away the excess between the two ligatures at that very hour, and then, if you see fit, cauterize with a blade cautery down to the bone so that the flesh is severed.
And this is the gentler operation if the patient does not have a fever and he is of a warm complexion. For cautery helps to end moisture: for this reason it is of greater help against moisture.
When it is fitting for the extraction of arteries that one fill the area with old cotton and put well-made tents on top;
And when they are unbound, let them be treated with dry medicines that promote flesh growth, and bandages, until it is healed.
And if the artery is cut as much as you work on it, hurry to cauterize it, or apply vitriol to the spot and press it with your hand until the bleeding stops. And if you don't have this, place your thumb on the spot until the bleeding stops, then apply something very cold to the area until the bleeding ceases, and it is removed as needed.
And there should be a thumb's width of space between the two knives. Then, when you have marked both spots, place the hot iron on top until it reaches the bone, and cut the vein in two places. and let them be spaced between the two heads for it is not soldered by this cautery at all.
And this is the form of the cautery:
And the best and easiest way to remove an artery is to cauterize the vein with a two-part trenching cautery, but make sure the trenches are well spaced to retain heat longer. For when the instrument is too thin, it holds its heat less.
of tears When the tears of the eyes descend from the veins that are above the temple of the head, and no remedy of medicine profits him, and you see the face of the patient reddening, and feel his forehead swelling as if trembling; and if the areas are tense and moist so that the hair of the papers is shed, and the papers are scorched, and parched by the heat of the tears, then this remedy is needed. And the ancients called it "the bruised cure," and it is that you make behind the patient who has this illness the hairs that he has on his forehead, then make him three cuts on his forehead equally according to the length of the forehead;
And the ancients called it "the bruised cure," and it is that you make behind the patient who has this illness the hairs that he has on his forehead, then make him three cuts on his forehead equally according to the length of the forehead; and let one of the incisions be as it should be all along the forehead down to the nape, and the others as it does to the ribs above the papers, and beware of cutting the arteries which are at the sides above the papers;
and keep your hand away from the continuation of the two jawbones, and let each wound be three finger-breadths wide across.
and have ready a piece of sponge and many cloths for wiping away the blood, then put the spatula sharp on two sides as follows:
from the incision which is behind the temple to the second incision. and scrape away all the flesh which is between the two incisions down to all the fascia which is on the bone, then make another cut from the middle incision to the other second one, and then pull out this spatula. If you put the instrument called "cultellaire" into the first fissure, which is very sharp on one side and blunt on the other, it has this shape:
And put the sharp side towards the flesh burned at the heart, and the dull side toward the bone, and push until it comes to the middle fissure.
And cut all the vessels that descend from the head to those until the incision is continuous up to those which appear at the heart, and then likewise make in the middle a split up to the other side.
And then extract the blood equally, and press the place for the blood taken.
Then put in each split a tent of old cotton, and put over cloths moistened in wine and oil and vinegar, and guard that no abscesses come there.
And on the third day untie the ligature, and he applies a large poultice of hot chamomile, then the cure of oil with rose oil, and other cures for which one cures wounds until it is healed.
When someone has acute catarrh accustomed, and you see those dim and small, and weaken the sight, and the papers burned; and the hairs stand on end, and when the head is cut off it gives sharp pain, and the patient sneezes. Then know by these signs that those substances and phlegm only come from many veins, and the best cure for it is this.
And command the patient to hold his forehead, then make a large incision between the eyebrows, and another two fingers wide. And begin at the fissure of the left temple to the right temple, and let the incision be down to the bone; and move your hand away from the nerves of the temples which move when chewing;
and when the bone is uncovered, wipe away all the blood with a sponge, and then insert between the two edges of the fissure some old cotton, and linen bandages; then bind cloths moistened in wine and oil on top, and beware of a hot abscess;
when it is removed, you must rub the bone until fresh flesh begins to grow, then treat it with drying agents that promote flesh growth.
In this manner: Take two parts of wheat flower, and four parts of colophony, and make a plaster. And administer it to these wounds to encourage flesh to grow all over.
Of the stuffing of the ears
Anything that aches in the ears is one of four things: either grain, or beast, or stone from a mine or similar thing like iron. or seed, such as peas, beans, lentils or flowing thing such as water and easily similar things.
When a stone or something else that doesn't fit in the ear lodges there, and it doesn't grow in the ear, place the ear in the sun.
If you see the stone, then apply a drop of oil of violets or oil of sesame, and then proceed to extract it. And make him sneeze by a certain method, and pinch his nostrils when the sneezing comes, and put around the ear pieces of cloth or wool. and hold the ear above.
Many times this cure comes by force.
and if it does not come by force, administer extraction with subtle pincers, of which this is the form:
If it jumps out by force with the pincers, that's good.
If not, administer extraction with a subtle awl of small double-edge.
And if it does not jump out by that, make a needle of iron and push the point of the needle or the hole of the ear strongly, and fill what is around the needle with soft wax so that the veins cannot enter with the needle. Then treat it by force, because many times it comes by force as we have said.
And if it does not come by force in any manner, take glue like that which is used for birds, and put into some instrument which is suitable for doing this, and put a piece of cotton around. Then press the buttock onto the stone or whatever it may be, and draw forth force.
And if it does not come forth from all these things that we have said, then hasten to split the ear just as a hot abscess may vein and spasm;
And the manner of the incision is that you first make the patient faint from cephalic bloodletting and extract some blood according to the measure of his strength, then have the patient sit between your hands and turn his ear upward, making a small incision at the root of the ear in the fat or where it depends; and let the incision be as round as a crescent moon until you reach the bone, then suck out the pus according to your ability, and quickly suck it into your mouth;
and care for it until it is healed.
And if it is grain that is inside and it swells, then administer extraction.
And if it cannot come out, then administer a thin, subtle spatula according to this form: and make an incision of that grain.
But do not do this when you think the grain is damp from the moisture of the ear, until you have made many pieces of it.
Then extract it with subtle pincers and a suction device, as we have said, so that the extraction is aligned.
In acute pain then when the jaw is inflamed in the ear it is necessary that the patient uses a sneezing of condition first and amples the ear with old cotton. And let him lie on that same ear where the pain is. If she jumps further than that, it is good.
If not, then take many stones according to the length of your finger, thin and light, and heat them a little in the fire; and place the patient's ear on one or two stones and press upon it with your feet on the other side, and strike another stone upon the stone that is in the ear. and do not stop doing this stone on stone until the sharpness has completely gone out, and thus it will all go out.
and if you see it, take the joint, and put one of the heads in the ear, and hold the other head over fire until the strongest joint is burned.
Then make another part of other joints until the sharpness has completely gone out, as we have said about the stone.
In the extraction of a beast, if it is small-bodied, such as a flea and similar things, treat it as we have said in the division.
But if it is large-bodied so that one can feel it, use extraction with pincers. And this is the easiest thing to remove that is in the ear.
In the extraction of worms embedded in the ears, when you treat it as we have said in the division and where we treat distillations, and the treatment does not help at all, then it is necessary that you look at the ear in the sun. If there are any worms, take them out with fine tweezers; and if there are none, take the cane whose shape is this:
And it is narrow below and wide above. Insert the thinnest end into the ear according to the amount of the patient's suffering, then suck up the whole cane. Do this often until all the worms come out.
And if they do not obey and come out, plug around the cane with cotton as I said for the stone;
and if they do not come out as we have said, administer distillations that the ancients have proven for the killing of worms, and you will find them or their treatment in distillations.
And if you distill your oils and medicines into the ear with all these instruments, of which this is the shape as you see: And whether it is of silver or of iron, three holes are made below for small openings, and above ones for distillation.
And to press the distillation inside, an iron instrument is well made for this, and if you see it take the razor and wrap cotton around the point. Then put your oil or juice in it, and whatever medicine you see fit in the cane, and the cane is in the ear.
Then insert the razor into all the cotton and press your hand gently until the oil is distilled or reaches the ear. And let the patient feel it inside, and let the distillation be somewhat heated over the fire so that it can be distilled into the ear. And make sure it is not too cold, for the medicine would not be as effective.
Of the stuffing of the ears
No child is born who does not have a hole in their ears;
and the same thing happens to men by rupture of a wound, or by a splinter lodged in the ear, and this rupture sometimes comes completely within the ear, so that one cannot see it;
and sometimes there is a small fire from the hole, and one sees it well.
That which then comes completely within, if one cannot see it, is a hidden ailment in various positions, and in this case it behooves you to place the patient's ear in the sun; and look inside: if you see an apparent opening, if the work has always this speculum of which this is the form:
And let it be sharp and cutting in front and behind, so that it does not crush the ear;
If the splinter is of flesh or from the earlobe, then hold it with fine pincers and remove it lightly until the whole piece is taken out.
And if the operation is perfect in the ear, then take a subtle and light razor and heat it a little in the fire, then put it on the body of the ear.
If you feel the splinter which causes pain to the ear, pierce lightly and be careful not to injure the nerves of the ear.
Then place a tent in the ear according to the width of the hole and moisten it with Egyptian ointment. Do this for as many days until the wound is healed, or you take a tent and moisten it with rose water, and powder over crushed vitriol.
And if you see the ear is swollen, it is necessary that you remove the tent and insert another tent moistened with cerate which is made of rose oil and wax until the swelling is removed. Then care for it until it is healed.
And if a flow of blood comes, immerse a sponge and cloths in cold water, and put it on the ear, and use other treatments that stop the flow of blood which are found in treatises on distillations.
This remedy which comes in papers of the eyes when they are moist and dry, it is fitting that you extend them with forceps and pincers, and the tip of a spatula from its roots; Then put on the place powdered vitriol.
And if without it coming off, then cauterize gently with a lentil-shaped cautery, and cauterize after the incision becomes numb.
And many times repair, so that nothing remains of their roots; and when they are cauterized by fire, those roots are destroyed and do not return.
From gravel Many times come in papers of the eyes things that seem rough in their shape and hardness, and for this reason this illness is called "hail", and it is a collection of moisture thick in the paper above and below. The works are such:
The works are such: Take care if the hail moves from one side to the other, and it is an easy thing to know;
Make the bowl quite wide, then lightly scrape each side, then take it with pincers and cut it.
If you cannot cut it without piercing a bit of the paper, do not worry about harming the patient;
and if the split is large, sew it together with stitches, and treat it until it is healed;
and if it is small, do not apply any pressure, for ointments will soon restore it and bring flesh.
And if the hail is descending inside the ear toward the upper part, turn the paper over and hold the hail with pincers, cut it and press on one side and the other;
and if the paper is removed by incision, it does not matter;
and when the hail is cut off, wash the wound with salt water and heal the place of the one who complains of flesh as long as the patient is healed.
of the fat of the eyes Exinach is a grease that gathers in cloths of papers above, and it happens more to children than adults, and it grieves them much in their eyes, and they get catarrh in the mornings, and cannot look at the light of the sun because tears hasten to their eyes;
and for this they lie down on their faces immediately, and sleep on them, and are their papers under their eyebrows so wet that it swells and the appearance has covered from the exinach which appears in the eye. And when you press the place with your fingers and feel the exirnach between them.
And the manner of the work is that the patient puts his head in a healthy place;
and then take a linen cloth and prepare a tent in the manner of a circle according to the quantity that it contains from each part, then put it on top. and press with your hands on one side and the other so that the exirnach is assembled within the circle;
then make in the middle of the moisture with a sharp spatula a slit about as wide, and not any larger than the wound one makes when opening a vein;
and cut the skin thoroughly until you reach the exirnach; and in several positions exirnach comes out of the slit, according to the shape of a piece of white fat.
Extract it therefore all at once with a piece of cloth pinched between your hands towards the fire, and turn your hand to the right and to the left so that it is scattered.
And make sure you do not put anything into the split, unless you reach all the way to the eye, so that you do not blind it.
And if the pus does not open at the beginning of the split, slightly widen the split until it appears.
Then extract it as we have said, then wet cloths in water and vinegar, and put them on the area, and bind with bandages.
And if there are such men who grind salt and put it on to corrupt that moisture which remains.
Then treat it until it is healed.
And if it comes to the place of a hot abscess, then let the healer apply soothing plasters until it is healed.
of the hairs of paper When hairs grow on warts other than those that nature makes and are mature, they harm them and bring about many illnesses such as accustomed tears and softening of the wart and albugine, so long as it is the cause of the destruction of the wart.
And the cure is according to four ways: either by cautery with fire, or by sharp medicine according to what is before it or the chapter of cautery, and is done either by incision and stitching or by canes, according to what I will say.
It is necessary that you place the head of the patient on your lap, then turn the paper from the eye to your left hand.
If it is turned over, it is good. If not, then if you stick a needle through all of it. and let this be near the edge of the paper or where the hairs grow near these hairs, and draw the thread over all the paper, and turn it to the razor.
Then make in the part below the paper, below the added hairs, at all the spatula joining, from the large tear to the small one.
Then extract the thread and put under the paper a small tent of cotton and drape, then draw on the paper a figure of an anchor, as the leaf of myrtle, and however it is necessary that the figure be according to the quantity that you see raising the paper which is divided into all.
And if one needs to make a large quantity of paper, according to how soft the paper is;
Then make all the spatula on the two lines that you have signed, and begin with large tears up to small ones. And let one of the cuts be near the natural hairs as thick as a root, then put the awl into one of the two angles of the heart, then skin it all.
Then bring the two lips together with a needle stitch using a very fine thread of wool, and wipe away the blood, and let the excess threads on the two eyebrows dry completely without anything sticky, if you see fit to do so.
And if not, don't worry about it, then leave the stitches and threads until three or four days.
Then treat the wound without suturing with drying and constricting things, for paper revives at the sewing of the wound and its joining, but the suture is weak (as the ancients say), and this work is done without fear. And if there is another way:
And if there is another way: And it is that you cut the paper into a shape like the leaf of myrtle, as we have said, at III ounces dried according to the form which is here:
Then bind those who overcome small forces equally according to the shape which is here:
And if you cannot hold the pliers and the thing is not equal, take a needle with one thread and put it through the shape. And put one other thread below the large tear, and the second thread below the small one, and bring together between your fingers the threads equally.
Then smooth your hand equally and lift all the skin on which you have signed, as we have said, then bring together the two edges of the wound by suturing, and treat it until it is healed.
and if an abscess comes to your incision, soothe it with wax and similar soothing ointments.
and it sometimes happens that the hair of the paper is converted.
then you should use what we have said about incision;
but the suture in one and the other is more artful.
The cure of boils is according to this form: and that you convert the paper and put it in according to what I have said, then make 2 boils by art, and 2 subtle ligatures as long as the paper and the width of a span is; and take 2 pieces from where you hold the threads;
then join one and the other subtly on what protrudes from the paper of the boil, and strain the 2 boils from the 2 parts they form. and leave it like that for several days, and the skin which is strained will die and heal and bear, as long as it seeks by itself.
If it delays, if the sore has some strength, then cure it as much as it is healed;
and when the wound is sewn up, and if the paper is lifted, and the hairs will no longer grow;
and this is the form of the two canes that you will make according to this figure, and according to this quantity of length and width:
the work is such that you take a subtle needle, and put a fine and subtle silk thread through it; then join the shoulders and knot one and the other subtly, and let the length of the threads be a palm long;
then arrange in the chase the other fine silk thread quickly, and knot the two threads together;
Then place the patient’s head on your knee;
and let it be beneath the sun so that the work is clarified, for this is a subtle and delicate operation, then push the needle all the way in at the root of the hair nearest the joint, and make it pierce quickly through the skin as you draw it along the natural hair.
Then pull out the hair up to the joint, and push that hair into the joint, if there is one or two or three or more.
Then withdraw your hand so that the hairs come out all the way at the joint through the skin with the natural hair.
And if the joint is treated and the hairs do not come out with it, then you will pull the joint down along the thread that you have ordered, until the joint comes out through the opening above, and you see it with the sight of your eye.
Then if you treat the wound and the thread, and close the eye and leave it closed for two or three days, until the hair grows in its place and the flesh rises over it.
And if the hairs are small, accompany one long hair from a horse's mane with it, and let it grow with the one you are letting it grow with, until it is long enough and then remove it.
of the rotting of the eye When this ailment which is called "aleacratio" or putrefaction comes into the eye, there are two ways:
one natural, and the other unnatural.
And it occurs through the cutting of a wound, or by incision or cautery, and by similar things.
And the way to treat it is that you split open that suture, and separate the lips of it, and put linen threads inside, and bind it until it is healed;
and it is not fitting that you use anything in its treatment that dries or constricts. For if you do this, the illness will return worse than the first.
But work with softening things, such as fenugreek; and roses of water or elder and flaxseed are cooked, and ointments of diachylon melted in some oils, and he wraps a tent, and cures it with this.
And the treasure of your cure is that you take care that it does not fuse according to the form it was before.
And this work that we have said is nothing other than the direction of this illness, so that it does not return according to the form it was before.
This sickness which is below, which truly is called "axacrati", and it is natural and accidental.
Accidents come from wounds and fissures and cauteries and similar things;
and the way of working on it is that you take a needle with a doubled thread and insert it into the flesh, and make it pierce from the left tear duct as far as the right so that the thread comes out in two sides of the flesh.
Then place the flesh above all the needle, and the cup at the spatulas width. And if the shape of the paper returns according to what is needed, it is good;
If not, take the razor and put it in the fissure, and turn the paper, and make two fissures on either side inside the paper.
And let the heads of the two fissures be at the two angles of the incision that you have cut, and make one angle so that when they are assembled, the shape is like the shape of a letter which has the name "Greek I";
Then remove that flesh, according to the quantity that its sides are below, from what is beneath the paper, then join the two separated parts, and sew them with a thread of wool;
Then follow the cure that we have said of softening medicines, and bandages, until it is healed.
And if the ailment comes from a fissure or seam or cautery, it is fitting that you cleave a full fissure beneath the hairs of the skin, and according to what is aforementioned; Then separate between the two leaves of a tent, as I have said;
Then separate between the two leaves of a tent, as I have said; And one must do the work according to the form of the ailment, for it is very diverse in form, and wise masters prepare all manner of things so that they may make the figure return to its natural form;
And the patients themselves, according to what is fitting of work and instruments are in several dispositions.
When this suture occurs in the hands of men in such a way that the skin above is joined with the white of an egg and cannot move nor do its natural works, then it is fitting that you put the point of a razor beneath the skin, and lift it up;
and hold them with pincers, as long as you cut what is exposed with a delicate spatula, which is not too sharp nor too dull, so that the patient can endure that the spatula is not too sharp and does not blind the eye;
and your incision, with which you remove the assembled skin, lightly, so that the paper returns according to its natural form;
and all that is assembled is cleansed, and do nothing at all in the sharp salty eye, and lift it with sweet water, and with coriander;
then place between the paper and the eye a tent of linen, and put on the eye wool softened in plenty of egg; and after the third day use sweet coriander and other southern things as long as it is healed.
Know that a nail is according to two manners: It is nervous and seems like hard fat, and another which is not nervous but seems like white frozen moisture, that when one touches it with iron and thinks to pinch it, one cannot.
And the one and the other resemblance begins toward the great tear duct, and grows little by little until it covers all the vision and all the light and the movement of the eye.
And the manner of the incision is such that the patient puts his head in a sound place, then he opens his eyes. And lift the paper to your hand, then with the point like small pincers, and extend it above; Then take a needle and put horsehair, or cow hair, or ox hair in it, and strong thread. And double the point of the needle a little and stick it into the angle, and pierce it with the whole needle, and tie the angle with thread and extend it above, and flay all the hair on the side of the angle which follows the prune and silk to the hair as far as the head, then cut the remainder at the root of the tear duct with a very fine spatula and with small forces, and leave the flesh natural or tear duct, so that by the incision the body does not usually shed tears.
And sometimes they are placed on the oncion alone, and on the thread as we have said; Then the skin is scraped off all over so that it resembles this form:
And be careful that the spatula does not touch the fleshy cloth and tear it, and that the plumule is not pierced;
And after the incision, a piece of silk thread is placed in the eye, and a collar made of pewter, and it is left until the next day; Then the healer does what is necessary until it is healed.
And if the nail is not sensitive, and you cannot insert the needle, and the oncion cannot enter, many times this type of nail is cured by medicines;
and it grows as I have said in the division, and if you see it covered, work on the eye of the patient, and take a light sharp spatula according to this form: And raise the splinter subtly, and if you see that it diminishes nothing and the reason hastens it, then distill from your mouth into the eye a collyrium made of litharge and red lead, and only grind it, and plug the eye until the next day;
If nothing else is against it in the eye, such as an abscess, then milk it and first heal the hot abscess until it is healed, then start the work as before, until it is healed.
Then begin the other work according to this same work, until it is all removed.
And if the appearance of the flesh or tears harms the eye too much, suspend it to the eyelid, and cover one part and not all, so that no body of tears comes in.
Then distill into the eye red collyrium which is made of litharge.
In some men, red flesh is never born, and covers the prunes and holds them on papers and turns them to the fire, and looks like a rose of baluster.
and the works are such that the patient puts their head in his healthy side, then he operates them, and all those who have suitable instruments for this, and support with strength;
then take the first instrument, and go shaving all the way to the end with the razor, and be careful not to blink at the work;
and let the incision be made in two places as we have said in the incision of the finger and with small forces, which remove the sebum, as the shape after this chapter demonstrates.
and when the incision is complete and all the flesh is removed, apply oil of cypress, broiled, or you can distill red sulfur, and similar corrosive medicines, and put hot oil with a cotton swab soaked in egg white so that it is assured of a hot abscess.
and if it remains there, and the shoe presses upon it, and you doubt a hot abscess, leave the eye and treat the abscess with soothing things for a hot abscess.
then return to your work until it is healed, and thus do as many charts are added to the eye in this manner.
But nevertheless, it is necessary that you relieve the treatment of each weak eye from the natural path; and from the accidental path, in work with iron;
and do not put your hand in any of these works until you see that this member suffers from this work.
Veins are red ones that are covered on top of the eye, and endure in sight their work and weaken the eye all days.
Therefore, it is necessary first that you look to see if the eye is strong or weak, and there is no other illness except for pain. Then the boil in a twofold manner:
instruct the patient to put his head in a healthy position, then suspend those veins at every ounce according to his wisdom, and let the ounces be subtle doubled according to this form:
And let them be applied by degrees in the body according to this form:
then one coils as forcefully those veins subtly, and wipes the blood hour after hour, as long as you see those veins move away from the eye;
and be careful that you do not prick the eye with the points of the spatulas, and do this work at noon in front of the sun, and be very fervent in your work so that you only cut those veins;
and when you have done this, if you distill green and red collyrium into the eye to corrupt what remains beneath the eyelid.
And if you cannot collect all of it in that hour, then make a plaster on the eye of soothing things to ease the pain of the eyes, and leave it for several days until the pain is eased and you are sure of a warm abscess, then begin again according to this manner which is before until he is healed;
and this is the form of force:
The one named "arissati" makes a fistula.
When you cure it by cautery and burning medicine according to what I have said before, and it is not healed, then cut into the abscess where it should drain, and draw out all the moisture that is there until the bone is exposed.
And when the bone is exposed and you see corruption and blackness, then take all the instruments with which its form is:
And it is called "sharp chief" and is made of hard iron at the head end and is pointed like a file as it is in the present form:
And place it upon the place of the corrupted bone, then turn it between your two fingers, and press your hand a little so that you know that corruption is removed.
and do this several times, then restore the place with drying medicines.
If the wound is soldered and flesh grows, and the body of the gut is soldered and remains so for 40 days, and it does not reopen and is not abscessed, and no bad accidents occur, know that it is healed;
If this is not the case, if there is nothing else to do but bring the fistula back to the opening of the nose according to this method: and that you uncover the bone the second time with an iron instrument and with sharp medicines; and when it is uncovered, take the drill according to this method, and let the head of the iron be three-angled, and let the drill be thinned down to its point as you see here:
then place it on the bone near the tear duct, and keep your hand away from the eye a finger's breadth, then turn the drill completely until it pierces the bone and let the patient feel this because the vein will begin to flow if he holds his hand under his nose;
and then restore the place with dry medicines, as I have taught you, and when the flesh grows and hardens the place, the matter goes to the snow. This is a lighter thing for the patient.
When the eye opens completely and there is no disturbance in vision, nor any dimming, it is fitting that you bandage the patient;
then the healthy eye, then apply cupping glasses or a cautery without piercing to suck out [the humor], then put on the eye a plaster made of acacia and aloe and frankincense and sarcocolle, and then strain the eye, and the plaster on top of bandages and cloths;
and the manner of the cloths is such that you take cloths soft enough, and fold each one into four, and then put one on top of the other according to the quantity that the eye needs.
Then it is strained with a hard bandage, and begin again with cupping glasses to suck without wounding.
Then remove the cupping glasses and leave the oil strained day and night, and if the ligaments soften, then you must strain it more.
Then remove the ligature after a day and night, and if you see the oil return, that is good.
If not; begin again the plaster and the cloths and the ligature and the cupping glasses until it is healed.
For a rupture of cloth with a warp When disruption comes to the woven cloth, then open it, and there will come forth shavings like grains of resin, and it is wondrous to behold.
Then if you see it covered, the work is such that you put a needle into the root of the part below up to that above, then put in another needle where it has a doubled thread from the tear duct. and let it pierce, and leave the first needle according to its position;
then take the place of the doubled thread and tie one part of the eye around it, and pull it well, then remove the needle and place a softened linen cloth soaked in plenty of egg white on top;
and leave it until the threads adhere with the eye, then treat the eye with comforting things until the wound is healed;
and once the wound is restrained by the eye on each side of a cloth circle, until it is healed.
And if the eye has a large appearance, pierce it with a fine spatula that comes perfectly from the eye, correct the white moisture and reduce the eye, and it will enter quickly;
then remove it until it is healed.
This illness which is called "alcunnati" is nothing other than a bowel assembled in the eye, resembling descending fire, and this is not fire;
And the manner of appearing in the work is such that you make the patient sit on a prepared and upright seat, then take the head between your hands in two parts, and move it so much as you see the bowel come up above your eyes; then let it be fixed, and not descend, and let the light be removed, and let the patient see things as he used to;
and if it does not descend below, know that it is fire, and if the descending of the bowel is not as we have said.
If you make the patient sit between your hands, then take a subtle spatula and put it on the horny coat in one spot along the continuation of the conjunctiva with the horny coat and the corona, so much as the bowel rises;
and when it is issued, if you distill in the sharp oil hot mixed with honey, or sharp or fenugreek is boiled and honey, then let it be cured by another cure until it is healed.
sharp objects of the eye We have seen the likenesses of the sharp ones in the division, and what it befits for piercing; if in work according to health.
It befits that you make the sick one sit between your crossed hands, far from the light of the sun, and bind the sound eye tight very strongly;
then put the paper of the eye in your left hand if the eye is left, or in your right hand if the eye is right;
then take in your right hand, if the eye is left, the instrument which is called "almagda," or in your left hand, if the eye is right;
Then place the point of the instrument below the cornea by the thickness of a reed in that part of the eye where there are fewer tears, then insert the instrument which is called "almagda" carefully and twist your hand until it pierces the cornea and you feel the almagda reach the empty space.
And it is necessary that the measure of the almagda passage be equal to the measure from the pupil to the end of the blackness. And this is the cornea of the eye.
If you see the bone through that paper because of the clarity of the corneal membrane, then put the instrument all the way to where the point is and then press it down one path after another.
If the point is now lowered, let the patient see it in front of him and the instrument in his eye.
Afterwards rest a little, and if the point goes back up the second path, put force on it with the instrument and when it is well fixed and it does not rise, carefully withdraw the almagda by turning your hand bit by bit.
And then put again a sharp point of a needle gem, and lift out the oil from within it. Then apply a cloth soaked in rose oil or linen softened in plenty of egg yolk and bind with good oil.
We, and those who are of our time, put on a common poultice with plenty of egg.
And if the almond cannot enter the eye because of its hardness, for there are some men who have their eyelids too hard, then it is necessary that you take the instrument which is called "alberit," of which this is the form:
And then pierce only the conjunctiva, and do not go too deep, but make a subtle place, then put in almond, as we have said;
And for the completion of the work prepare the patient with a coming doctor, in which he sleeps on his back in a dark place;
And let him be devoid of all movements, and take light foods, and do not move his head neither to the right nor to the left, and let him be bound according to his condition until the third day;
Then untie him in the same dark house, and test his sight, and let him see some things, and then tie him again until the seventh day;
And it does not suit you to do this in the hour of the cure or after the incision now, but it suits you to delay this, because the sharp point rises quickly.
When an abscess comes, untie the oil before the seventh day, and dress it with what relieves abscesses.
And when it is soothed, untie the bandage and put on its face a little gold leaf to cover it for a day, and let it be then in that dark room.
Then go out of the house little by little, and convert yourself to your ways;
And know that no disciples should interfere in this matter. And one came to us who was from the Yrach, who told us that in some parts they made a kind of almond paste, which caused a sharp pain, but even so I never saw any in our land, nor did I ever read about it in the books of the ancients. And perhaps it is a new thing.
And these are the resemblances of the forms of almsgiving, so that those who do not know them see them;
and they should be of proper iron: And let the head of these same instruments be of such subtlety, and the last one in three sharp angles.
Sometimes there are born or made various joined chariots, from which there are some that seem like scorpions with many feet;
and if there are such that have a chariot enchanted with a fox color, and if a chariot of good bone color. In this case then of these chariots which is of good bone and not enchanted, it behooves you to make the sick person sit between your hands against the sun;
In this case then of these chariots which is of good bone and not enchanted, it behooves you to make the sick person sit between your hands against the sun; and open their nostrils, and throw the ointment on those chariots, and draw them forth; for hold it so that you can sustain it with a subtle pointed spatula on one side, as long as you know that the chariot is entirely removed.
And if anything remains that cannot be grasped, carefully work it out with all the fine instruments so that nothing remains. And if there is swelling or a pustule appears, cut it as appropriate;
and if it is malignant pustules, hurry and cauterize them until the swelling subsides and all the matter is removed, then pour wine or vinegar gently on them. If vinegar works and moisture comes up to the palate, know that it is cured.
And if the moisture does not break through as it should, know that there is matter lodged in the bone above which instruments cannot reach to cut.
Then it is necessary that you insert a thread of linen, rather thick, knotted by hand, and leave a space of a finger or less between each knot. and place the patient's shoulder on a thread in its nest at the bottom of the armpit, and draw it in smelling as long as it comes through the nose into the mouth;
and many times they do this to the child like schools, and it is a light thing for him who wants to do it;
then hold the head that comes through the nose with one hand, and the other head that comes through the mouth with the other hand, and pull them one after the other as we are on the thread.
Do this until you know that the new ones have corrupted the flesh, then draw the thread, wipe away the blood, and wet the thread with Egyptian ointment, and put it back to the nest as before;
do this for three days or more, until the ointments corrode everything that remains of the flesh;
and then put or place a splint of plank for some days until he is healed, and if he needs drying medications, use them.
and this is the form of the instrument for purging the head, in which one distills the oils and medicines or places them:
And it is of silver or of iron, resembling an open lamp, like a tube, and it conducts also.
and if you wish, make a closed tube, and let the instrument be filled to purge the head;
and it has a handle at the head to hold it when one heats the oil or any liquid.
From the flesh out of the nose
Many times a disease called "telul" is born on the head, grows and becomes very large, so that it is dreadful to behold.
And for this reason, you must cut it off at the beginning and remove all the bone, then place a cautery or burning medicine on top.
and if it is delayed being covered until it becomes large, then beware if it is hard, of dark red color, with poor sensation.
Do not touch it with iron for it is an inflamed abscess, for when one covers it even once, great harm comes to the patient.
And if the abscess is soft to the touch, not of dark red color, and you see that it can be completely covered, then empty the patient and cover it without fear, and treat the area with drying and astringent things.
Know that when a solution of continuity comes in one of these cartilaginous operations, it profits little, except in some men.
It is therefore necessary when this happens to anyone, to see if the wound is fresh and bleeding freely; and then join the two edges with stitches, and then treat it until it is healed.
And if the edges are already separated on one side and the other, it is necessary that you scrape away all the parts of their core until they bleed, then join the two edges with stitches, and remove them, and sprinkle powder made from dragon's blood and ground incense. and put on the powders a piece of plaster of Paris or other soldering plaster and leave it until it heals then cure it with anointing until it is healed
The way to suture is that you bring together the solution: either with needles as we have said in suturing the belly; or with thread as I have shown you.
of abscesses of the lips
In the hands sometimes appears within the lips of an abscess hard, resembling grains of millet, small and large;
then you must turn back the lips and split open each knot and take them with pincers and cut them in each part
then apply oil after the incision of ground glass, until the blood is stopped.
and then wash with vinegar and treat the area with dry things until it is healed.
Many times flesh boils arise on the gums, which the ancients called "albulus";
It is necessary that you hold it with tweezers, and cut it at its root, and let the pus or blood run out;
Then put powdered vitriol on the spot, or other restraining and drying powders;
And if that flesh returns after the incision, which often happens, cut it a second time, and cauterize it: if it does not return after the cautery;
Sometimes rough and ugly scurf assembles at the head of the teeth, inside the mouth between the gums, and sometimes the teeth are black and yellow and wormy, as long as the corruption comes to the gum, and the teeth stink;
It is necessary that you make the patient sit between your hands, and his shoulders be in your lap, and raise the bones or the bark which appear, as long as nothing remains; And then make black and green, and yellow and the other stains, as long as they are cleansed;
And if you remove that which is at the first reason, it is good; If not, start again on the second and third day, until you have raised everything;
And know that the teeth need various forms of instruments to raise them, according to what the work shows, because the rasp with which one raises the front teeth has other shapes than those with which one raises between the teeth; And these forms and others should be prepared for you.
It is fitting when you cure a tooth for its pain that you delay as long as you can, for this ought not to be done. For it is a very high substance until one has no excuse for the removal.
Then when the patient is forced to draw, it is fitting that you are certain of the tooth pulling. Many times the pain deceives the patient and he thinks that it is a holy tooth, and causes the good tooth to be removed. And nevertheless the pain does not depart because of this, as long as the bad one remains, for we have already wanted to do this at these sanctuaries.
And when you are well certain of the aching tooth, it is fitting that you scrape around the tooth entirely, and cut deeply to keep the gum from all sides.
Then move it to your two hands or with delicate forceps at the first pinch and pinch, so that it is well loosened, then firmly grasp the forceps. and let the head of the patient rest upon your thigh between your knees, and hold it firmly so that it does not move.
After extracting the tooth straight without breaking it, and if it does not come out easily, take any of these instruments and gently insert it into each side, and move it as you did at first.
And if the bone is pierced and gnawed, it is necessary that you fill it with cloths, where the holes are; and if you extract it subtly with forceps, so that it does not break when extracting;
and it is necessary to work very carefully around the gum to dislodge the tooth.
And take good care that you do not break it, and a part remains, and the patient suffers greater pain from the root's malice than before.
And beware that you do not do as the ignorant barbers do, who by their haste and boldness often break the carriage, and do not apply what we have recounted;
but they bring about a great illness at times through the roots that remain, or through the carriage that they break, as we have often seen.
and when the tooth is drawn, wash the place with wine or vinegar and salt;
and if blood runs out, which often happens, apply powdered vitriol to the place.
And if that doesn't work, cauterize it.
The forms of the instruments with which one first draws teeth should have long points and thick handles so they do not bend when you draw the tooth;
and these are the forms: And they should be large members so that they do not bend in the opposite direction, and made of well-made iron, and have teeth to hold the pieces.
From the root of the teeth When the root remains after drawing, it is fitting that you put moistened cotton smeared with butter on the place for a day or two until the flesh softens, then insert the forceps which are called "algefri," whose head resembles a bird's beak;
and within they are made like a file and this is the form:
And if the roots do not want to come out with all these forceps, it is necessary that you uncover the flesh all around the root, and put in the instrument which is called "althali," that is to say, a small scraper, of which this is the form:
And let it be strong and thick so that it does not break, and if the root jumps because of this, it is good.
If not, help yourself with all the instruments, from which the following shapes come:
And if one uses this instrument which has two arms, of which this is the form: and other iron tools which are before in the manner of teeth, and of this instrument which seems like large pincers, whose form is this:
And let these instruments be strong so that they cannot break, and know that many instruments are dense. and also other instruments, which are not counted.
And wise and subtle masters find their own instrument according to what their work and the illness show them, for there are such illnesses where the ancients did not teach an instrument because of the diversity of others, so that it does not break the chariot or other bones, or if it rots, if he seeks the instruments that suit it, as I told you, and help yourself with gestures, of which this is the form:
And let them be large and well-holding to hold the bone so it does not escape, but can hold and remove it.
And then restore the place with medicines suitable for this, and if there is rot in the bone, and it is small, remove it with all these instruments.
When a tooth appears not according to nature and its form is ugly, especially in young women, you should know if the density is born after the tooth and is not in its proper place and cannot be filed.
Then remove it. And if it is joined with the tooth, take this instrument whose form is like a small beak and is made of sharpened steel.
And the saw cuts little by little in the hand for the hardness of the tooth, and so that you do not move the others, and if it appears one can file it, then the file of a part files as here is its form:
And it is also like the file with which one makes needles.
And then file the tooth bit by bit with your hands lightly so that it does not move until it falls out.
Then smooth the surface at the end with no sharp edge, and if it is too sharp and cuts the tongue, then file down the sharpness until it is even so that it does not cut the tongue or corrupt speech.
When a tooth in front falls out, whether by blow or by falling out, and the patient cannot press on what they eat without it hurting, and you have treated them with restrictive medicines, and that does not work;
then it is necessary to restrict it with a thread of gold, because threads of silver turn green and rot, but gold never changes.
And the thread should be neither too thin nor too thick, according to the amount of space between the teeth;
And if you see that the teeth need to be straightened, take a thread and double it between the two sound teeth, then place the dislocated teeth between the doubled thread so that it comes out cleanly on the other side of the sound tooth. Then begin again the covering until the place where you started and pull your hand subtly and carefully so that it does not move.
And let your ligature be at the root of the tooth so that it cannot escape.
Then cut the teeth with the thread using pincers and bring them together and place them between the sound tooth so that it does not bite the tongue;
and then leave them tightly bound as long as they can remain so, and if they come undone or the thread breaks, bind them with another thread.
if it remained and served thus for all its time; and that is the form of the teeth and the arrangement of the two healthy teeth, and the two missing ones, as you see:
And when the tooth falls out, if one puts it back in its place, fresh to fresh, as we have said;
and no one should interfere who is not wise and experienced, and sometimes one makes the shape of a tooth from a cow's bone, and puts it in the place where there is a missing tooth, and takes it out as we have said, and it remains and serves thus for a long time.
Sometimes this frenulum which comes below the tongue by nature, one is born like this; or by an accidental wound that has healed;
and the operation is such that you open the patient's mouth and put your hand on their head, and lift the tongue;
Then cut the nerve ligament widely, as long as the tongue is loosened from its attachment, and if there is hardness or knotting, which comes from a wound, then insert the hook and cut widely that ligament.
And be careful that the incision is not too deep, because of the artery which is underneath.
And when you have done so, apply a dressing of rose water and alum, or sharp cold water, then put under the tongue a tent of linen.
And bandage the patient's tongue every night so that the blood cannot coagulate.
And if bleeding occurs, apply powdered vitriol to the area. And if the bleeding does not stop, cauterize it with a lentil-shaped cautery, which is good for this purpose. Then the healer continues with other cures until he is healed.
And if you see it become red, black, or hard, so that the patient does not feel it, do not touch it at all, for it is a chancre.
And if it is turning white and there is moisture, then cut the skin with a fine scalpel and free it from one side to the other. And if the pus does not come to your work, apply ground vitriol until it is extinguished, then return to your work until you draw out everything completely.
Then lift the place from dirt and salt, and treat it with other treatments until it is healed.
of the abscesses of the throat Sometimes boils come inside the throat which are called "godaths", and we properly call them the two almonds, and when you treat them as we have said in the division, and they are not healed, take care:
If it is a hard abscess of small size and dark color, do not touch it with iron at all.
And if it is red and the root is large, do not touch it with iron either, also for the drainage of blood. But leave it alone until it is ripe, and then you will cut it open, or it will burst on its own.
And if it is of whitish color and the root is delicate, have your instrument ready to cut, but first look to see if the abscess is warm, at rest, and appeased.
Then have the patient sit facing the sun, with their hands in your sight, and open their mouth, taking the instrument between their hands, press the tongue down below the whole instrument, so that its shape is seen.
And it should be of silver or fine steel like a knife;
Press your tongue against all these instruments, and you see the abscess, then take the lancet and insert it into the almond, and hold it firmly above more than you can.
And draw nothing of the cloths with it, then apply the cup to the instrument, from which this is the shape, that it seems like one force. And all the ways the tips are curved, and one to the other, and they are very sharp, and it is made of Indian iron or steel.
And if you do not have this instrument, take tongs, of which this is the form: And let it be cutting on one side, and not on the other.
And when you have covered one of the almonds, cover the other according to this same manner, and after the incision gargle the patient with hot water, hot and clear, and if bleeding occurs, gargle the patient with hot water, or decoctions of pomegranate rinds are cooked, or myrtle leaves, and similar things, until the blood is stopped. Then cure it until it is healed;
And if any other abscesses arise in the throat besides the two tonsils, then treat them as you would the two tonsils.
And I treated a woman for an abscess that had formed in her throat, namely, a small abscess.
And it had nearly closed off her entire throat so that the woman could not exhale through the blocked passage, and she could neither eat nor drink, and would have died if she remained in this state for a day or two.
And the abscess was so swollen that he had to put two reins through the two holes of the nose.
I hastened therefore and quickly inserted a lancet into one of them, then drew out the pus, and extracted a large quantity of matter.
Then I performed the same procedure on the other opening, and opened her mouth and pressed her tongue.
After you pierce the lancet into these abscesses, and scoop out a part of it, only a little blood should come out. And thus the conduit of the woman's throat was unstopped, and she now began to drink water and then wine, and did not cease to lance that abscess for a long time.
And the abscess grew again, and filled the place that I had emptied, until it became very large.
Then I ligated it and cauterized it inside her throat: Then it stopped growing.
And I left those parts, and only God knows what happened to her after me.
of the eye
When the swelling descends to the uvula, and it is swollen and elongated, it is called "perpendicular".
and if it is below large and round, it is called "grape."
When it is cauterized as we have said in the division, and the cautery does not profit, and you see that the boil has been appeased, and it is subtle, then it is necessary that you cut it.
and that which is round assembled and is not long; and it is of blood or of purple color or black, then it is necessary that you avoid the incision of it. For there is great danger upon the patient.
It is necessary then, when you see it, according to the manner that I have said, of its whiteness and length, that you make the patient sit in front of the sun, and press his tongue to the instrument of which we have made mention before; then insert the lancet into the grape, and draw it below, and cut with one of the two instruments that I have mentioned in the incision of the two almonds.
And you must not cut away any more than the superfluity which is beyond the natural limit;
For if you cut away more, it grieves the voice and speech;
And after the incision, use what we have said in the incision of the two almonds, and care for it until it is healed.
And if the patient is afraid of being cut, you should give him something to dull the fear of the cautery.
And the manner of the cautery is sharp and pointed. And let the patient put his head in good health, and then press his tongue against the instrument that we have said in the chapter on cautery, and hold it with sharp, hot coals, so that it is not too thick nor too thin; and in using the point of this instrument, which has this shape:
And have on the head a hair or where one puts the medicine, such as the hairs of a spoon, and put the instrument on all the medicine upon the eye;
and let the patient lie on their side so that the saliva and mucus run from their mouth into the medicine within so that it does not go down the throat and lungs
then hold your hand over all the medicine and press it on the eye, the amount of half an hour, until you see it soften and the stinging of the medicine is soothed;
and if you see it, take cotton and wrap it around any instrument, moisten the cotton in the medicine, and insert the instrument all the way into the cotton above, until the cotton is inflamed on the eye;
and do this often, until the cautery is perfect, then leave it to dry and take it out after four or five days.
And if you need to restart the cautery with medicine, do so, and after the cautery wipe it around the eye with cotton soaked in butter, and cleanse what is around it from the medicine.
And let it be treated with sharp cold, and be cured by gargles until it is healed.
This treatment is safer than incision, or the cautery;
If it is cured by fumigation according to this manner, take calament and wormwood and origanum and rue and chamomile and avronne and similar herbs, and assemble them all or some of them in a pot, and put water in it, and let it boil;
and the pot should be well sealed with strong earth, and within the pot there should be an instrument fitted in this manner: And it should be of silver or iron, and one of the ends should be put into the patient's mouth so that the vapor rises to the eye through the tube, until the eye is mortified;
Afterwards, repeat often until the eye dries, and be careful not to do this at the beginning of the arrival of the hot abscess, because many things happen; and do not make this fire hotter than the decline of a boil allows.
And if this instrument is not present, take a cane and put inside the head a crust of egg, so that the patient's mouth is not too hot; for the crust of egg does not make the steam burden the mouth, and it is a good cure altogether healthy.
Many times a bone or fishbone, or something else gets stuck in the throat;
so you must draw out what you can see, and press the tongue against the sun with all your might, so that you see the thing move;
and what does not appear to you and is lodged in the throat, you must make the patient vomit so that the food is cooked in the stomach; if perhaps it extracts the thing by vomiting;
or the patient swallows a piece of sponge, or a piece of navel, or a root of lettuce, or a piece of dry bread; and tie a thread to the sponge, and then swallow it; and when it comes to the place, it will air out, and then you will pull hard;
and if it does not come easily as we have said, then take an instrument of lead according to this form:
Let the instrument be curved at the head so that it can more easily enter the throat, and have the head raised up; and be careful not to touch the epiglottis, lest it suffocate him, and do not push the bone in;
and it is better that the patient pushes the instrument in, so that he knows where the thing is lodged; If the bottle is empty, or if it draws the instrument equally strong, until it is strong.
From the bloodletting of the throat
Sometimes medicine is without blood, as I have said in the division by the treatment of medicines. And when that does not profit, then look into the throat of the patient in the sun, and press their tongue to the instrument as I have told you.
And if you see the sinew, cut it with very small forceps or with subtle tongs that are suitable for this.
And if that does not work, take a hollow reed, and put it into the throat of the patient, then put the end of the reed on a hot iron, and do this often. And hold the patient with sharp pain every day.
Then take a full view of sharp cold and work the mouth and swallow it in a sense and move it with your hand often. And as soon as the blood feels the cold it will stop.
And if it does not stop as we have said, then fumigate the patient with asafetida at the instrument as I have said in the fumigation of the grape.
Do this many times, for it will fall without delay.
And the way of fumigation is that you take a pot where there are live coals, and it is covered with a cloth pierced in the middle, and the head of the instrument is put through that hole.
Then you give the patient the fumigation and they put the head of the cane in their mouth, and close their mouth so that the smoke doesn't escape but comes up to the sinuses;
And the sinus will now drain, and if it doesn't, you repeat the fumigation many times;
and the patient should endure thirst, and eat salty things and such, and not drink any water;
And then it will be necessary for it to drain freely by this treatment.
And the shape of the instrument with which one treats the sinus is, when it can be seen, like curved forceps to be inserted into the throat. And it should resemble a soignee beak, and it should have the roughness of a file, so that whatever it takes hold of, it cannot let go.
Many abscesses are similar, according to what memory brings here of one and the other in this book, and they vary in perforation and size.
And it is in two ways, one of which is in its own appearance, and from the moisture it holds.
And the second manner is for those wounds which are on the body.
For abscesses of the head are different from those of the buttocks, and abscesses of fleshy areas are different from those that come in joints, and each has its own judgment in the work.
And abscesses should not be pierced until the swelling is mature according to its fulfillment.
And if there are such that it is necessary to pierce when they are ripe, and they do not die according to their fulfillment, such as abscesses that are near joints.
For when abscesses come near joints, and it is left until it is rotten around, by chance the ligament and nerve of the joint may be corrupted, by which there is a cause for contraction in that limb.
If the abscess is near a main limb, and you delay perforation until it is ripe, it will harm the main limb.
if it is located near the foundation, if you pierce it, so be it that he dies;
and it is not fitting that you pierce an abscess raw without digestion being completed, except for the one that is located near the foundation, lest it rot completely through and become elongated within, and a fistula arises; and it cannot heal in due time.
And it is fitting that you know the time of perforation of the abscess which is dead according to its fulfillment, and that is when the pain is eased, and the departure of fever, and the lessening of pain and redness, and the softening and sharpening of the head of the abscess, and the other signs;
and it is fitting that you make the perforation where the most dependent part of the abscess is located, and where it appears to move;
And it be the perforation along the length of the body, and if the abscess is at the hands or feet, or in joints and nerves and arteries, and in all their equals where there is no weeping. In these cases, according to the member which is bent.
And when an abscess is in fleshy place, it is best that you leave the perforation until it is confirmed in complete digestion, as we have said.
For if you pierce it before this, the venom will spread along the length of the body and is full of much filth. And by chance the lips harden and its depth.
And if there is an abscess that is pierced according to the width of the body, according to what the limb needs.
And it is fitting that you treat small abscesses, small openings; and in large abscesses, large openings, and many fissures according to the appearance of the size of the abscess;
and if there are such abscesses where it is fitting to cut out the core, and cover. When it has become as yellow as draperies, and is dead, then it is fitting to do as one does for buboes:
and if there are some that are split into three angles, and if there are some that we cut like the leaf of myrtle, just like abscesses of angers;
and if there are some where we make a round incision, and other incisions and similar cuts.
Those that do not have a head, such as a superficial boil, it is necessary that you pierce it completely;
and it is necessary that when the abscess is large, and it has collected a great deal of pus, and you pierce it, do not drain all the pus in that hour, but drain a part; then open the abscess until the next day, then drain nothing at random; do this many times gradually, until all the pus is drained;
the same applies if the patient is of weak constitution, or a woman bearing [a child], or young children, or old men decrepit. For sometimes the intestines jump out with the issue of the bowel, and by chance the patient dies, and you do not notice.
Avoid therefore this chapter with great caution, and when you have pierced your abscess, if wipe the wound, and look whether the wound of the abscess is small; and if it is a large opening, if apply bandages of linen or fine cotton; and if it is a large abscess, and there are many openings, it is necessary that you put in each one a bandage so that they come against each other;
and if you have cut into the abscess a part of the skin, and you have stitched it around, it is necessary that you fill it with old cotton or rasping of linen cloth without moisture, and bind it until the third day;
then let the bone set, and treat it with ointment until it is healed.
And if bleeding occurs during your work, apply cold water quickly and easily, wet a cloth, and put it on the bleeding area many times.
And if the discharge of blood persists, apply dressing and treatment, and the powders that I have mentioned in this book, and if it is a time of winter, and the flesh or abscess is very nervous, it is necessary that you put on bandages and cloths moistened in wine and hot oil;
And if it is in summer, and the flesh is thick, then you should place wet cloths soaked in vinegar and oil or in cold wine and oil on top, until the third day as we have said.
Then untie the abscess, wipe it and dress it as is appropriate, until it is healed.
And this should be universally known in the treatment of abscesses:
As I have told you how one must proceed before treating abscesses, see this chapter.
When boils appear on the head, they are like little pouches of pus, just as the jeweler's pouch for a ring, and there are many similar things.
There are some that are fatty and others that have moisture as well as pus;
and if there are some that are hard and stony at the waist, there is no doubt that the artery does not oppose it.
And the works of the waist are such that you prove with all the instrument which is called "entromissoire", of which the form comes hereafter, what it contains.
For if it contains moisture, so let it go through above for a long time.
And when the moisture is drained, do not leave any skin that contains that moisture, for it will return immediately if you leave anything.
Then soak cotton in Egyptian ointment, if it is present; If not, in water and salt, and apply it to the wound, and leave it until the next day; And do this as often as needed for a night.
Then repeat the cotton, as before, on the second day and the third, until you are sure that it no longer remains at night;
Then treat the wound with ointment until it is healed.
And if the abscess holds a lot of fat, then do this according to this form for a long time. And you should rub in ointments and scrape it from all sides, and apply all your healing milk for the boil where it lies.
And if the artery goes against you, do what I told you afterwards.
And also do the same for an abscess if it is ripe, and for the waist and for curing as I have told you.
And the incision on the abscess pierces it and draws out moisture, for they are of little blood. And if some of these abscesses or boils have no moisture, and like those were the boils that I cut from an old woman's head.
And I found the boil as hard as a stone, rough and white, and it could not break. And if one had cut into it, they would have done just as much harm as cutting into a stone.
In other abscesses coming or appearing, especially those that come at the head of children and at the roots of the ears, the opening should always be made in the lowest place so that the pus can come out.
And the cure should be done as it is appropriate.
Many times these abscesses happen in the neck, and under the armpits, and in the groin, and sometimes they come in other parts of the body, and they are very painful, and they are joined together.
And each scrofula is properly within its own rib, just as the wart and the abscess on the head, as we have said; and there are many resemblances to these scrofula.
and there are many resemblances to these scrofula. There are some which contain moisture, and some which are malignant and will not obey health.
In that one then which you see of good disposition to touch, and resembles the color of the body, and moves at each point and is not adherent to the nerves of the neck nor to the artery nor to the duct, and is not deep;
it is fitting that you cut it from above and scrape it at each point, and extend the two lips of the wound to the sutures, if you need them, as we have said in abscesses on the head;
And treat it little by little, and be sure that you do not cut the nerve or vein, and do not let the instrument be too sharp nor cutting, lest the hands slip, and do not press too hard before, lest you cut what you should not.
And if you cut a vein or artery and it will not let you work, put powdered vitriol into the wound, or some powders that staunch blood, and remove the plague; And leave it until the abscess is soothed, and the wound softened, and begins to rot.
And when the blood has stopped, return to your work until you complete it;
then inquire with your index finger whether any small scrofula remain, if so, cut and cleanse them.
And if it has a large vein at the root of the scrofula, it is not fitting that you cut that scrofula at its root, but bind it with a strong double thread and let it fall off by itself without harm.
Then apply the wound with old cotton steeped in Egyptian ointment, then dress it.
And if you cut out all the scrofula, it is necessary that you bring together the two edges of the wound and sew them now, since there is no longer any excess due to the size of the scrofula. It is necessary that you know how to cut off its root, and draw with force, and sew as we have said.
It is necessary that you know how to cut off its root, and draw with force, and sew as we have said. Those scrofula that hold superfluity, pierce them where it appears dead;
and pierce it as the one mentioned before, in dependence, then apply bandages with ointment and such things so that it corrupts what remains of the corruption. And when the wound is well cleansed, apply a dressing with ointment containing charcoal, until it is healed.
The ancients said and spoke of the cutting of the throat; but I never saw anyone in our land who did it, and that is the writing of their words.
For those who have strabismus, it is necessary that the slit in the throat which is called "epiglottis" be scraped. And one should not do this, for all the veins and the lung of the patient are affected in those who have an abscess hot in the mouth, or in the throat, or in the tonsils.
When the illness is in the windpipe of the throat, it is fitting to lift the epiglottis to avoid the destruction that comes from strangulation.
It is necessary then, when we wish to split the epiglottis, that we split it below three circles or four, a small slit across, between the two circles, or according to the quantity of the slit of the face, not in the cartilage.
And those things are suitable for the section of the epiglottis if there is no flesh, and the vessels are long from it.
And if the master is fearful, it is necessary that he stretches the skin of the throat to the whole length, then splits the heart as far as it comes to the chin. and avoid the blood vessels, if you see anything, and then cut out the bone marrow, as we have said.
And it is demonstrated by the section through which the phlegm of the chest passes out, and by the defect of the voice.
and leave the wound open for a while.
And when the hour has passed in which strangulation is doubtful, bring together the two lips of the wound in the heart, and sew it all up without touching the cartilage.
Then administer medicines that promote flesh growth, until it is healed.
Albucasim says that one should not do this until the throat is all torn open and the patient is judged dead, and the defect is in the pharynx. Then cut out the epiglottis so that the patient cannot breathe, and he breathes through the wound, and thus is kept from death.
And because the ancients commanded to leave the wound open until the evil of the disease had passed, and it passes in three days or four. And then they commanded to sew up the wound and clean it, until it was healed.
And I will tell you what I have seen. I saw that a young woman took a knife and stuck it in her throat, and cut part of the channels from her windpipe;
and I was called to treat her, and I found her as if dead.
I discovered the wound, and found blood coming from it; although it had not pierced a vein nor gone farther than the throat, the veins were ruptured by the wound.
I hurried and sewed up the wound, and treated her until she was healed;
and it only happened to the young woman that her voice became hoarse, and afterwards returned to its normal state;
for this reason I say that you should not fear cutting the epiglottis.
This abscess is called a "hernia of the throat," and it is a large abscess in the color of yellow, and it is very common in women;
and it occurs in two ways: Nature and accidents;
Or nature has no part.
And accidents are according to two manners, one of which resembles fat to us, and the other manner resembles an abscess which comes from our arteries; And there is fear, and it is not fitting to work with hot iron except in that which is small, and he tests and searches at all the entrances. If you find it as we find our fat, and it cannot go through any vein, then cut it off as we cut off the warts, and treat all its top, if there is any. And surround it well soon, and cure it as it should be, until it is perfectly healed.
There are many manners of ours, of which I will say all the resemblances;
and therefore it is necessary that I say all the difference which is between us and issue.
I say that issue is heat and fever lasting, as long as the boilings are passed, and rot is accomplished; then rest the fever and the heat.
With new there is neither heat nor fever nor pain, and it contains its own juice, which is its own bag and is according to the color of the body, and begins also as a pea, and grows large;
and they are according to two resemblances, either greasy or moist, and many of the colors are as I have said in the division.
It is necessary, when you come to the treatment of a wound, that you examine and inquire first about all the instrument which is called "entromissoire," according to its shape or chapter which is afterwards.
And the manner of the inquisition of abscesses for us is that you take or a more moist place than you find in the abscess, and turn your two fingers, little by little, until you know that the instrument has pierced the heart, then that it be according to the size of the abscess;
Then remove the instrument, and take care that it does not leap out.
If moisture runs clear, whatever its color, then do as I have said for the other abscesses;
and if after the instrument no moisture comes, know that it is fatty; then do as I have said in a cross shape, and take hold with pincers, and lightly scratch it on each side and guard the garment where it lies so that you draw it clean with the needle.
And if you cannot draw it out clean, then do so in pieces so that nothing remains.
For if anything remains, the pain will return many times;
and if even a small piece remains and it does not bother you, then apply the wound with some corrosive sharp powders, and extract the wound, and put soothing things on the hot abscess, and treat it with other treatments until it is healed.
and if it is large, sew the two lips of the wound, and treat it with what causes flesh to grow.
and if the vein beats against you or another thing hastens and apply powdered vitriol, and let it rest for two days or three, as long as the wound ripens, and stills the boiling of blood; then return to covering what has remained dry.
See here the forms of inserting instruments, and they are of three kinds: large and medium and small;
and there are three squares which are called "albaret," and one which is called "breb," and there are three kinds: large, medium, and small, to surround the abscesses of fistulas;
And they are also like needles with which we sew charms, and they are made of citric iron, or of iron, or silver, and those that are yellow are the best, and are more proven for black pitch to surround the curves of a fistula.
And they are of three kinds: Large, medium, and small, according to the quantity of the width of the opening.
The shapes of the needles are of many resemblances, as you see here:
and there are needles that have two curves in three ways also;
and there are needles that have three curves, and they are also of three ways;
and there are needles that have two curves, and needles with only one curve, and they are of three ways also;
And all this is necessary in their place.
The head of these is what we make are cutting, and some of them do not cut more than one side, from which we flay the veins, for this we do not cut the vein nor the nerve;
And of these inserters are the alamel replied in handles, so that the patient does not perceive them at the opening of abscesses;
and they are of three kinds: large, small, and medium, as you see;
and we do not use them more than in fleshy places, such as legs, arms, breasts, and similar places;
and at no time do we make another small instrument resembling punches of fists, according to this form, with which we staunch blood: and put it back in place so that it heals properly in accordance with the veins and arteries, and never again return to this large shape:
Sometimes the breasts of some men swell when they begin to rot, so much that they resemble women's breasts;
and they remain ugly and swollen, and whoever wants to heal them, if it is necessary, should follow the form of these lines b. up to g.: then scrape off the fat, and fill the wound with medicine made into a paste, then bring together the two edges of the wound with stitches, and treat it until it is healed;
and if the breast hangs down, and is softened by its size as it happens with women, then make two cuts on it, by two similar incisions; so that one is connected to the other at the end of one and the beginning of the other, so that the larger line contains the smaller according to this form from line b. up to line g.; Then flay the skin that is between the two lips, and remove the fat, and apply what we have said about stitching and powders, and what is necessary in the treatment, until it is healed.
And if it is not healed, or the incision is not completely made, because the patient does not want to rest, or because of bleeding, then you must fill the wound with softened cotton in corrosive ointment. And leave it until it softens the remaining and fat, then treat it until it is healed.
These abscesses which come under the armpits are types of hard scrofula where there are ribs, and some contain moisture.
Therefore those which contain moisture must be cut according to this form, from the line .b. to the line .g.: And when all the pus that is in the abscess is emptied, then dress the wound with old cotton and leave it until the next day.
And if the abscess is similar to scrofula, make it as we said for incisions of scrofula, and if the wound closes inwards, apply a cautery as we said before.
When the artery is severed and the skin above it is sewn together, many times abscesses come about, and the same thing happens to a swollen vein and an abscess.
And if the knower knows when it is for the artery, the abscess is long and perfect. and when you feel it at your fingertips, if you feel dislocation;
and when it is for the vein, it must be put back in its place.
and it is folly to cut this abscess, and especially when it is under the armpits and at the angles or neck and many other places, and it is very large. It is therefore necessary to avoid the use of iron, and he who is in charge must also avoid it, and in the one who is swollen from an artery making its way through the skin for a long time;
then operate with lancets and cleanly separate the artery from the tissues, until it is exposed;
then put a needle underneath it and make it pierce through to the other side, and remove the artery with a doubled thread in two places, according to what I have taught you in the extraction of the two arteries that are in the temples;
Then press the place between the two strands of a speculum until the pus that is in it comes out, and let the abscess be released.
Then apply a bandage that compresses the wound, as long as the ligaments tighten. Then treat it with an ointment suitable for this, until it is healed.
And if the abscess is as large as a vein, it is fitting that you hold in your hand what you can take from the abscess to all the skin, then put the needle under the place that you hold in your hand and make it pierce, and let there be a double thread so that you pull it from the other side; Then tie the abscess, as I have told you, with a ligature from one of the two sides to the two ends of the thread.
And if you doubt that the thread will come out, put another needle all along the thread below all the abscess at the incision of the first needle, and pull out the threads in four places;
Then cut the abscess until the excess comes out, then cut the excess of the heart and leave that which is tied;
Then put a cloth moistened in wine and oil on top of it, then apply dressings of tents and ointments until it is healed.
Just as abscesses come in arteries and veins, abscesses come to nerves when they are strained, or through too much work, and similar things.
And this happens most often in the shoulders and hips and in all places where there are joints, and it is a pain of abscesses, and its color resembles the color of the body, and it is in several positions without pain;
And when it is extracted, the patient feels pain, and it is not in perfect position with the body, but under the heart;
and move well on all sides, and do not go forward or backward, nor down nor up, and the one that is in joints should not be covered by iron. lest it cause contraction; and the one that is on the head or forehead, make the skin with a spatula.
and the one that is on the head or forehead, make the skin with a spatula. If the abscesses are small, if you have some tweezers, and cover it at its root;
and if it is large, if you suspend it to the lancet, and flay it, then bone and assemble the wound with stitches, and heal it until it is healed.
Sometimes it occurs in bellies and not elsewhere, a disease called "fungus" because of its resemblance to mushrooms, and the root is subtle, and the head large;
and there are some small and some very large;
And I saw a man who had two or three things on his belly which were more like fungi than anything else, and there was no difference between them, and they were white, and had small roots, and they were easily cut open, and moisture constantly flowed from them.
I cut them off and found that one weighed eighteen ounces, and the other six ounces. The work of cutting is such that if you look and see that the patient is moist, and the color of the joint is white and moist and has fine roots; if the cut is made with a broad spatula, and you have a fire cautery present.
if the cut is made with a broad spatula, and you have a fire cautery present. For at the waist there often come excessive flows of blood, and if your patient faints, then hasten to cauterize;
and if you see the patient fainting and afraid of the incision with iron, then take a good thread of flax, and tie the joint as we have said, and leave it for two days;
and then restrain it, and do not cease to pull the thread of flax until it reaches the joint, and passes through it by its effort.
and if the roots are thick, it is painful to cut them directly through the abdomen, but you can well cut half of them, and then cauterize them so they do not grow back.
Then dress the wound, and be careful not to cut the tendon which is of a dark color and poor sense and full of milk.
For this is an ulcerated abscess, and I will come to the treatment of ulcers later.
When the arm is strong If the appearance of a boil comes from cautery of a wound or an incision, and it is on the belly and in some of the bowels, as it happens in other ruptures, or from blood that flows from veins or arteries according to what is before it, or from windiness;
and if it is from a rupture of the intestine and through an opening in the bowel, then the color of the abscess resembles the color of the body, and it is a light thing without pain, and opens from various exits. And if it is due to the exit of the intestine, then it is more diverse, and when one presses it at its hips if it responds, and then returns, and by chance if it is squeezed, and increases greatly at the entrance of the bath and through great effort.
And if it is due to moisture, it is a light matter, and opens well when you press it with your hand, but do not constrain it.
And if it is due to blood, it opens by these signs: the abscess is large and hard, and it is fixed according to a certain quantity. And if it is due to windiness, it is soft to the touch, and the work is that you look to see if the appearance is due to blood from the artery or vein, or windiness.
And if it is due to windiness, it is soft to the touch, and the work is that you look to see if the appearance is due to blood from the artery or vein, or windiness. Then you must let the healing take place. For there is doubt and fear, as I have told you in the chapter of abscesses, for the artery and for the vein.
And if the appearance is due to the intestines or the bowels, it is fitting that you instruct the patient to hold his breath and be stretched out straight, then bind all around the arm. Then command him to grasp often between your hands, then go around the place that you have signed with all of the spatula, then extend half of the abscess above to all the great one. Then bind the limb with a strong thread or a cord of strong silk tightly, and let the knot be loose.
Then work on half of the abscess extended over the bandage, and push your index finger in, and squeeze the intestines. If you find it caught under the bandage, untie it, and push the intestine out of the belly cavity.
And if you find pus, take it with your thumb nail, and cut off the excess.
And if an artery or vein opposes you, wind it carefully, then return to your work and take two needles, put them with two threads, and insert the two needles around what you have done in a cross shape so that you pierce.
Then strain the abscess into four parts on the needles, and if you see it, remove the needles, and let the wound remain until it dries, and let the dead flesh come off by itself. where you find it subtle and rotten, then treat it as necessary, and drain the abscess as we have said;
where you find it subtle and rotten, then treat it as necessary, and drain the abscess as we have said; and extract the blood or moisture that you find, then treat the area as necessary, and suture the area.
a sore We have said in the division the likenesses of ulcers, and how one must work with medicine, and how one must avoid treatment with iron;
and say that the ulcer spreads in the marrow, and great caution is needed in its treatment, and they say that when an ulcer is in a place where it can be scraped away like an ulcer that is on the breasts, and on the thigh, and in similar places, one should remove it all when it is at the beginning;
No one heals without me before me.
And the works, when it is in place or we can remove it, as we have said, is that you purge the patient of black bile sometimes.
Then make him fast if he has manifest repletion, then put the patient in a good place to do the work;
Then gird your tunic or shirt and shave his head from all sides and all bones leaving nothing.
And let the blood run freely and wipe the place with your hand or some other thing, and if the flow of blood goes against the incision of the artery or vein, then cauterize it until the blood is stopped. Then cure it with another cure until it is healed.
Of dropsy We have said in the division the likenesses of dropsy and in what manner the gathering of water is made, and the signs of each likeness, and the cure which is made by medicine and that which is cured by iron.
and one must not touch it with iron in these two ways: that is to say, tympanites and yposarche, for they are deadly things;
Therefore, when you treat this kind of dropsy which is called “split” and the treatment does not work, consider whether the patient is weak, or if he has another illness besides dropsy, such as cough and loosening of the bowels and similar things; do not touch it with iron, for there is doubt;
and if you see the patient is of strong constitution, and he has no other illness besides dropsy alone, and he is neither too young nor too old, then you must work thus: Lay the patient straight upon your hands, and have your assistant press on the belly at the lowest part below the breastbone, then take the sharpest pointed spatula according to this form: And let it be sharp on two sides. At a point, but it should not be so inserted that it can reach the intestines when put in, and it cannot be bleached.
Then look to see if the dropsy is directed towards the intestines: If it is necessary, you should cut into them below the shoulder blade three fingers' width to the right. And if the dropsy is due to liver disease, your incision should be on the left side of the shoulder blade three fingers' width.
And if it is due to the spleen, it should be on the right, and it is not necessary for the patient to lie upon the incision so that the superfluities do not run into the weak part.
Then pierce all the skin with the instrument and push it in, lift your hand as far as possible between the skin and the muscle, just like when flaying to the amount of a fingernail or so.
Then pierce the syfac until the spatula comes to the eighth place, and this is the place of the needle, then pull hard, and push this instrument which has this form: And it resembles a subtle silver cane, and is made of willow or artichoke wood light, and has a small hole at the bottom part. And on one side, there are three holes. And two on the other side, and one on another.
And the head is cut like a feather, and this is the shape of the incision which the scribes use to cut the feather:
At the head above is the point so that when the instrument comes to the needle's eye, it descends now onto the instrument.
Empty then half or a third part, for if you empty more than is needed at that hour, the patient might die by chance due to the spirit's release from the weapon, or the head weakens, or he approaches death.
but according to the void of its virtue, and according to what the disposition of the patient's virtue signifies; and his pulse.
then treat the instrument and hold the point, and it is now held for the heart which stops the opening that is above the face, of which I have spoken, that you pierce according to this manner;
then resume the instrument the next day, if you see the patient suffering thus, and treat the point with a small amount;
do this every day, and be careful not to press while it remains but a prick of a point.
And if you doubt the patient, and you leave a lot of point, if the cure is from burial or hot sand, and by much sweat or bath and in the sun, and if he drinks; and the treatment of drying medicines until it is healed, and cauterize on the stomach and on the liver and on the spleen after the extraction of the sharp object, as I said before.
Sometimes children are born who do not have a hole in their penis, or the hole is small, or it is not in its proper place.
If it is necessary as soon as possible, he has not pierced with a very subtle instrument according to this form.
then put or make a small plug of lead, and tie it and hold it for III days or IIII and when he wants to urinate, remove the plug, and urinate, and then put it back;
and by chance none is needed, for the urine that comes out will not leave it closed.
Those whose anus is small, if it is treated with a plum stone as we have said, it will enlarge.
Those who do not have the opening in their place are unfortunate, for no one is born who has the opening at the head of the penis, so they cannot urinate before lifting their penis up; and they cannot ejaculate because the matter cannot come to the end, and it is a bad disease.
And the manner of the work is such that the patient lies often on his back, then extend the head of the penis and the foreskin as thin as a feather, so that the hole pierces in the middle, as it should.
And be careful of the flow of blood which often comes, and if it happens, let it be stemmed by one who stems blood, and dress the wound until it is healed.
of the pimples of the penis Often these abscesses come on the penis, and are a sight of foul flesh;
and there are malignant and non-malignant ones;
it is fitting that you take them with a subtle lancet, and cut and cleanse all of them, then put softened cotton with Egyptian ointment on them; then cure it with diachylon ointment until it is healed.
And if the pus is malignant, of a foul color and corrupting, then you must apply cautery to it.
When you have grasped it, and if the foreskin is on top of the penis, and has part inside the skin and part outside, then it is necessary that you remove the foreskin which is inside first. And when it is joined, then let the wound heal outside.
For when you treat it together, unless the head of the penis is very secure so that it is not pierced, then blackness and corruption will come to its penis and testicles.
It is necessary to cut away everything that is black and corrupted, then bind on a plaster of honey and flour which is made from the bark of pomegranates and wine, then treat it with other treatments until it is healed.
And if bloodletting is required, apply the lunar cautery according to this form:
Cauteries help in two ways together: that is to say, in the stopping of blood and in the corruption.
and if the head of the penis is corrupted and retracted, it is necessary that you bring or conduct a cane of lead to the penis, and the patient urinates among it.
and when the hairs grow around the head of the penis which happens to those who have not been circumcised, or there is a wound or an abscess, it is necessary that you scrape it with a sharp instrument, until the bonds are loosened, and the head of the penis is delivered from all sides;
and if it is a grievous thing to do this, it is necessary that you scrape it with a spatula any spot on the head of the penis and of the skin;
then you must carefully separate them both, and put a fine linen cloth softened in cold water so that it does not burn at the beginning.
Circumcision is not a breaking of continuity like other wounds; Whenever we do this work of our own will, and especially on children, it is necessary that we make the best work and the lightest for safety.
I say that the ancients did not speak of the circumcision of their children, for they did not use it in their law, and we have only what we have acquired by experience.
For I want most masters and surgeons who performed circumcisions used a knife, with force, and a whole scalpel;
which would cause the heart to faint because there are two layers, and by chance if one cuts above and leaves the one below. Here it is necessary to cut again, and the pain is doubled, and at the cleansing which is done with two layers, the point of the member is not well secured.
and in the cleansing of the ulcer if the iron should happen to escape and spoil the work, and many times they are born without needing cleansing and I want it so.
Regarding modification which is made to the strength of all the thread I have found the goodness of experience, for the strengths cut precisely both above and below.
For when you press your hand, if you cut equally in a straight line all at once; but let the threads be well twisted around the leather;
and let the manner of the first work be such that you make the child think, if they understand, that you are only doing to tie the thread around the penis, and then let them rejoice in all the ways that you can;
then make it come out straight between your hands, and support its weight between your hands or under your feet so that the child does not see them, nor any of the instruments;
then put your hand on the penis and blow or breathe on it, and pull it upward until the head of the penis is inside; Then cleanse it well of the filth that has gathered there, then bind the place with a doubled thread, then bind it below the spot to the other binding;
Then cleanse it well of the filth that has gathered there, then bind the place with a doubled thread, then bind it below the spot to the other binding; And hold it with your two hands by the second binding to the thumb and index finger, and tie between the two bindings, then lift the core on top quickly and treat the head of the penis; Then let the blood run drop by drop, for that is best; And put powder on top and on top of the powder a dressing made from a half-cooked egg yolk tempered with rose water, confected with good fresh rose oil, and leave it on until the next day, and treat it with another treatment until it is healed.
The form of forces for cleansing is this:
The two jaws should be held and sharp, and the jaws should also be as large as the handle evenly:
The error of purification is when the kernels inside escape at the incision;
Therefore it is necessary that you extend it to your fingernail, so that the pus will form an abscess;
And the tip similarly, and if you cannot hold it to your fingernail, then use tweezers and then the tip.
And if it passes three days and what is below the penis is swollen, leave it until the abscess under it is appeased, and scrape it lightly.
If you can move the tip, and keep yourself away from the penis, it will not harm anything.
Treat then the place of these internal wounds with powder, as we have said in our treatise on powders, and if the tip goes beyond the kernels too much and it rises above, it will not harm.
Then cure it as we have said until it is healed.
For the retention of urine
The retention of urine is due to a stone, or congealed blood, or bowel obstruction, or a new growth, or similar things as we have said in the division.
And if the urine is not released and you see that the retention is due to a stone in the bladder neck, then it is necessary for the patient to be bent on their knees. And let their feet be placed on the back and extend their belly above the back and restrain the patient from moving as much as they can. And then the neck of the bladder is compressed for the expulsion of the stone above so that the urine is released.
And if it does not come as we have said and the patient feels great pain then you must administer extraction with an instrument called a "syringe" which has this form:
and let it be of refined silver, light as a bird's feather; and let the handle be a palm and a half long, and refined at the head.
And the manner of drawing out urine is that you take a doubled thread, and tie at the head a piece of wool or cotton, and put the head of the thread inside the syringe;
and cut off the excess wool and put it just to the head of the syringe, then anoint the syringe with oil or butter and yolk of egg, and make the patient sit on a seat, and anoint his bladder and penis with moist oil and olive oil and warm water;
then gently insert the syringe into the penis, until it reaches the root of the penis, then bend the penis upwards towards the thigh;
Then insert the syringe forward until the bladder, and feel the patient come to the empty thing, and this is not done according to this order unless because the one who guides where it goes is crooked;
Then stretch the thread all along the wool piece by piece, and the urine follows the wool, then pull it out, and let the urine run.
And begin the syringe again until the bladder is emptied, and align the patient.
When scaldings or blood come into the bladder, or putrefaction is gathered there, and you see sharp waters and medicines distilled, then make all the instrument which is called a "clepsedre", and this is its form:
It is closed, and if it has three openings: Two on one side, and one on the other, as you see;
and let the veins be cut so that the medicine flows well into the penis without addition, if one can draw out the moisture, and insert when needed.
And when you see your medicines enter the bladder, put the head of the catheter into the moisture, and draw with the one that is inside.
If you treat the moisture at the caster, and then firmly reset the traction. If the moisture enters in, and comes to the bladder now, so that the patient will feel it;
And this is the form of a subtle clyster with which one clysters the bladder:
And it is of silver or of boxwood, and its head is higher;
and below at its side where the linen strings are attached;
Then take a sheep's bladder and put in it the moisture which you have seen used to clyster the bladder, then tie it between the two sides with a good strong double thread, and heat that part of the moisture over the fire;
Then put the head of the clyster into the urethra, then hold your hand on the bladder with all the moisture flowing in, until the patient feels that the moisture has come to the bladder;
and if you do not have a bladder, take a piece of parchment and make a circle out of it, and pierce it round about. Then put a strong thread through these holes, then assemble the circle as one assembles a dish, and put in it what you see of oil and moisture and vinegar, and tie it to the instrument.
And do as you did with the bladder, pressing with your hand until the moisture comes to the bladder.
of the stone
We have said in the division the ways of stone and the extraction together with medicines;
and we have said the difference between a stone lodged in the reins and all the signs, and what kind of stone one should work on with an incision. and in the bladder, and in the penis;
and I will tell you openly and briefly.
I say that the stone which is lodged in the bladder happens more often to children, and it is a sign that the sharp point of the stone resembles a sharp spike in its thinness.
And it opens wide, and grasps the patient's penis, and bends it many times, then twists it. And many of these points are embedded.
And the healing is easy for children until they are four years old, and it is very painful for the elderly, and it is in between for those who are between youth and old age.
And the treatment is easier for those who have large stones than for those who have small ones.
And when we come to the treatment, it is necessary first to purify the patient by enema, in order to draw out all the phlegm that is in the intestines. For it often hinders seeking the stone.
Then take the patient by the feet and push him down and move him below so that the stone descends to the bottom of the bladder and comes out sometimes from above.
Then make him sit between your hands evenly, and his hands be under his thighs so that the bladder is entirely inclined downward;
Then take hold of it and touch it inside.
If you feel the stone in the space, then hurry now to cut upon the stone.
And if it does not move at all when touched, then moisten your index finger with oil from the left hand if the patient is a woman, or your middle finger if the patient is a young man; and insert it into their fundament and grasp the stone, and when you feel it on your finger then pull it to the neck of the bladder.
Then press upon your finger, and push it out where you see that you should cut.
And command the assistant to press upon the bladder with his hand, and command him to extend with his right hand the testicles upward, and with his left hand remove the skin that is under the testicles in the part where the incision is made.
Then he puts the spatula in a cutting shape. And it cuts between what is between the buttocks and the fundament, not in the middle but on the side of the left buttock.
And it is straight on the stone, and your two fists should be right at the fundament, and the waist should be wide externally and narrow internally, according to the quantity of the stone, not too large.
If by chance the press is at the two fists which are at the fundament, so that it jumps out without effort.
And know that there are stones with angles and edges. If it is grated to come out.
And if there are some that are underneath, resembling a bullet and round, of which the exit is easy.
Therefore, for those which have angles and edges, make the incision larger.
and if it does not jump, it is fitting that you extract it with tongs which are also like a file at the head, in order to pull out the stone so that it does not escape. or you insert beneath it a subtle instrument bent at the head;
and if you cannot bring it out this way, enlarge the hole a little, and if the sinew is cut, extract it with vitriol.
And if there are more than one stone, insert the largest first into the neck of the bladder, then one above it, and then another, and so on with the smaller ones if there are several.
And if it is very large, then it must be sewn and a larger wound made. For two things happen to the patient: either he dies, or his urine comes forth immediately because the veins cannot solder together.
but nonetheless, exert yourself to draw it out, or to break it up with tongs, as long as you draw it out in pieces.
And when you have completed your work, apply the wound with incense and aloe and dragon's blood, and extract it, and put on top a soft cloth moistened in oil and wine, or in oil and rose water and cold water, to soothe the hot abscess. Then let the patient rest on his neck, and do not loosen the bandage until the third day.
And when you loosen it, if it arises very well in the place of oil and water, then treat it with diaphycon ointment and basil ointment, until it is healed.
And if abscesses come to the wound and corrode it, and there are blood clots in the bladder, and urine is retained by this, which is known in part that it does not flow out with the urine: Then put your finger in the wound and extract that blood, for if it remains, it will corrupt the bladder.
Then lift the wound with water and vinegar and salt, and help it in all ways that you know, until it is healed.
and it is necessary that every hour when you treat it, you bind his two thighs together, and apply the medicines to the place.
And if the stone is small, and it is lodged in the urethra and stuck there, and the urine cannot pass; if the treatment that I have described thus far is followed, you are excused from a surgical incision by this treatment. I have already done this myself.
Take a piece of iron shaped like this, with three prongs fixed on a fire.
Then take thread and tie it around the penis below the stone so that it cannot move back into the bladder;
then gently insert the instrument into the penis until it reaches the stone; and turn the instrument in your hand against the stone bit by bit until you can pierce the stone through to the other side;
soon the urine will come, then press your hand on what remains of the stone inside the penis. If it is broken soon, and jumps out with urine, and is carried away by the patient;
And if you cannot do this for anything that defends it, then tie one thread under the stone and the other above, then make a rod at the place of the stone between the two ties, then pull it out, untie the tie, and cleanse the congealed blood that is in the wound; And cure it until it is healed.
of the stone of women
It sometimes happens that a stone is lodged in women, and if it ever does happen, the cure is painful and forbidden for three reasons:
One is that perhaps the woman is a virgin;
And the second is that one cannot find a woman who knows well how to uncover herself at her privy parts, even when she is chaste.
And the third way is if by chance one cannot find a woman who is well-versed in this art of hands;
and the fourth way is that the stone of the woman is more deeply embedded than the stone of man, for which it is necessary to make a deeper incision, and there is great fear. And if necessity compels you to do this, it is fitting that you take a midwife who is well-knowing, and she is rarely found; and if you cannot find her, then you should not hesitate to use a small, subtle knife.
and present a wise midwife in the life of women, or a woman who knows a part of the art, and command her to do what you command her from the inquiry of the stone; and look very well if the woman is a virgin:
and look very well if the woman is a virgin: then it is fitting for her to put her finger or foundation and seek the stone;
and if she finds it, if she compresses it below her finger, and recommends that she put her finger where the patient is, and wants and presses her left hand on the bladder.
If she finds it, it is fitting that she moves it quickly from the entrance of the bladder to below, as far as it comes to the root of the thigh;
then press on the stone in the root of the thigh against the middle of the bone, where it is moved and appears, and feels the stone in that part; and does not move her finger above or below the stone, and let the size be small at first;
and does not move her finger above or below the stone, and let the size be small at first; then put the knife in the size, if you feel the stone so enlarge the wound as much as the stone can come out forcefully, and know that many kinds of stones are:
This is to know, small and large, rough and smooth, long and round, and those that have points.
if you know the resemblances to know the outcome.
And if the flesh swells, apply powdered vitriol to it, and hold it for an hour until the flesh is cauterized.
Then return to your work, as long as the stone is hard, and have instruments that I have told you about for extracting stones from men to help you in your work.
And if the flesh swells, and it is from an artery that has been severed, apply the powder to the area and bind it with tents and bandages, and do not restart this work, and leave the stone and do not remove it, lest the patient should die. Then treat the wound.
And when the heat of the blood is calmed, and the swelling subsides, you return to your work, as long as the stone remains.
Ramic aquose is nothing other than a collection of moisture or white phlegm, which is located below the heart of the testicles, which contains the seed.
And it is called "phlegm", and at no time is it properly in the fabric of the seed, if one thinks that it is another seed. And this is the skin of the testicle between the white phlegm which we have said;
And this would not have occurred otherwise. And the generation of this ramice comes from weakness which comes to the yolks, and is spread out this matter.
And at no time if there is percussion on the testicles, and this moisture has many colors: Either it is a color tending toward yellow, or it is without red, or black, or watery white, and this happens more;
And these are the signs to recognize this collection, for if it is white as we have said, then the abscess has returned.
And if there is moisture in the fabric itself, then the abscess will return with part of the egg, and for this reason it is thought to be another egg.
And if the moisture is between the leather of the testicles and the white membrane, then one feels it well.
Therefore, when you see the color of the moisture, test all the instruments, of which the shape is described above. According to this, then, which comes after the introducer, judge what is within.
And when we cauterize it with iron, it is necessary that the patient be purged according to our power and the repletion of his body.
Then place him on his back, on something a foot high, and put many cloths under him.
Then sit on his left side and instruct the assistant to sit on his right, and extend the rod to one of the two ribs near the heart of the testicles.
Then take the scalpel, sharp and clean, and cut through the skin of the testicles among them lengthwise, right down to the point, and make your incision straight, parting the skin of the testicles until you see white flesh, and carefully scrape it according to its nature.
Then pierce the white flesh plainly with a sharp needle, make one large opening and extract all the fluid, then apply your ointments and bandage the wound upward.
And do not touch the heart of the testicles, but only the white flesh. Cut all or in pieces immediately the side of it subtly, so that if you do not cut it wisely, the fluid will return.
and if the egg jumps out of your work, reset it in its place when you have completed the work of the sinew.
Then bring together the two leaves of the heart of the onions with a suture, then treat it as you would other wounds, until it is healed.
And if you find the egg corrupted by another disease, it is necessary that you tie the vessels that are suspended, in order to stop the flow of blood;
then cut the onion at all its suspensions and extract the egg, and treat it as we have said.
And if the point is assembled in two parts together, know that these are two branches; if you cut the other part as you did the first equally, then wipe away the blood, and put into the wound linen moistened in rose oil;
if you cut the other part as you did the first equally, then wipe away the blood, and put into the wound linen moistened in rose oil; and put damp wool soaked in wine and oil on the two joints
Then take two cloths and make them of tow according to this likeness and let them be joined together by stitching at the throat of the breeches, and one of the ends take upon the foundation up to the back, and the other at the part of the hilt;
and the other two chiefs upon the two angles, and let all be assembled together in the loop of the breeches;
And it is often medicine this branch of the cautery in place of a blade of iron, and it is that you take a subtle culinary cautery knife, and cut the skin of the testicles, and let it be heated as we have said so that the white fascia that contains the point is uncovered;
Then take the cautery according to this form and pierce that fascia with awls, and flay it with this subtle hot cautery;
And loosen the cautery in every way you can until you completely remove it.
And be careful that the fire does not touch the eye.
And know that this work is safer and easier to manage in terms of blood loss and less dangerous than operations.
And if anything goes wrong, whether it's an abscess forming, bleeding, or something else, treat what is causing the problem according to what has already been said.
And if the patient is fearful and does not want to undergo this procedure because of its horror, then perform a perforation as I have told you, and only when you are sure by the signs we have mentioned that the aqueous humor is gone, make the patient sit on a raised seat. Then pierce the abscess at the bottom part of it, wide enough for the whole spatula to fit, and make the incision as long as the body.
and let the opening be wide so that all the sharp point may pass through
then put cotton on the spot and bind it and let it run through the remaining point then treat it until the wound is healed
and if the white cloth does not let the point out in the mouth of the wound then it is necessary that you put a quill or an instrument with which one treats the points of hydropsy in it, of which the shape is described above
and enlarge the sore and know that the point will return and will gather after six months or thereabouts and when it is gathered as before then the patient will spend his days like that
Know that in the cutting of this branch there are more dangers
and I will tell you the work and the resemblances of the abscess.
I say therefore that many abscesses come on the body, and likewise on the testicles; and it is by many cases.
It is to know by excessive sour and hot acidity, which is spread to the testicles, or by percussion;
and the color of the abscess according to the color of the body; and there is no pain found, and it is an abscess sorrow;
and by chance there are some abscesses gray porous and piercing, and of purple color, and sometimes it comes from a new artery, or from swelling of the vein.
When it is from a new artery, it is known by the hot disposition of the abscess, when you press it with your fingers; and it is not right that you touch it.
He who is made of swelling of the vein is known by his arrangement at the touch of the fingers, and one can well make the incision on this resemblance, and on the other humors; And when you cut the heart of the testicles, then lift the egg up high, and the vein from the white sinew, and deliver the suspensory ligament from all sides of the egg.
If the egg is already dead with these humors, then it is necessary that you draw out the egg, and cut it.
And if it is air in the sinew, or in those that are within the vessels, then it is necessary that you deliver all that tension, and cut the heart roundly.
And if the birth of the flesh is behind or further back, it is necessary that you cut all of it and extract the egg, as we have said.
And when your work is done, apply the wound with wool moistened in rose oil and wine, then cure it with other cures until it is healed.
This is an abscess wrapped in a wrapping resembling the bud, with softening of the testicles, and he who is ill groans when he goes.
And the treatment of this disease is just as perilous as the one before it, and nonetheless we will tell you its work, according to what the ancients did.
It is necessary that you make the patient sit on a raised seat, then you put the suspensory of the testicles below your thighs, at all the vessels which are near the penis, and grasp the masters, and extend them.
Then cut with a sharp scalpel at a distance from the vessels so that they are uncovered, and then flay on each side as we have said in the extraction of the arteries which are in the temples.
Then he puts in a needle with a doubled thread and ties it at the first place where the vein appeared, and ties it straight to the other end. Then he cuts them in half straight according to the length of the body, and removes the corrupted humors.
Then treat the wound as you would any other where you are drawing out the poison so that no vessel breaks and nourishes one of the boils.
For if this does not happen, and all the vessels are visible, then you must drain the boils of all the vessels. So that the bone does not lose its nourishment from the incision of the vessels, and they dry up and cannot be helped.
The occurrence of this rupture is by the section that comes or arises on the belly in the part of the intestines, so the intestines descend from that break to one of the boils.
And this rupture is either at the syfac or from the stretching of it, and these two manners come from many causes.
either from percussion, or from a jump, or from a blow, or from lifting a heavy weight, and by similar things.
and the signs when it is a stretching of the sinews, if it happens little by little, over a long time, and does not come suddenly; and the abscesses are equal towards the end, because the sinew presses on the intestine.
And the signs are when it is a section of the sciatic nerve, that it brings at the beginning sudden pain, and there are diverse abscesses appearing beneath the skin nearby, and this is due to the exit of the intestine and the body's rejection of the sciatic nerve.
And never detach the intestines with the entrails, and they are retained within, and cause great pain to suffer to the patient, especially when it is pressed.
And in these iron treatments for fear, because it is necessary to avoid them.
And the way to work it is that you instruct the patient to knead the intestine with his hand inside the wound, if he can enter it; then have him lean back on his neck between your hands and lift his thighs;
then stretch the heart above, and peel all the skin of the buttocks along its length; then insert wedges of wood into the spaces of the waist according to what you need to open the wound, and let them be such that your eyes can come out;
Then flay the skin that is under the leather of the testicles, so that the white firm flesh is uncovered on all sides;
Then put your index finger into that which follows the testicle, in that which is between the white flesh that is under the skin of the testicle, and between the second flesh, and separate that which is behind the testicle, and between the second flesh.
And then move with your right hand inside the heart of the testicles, and stretch the white flesh upward with your left hand, and lift the testicle up away from all the flesh towards the waist. And instruct the assistant to extend the testicle upward, and loosen that which is behind the ligature.
And inquire with your fingers if there is any intestine entangled or white firm flesh, and if you find nothing, then put it back into the abdomen below.
Then take a needle with a thick thread made of ten threads, and insert it into the back part of the thigh, which is after the skin of the testicles; After the waist, then cut the hairs that appear from the threads, as long as there are four threads; Then assemble them one on top of the other in the shape of a cross, and bind the thigh, which we said is below the skin of the testicles, with a strong ligature in two parts; Then wrap the hairs of the threads and tie them in two parts so that none of the vessels that nourish them can enter, so that no abscess may come. And place a second ligature according to the first ligature, long two fingers from it, and after these two ligatures leave the thigh which is below the heart of the testicles, a finger in width. and afterward all the others according to the roundness which the egg bears;
then carve into the part that is under the skin of the testicles, as long as it does not cut the veins and the bowel, as we have said before;
then apply wool softened in oil, and put it on the wounds, and I apply the bandage that we have said. And never cauterize white flesh as we have said after incision, for fear of the shedding of blood. For this happens many times, and leave the bandage as long as it oozes through it;
and if it is slow to drain, then it should be washed with hot water, and put on what we have said as long as it oozes;
then treat the wound with another treatment until it is perfectly healed.
Of a fleshy hernia
In this branch I have never seen anyone who dared to make the cure with iron.
And the ancients said that it is made like a twig that is together with the vine, in part so that you tie the vessels, after cutting under lightly below;
Then cut into me, and cure the abscess of the one who works, as long as the vessels weep;
And cure it as we have said, until it is healed.
Sometimes a rupture comes in the angles, as we have said, and open its sides;
And do not draw out any of the intestines at the hips, and if any are drawn out, it is bad, and repair them every hour;
And in all ways if it remains too long in this place, the wound or fistula will grow as long as the intestines are drawn out;
And this happens by the extension of the fistula which is at the angles, as we have said, because it is extended, then softened and swells the sides and opens.
And the cure is by cautery, as we have said before;
And it is sometimes cured with iron in this way: And have the patient lie often on his back between your hands, then cover the area of the fracture swollen twice as wide according to the quantity of three fingers;
Then extract the sinew which is under the skin than the usual, then take a knife and put it on the apparent area of the sinew.
And press at the bottom of the belly, then sew the two apparent areas of the sinew on the head of the knife and sew one and the other.
Then extract the head of the knife, and do not cover the sinew nor extend anything else as I have told you in the cure of the rupture of the intestines. Then cure it by curing the wounds.
Then cure it by curing the wounds. And when you cut the threads, if the patient cleans and cares for the wound until it heals.
The sinew is constricted and has no appearance in the fracture, and the cauteries are milder in this place, and closer to salvation.
of the softening of the skin of the testicles
Often the skin of the testicles is softened in some men because the membranes inside are softened and it is made to be seen.
And it is necessary, when one wants to heal it, that one makes the patient lie on his back, and peels off the softened skin from the natural skin.
Then bring the two lips together with a suture, and if you see fit, sew the excess of the softened skin at three or four sutures firmly.
Then peel between the sutures, and treat the wound like other wounds, until it is healed, and remove the thread.
where cautery
Know that castration is forbidden in our law, and therefore it would please me not to speak of it in this book.
And it is only necessary for two reasons.
One is that the patient can answer when asked and understands the treatment.
The other is because we often need to castrate certain beasts to help us, such as goats and sheep and cats and other animals.
I say then that cautery is done according to two manners: either by attraction or by incision.
In that which we do by attraction, we make the iron sit in sharp heat until the coals are softened and hang down. Then we take them with our hand as long as they are cooled down and you no longer feel them.
Of the cautery of the waist: it is necessary that you hold the iron and press the skin of the coals with your left hand, then tie the suspensory, and apply one blow to each eye when you have well scorched them.
and leave no spot so that it can be seen and the subtle spot which is on the vessels.
and this manner of cautery is better than that which is done by attraction because in attraction some coals may remain by chance, which causes the iron to desire luxury.
Then treat the wound until it is healed.
of hermaphrodites
Hermaphroditism occurs in two ways like men: One is when between the two testicles appears also as the shape of a woman's nature, or he has hair, and sometimes urinates in front.
And the other way is for women, and it has a handle like a rod and two prongs.
And the treatment of the man and woman is that you cut off all the added flesh, and treat it like other wounds;
In the second manner, men whose urine comes out through the skin of the testicles have no cure.
A tentingene is an added flesh upon the natural part, so long as it is too ugly to see. And some women have them as large as a hand, and this is the cure.
It behoves you to hold the superfluity of the tentingene in your hand or with forceps, and cut it lightly.
and do not apply too much force, so that blood does not flow, then treat it with another treatment until it is healed.
and there is another flesh that grows at the mouth of the wound and spreads, and by chance jumps further, and it appears like a cow, and for this reason the ancients called it the "cow disease." It is necessary that you cut it as we have said about the tendon, and treat it until it is healed.
It is erratic when the nature of the woman is not perceived, or when the opening is small; and it is natural by birth, or accidental through a sickness that has come;
and it is natural by birth, or accidental through a sickness that has come; or it is by added flesh, or through subtle syphilis or some such thing, and it is made forcefully in the wound, or on the side, or below, or wherever it may be;
and it prevents conception, and childbirth, and by chance having flowers;
And the recognition of these is by looking at the swelling.
If the splinters are close together, appearing on both sides or to the right.
If it is a subtle synovial fluid, and it is close to two liters, if you hurry, then do this:
Put your two index fingers together, and the woman should be on her back, spread her legs;
Then extend the two liters, as long as the subtle synovial fluid is gone, and the strainings are over;
Then take wool, and moisten it in oil, and put it on the spot, and let the woman rest at home each day, so that she cannot sew.
And if the syphilis sore is hard and thick, it is fitting that you cut it with a spatula resembling a myrtle leaf.
If the strainings are of bone, suspend it with an onctment and a cop;
and take medicinal substances that staunch blood, such as alum, dragon's blood, frankincense, together with plenty of egg white.
Then apply a broad bandage soaked in water so the wound cannot close.
And do this for a long time, and apply a tent of dry linen.
Then it should be treated with other remedies until it is healed.
And when a boil comes to the flesh, if it should be covered according to this manner, unless it is an ulcerated abscess. For an inflamed abscess which is in the marrow, one must not apply fire.
of hemorrhoids Hemorrhoids are openings of veins which do not usually bleed, and when hemorrhoids are old they become hard.
And we have said in the division the likenesses of others, and the signs, and I will say here those which receive a cure.
I say that hemorrhoids and the lul, when they are steeped in marrow, and they do not appear to the feeling, unless it is not cured by iron.
Those who are at the mouth of the marsh, one can feel, are those that one can cure.
Therefore, it is necessary that you place the woman in a cold house, then hold the hemorrhoid with forceps and cut off its stem, then sprinkle medicinal powders that restrain blood, such as alum and dragon's blood and frankincense, and similar things.
Then place her feet against the wall for an hour, then put her in cold water.
And if a discharge of blood comes, let him sit in a decoction of sumac and pomegranate bark and gallnuts and similar things; then take barley flour, and mix it with honey and oil, and make a plaster on his back.
And if it extinguishes, it is good. If not, let him have cupping on his back and breasts without pricking.
Then take wool and moisten it in plantain juice or elderberry juice with old wine, and apply it to the place.
And when the abscess subsides, treat the area with ointment until it is healed;
and that which is called "albather" is red and is similar to sharp alum; if it is needed, cover it as I have said for the thelul; and then treat it until it is healed.
Many kinds of abscess come to the cheek, such as sore and pierced abscess and herpes and inflammations and fistulas and hemorrhoids and hot abscess, and many other diseases that I have said in the division.
It is necessary therefore that I say in this treatise the hot abscess which comes in the marsh, which is not of the abscesses that collect pus;
And if you wish to know the work of iron, see if the abscess is sharp at the beginning of its arrival, and full of heat and fever, and if it becomes red when you can see it. Then do not hurry to pierce it, but let it mature until the pain is eased;
and then have the patient sit on a stool, and let it have two small stools where he leans, and support himself on his back and bring his feet together towards the outer part of the leg;
and let his thighs be spread, and put his arms under his knees, and tie them well with a good bandage;
then draw the abscess towards the right side and prepare the instrument with which one works the mouth of the abscess, from which the shape will come afterward;
And it is necessary that when you see this instrument being used, you insert the point first to know the depth of the wound, so that what enters the instrument does not go in deeper than it should and so that it does not injure the patient. And if the instrument is larger, it is necessary to cover the depth of the wound with cloths so that the instrument does not injure it.
And it is necessary for him to put the funnel of the instrument above and to hold the instrument.
And when the abscess opens, and it is made soft with the hand, if necessary cover it at first with linen or a spatula.
And when the bowels are emptied, it is necessary that you put softened tents into the wound in oil of roses, or in dried green oil.
and put the strong tent of the wound to the end of the marrow, and put by fire on the marrow and on the handle leave clean linen moistened in vinegar or honey are cooked;
then the cure after two days of anointing following it, until it is healed;
and no time lift the marrow and the wound by enema of vinegar and honey, and then of vinegar or long roots of lily and aristolochia are cooked; then return to anointing.
And if the wound is healed in the marsh, it is fitting that you guard against cauterizing with iron, but treat it as we have said in the division.
From childbirth It is necessary first for the midwife to know the figure of natural childbirth, and the signs if it is when you see the woman hasten down, and desire to smell the air:
then the child hastens out with force. then know that those childbirths are according to natural figure, and is the issue under its head, and the afterbirth with it;
and when you see these signs, it is fitting to press their belly lightly so that the infant comes out quickly;
for when it descends onto its head, the placenta comes with it, and the mother is cleansed of its superfluities by good purification;
and this which comes otherwise does not come naturally.
For it sometimes comes onto its feet, and the body or head comes out first, and the hands, or it comes onto its stomach, or often, and is accidentally turned on its neck, and by other bad positions;
it is necessary for the midwife to be wise and subtle in these matters, and beware of error and deception, and I will show you all the positions how one should help her.
If the infant comes onto its head by natural passage, and the woman labors painfully, and her strength is weak, then have her sit on a stool, or have women hold her;
and make a poultice of oil or fenugreek when cooked, and then insert the ball between its two halves the small spatula which is in this form: and split the second finger, and cut off at its nail until the moisture that is inside comes out.
and press the belly of the woman until the infant descends, and if it does not descend, then give the woman an enema of fenugreek mucilage with sesame oil.
then make her take and sneeze from mustard seed, and hold her mouth and nose for an hour: then the infant will now come out.
And if both hands come out weak, then you must gently reset them little by little. and if they cannot enter, then place the woman on a stool and raise her feet. Then unseat her from the stool onto the ground, and hold her so she does not shriek during the unseating.
And if her hands cannot enter, and the child is dead, then cut her hands with a knife that was previously placed there, and extract the child, and reset it equally.
of the issue of the child upon its feet When the child comes onto its feet, if he needs to be pushed upward; and then turn it little by little until it is equal.
Then take it by the feet and extend it little by little.
If it jumps up to the thighs, then command her to take it and make her sneeze forcefully; if it jumps further, then God wills it.
And if it is not as we have said, if it returns little by little, until it is according to the natural form. For then it is light.
And if it does not come further as we have said, take a mixture of elderflower and sesame oil and melted gum, and grind everything in a mortar; and put it on the nature of the woman inside and remove this ointment, then make her sit in a warm bath up to under her ribs;
and when she is softened underneath, give her a collar of myrrh, and put it underneath, and leave it for an hour; then make her sit on a stool, then make her sneeze and draw out her mouth and nose, and gently press her belly, for the child leaps now.
from the issue of the child upon its knees When the child comes in this manner, if it puts its hands on its belly little by little; then let it be swaddled on its neck, and hang its feet down, and let it lie upon the bed; and fold its hands little by little, and then place its hands upon its belly, and remove the cushions underneath until it is fully exposed downwards; and if the child does not jump, then he takes his feet and lifts them up, then lifts his belly upwards, then pushes with his hands. And he shakes the child little by little. And he instructs the woman to hold on until the child sits up.
From the issue of a child who comes forth, with one hand pendant It is necessary to engineer a way to bring back the hand: If one cannot bring it back, then have the woman stand up and walk.
If she cannot walk, then have her sit on the bed and straighten out her legs.
Then apply the muscle relaxant that I have described.
And if she does not give birth, then have her sit on a chair and then study how to bring back the hand. And shake the child according to its natural form and make it sneeze, instructing her to hold on until the child sits up firmly.
From the issue of the child upon its neck, and let it spread its hands, and its face turned towards its mother's back. It is fitting that the bailiff hold his hand, then turn it little by little, and lift it lightly;
and when it is equal, he puts on the natural ointment of ivy and oil, as we have said, then instructs her to move little by little;
and when you have done this, make her sit on a seat, and instruct her to take hold; and make her sneeze. in the same manner for all the second joints
in the same manner for all the second joints When it comes strong in this manner to the entire second joint, he applies the second joint to your fingernail, as long as the moisture is drained;
and if the child can put its hands on its face and neck, he applies it from the elbow down so that it is not held back, and kills the child;
then put the child inside as long as you have put it as it should be, and instruct the woman to take hold at no time:
from the issue of twins Know that twins are born many times, and rarely are three or four born; and this is not a strange thing, and it does happen. Two are a strange thing, and do not live if born;
Two are a strange thing, and do not live if born; I know that when they are multiplied, and are nourished by the milk which flows from the breast;
and sometimes they are also born naturally as one under another, as we have said.
And if they are born prematurely, so the care is as we have said, and the child is delicate, make quickly and gently what she does; and do as is best for its salvation. of several children
Sometimes they are formed in the womb one or two or three or four or five or six or seven, or more up to fifteen, and are all formed in the shape of a child by the measure of the glorious sage, and it is fitting that the midwife knows all this, because such things may happen by chance; If you do according to what is right.
Of the dead child
When you treat a woman for stillbirth or dead child in the womb, as I have said in the section, and it does not come out, and you are forced to use your hands. It is necessary that you know if the woman is of sound constitution and has no illness or fear of death.
The woman should be placed on her back, with her hips inclined downwards, and her legs raised.
And the attendant should hold her down in two places, or tie her to the bed so that she does not move during the removal of the child.
Then rub the mouth of the womb with warm oil mixed with marshmallow and fenugreek mucilage and flaxseed, then anoint her hands with these oils and mucilages.
Then put them in the marrow slightly, then want the place where they put the splints that are suitable for it, and take care if the child is frightened that he should descend on his head.
If he puts the splints in his eyes or in his neck or in his mouth or in his palate or under his beard or in his throat or near his ribs, and if his descent is on foot, then he puts them or a dagger and at the middle ribs.
And it is necessary that he holds the splint in his right hand and puts the curve between the two fingers of his left hand and puts it gently with all his hand and puts the splint in none of these places that we have said, as long as he comes to the empty thing.
Then put it against the other splint, or the third if you need it, so that the extraction is equal.
and then they are stretched equally by moving back and forth, in order to come out, and let the incisors be toothed in order to hold them, as this is the form:
And if a part remains, anoint the wound with some of its two drops of oil, and put them in that part, and pull out the other part;
and if none remains, put this incisor or higher up, and do this as much as it comes out all the way.
And if one hand comes before the other, and he cannot bring it back because of the tightness, it is fitting that you wrap it up on a cloth, until it comes out all the way; then cut at the joint of the sole or at the knife, and so it is fitting that you do this in the other hand, and with both feet.
And if the child's head is large and it is stuck in the birth canal, or if there is sharp bone assembled, then you should put the sharp spatula between your fingers, press the head and extract the sharp bone. Then you will turn it to an instrument that is called "almidach," from which the shape comes with the instruments or chapter that follows this one.
And in the same way, do this if the infant has a large head naturally.
Then pull the bones with tongs, and if the head comes out too far and is extracted by force, it should be split, so that the moisture that is or in the bad birth canal comes out.
And if it cannot come out, then cut it into as many pieces as you can.
And if it is swollen in the belly or below the ribs, then you should pierce it so that the moisture runs out.
And if the child is on its feet, the attraction is light, and straightening at the mouth of the uterus is easy.
And if it is embedded in the belly or breast, you should remove it wrapped in a cloth on the hand; and covering the belly or breast, until the moisture which is there runs off;
and if the other members are removed, and the head remains, then put the hand on the mouth of the wound and draw it up to the mouth of the wound; then he puts in one or two fingers and draws them out.
And if the mouth of the wound is constricted by a hot boil which has come there, then one should not work at it, but rather administer moist and fatty things; and apply poultices, made of herbs that are sharp, softening and moistening.
And if the arrow is on its side, and you can put it straight, then administer what we have said about the living child;
And if one does not have power, so let it be cut into pieces and leave nothing of the sinew.
And when you have done this, apply what we have said about abscesses which come in the marrow.
And if bleeding comes forth, it should be put into a tight bandage, and apply other treatments.
And I saw a woman whose belly had a dead child inside, then she conceived another on top of it, and the other one was born dead too. After a long time, an abscess appeared on his arm, and it swelled so much that it opened, and then began to discharge profusely.
I was called to treat him, and I thought for a long time, and could not sew the wound.
I put on a plaster of strong attraction, and one bone came out, and after a few days another. I marvelled greatly, for this belly has no bones.
If I thought they were bones of a dead child.
I cleansed the wound and set the bones by hand until the woman was in a better state; and I kept the woman for a long time like this, and there remained afterward only a little hump on the spot.
And I have not recorded this chapter other than for this reason: so that when masters encounter a strange thing they may know how to help it.
Here follows the form of the pressor, with which one crushes books;
and at two turns as the head of the two linens. Nevertheless, the horn should be more delicate than the restrictor, and should be made of ebony or boxwood.
And its mouth should be two fingers wide, and the margin of the trees should be one, and a half palms long. And between the two limbs there should be two adjustments of this same wood, which should be firm on one side and the other, half a palm long or a finger more.
And these two adjustments are fitted into the mouth of the mallet to open when one turns the two horns.
Another form, more delicate and lighter in appearance, should be made of ebony or boxwood, according to the appearance of tongs. And it has two horns and two adjustments, as you see, a palm long and two fingers wide.
and when you see the vulva open to all instruments, make the woman sit down off the bed with her feet dangling and legs open, then insert the two stirrups together into the vulva, and hold the head of the instrument below between her thighs; then work your hand on all the instrument, just as you did with the forceps equally, according to the amount that you see the mouth of the vulva open, as long as the woman does what she wants.
These instruments are all mounted and are multiplied in their likenesses; and when the surgeon has them prepared, so much quicker is the work, and higher are the hopes for their quantity.
If you do not prepare your instruments, their necessity is inexcusable.
When the second stage is retained in childbirth, you must instruct the patient to hold her breath, and then make her sneeze on purpose, and extract your hands from her mouth and nose; and if she jumps through it, all is well.
If it does not, then take a pot and make a hole or lid in it, and put herbs that can open the mouth of the wound, such as calamint, rue, anise, chamomile, cassia lignea and centaury; all these herbs, or some of them, are cooked in a pot with water over the fire;
then put a cane or tube in the pot, and the other end in the mouth of the wound, and let it steam until the vapors enter the wound;
then make her sneeze, as we have said. If the shoulder jumps quickly.
And if it remains after this treatment and is not healed, order the patient to moisten her left hand in sesame oil or marshmallow mucilage, and then put it on the wound, and let it stay for a while. And when she has found it, if she takes hold of it and extends it little by little straight so that the marrow does not break during extraction.
But then it must be moved slightly to the right and left, and then pulled. It will come out and loosen.
And if the mouth of the marrow is narrow, we have said the cure is sneezing and fumigating herbs;
and if it's not from all that we have said, be careful not to pull the opposite way;
but it is necessary that he who is at the mouth of the marrow tie it to the thigh of the woman, then anoint her with tetrapharmacy ointment. If she purges and returns, and will come out strong;
But in any case, when she purges, it comes with a bad odor to the stomach and head, and weakens the patient. So it is necessary then suitable fumigations for this:
None of the ancients have experienced fumigation of cress and dried figs.
The form of the instrument with which one smokes the woman for the retention of flowers and the afterbirth is this:
And it is seen to resemble a cane, and one puts the subtle head in the nature, and the heads wide on the fire;
and let the fumigations be on the coals, and the moth as long as it is eaten up, and begin another.
Many children are born who do not have the foundation pierced, but rather have it stopped by a subtle tool: so it is necessary then for the midwife to pierce that tool with her finger, and not pierce it with a sharp spatula, and she guards the placement so that it does not touch;
then put on linen moistened in wine and oil, then the cure of anointing until it is healed.
And if you doubt that it will stay in place, put or insert a cane of plum wood, and leave it for seven days, and have it removed when the child wants to go to the chamber pot.
And sometimes this inflammation comes from the opening of a wound or abscess. So it is necessary to cover that opening. If it is cured, as we have said of the chain of lead.
Fistulas that come below the buttocks are nodules and swellings that come from below the buttocks or in the space between the two parts, whether it is one fistula or several.
And when that nodule is old, if it works, and still produces moisture which causes white or subtle boils, and sometimes these fistulas are persistent.
And they are known by the fact that there is discharge or flatulence when the patient makes a bowel movement, and perhaps it jumps one time.
And if there are fistulas that pierce as far as the bladder and as far as half of the penis; and they reach up to the hip joint, and up to the knee.
And thus one recognizes a fistula draining at the fundament, and not draining: and it is that you put your thumb or finger on the fundament, and insert a fine needle of silver or iron into the fistula when there is no twisting.
And if it has twisting, you put in a tent of fine linen, or a horsehair, until you feel the tent or hair with your finger;
and if you do not feel it, and there comes no discharge of pus or wind or worm, as we have said: know that it does not pierce through; if you hasten to cure it.
And when the fistula extends to the bladder or to the urethra, then the urine escapes and cannot be held back by medicine.
If it is pierced up to the hip joint, the tent comes up to that place; if there is no crookedness and the origin of the pain is elsewhere, it is as if he bows to it, and neither medicine nor ointment is of any use.
and in these fistulas that persist there is no stronger cure than hard work, and the vanity of foolish doctors who interfere with it.
In the one that is not persistent and is not old, there is hope of healing with iron, as I have experienced, and it is that the patient lies between your hands on his back;
and he lifts his legs up to his thighs, and has his thighs inclined towards his belly; then insert a tent of iron, or of lead if there is crookedness, as far as you know where the tent comes.
If the patient feels it around the base, it is fitting that you insert your index finger, and feel then if the tent has pierced it;
and let it be uncovered where you feel between your finger the sinew or the flesh, then know that it is pierced. If it does not work, one cannot heal it.
One always says that one can heal them well, but this rarely happens;
and the help that one does, if it is heated according to the width of the fistula as it is said before; and the end all hot in the fistula, as long as it comes from the bottom; and do this II or III times, as long as you know that these bad sinews are burned, which resemble a bird's feather;
and then the dressing of softened tents in butter, as long as the sinew dries out, then the dressing of ointment hardening sinew and soldering.
If it is thus healed, it is good.
If this cannot otherwise be healed;
and if the tent enters but does not pierce through to the bone which is its foundation, and between your finger and the tent there is a thick covering of flesh or sinew, and you see the fistula at that point where it goes beneath this covering. If the opening of the fistula is at the beginning and extends forward before the tent, then apply the cautery afterwards, as far as it reaches the head of the tent; and the tent will be delivered and will fall away;
Then cleanse those faulty flesh parts which resemble a bird's feather, so that none remain.
And if the blood comes, and is cut between you and the work, then cauterize it with fire or medicine.
For fire cauteries bring together two things: namely, the burning of those added flesh parts, and the stemming of blood and drying of moisture.
Then apply a dressing softened with butter or crushed cheese until the wound swells, and let the charring be burned in the swelling.
Then treat the wound with bandages soaked in strong vinegar, which are dry medicines.
For when it is restored, it is healed and does not return.
And if a fistula comes all the way to the foundation and is distant from the body, stick it with your thumb or finger, and inquire about this.
If you feel the dressing and between the two is cloth or linen or charring, where it is about to pierce, unless there is a way of faith and hope, by the administration of one of the three methods:
you cauterize it as we have said, or you cut it to the bottom, or if you can, you put dressings and treat as before.
And do not go too far in perfection, lest you cut the ligament that holds the foundation, and let the excrement come out against your will; Then treat it as we have said.
Then treat it as we have said. Perhaps it will be healed, or you remove that covering and clean it once it is cut away from the foundation, either by hand or with another pointed instrument. Then cleanse that rotten flesh which is in the wound, as much as you can. Then study to restore the wound and to keep the fistula on the side away from the foundation.
Then study to restore the wound and to keep the fistula on the side away from the foundation. If it were a lighter thing for the patient.
And fistulas are never made in this manner: and when you insert the tent into the fistula and it is near or touches the foundation of the skin above, then take a pierced tent at its head according to this form. And I bend the thread in two, and I put the tent on the whole thread into the fistula as far as the head.
If it is pierced in the margin of the foundation within, then remove the thread from that perforation, so that you insert your finger or foundation.
and treat the head of the thread, and bring together the two ends, and pull one from the other, and leave it for one or two days;
and restrain it several times, as long as the threads hold those fibers that are between them, and they shrink;
then heal the wound until it is sewn and healed.
If the fistula does not pierce, make it pierce in all the ways that you can, as long as it is not too inflamed. For it is not right to make for the placement cover so soon, and then the cure, as we have said, until it is healed.
The shape of the spatuila used for making a fistula must be very sharp and cutting on one side; and on the other side, blunt, so that you do not cut what you should not cut, as you see here:
Hemorrhoids are according to two manners: where they are inside the fundament, like grains of resin, and there are small and large ones, and they often bleed, and there is one or several, and they protrude from the fundament and at the head of the fundament;
but those which are weak have a bit of moisture, and still now or a bit of sharp citrine or a bit of blood, and they have the color of the body;
And the treatment of those who have them in their foundations, if it is such that you command the patient to stretch himself out to go into chambers, until the foundation allows them to appear, and the threads are seen; If you hurry, and hold it with tweezers, or hold it at your fingernail, then cut it at its roots;
and if the tweezers cannot hold them because of their moisture, then take them with a cloth, or cotton, or a piece of chamois leather; and pull them out at your will, then cut them, and powder over them some hot powders that are in place of a cautery; Where you cauterize them as it is said in the chapter of cautery, then treat them with other remedies until they are healed.
And if the foundations cannot come out, give the patient a harsh and sharp enema to wash out what is in the foundation so that it can come out openly. If the patient complains, and if the thread is strong from the foundation, then the treatment is easy.
If the patient complains, and if the thread is strong from the foundation, then the treatment is easy. And you take them with your fingernail or with tongs and cut them, then treat them as we have said until they are healed, and that he fears the incision by iron. It is fitting that you administer the suture according to this manner:
It is fitting that you administer the suture according to this manner: Take a twisted thread and put it into a needle, then draw the thread over and make the needle pierce through the other side, then turn both ends of the thread under the needle, and so it is doubled.
and pull out the forming thread, then tie the thread, and pull out the needle, and do so for all the others, and leave it to correct the excess of blood.
Then put on the base a soft cloth moistened in rose oil or wax, and put it on the base, and instruct the patient to rest.
And then leave it until they fall out, and when they have fallen out, then cure them with ointment and other cures, until they are healed.
of dryness of the veins or foundation Many times there occurs dryness of veins in the intestine, and by constriction of nature, and when the illness is old and medicine is of no avail. It is necessary that you scrape off the bark with the tip of a knife or your fingernail, so as not to let it become moist. Then cure it until it is healed as is fitting.
And if it cannot heal, then start the scraping again stronger than before, until it heals a lot and is well scraped. Then heal it until it is healthy.
Where it trembles A boil is a small foul appearance against the body, and it goes out very quickly
and often one finds it cold, and one also feels it as dead numbness, and it comes throughout the body, and more in the hands than anywhere else.
And the cure is that you take a cane from a goose quill, or a strong vulture quill, and place that cane on the numbness, until the circles completely encircle the numbness; then turn your hand on all of the cane until you grasp it all around the numbness, and pull it out quickly, and uproot the numbness from its roots.
And if you see it, make one of a thread of linen or iron according to this form, and let it be thin underneath and wide above: Do not pierce, but hold tight to the pain and press.
And if you see that it must be cauterized, do so as described in the chapter on cautery.
Sometimes a clyster of silver or artichoke is made, or melted lead or mallet;
And sometimes these small and large instruments are made, according to those to whom they are administered. Therefore those who are treated in the care of children and who are weak and painful are small.
Therefore those who are treated in the care of children and who are weak and painful are small. The form of the small and large clyster is wide on top, where the belly is tied according to this manner:
And if you see that the belly is tied and pierced as it is,
and there are two openings on one side, and one on the other;
and the belly or where medicines are placed is made from a bladder of an animal or parchment, and pierced all around with small holes, and there is one space between each hole, then insert into these holes one strong thread of raw silk twisted in X or any shape around them, and assemble the belly as if it were a goat; and when the medicine is inside, tie it to the instrument with a strong thread, then give an enema.
And this is the shape of the circle:
And let the medicine be neither too hot nor too cold, and anoint the head of the clyster with oil or yolk of egg, or something similar, then insert it gently. Then the minister squeezes it with both hands together until all is squeezed out, then extracts the clyster and has the patient lift their legs to the wall, and if the medicine wants to come out, they should hold it as long as they can. And if he sleeps all night, it is of greater help.
And if you cauterize it for a disease of flux of the belly, and the medicine hastens to go in, then begin again until it is healed.
And if the hemorrhoids are in the fundament or abscess, let the clyster be as subtle as for a child.
And this is the shape of the subtle clyster on which the skin is removed:
We have said in the aforementioned section the treatment of wounds;
Or we will tell you the treatments with hands and medicine, according to its accomplishment.
I say that wounds are diverse according to how they are made, and according to the places or the wounds where they are made, and of what they are made.
The things by which wounds are made are by the striking of a stone and the cutting of a sword and knife or lance or gun or arrow or similar things;
Or that are made according to their locations in the body, such as a wound that falls on the neck or head or foot or belly or liver and similar limbs;
And I will tell you the treatment of each wound and begin with simple head wounds because remembrance will come in its chapter.
I say that when a simple wound comes to the head and the bone is not broken, if you take care if it is from a striking of a stone or similar things and the skin is completely torn and the wound is large, and you slightly doubt a hot abscess: if it bleeds quickly from the cephalic vein itself, if only a little blood comes from the wound, and it is bled from the opposite side of the injured part
and avoid having the patient overeat wine and rich foods.
And if it does not want to bleed, let its meat be reduced, and do not drink wine, nor eat any pork.
and put on the wound, if a pustule should come, cotton moistened in rose oil alone, or in astringent wine.
And if there is no hot pustule, put on the wound, if it is fresh and bleeds freely, and it is not moved by air, powder, which I will say a little later.
And if the fire has moved it, put on some ointments until it is healed.
And if the wound is large like that of a sword cut or similar, and the edges cannot be brought together by stitching, then bring them together with sutures as I will say for abdominal wounds, from stitching.
If the wound is uncovered from the bone, and it can, and does not hold but to one point, then stitch it. Then treat the wound with medicine and restore hard flesh in place of leather, and instruct the patient to eat large meats, such as beef and cooked wheat, as well as poultry, and similar things.
And if you find rotten leather, and it does not reach the bone, stitch all the rot together, then cut it away, then treat it.
And if it has an artery in the wound or vein which without cutting, and it cannot be stopped by medicine, then cauterize the artery, and if you find it dislocated, tie it with a thread. And if that does not help, then cauterize it.
And if these wounds are small and simple, the treatment is light: and put this powder on it so that it fuses as if the fire had moved it.
And the manner of the powder is: Take incense one part; dragon's blood two parts; quicklime three parts, and powder it finely, and apply it to the wound, and bind it firmly, until it burns well and joins with all its blood;
and then bind it well, and leave it unbound, if it does not swell; for one does not remove the medicine until it is healed.
And never do this with chalk alone, when one does not have incense or dragon's blood, but that the fire has dried the wound.
And if the fire has already moved the wound, do not put this powder on it at all;
but put some digested ointments on it, or poultices of barley flour made with water and honey, until it flows freely; Then the cure of other cures until he is healed.
And if the fracture of a bone comes with the wound, and it is small, extract it with subtle pincers;
and I will tell you later about fractures of the head.
of the wound of the neck
If a wound comes to the neck and it is simple, it has no difference between it and that of the head, but if the nerves in the neck or the artery is cut.
If it is nerves, there is no other remedy than to leave the treatment alone and not apply anything restraining, for it harms the nerves and makes them retreat; and do not put anything cold on the wound, for the substance of nerves is cold, and their continuation is with the brain, which is the highest member;
but let the medicine be underneath, such as chamomile boiled in fresh water and mixed with rose oil, and cucumber also boiled in fresh water, and other stones of alum according to this manner, and moist ointments.
And if the wound is large, sew it and bind it with bandages, then treat it until it is healed.
And if the wounds are deep and it is covered and full of pus, then pierce it lower.
And if the artery is cut and blood flows from it, then tie it off, bind it, and cautery is necessary.
And if the spine of the throat is cut, or the heart, and the conduit is preserved through which the flesh goes, sew the heart onto the bone of the throat, and do not touch the throat but put it back according to its natural shape. And then remove it carefully and leave it for a few days, then treat it with dry dressings until it is healed.
And if the wound has made an impression on the bone, then scrape it. And if there are bone fragments, remove them all if you can. If those that you cannot reach, then leave them until the wound has suppurated and is cleansed and the way out is cleared.
and if the wound is fresh, put powder on top of the powder that I have mentioned. And if there is bone in the wound and there is a fistula, then treat it as I have said in its chapter.
If it is a cut from a spear or knife, and the wound is deep, look to see if the wound lets out wind, while the patient is standing. You should then know that the wound is mortal;
and if it is not deep and is fresh with all its blood, do not put any powder on it in the first hour, nor bind it because of the blood that will not stop flowing completely and return to the heart and kill the patient. But apply a drawing ointment, and bind it twice a day;
and if you do not have ointment, put old cotton in the wound to soak up excess moisture, and make the patient sleep on the wound for three days, or four, or more. if there will come no spasm, nor evil tremor of heart nor twitchings of the flesh; and when you see good signs, know that the wound is saved. So cure it then with bandages and other treatments, until it is healed;
and if it cannot heal, and the work, then know that there is a fistula;
if the care is as one must. And if the wound is from a sword or knife incision and it is simple, whether on the thigh or back, care for that which is in front; if it is large, with sutures;
and if it is small, with powder, and if it is driven into the bone, and has split into pieces, clean the wound, and treat the wounds if they are detached; and if they are not removed, let the wound fester, so it will make extraction easier.
and for other wounds of other limbs, judgement is as we have said.
regarding rupture of the belly
The ruptures of the belly are great, medium, and small;
from a large wound sometimes the intestines or the nerves of the intestines protrude, by which entry of others is permitted.
and the suturing is more difficult, and sometimes a small wound is worse than a large one, because one puts the intestines back in more carefully if they are not put back hot.
because the intestines swell quickly when they feel cold, and do not go back in carefully, and therefore a moderate wound is better, because one can move the intestines to their place more easily than the others.
And know that a rupture of the belly is according to four manners:
The two common sutures occur in the suture of the belly, and the suture of other wounds of the body, and two other proper sutures are common to other wounds.
And nevertheless they are more proper with the suture of the belly, and I will say each one and declare it.
I say that when the wound is small, and nothing of the intestine is out, and grievous thing is to put it back in, this is by one of two manners: either because of the smallness of the wound, as we have said, or because the intestine is swollen because of the cold.
And when it is cold, warm it in two ways: Moisten a sponge or a soft cloth in warm water only, or you cook in warm water, vinegar and cypress and spikenard, and raise the intestine until the swelling is removed;
And at no time make this wine restraining, and it is a mother that has only one breast to reduce swelling.
And when you see the swelling subside, moisten the intestines with sharp or sweet and well-cooked herbs, for by this is aligned the entry to few things.
And if it cannot enter, make a small cut at the instrument with which we cut hemorrhoids.
And the first remedy is a mother that is smaller than the waist, so that none should be carved without great necessity.
And these are the instruments for splitting it:
If you cut inside the curvature and don't tear, and see here the shape: And when the wound is enlarged, and the intestines protrude, if you can put them back into their natural form in their proper place, do so, for this is worth much.
When the wound is wide, and it is in the lower part of the belly, it is fitting that you make the patient lie on his back, and place his legs higher than his head. and if it is in the part below the belly, then put the head and the breast higher than the parts below, and also if the break in the belly is in one of the two parts, then put your understanding so that the injured part is higher than the other.
and thus it is fitting to administer what I say in large and small wounds.
In small wounds, put what appears to you, then have between your hands one minister who holds all the break with his hand and brings together the lips;
and this is the common way of stitching, and it is that you take a needle or several, according to the quantity of the width of the wound, then leave from the head of the wound a space of two fingers, and put in a needle where it has a good strong thread; and pierce the two edges of the skin with the two edges of the sinew, which is below the skin inside, as far as you make it pierce from that part, and bring together the two edges of the sinew four together;
Then strain a double thread onto the needle in two parts, then join the two edges of the wound carefully together and leave one finger space. Then insert another needle.
Then tie the thread as you did with the first needle and do not cease doing this according to how many needles are needed until the whole wound is closed.
And let the needles be medium sized, between thin and thick, because thin needles pierce all the flesh and too thick ones cannot enter well. Therefore it is necessary that they are medium sized;
And it is not right to push the needles too far through the flesh and skin, lest they pierce and open the wound before the stitching.
And then cut the threads of the needles so they do not bother the patient while sleeping and put bandages or cloths over the needle threads to keep them in place, and leave them until the wound is healed.
And this manner of stitching with needles is more suitable for small wounds, for it suffices one needle or two.
The second stitch is common, and it consists of assembling the two sides of the skin and the two sides of the sinew together on one needle with a strong medium thread.
And when you have pierced all these sides together, pull the needle back to where you began, in the manner one sews cloth.
And place a distance between each stitch the thickness of a small fingernail.
This stitch heals a man, and I sewed a wound one had on his belly or chest which was inflicted with a knife, and the wound was more than a handspan large, and the intestines protruded two handspans, and the wound lay in the middle of the belly.
I brought back his intestines after they had been outside for XXIV hours, and the wound was sutured up to XV days, and I treated it, and he was healed.
And they thought he would die, and it was a miracle.
and I did not anoint him at all, for I was in a place where none could be found, nor any medicine. and I put clean cotton on the wound twice a day, and washed it with honey water until it was healed.
Now I will tell you the two proper ways of stitching:
Take the needle and push it from the outer part to the inner part.
When it has pierced the flesh straight through, take the thread or twine or whatever you used to push the needle through and make it pierce from the other side, from the inner part to the outer part.
And the understanding of this stitch is that you sew as furriers sew furs, and that you leave one time the thread on one side and take it up on the other, until the whole stitch is complete.
The second manner of suturing, which Galen properly calls, is as some do, who bring the two parts together naturally, and apply one of the heads of the thread to the other head, in this manner:
Insert a needle or head of silk thread close by, and pierce only that spot, and leave the two heads of the thread. Then turn the needle, and pierce it from the part behind to that inside, with the two heads of the thread.
Then pierce one and the other from the part behind to that inside, with two other heads of silk thread which are on the other side.
And this is the gentler manner of suturing and the more common.
Galen said this word, and some testify to it, that one should sew the belly with two needles, or he has thread in each.
and one must insert one needle from one side, and the other from the other, in the manner of those who sew straps;
and know that when the rupture is halfway down the belly, the stitching is more painful than in other places of the belly.
The judgment of the wound is such as the judgment of other wounds:
and it is that when you find the wound fresh with all its blood, as if the fire had moved it, then put back together the intestine, and the seam;
then put on burnt charcoal powder, and if the fire has moved it, then put on any ointment that is present, as long as the wound swells; and sew the thread, and let the sinews be joined together, and the muscle fibers then treat the wound as the others, until it is healed;
And if you do not have medicine, put upon it as soon as it begins to fester, old cotton and move it twice a day until it is healed.
For you need no other medicine in many situations unless the wounds are complex;
And if you doubt that the wound will cause infection to the principal limbs, it is fitting that you moisten linen lightly in tempered oil or rose oil and place it around the edges and under the armpits.
And if he feels pain or putrefaction in the bowels, which often happens, give enemas of warm red wine and likewise if the putrefaction comes up to the intestines.
And pierce it within and know that when it is the large intestine, it heals more easily than the small.
The intestine which is called "jejunum" cannot heal when it is wounded, and this is because of the plantations of veins that are in it, and because of the subtlety of the whole body, and the closeness of its nature to the nerves.
And if the gristle jumps from the wound, put it back as you would the intestine, while it is fresh;
And if it is old and has become green or black, you must bind the black area so that blood does not flow there, for there are veins and arteries.
Then cut what is between the ligatures and put the two ends hanging down from the part below the wound until it comes out to align the extraction when the gristle shrinks and the wound swells.
of the fracture of the bone
When the intestine is round and the wound is small, you can restore it in some men, for I have seen a man who was wounded in the belly by a spear;
and the wound was on the right side of the stomach, and it became inflamed and turned into a fistula, and excrement and wind came out.
I put a remedy according to what I could, and did not cease to refine it until he was healed, and his wounds closed.
And when I saw his wounds close, I doubted that the patient would not have pain in his belly; and he did not have any pain, but remained in better health, and ate and drank;
and some experimenters said that when he has a small wound in the intestine, it must be bound in a certain way: Take thread with large heads, then bring together the lips of the wound, and when the thread has opened its mouth, place it on the two lips so that it squeezes its mouth shut;
and then cut the thread head, and it will stay so that it cannot loosen, then put another thread afterwards in the same way as before, until the wound is completely closed; And sew the wound.
If those hairs burn inside the intestines, and no harm comes to the patient, one can tie the intestine with a fine thread which is cut from the intestine of an animal, in this way:
Take the end of this thread from the intestine, which is well-detached, and then tie to the end of this thread a fine linen thread twisted tightly, then pass the thread through the needle, and sew the intestine, and straighten it at the break;
and this method of suturing is nothing more than according to the way of cunning and hope;
and if the wound is large and wide, especially when it is in one of the intestinal folds, there is nothing but subtlety.
of fistula or wherever it may be Know that every wound or abscess, when it grows old, is called universally "fistula," and the same when it is healed and drawn inward.
A fistula is, according to the green color, a hard and white node, where there is no pain felt, and it is also raised like the feather of a bird;
And sometimes the bowels are clear, and other times thick; Sometimes it's few, and other times enough;
And as I have spoken of in the division of wounds, that any wound that is not healed, and there is no flesh, it is only due to one of nine causes: That is to say, by the smallness of blood or flesh; or because of its malice; or because there is hard flesh inside and on the edges that does not allow new flesh to grow; or there are too many bowels; or the wound is purulent and the matter is of poor quality; or the medicine is not good for healing; or because the corruption is in the manner of a pestilence; where by its nature digestion is delayed in the region, and feeling is slow, and it swells; where there are veins or bones:
And I have already shown all these causes, and the signs, and the cures of medicines in the division.
Therefore it is necessary for me to teach you the treatment of a fistula which is made by handwork.
Know that a fistula occurs in all the members of the body; for there are fistulas that come from large veins, and arteries, and nerves, or the face, or the intestines, or the bladder, or some of the ribs, or the spine of the back, or any joint of the hands or feet; and if it extends to the nature of the principal member, and similar ones.
And all fistulas that are of this kind are due to poor healing, and there is nothing but toil, and ignorance;
and if there is any fistula that does not come all the way to the place I have mentioned, and you are confident of the cure and see it clearly, then take a tent of linen or iron, if the fistula is straight;
and if the fistula is twisted, if it searches with a subtle attempt to plumb, for the plummet bends and moves around the twistiness;
and if the fistula has many openings and you cannot well search it with probes, then irrigate it through one of the openings, for the moisture will pass from one opening to another and cleanse it;
then let the patient bleed as much as you can, so that you know if there is bone or nerve, and it is raised in a proper manner, and inquire well of the patient about the pain he feels when you press with your hand, and the place where he feels it;
and when you truly know the place where it is, and if it is far from a joint, or nerve, or artery or vein, or in any of the places that I have told you, then cut according to what I have told you, and remove the corruption and rotten flesh that are within;
and then the cure as long as it is healed, and if the fistula is deep in the right place, it is fitting that you cut it thoroughly, as much as you can, then put tents softened in medicine water, and push them to the head of the fistula, until the medicine corrodes the superfluity which remains at the bottom;
and then put ointments spreading healthy flesh, as long as it is healed;
and if it is not healed by this, then cauterize as we have said, and if the bone is corrupted by the fistula, then cut it.
If veins or nerves trouble you or principal members, as we have said;
and if the bone is uncovered and there is corruption and blackness, then wash it as long as the corruption is entirely removed, then treat it with spreading healthy flesh things as long as it is healed;
and if it is not healed, and goes back in as before, know that you have not gone far enough.
if you uncover and scrape as much as you can until you reach the bottom, and remove all the corruption, then restore it to its place;
and if it is thus healed, it is good. If not, know that the corruption is too deep, and you cannot reach it; there is no other remedy but to leave it to nature;
and if there is a small bone corrupted and you can pull it out with forceps, extract it with an instrument suitable for this purpose, and if there are many bones, remove them all, leaving none behind;
and if moisture works against you and there is no error or fear, cut away the moisture and flesh and free the bones.
And if you cannot remove them in an hour, put something promoting decay on the wound, and leave it until the flesh is rotten around the bones, and then you will be able to remove the bones more easily.
And if it is a large bone, such as those of the leg or thigh, only allow the corruption until all the blackness is removed, then restore the wound.
And if there is a large part that has become corrupt and comes up to the marrow of the bone; you must sew and cover everything up to the corruption, and then treat it until it is healed.
And I will tell you about a fistula that happened to a man in his leg, so that you can take an example and help in your work.
He was a young man around 30 years old who had pain in his leg from an internal cause, so that the matter came to his leg and it swelled into a large abscess, and there was no reason to open it.
But the sick through their folly worked so much on the abscesses that they opened them and corroded many substances and became fistulas and there came many openings which all flowed with pus and moisture from the body.
And many sick people put treatment on for two years and there was no wise man in the art of hands until I was called upon and saw his leg and the medicines by which he was treated and what flowed from the openings with great force. And it became red the flesh of the youth and had a yellow color.
I pushed a tent into one of these holes, and then searched all the holes, and found that some came against each other from all sides of the leg.
I hurried then and dug into one of the openings until I discovered a part of the bone, and found it corrupted and pierced, and the corruption came even to the bone within.
I cut away all that appeared to me of the corrupted bone and thought there was no other corruption except for that which I removed.
And begin to restore the wound with hot medicines for a long time, and it cannot heal.
And then I began again and uncovered the bone as before, and found the corruption continued in the bone, and I treated it, and then I removed it, and I tried to heal the place. But I could not do so until I scraped away a palm's width of bone, and the wound pulsed throughout its entire length, then I restored it with medicines. And it healed and closed quickly, and I did not have to start the work again except for the weakness of the patient, who could not endure, and for the fear of death that I had of him. For the evacuation it often bled, but it was healed completely, and in place of the bone there grew a hard flesh, and it was of good disposition and had no harm or contrariety at all, neither in coming nor in going.
And if the bone is broken in any place in the body, it must be treated in this way: Take linen and bind it to the head of the bone that is visible, and order someone to extend it upwards. And put another bandage of linen thicker than the first bandage, and tie it on the flesh that is above the bone, and extend the head so that you draw the corrupted flesh out from below, and uncover the flesh on the place where you see sinew, so that the sinew does not blanch the flesh.
And put a coal or a board under the bone to make the corrupted flesh rise up.
And it is necessary to boil as much sinew as one can see and feel the corruption, and boil it again another time.
And if the bone is corrupted and does not appear, and the corruption is in the middle or in a part, then uncover all the flesh.
Then put a coal underneath, and then boil from one part to the other the corruption, and let the boiling be as long as the corruption is deep, as we have said.
and if the corruption is in the joint, then treat the corrupted joint, and the bone where it holds from the other side.
and if the corruption is in the continuation of the two joints, there is no other remedy than to treat both.
and if the corruption is in the wrist or ankle, it is a very serious matter, but nevertheless you must inquire into this ailment, how it reveals itself to you. and cleanse it in all the ways that you can, but make sure that the vein or nerve do not oppose you.
and know that the instruments and saws for treating these bones are many, according to the arrangement of the bones and their appearance, their thickness and thinness, their size and smallness, and their hardness. and for this reason, it is necessary to have the appropriate instrument for each kind of work.
And know that the work will show you the instrument you will need, according to the knowledge of this art, and the testimony of the ways of diseases. So prepare the instrument you need according to what is fitting.
The shoulder dislocates either from within or from without;
And when you have medicine that will corrode it through the treatment of medicines, and it does not profit, then bind that limb up to the place where the corrosion comes from, so that the patient escapes by this means death or malice, which is greater, from the lack of the limb;
And the signs are that the limb becomes black, as if it were burned by fire, and swells after the blackness, because the corrosion goes from limb to limb, and takes over the whole body;
If you hasten to cut it out, and if it is by the sting of some venomous creatures, such as a sea scorpion and an adder and similar ones, if the corrosion is at the head of the vein, cauterize it, and do not give it any space to come as far as the hand.
And if it comes as far as the hand, cauterize it at the joint so that the corrosion does not come as far as the arm;
and if it comes to the arm, cauterize it at the elbow;
and if it passes the elbow, it is death, and there is no remedy except for the amount of its venom;
and do the same thing when the corrosion comes to the foot: if it comes to the first joint, cauterize it after the other joint;
and if it comes to the foot, cut off the whole foot; and if it rises in the leg, cut it at the knee joint;
and if it comes above the knee, there is no other remedy than to leave the patient to die;
And the way to cut or sew the limb is that you bind it above and below, and extend one minister the lower binding, and another minister the upper binding, and you sever the flesh between the two bindings at a span wide, until the bone is exposed;
Then cut or sew, and place on each side a linen cloth so that the sewing does not touch the healthy area, and causes the patient further injury and abscesses.
And if bleeding occurs while you are working, quickly cauterize the area or apply some restraining powders;
Then return to your medicine until it is completed, then bind the injured limb with a suitable bandage, and treat it until it is healed;
and I will tell you what happened to one man in his left foot:
He had a blackness that looked like a burn, and this corruption first came in the back of his foot, until it spread throughout the whole foot;
And when the man saw the corruption, he quickly covered the foot, and was healed;
And a long time afterwards the corruption returned to the back of his hand, and he came to me, and I applied things that drive it back after cleansing the body, and I could not stop the corruption;
And he wanted me to cut off his hand, and I did not want to, because I had hope of driving back the matter; and I also doubted that if I cut his hand, he would not die, because the strength of the man was weak;
and he despaired altogether, and returned to his land, and hastened to cover his hand, and was healed;
and I do not tell this except for the fact that one should do otherwise, if need be.
Sometimes an abscess comes in flesh, and remains so long that it makes a large gathering of pus; and then it bursts and opens, and the pus flows out, and the wound remains empty, like some vessels; and the skin that is above it is also as delicate as fine linen cloths, and does not run down to the bone, nor to the nerve, and such a sickness is called "healthy," and is not called "fistula";
But if it is so elongated that it reaches the bone completely, it is called a "fistula".
And the cook if it is such that you cut the whole skin around it, and likewise when it is thin, as a cloth. And it does not spoil because of its putrefaction.
And if you believe that the skin will burn, and the putrefaction is not complete, and the skin is thick as leather, then cure it with an enema like this:
Look if the breasts are large, and the belly that is in it has a foul smell, then give an enema of Egyptian medicine which is made like this: Take alum, and oil, and litharge, equally, and put them to cook in a vessel over the fire, until the medicine is red, and becomes as thick as honey;
And then take some according to your need, and make it with vinegar and honey, and apply it as a poultice on the breast, and draw out the purulence. And leave the medicine in place for two hours, then remove it while squeezing.
Do this many times until the breast is softened and the pus is removed.
And sometimes apply a poultice of ash water when this medicine is not present, taking ashes from vine wood, pouring vinegar over them, then straining it and applying it as a poultice until you know the breast is well cleansed.
And if the patient cannot bear the Egyptian medicine or the ash water, then apply a poultice of vinegar and honey or one containing a bit of powdered litharge. Where you cleanse it with honey and mead wine, so that the honey has the property of purifying and washing, and the wine makes the healthy part air.
And when you have done this, and you are certain that the breast is well purified, then cleanse it with something that produces flesh in it, and take a plaster that promotes healing, and make it with rose oil and wine.
Or you cleanse it with certain medicines and ointments, of which I have spoken of the properties or treatise on ointments;
And if the opening of the breast is small, and the cannula of the enema cannot enter, then enlarge it a little with an iron instrument, and put in a tent of Egyptian ointment or basil ointment, as long as it is enlarged.
And if the wound is too large, sew it up so that only the place where the enema can enter remains open; and if the opening that leads to the bowels is above, then make the cut lower than where it is.
And if you cannot cover the breast below as you see it, arrange it in such a way that the belly runs to the lowest place where it is; for when the belly is perfect, do not let flesh grow and if you cannot cover the breast below as you see it, arrange it in this way. Let the belly run slightly downward, and do not let anything of the belly remain;
Let the belly run slightly downward, and do not let anything of the belly remain; and take consolidating medicines to draw out the health, and extend upon a linen sheet that covers all the health. Then cover as forcefully as possible the hole of the breast so that it is wider than the first, and extend ointment gently upon the other cloth according to the quantity of the hole, and place it upon the hole of the breast to align the belly, and do not remove the large cloth except after many days once.
and he who is out the hole of the breast, often removes the bowels to know what runs from the bowels, whether it is venom or pus or enough, whether digested or undigested.
and take care if the patient feels pain or not, and if there is an abscess or not, and when your medicine has extended in a certain way and you see the nature that leaps upon the hole of the breast, know that the breasts will soon heal, and health approaches.
and then untie it in the morning, or on the third day, and when you untie the wound, if you change another bandage, and renew the ointment.
And if subtle poisons linger for a long time, do not despair of health, for healing approaches.
For there are men whose wounds heal slowly, and some who do the opposite.
And if undigested bowels leap from the breast after many days, know that the breasts will not heal.
and if the breasts are slow to heal and are extended, apply drying medicines in substance and dry in virtue, such as diachylon ointment, for there is a great part of vitriol in it, and this is the last medicine;
Take diachylon ointment, and make it with rose oil, and rosewater of old wine equal in substance;
then cook it and use it;
and this same one made thicker when diachylon ointment is not present, or you take myrrh and aloe and incense, and grind it, and powder it on the honey when it is off the fire;
and then make it into a paste and spread it on the breast, and sometimes administer aristolochia longa, and roots of orchis mascula, which are also like flour of vetch and centaury; and in the use of simples or compounds: crush them, and make a powder, and put on the honey that I have said, and use it;
and if the sore is lengthened and is not cured by this remedy, then know that the corruption is thoroughly embedded, and makes an impression in the bone, or in hard limbs, or in ligaments; if the cure of the cure of fistula, as we have said before.
A felon is an abscess that arises beneath the nail of the hand or foot, or by chance arises in other places;
and when it is envied, and no attention is paid to it, then it comes as a large abscess, running and dripping pus so much that it runs to the root of the nail, and by chance runs through all of it;
And corrosion comes to the bone, until there is a foul stench of pain, and the flesh around it becomes wide, and its color is dark.
When you treat it as we have said in the division, and the treatment does not help, then you must cut away all the superfluity that remains from the ulcer, then cauterize the wound afterwards. Cauteries are very helpful if the bone is healthy, and the nail is healthy;
and if the nail presses on the flesh and starts to grow, and the wound, then it is necessary that you put the point of a knife under the nail where it touches the flesh, and lift it up, and cut this flesh delicately and lightly, and apply burning and corrosive medicines on the remaining flesh to remove everything; then treat the wounds until they are healed.
And if the corrosion is in the bone, cut it out and treat it fiercely, for as long as the corrupted bone remains, it cannot heal;
and if you see the flesh corrupting, cut it out in a manner as previously described, then treat it until it is healed;
and if it is wild, and swollen, and he feels great pain, then you must first heal it.
Then cut the splint with a sharp knife across it, and be careful that the cut does not reach the flesh underneath the splint, for the patient would feel too much pain;
and if it happens, put something on it that soothes.
The two growths that are born in the hands of some men are all fleshy, and sometimes there is bone where there is flesh, and sometimes there is a nail, and none of these are born at the root of the joint, or their birth is in some of us of the fingers.
Those born in any part of the thigh do not move, and those born at the joint of the thigh may move;
the size of that which is fleshy is light, in a certain way: Cut it at its root with a wide splint.
Those born at the root of the joint are difficult to heal: you must hold it together.
For one who is born or about to be born soon, it is fitting that you first shave the flesh roundly down to the bone, then cut the bone to a suitable size for him, then treat it until it is healed.
Solderings which come together at the two ends come by birth, or by soldering of a wound, or by burning with fire, or by similar things.
It is necessary that you mend this suture so that it may repair according to its natural form. Then place between two tents or cloths softened in rose oil, so they do not stick together. Or you can put between two thin slices of plum, as long as the wound is soldered, as it should be.
If a soldering comes to any of his limbs with the palm, then cover that solder as it should be done.
Veins are large winding vessels full of melancholic superfluities which come from many parts of the body;
and they occur more in the legs of those who walk and work and carry things than in others.
Therefore, you must administer purging with colocynth to him, and then apply balm of basilica.
The treatment with iron is according to two methods: One is where one cauterizes them and draws forth the black blood; And the other method is that you bind the vein and draw out all the blood.
The length is according to this manner: First, raise the leg with hot water very strong, until the flesh becomes subtle, then strain the leg from the patient from above the thigh to the part below the knee;
Then cut the vein in one place, or two, or three, of a wide size, then loosen and draw forth the black blood with your hand, from one end to the other, as much blood as the virtue of the patient can suffer;
And then bind it, and command him to abstain from meats containing black bile;
and begin the evacuation and cleansing again when the veins are full, and it is of benefit to the patient.
The alleviations for this are according to this manner: Raise the leg of the patient, if there is much hair, then put him in a bath, and raise the leg with hot water until it becomes red, and swells the veins;
and if you do not have a bath, heat it by the fire, and then apply the heated part to the vein near the head of the knee, or in the area below the ankle;
then apply the leather to the incision, and flay the vein from each side until it appears when touched;
and you see it red and black, and when it enters the leather it also appears white like a cord;
then push the vein down as far as it is raised from the leather, and then lift it lightly at the incision, then apply it to the other place above three times;
then flay the leather on top of the vein until it appears, then lift it with the vein as you did, and lift it at another incision, as you did first;
then make another incision, or several if needed, then lift it and apply it to the calf of the foot, then pull and lift it up to the second incision;
Then extract it piece by piece, until it is all out, then the cup.
And if you cannot pull it out and lift it, then insert a needle at all its length doubled strong, tie it, and pull it, and insert it below the root, and turn your hand from side to side, until it comes out. And be careful that it does not break off, for if it breaks off, one cannot pull it out or lift it, and harm comes to the patient.
And when you have removed it all, put over the site of the wound wool softened in wine and rose oil; and dress it until it is healed.
And if the vein is contracted and twisted and wrapped together, and it is not straight, as we have said, then you must split it crookedly, but do not break it. and treat it as we have said before.
The shape of the iron with which one cuts a vein, if it is curved and does not cut, let it cut the vein;
and is of a large curve, for if it were subtle, it would cut the vein, but let it be large as we have said, and this is the form:
This vein is planted in legs, in warm parts where neither herbs nor trees grow, and in earth where there is no moisture;
and by chance it grows elsewhere than in the legs, and this happens from the rot that comes under the skin, as it comes inside the body snakes and worms, plant between the skin and flesh.
And if the signs of the beginning of this vein are such that a very large inflammation comes in the leg, then the color changes, and the vein begins to protrude, just like a root of a plant.
When the shoulder opens, it is fitting that you wrap around a piece of linen from three and a half to two fingers, and tie it, and let the linen hang down on the leg, and every time it is damp with pus, wrap it around the linen, and tie it.
and if it is too long, cut off a portion and wrap the rest, and do not cut it at its root, until it is all out. For if you cut it, it will go back into the flesh and cause an abscess and rot or a wound, and evil sickness.
Because of this, it must be treated little by little until the end, and nothing should remain on the body.
And it sometimes happens that this vein when treated is ten palms long or even twenty, and a man once came to me to whom it was twenty palms long, and when you cut it, it will burst into one or more holes and pierce through to the bottom so that everything comes out.
And let the matter inside be emptied, and apply to the area poultices that prevent putrefaction at any time, then treat it as you would an abscess.
And never at this vein but two rain-drops, and likewise when it opens in the joint of the foot or leg and there comes a great deal of pus, and then it leaps rain.
Cure it then as we have said before.
of worms which are born between skin and flesh This illness is called in our land “ox disease,” because it often occurs in oxen, and it is a small worm that is born between skin and flesh, and goes throughout the body going up and down, and one feels it well from limb to limb as long as it remains under the skin where it travels, and leaps hard;
and it comes from putrefaction of certain humors, just as worms and snakes and lampreys and ascarides or roundworms come from the belly;
and one fears its wickedness, because when it goes through the body and rises to the head, and comes to the eye, it may enter and destroy the eye; And this happens many times.
When you see it heal and drain, you cannot force it except when it goes.
Therefore it is necessary that you bind the place above and below with a strong tight bandage, then cut it above and drain it forcefully, and if the worm is deeply embedded in the flesh and you cannot find it, then cauterize it with fire until it dies.
And the greatest harm that it does is that it runs the eye, as we have said;
And if you see it coming or close to the eye, remove the eyebrow below it, then cut it above and drain it forcefully.
And it is necessary to treat the patient with purifying medicines that dissolve harmful humors, and they should avoid meats that cause decay.
of the pain which comes from windiness This illness is called "vakirir" in our land, and it is a pain that comes to some limbs, and then can move from limb to limb;
and I have seen what I tell you. I was called to a sick woman, and she revealed her arm to me, and I saw a small swelling in the vein of her arm;
and shortly after, I saw it rise as quickly as a worm to her shoulder, faster than anything, like living silver when it moves from one place to another;
the pain departed from that area and settled in her shoulder, and then shortly after ran throughout her body until it reached her other arm;
then she told me that it was turning again throughout her body, just as I saw.
I marveled greatly how she moved thus from limb to limb, for I had never seen this disease in this manner. Nevertheless, I had seen many who claimed to move pain from place to place, but I had never seen it as clearly as I did in this woman;
And I thought it was because the woman had a dry body and uncovered veins, and that is why this constrained wind appeared;
And it does not appear according to this reason in those who are fleshy and have moist bodies and filled veins.
And when you see this illness being healed, and the patient feels this pain as we have said, if it appears to you, immediately bandage it tightly above and below, then apply a poultice on top until this constrained wind leaves. And cauterize the place;
and if you do not see it at your own hands, then the cure of those who expel winds, such as foul-smelling pills and serpent pills, and similar others.
Arrows are diverse, according to their appearances and according to the places in the body where they lodge.
The variety of theirs is that there are some which have large points, and small ones, and bristling ones, and joined ones; and of those which have two angles, and of those which have tongues, and of those where there are pieces;
And that which falls in no member falls according to two manners: Where it falls in a principal member, such as the brain, heart, liver, lung, reins, intestines, bladder, and similar members. When it falls then in any place of these members, and the signs of death, which I will tell you hereafter, appear to you: It is fitting that you refrain from the extraction of this arrow, for death comes afterward in several ways; and when these evil signs do not appear to you, and the arrow is not completely embedded, then treat it and care for the wound.
And the sign of the brain when the arrow falls and pierces the bone, and leaps the dura mater which is above the brain, is when there is dimming of sight and stupor and trembling and redness in it, and inflammation and redness of the tongue, and spasm and confusion of understanding, and vomiting of bile; and perhaps it is without strength from the nostrils, or ears; and perhaps loses speech and voice; and there leaps from the wound white moisture resembling pus, and it also leaps like a burn from a chariot wheel;
and if these signs appear to you, keep away from the treatment, and treat the arrow if it is not embedded.
The signs of an arrow when it is lodged or stuck are that it is near the left breast, and also feels as if it were fixed in something hard, not empty; and perhaps the arrow moves like a pulse, and dark blood flows from it, and coldness and cold sweat come, and fainting: Know then without doubt that death approaches.
And the sign of an arrow that has not been removed is that without any discharge of pus it leaps from the wound, and the throat swells, and the patient changes color, and sighs deeply and desires cold air.
And if the arrow is lodged in the covering of the buttock, it is below the small ribs; and gives great weariness and great pain and sighing; and it moves all the members of the shoulders.
And if the arrow hits the stomach, by chance, some undigested meat may come out of the wound.
And if the arrow lodges in the belly or bowels, and no part of it sticks out through the intestines, there is no hope for a cure, nor for extracting the arrow.
And if the arrow lodges in the bladder, and the urine jumps and begins to flow, and the patient feels great pain: know that the wound is mortal.
The other limb, such as the face and the neck and the throat and the shoulder and the armpit and the spine of the back and the forearm and the thigh and the legs, and similar limbs, are safe according to various positions. When the arrow is in the nerve or artery, and it is not venomous, as I will tell you what happened to me so that you may do likewise.
It happens to a man that an arrow falls or pierces at the root of the nose: I tried it, and drew it out on the other side below the fat of the ear, and he was healed without any trouble.
And I drew out an arrow for a man that had lodged in the fat of the eye below the eyelid, and the arrow was blunt, and one could only reach the point toward the fletching, and the arrow was large from a Turkish bow, all iron light without ears;
The player was healed, and no evil accident befell him.
And I removed an arrow from the throat of a Christian, and the arrow was Arabian with ears:
I shaved the beard, and skillfully extracted it until I removed it, and the Christian was healed.
And I removed an arrow from a man, who had it stuck in his belly, and I thought he would die;
and then after he had passed thirty days, his condition did not change at all; I cut above the arrow and pierced it, and removed it forcefully, and he did not suffer any ill effects.
And I saw a man to whom an arrow had fallen in the back, and the wound was sealed over;
and the arrow remained inside him, and did not change his natural state in any way, nor did it cause him harm in any of his natural functions.
And see another man to whom an arrow fell in his face, and the wound was sewn. and he remained thus without suffering great pain;
and many other similar cases.
And treat an arrow to a man of the princes, the king, which had fallen among his nose, and was sloping a bit toward the right side; and the arrow was all embedded.
I was called to treat it after it had fallen three days. If I find the wound very narrow.
I carefully tried to find it and did not feel it at all; and he felt a throbbing and pain below his right ear.
I thought it was from the point of the arrow. I put on the place a poultice that was attractive and digestible so that the flesh would not swell; and I saw the arrowheads.
and I saw the arrowheads. I put on a plaster for several days and sewed up the wound thoroughly, and kept the patient for a long time, until he felt the arrowhead inside his flesh.
And he told me so. I put a caustic medicine on the wound for several days until it was open and I tried it and felt the head of the arrow stirring in its place.
Then I widened the opening of the wound with that caustic medicine until the head of the arrow became visible to me.
and carefully worked the edges for four months, and then enlarged the wound so that I could put in the forceps and pull it from one side and the other, but it would not come out.
Then I did not cease to refine and devise ways of instruments until I made them one day with well-made forceps, according to their shape which will come at the end of this chapter, so that I could pull it out and restore the wound.
And the master judges that the cartilage of the nose cannot be restored. I restored it then, and the wound was sutured, and the patient was completely healed.
I have told you the quality of extracting some arrows, so that you put your treatment on those which I do not say, for books cannot contain everything.
But wise masters compare on very few things, and on those which are present and lacking, they find nine works and nine instruments for the removal of foreign things that happen in this art.
I say that arrows do not leave the limbs where they are lodged except according to two manners: Either by the place where they enter, or by another part;
And that which leaves further by the place where it enters is an arrow entering their flesh, and it leaves hardly ever now.
And if it does not jump now, leave it until the flesh around it is rotten, and the exit is clear.
And if it is stuck in the bone and cannot come out, leave it like that for several days, and move it each day.
Then it will jump out, and if it does not, pierce around it with a very fine tool until the flesh around it is enlarged, and then treat it.
And if the arrow is lodged in a place in the body so that it cannot be seen, then one must seek it entirely. And if you feel it, remove it with any suitable instrument;
and if you cannot, because of the tightness of the wound and the depth of the arrow, and there is no bone, nerve, or vein, then widen it until the wound is large;
and remove the arrow if you can, and if there are ears on it by which it is held, then cut away the flesh that is stuck to it in two parts as much as you can, and then break or bend the ears of the arrow until you can pull it out.
and subtly, even though you do not break the arrow, draw it out more easily.
And if you cannot do it at once, let it be until the sinews around it are ripe, then treat it, for extraction will bring relief. And if the flow of blood opposes you, then apply what we have said about wound treatment in its chapter.
and beware of cutting a nerve or vein, and place something as you can move to draw out the arrow without danger, quickly or slowly, firmly or gently;
and place the patient according to the shape they were in when the arrow fell upon them, for that is the greatest help there is, and if you cannot, then place them according to what the signs show you.
An arrow that has come from another direction, or where it appears there is something of it, or the skin is swollen in a place where one can see or feel it apparently:
then cut on top, so that the forceps can grasp it, and then extract it. if a leap is possible now.
And if it is held in the bone, turn your hand round and round until it enters the bone, and widen the bone, then draw it out.
And if it cannot come out, leave it for now and then begin the extraction again until it comes out.
And if there is an arrow shaft in it, push it through the whole shaft
And if it is bone, and you see that the pushing will be difficult, then use an instrument with a point, so that the tip of the arrow enters into the point of the instrument.
Then push it in, and if the arrow is pointed, push the instrument with its point entering inside to make the extraction easier.
And if the arrow is touched, it is fitting that you cut away all the flesh around where the poison is, if you can, then treat the wound as is appropriate.
And if the arrow is bone or lead or in the belly or bladder or the side, and it is close, and you can cover over it, then cover it.
And be careful not to cover a vein or nerve, and then extract it, and then stitch the wound if necessary. and the healing as long as it is healthy.
The shape of the tongs with which one treats arrows is similar to the beak of a bird, and see here the shape:
And there are many ways: large, medium, and small, according to the quantity of the arrow.
The shape of the end of the arrowhead is like the feather of a bird, to push at the point of the arrow, as this is its shape:
There are XXXI veins from which one heals, of which there are XVI chiefs, namely: Two beaters that are after the ears, which are called the two "herbech"; and the two arteries that are in two apparent temples; and two veins that are in the two tears of the two eyes, which are called "aspirers"; and the vein that is on the forehead; and the vein that is at the head of the nose; and the two gullets that are at the neck; and the two veins that are above the mouth on the lips, and these are the veins called "augeherich"; And you see those veins that are under the tongue.
The veins from which one commonly draws blood are five in each arm:
one is the cephalic, and it is on the left side, and common people call it "the vein of the head"; and the middle one is called "fascia," and it is composed of the cephalic and basilic veins, and common people call it "the vein of the heart"; and the basilic is on the right side, and common people call it "the vein of the belly," and it is above the ulna bone, and it is the one from which we draw blood, which appears clearly above the hollow.
And the salvation is the vein that is between the little finger and the ring finger, and it has two branches;
and in the leg and foot there are three veins: one is below the curve of the pouch on the left side, and the second is at the ankle on the right side; and the vein called "nesse", which is at the ankle of the other side;
and in the other leg there are three veins below those.
The vein that is behind the ears helps with old catarrhs, and migraines;
and the qualities of bloodletting, as I have told you, are that you raise the head of the patient, and rub the place where the veins are with a rough cloth; then tighten the patient's neck with a vise, until the two veins appear behind the ears in two places hanging from the head; Place your hands on your side, and where you feel the pulse below your side, that is a sign of incision.
Then take the lancet and insert it below the vein to the bone. Then lift your hand along the whole vein upwards, cutting both the skin and the vein well - it must go through twice - and make the blood flow until you see it.
Then bind and bandage it tightly until it is healed.
And as I have already said in the first book, incision and cautery.
The cutting of the two arteries located in the temples is good for old migraines, headaches, and habitual ophthalmia, and for a flow of hot tears.
And the qualities of bloodletting are as I have said: And this is so that the patient tightens his neck until the two veins appear openly. and they feel the pulse beneath your thumb, and then sign to hold.
Then lift the heart onto the vein at the top with your index finger and insert the lancet beneath it, lift the vein upward, and cut it, just as you did for the other two veins, and let the blood flow according to your need.
Then untie the patient, and place your finger on the vein for an hour, then put cotton on it. And then bind it firmly, and leave it until it is healed.
And we have already spoken of their cutting and extraction, which is the beginning of this book.
The bleeding of the vein in the forehead is worth as much as the bleeding of the cephalic for ancient diseases of the face, and migraine, and redness.
and its quality is such that the patient twists their neck until the vein appears; then take the instrument called "fosseur," of which this is the form:
And place the point on the vein, and press down with your hand or something else, and let blood flow out according to the quantity you see; then release the patient's neck, and tie the vein until it is dry, never leaving the ligature for a long time with a wide flame.
However, the flame should not be too strong; and the ligature must not be twisted sideways, because the bone is nearby and it might break if the flame is too thin.
Ligating the two veins that are in the temples helps with the eyes, and with tingling, redness, and pain in the face;
and the quality of their health is such that the patient tightens his neck by twisting with some cord, as before;
then the cautery, and whether the cautery is through or long, a peck long and a peck wide, because there is no flesh. And if the flame is subtle, it may break;
then let blood flow, as much as you need, and then bind on cotton, and bind it well.
The cautery of the vein in the nose is good for fever and for strong headache, and for facial ailments such as migraine and redness that comes to the face, even when it is old.
and the quality of the cautery is such that the patient tightens his neck, then he pulls his nose to your left hand, and take a long subtle flame, and put it between the lip in the space between the two nostrils, because the vein does not open well there, and the blood will now begin to flow.
And do not go too far with force, and let it run blood according to your need, then bind it for a night, for it is very quickly restored.
The sinew of two guindeges helps in the constriction of the urethra, and at the beginning of menstruation, and for many diseases, and for itching, and for corrosion, and for herpes, and for estiomenes;
And the quality of the sinew is such that the patient tightens their neck under one and the other, as we have said.
And let the masters be standing upon the head of the patient, and the patient sit upon a seat, then sinew the vein along a good distance widely, then draw out blood moderately, or as much as is needed.
Then redo it on the other vein, then untie the ligature, and remove all the veins moderately, so that the patient doesn't strangle. And leave him until morning, so that the wound may heal.
From the sanctity of books The vein of the lips above helps with coal in the mouth and corruption of gums and fissures of the lips and pain and swelling.
And the quality of the healing is to make the patient sit in front of you, and remove their collar as I have said; then turn back the lip, and look at the two veins, one of which is on the right lip and the other on the left, and recognize them by the fact that they are black, and by the fact that around them are small black veins:
therefore cut one and the other, and if you do not know them and are in doubt, then cut the largest of each side, and also do the same for the two veins that are above and below, for it is the same manner.
from the vein below the tongue The vein under the tongue helps after the head vein is bled, and it is for the constriction of the throat and diseases of the eye and mouth.
And the quality of the bleeder is such that the patient sits between your hands in front of the sun, and lifts their tongue, and looks underneath on each side for a black vein.
Bleed one and then the other, and do not go too deep because underneath are the arteries.
The veins of the arms which we commonly bleed are bled in two ways:
Either by striking with a sharp instrument like a lancet or a thin olive-wood tool as sharp as a knife, and it is called an "anesil"; and they are wide and thin according to the width and narrowness of the veins. The form of the flame mirror is very renowned, and it is as wide as you see.
And it is necessary to open the veins filled with thick blood which appears, and that contain thick and troubled blood. And this is the form of the olive flame:
And it is more delicately pointed, and it is for cauterizing delicate veins, where there is subtle yellow blood.
The vein of the basilica, which is one of these veins, helps illnesses that are below the throat, and at the neck, and at the chest, and at the belly.
And it is fitting for the healer that he bleeds it well, and that he guards against the artery which is below. And if he cuts the artery, and a flow of blood comes, then it is fitting to staunch it, as I have said; and the flame must not be pointed but cutting like a knife.
And if the basilica does not open clearly, then it is fitting that you extract it and change another; Where you want any vein of it, or you make a vein in place of it on the arm: It opens manifestly; And the cautery is applied to the flame, as we have said.
And if you want to know the place of the vein, it is fitting then that you take hold of the arm, and touch the place until you feel the pulse; then mark the place with a cut, and then bind the arm, and cauterize the vein with the flame; and be careful that you do not strike the artery when you see the place swollen, for it is of the artery: Avoid it then.
And if you see it protrude upwards as the urine of a child, and its blood is red and thin, know that it is the sinew of an artery: Hurry then, and place your hand on its length, then remove your hand if it does not stick, which often happens. Bind the arm, and leave it thus, and let the patient not move it.
And be afraid, and do not move it until it is healed.
And if the blood is not clotted and it flows, and no medicine is present for you, then bind the artery when it appears, because it is the head of the removal. And clot the blood.
Take a bark of fig, and split it, and take one of the halves and bind it well until the next day.
If the blood clots, that is good. If not, if the wound cures, as we have said, use powders which clot blood.
And the bandages are not tied too tightly in several ways because of the small size of the wound and the strength of the arm's binding.
The vein in the middle of the arm helps it draw blood from above the head and below the body because it is composed of the basilica and cephalic, as we have said.
And it is necessary for the phlebotomist to be careful of the nerve that is below and if he pricks too deeply and finds the nerve it will swell and the bloodletting will be tightened and perhaps it cannot heal.
And this nerve appears many times and if it does not appear in some men because of its subtlety, then you must draw blood from the instrument numb. and avoid the nerve as best you can.
And if there is a vein between the two nerves, make the incision long.
The sinew of the cephalic vein helps so much that it draws blood from the head and helps them.
And it is fitting to bleed by pricking with olive oil flame or myrtle flame, because it is the safest of all the veins, for it has neither nerve nor artery beneath. Nevertheless, one must seek out the lightest place, and do not grieve if one misses the first time, and one begins again. And by chance some men's veins swell when pricked for the first time but it does not matter.
The quality of the bloodletting is according to your thought.
The first thing that you must know about bleeding is that it is not administered except to preserve health and to avoid illnesses to come.
And let the bleeding be done in one of the three veins which are these. That is to say, cephalic, basilic, and median cubital. and one must bleed at the beginning of spring in young people, and in autumn and winter after eating, when the signs of repletion appear;
And one must bleed on the first day or the third, after two hours or three on the day.
The bleeding which is administered for illnesses has no set time, but only when need be, by day or by night, in all hours and at all times;
And it is not fitting to bleed children until 14 years old, nor women carrying a child except from the fourth month until the seventh. Those who have passed sixty years should not bleed themselves.
And when anyone wants to be bled, in whatever way it may be, it is fitting that they cleanse their bowels with a light enema, if they have much phlegm retained, so that the veins do not draw from the intestines harmful superfluities damaging the principal limbs;
Nor does he who is too full of meat heal, nor he who is drunk, as long as it lasts, nor those with dropsy.
And it worsens one who is treated after colic, fever, discharge from the belly, and frequent intercourse for a woman, and labor, staying awake and fasting, and those who lose their strength, or by something of the weapon or body.
Then subtle the humors, if it is thick, by meats and drinks and by medicines, if you have the power.
Then enter a bath, if nothing forbids it, to make the blood thinner, and let it bleed from the vein of the left arm near the third rib, as we have said.
And guard yourself that day from work, and straining, and lust, and similar things;
And be bound and joined, and let the bandages be higher than those on which one is bandaged, and rub the arm two or three times, then tighten the bandage moderately, for when it is too tight or too loose, it cannot correct the sinew.
Then rub the place with your hands until the veins swell and are felt.
Then moisten the bandages with a drop of old oil, then put your index finger of your left hand on that vein below the place where he wants to bandage it, so that the vein does not go and fail when cutting.
For there are veins that flee as ropes in a bandage, and if there are such ones that are full of windiness, so that when you put on the flame, it withdraws from the flame and cannot open the vein, and thus one is among them. And if he opens the vein, if the wound is too narrow, therefore it is fitting that the barbers be informed in these things.
And if the vein opens the first time, it is good; If not, begin again a little lower than that place or higher quickly, if the veins are not swollen.
And if the veins are swollen and the patient is afraid, let it rest for a day or two, and do not bind the arm: perhaps some abscesses will come;
do not enter a bath, then begin the bleeding again if it pleases him;
and if the puncture is small, or the blood runs subtly and you doubt that it will not issue as much blood as you see, stick into that puncture itself with all your might.
and work quickly so that the veins are swollen; for this often happens when the wound is small.
If you see the place swollen, do not begin the lancing again, and put a poultice of oil on it, for it draws the body's blood, and oil is gentler in this place than lye.
And thus administer the oil poultice to each vein you lance, to staunch the flow of blood.
and this same thing makes a triangle and bowl of it, when it is placed on the spot. if the blood is too thin it separates when it is too large.
And if a large abscess comes, which often happens, even when it has not been lanced before except at this time when the opening of the vein is small, hurry and put a sponge soaked in hot water and salt on the spot for an hour.
and it is necessary that you do this after the blood has been released from the vein, and if it remains in place after several days without any blackness or greenness, then do not harm it. And if you see it, put some aloe or myrrh mixed in calamint juice, mustard, or something similar.
And often there are abscesses and swelling at the incision of the basilica:
Then put your hand on it, and if you find the area soft when pressing with your hand, then that swelling is bad. Therefore, be careful not to put anything of what we have said on it, for you might cut into an artery by accident.
But apply a dry plaster to harden the area, and then treat it with another dressing until it is healed.
And treat each one with blood according to the quantity of its virtue, and the color of the blood.
For if the blood is black, let it flow out until it is red; And if you see it thick, let it flow until it is thin; And if it is too hot, let it cool down.
And it is fitting for one who is full and strong, and needs bloodletting, that a larger wound be made, and the incisions be wide;
And for one who is weak, do the opposite, and they should be bled a little and often, and one should bleed them by cutting across, not by pricking.
And this manner of bleeding is safe from running of blood and cutting of nerves, and is worth more than bleeding that is long or wide.
And for one whose body is lacking in bloodletting, it is fitting to give soft bread with pomegranate juice; If it is hot, draw blood three or four times.
And if he faints after the outflow of much blood, it is fitting that he inhales broth of flesh and fragrant subtle syrup and uses other things as we have said in the division or chapter on fainting, for the evacuation of veins.
And if he wants to heal his arm and bleed again, it is necessary, when he is weakened by great bleeding, that he bleeds a little at a time, according to the quantity of his continuing strength.
And whoever wants to bandage their arm after the first bleeding, and they have strong flesh, then they should bandage seven hours after the first bleeding, or after the ninth hour.
And whoever wants to heal from another injury, it must heal on the second or third day.
For it has much blood within the body which is already heated, and brings fever; so it is necessary to draw a large quantity, and widen the opening so that it discharges in streams; after you have observed all the conditions of health, and place your hand on his pulse when he is well, so that death does not come in place of streams, and this happens many times, when the healer is negligent;
and it is not fitting when you see the arm loosen, and make the blood come out the second time, and the opening is closed, that you press strongly on it; and if it is crooked, let him extend his arm quickly, for this would be bad;
but leave it until it heals the second time; or you put the tip of the flame there, until the blood which is frozen at the opening of the vein comes out strong, and place on it a bit of salt recently made into lye, and press lightly on it.
And if the vein is swollen, leave it and do not constrict it, until the abscess is appeased.
And if it is necessary to draw blood a second time, then do so in the same place or in another vein, or in the other arm.
The vein at the elbow is cut instead of the vein at the temple because it is thicker.
And the manner of the healing is such that the patient plunges their hand into hot water, until the pulse is red.
Then it is bound moderately, so that the vein appears well, then the healing is maintained crosswise, not wide nor long.
And the opening should be wide, and it should be healed very close to the joint of the hand, and if none can come out, put the hand back into hot water, and let the blood run into the water until you have enough.
And if it is summer, do not put the hand back into hot water at all, for one puts it more in winter than in summer.
And this vein's healing is safer than all other veins, because there is neither artery nor nerve.
The healing of the salvation vein of the right hand is worth for all diseases of the liver, and this is the manner:
Strain the hand, and plunge it into hot water, until the vein is swollen if you see it. And if it deviates sideways, and if you cut it all the way through, it will not matter.
And do not go too deep, for the nerves are beneath all naked of flesh, and then put the hand back into hot water, if the blood is frozen in the wound, and it cannot come out.
And when you have treated the blood as much as is necessary, put oil and wax on the vein to heal quickly, and do the same for each vein.
The sinew of the left hand is worth against the disease of the mouse, and do all as I have told you to the right.
The vein of the saphenous is worth more than all the diseases that are below the body, such as diseases of the marrow, and retention of phlegm, and disease of the kidneys, and thighs and old legs, and similar diseases.
And the quality of its bleeding is such that the patient plunges his foot into hot water and rubs on the vein until it bursts, and binds above the joint of the foot. And the vein is at the ankle, and there are many veins that run up above the foot.
So bleed from the largest vein, or at the ankle, which is worth more.
And if you heal it on the foot, beware of the nerves underneath, and heal it through as in cutting.
Let the flame be extinguished.
And if the blood cannot come out, put the foot back in the water and let the vein drain well.
And if the cautery fails the first time, begin the second a little higher up, for the flesh is salty.
Do not doubt about nerves as we have said, and so do the same to the saphenous vein of the other foot equally.
The vein of the sciatic nerve is at the ankle bone, and its pain is worth the pain of the hip when it is for hot blood.
And the quality of its cautery is that the patient enters a bath and squeezes above the ankle four times by twisting, for otherwise the vein does not open.
And if it opens, cauterize it in all ways that you can and crosswise. And it is worth more for you to cut it, for the flesh is dry and it is much replenished by most men.
And it is worth more for you to cut it, for the flesh is dry and it is much replenished by most men. And if you do not find it, look for no vein that appears or back of the foot, and toward the little toe, and beware of the nerves;
And draw as much blood as you see, and then untie the ligature, and put cotton on it and remove it; It is now healed.
Cups are made of horn, or of ivy, or of glass;
And cupping is done in two ways: Either by cutting and drawing blood, or without cutting.
And this cupping which is done without cutting is according to two methods: Either it is with all fire, or without fire;
And cupping which is done by cutting and extraction of blood is done in fourteen places on the body, of which one is all over the head; and the others are hammered onto the neck; and the others on both sides of the neck; and the cupping glass below the chin; and the cupping glass on both shoulders; and the cupping glass on the loins; and the cupping glasses hammered onto both arms; and the cupping glasses on both legs; and the cupping glasses on both ankles;
and cupping does not draw blood, except for a few small veins that are scattered in the flesh, and because of this it does not weaken anyone, as one does when bleeding from a vein; and it should not be administered, neither with much heat nor little heat, in any illness that comes from fullness, until the whole body is emptied.
And if it is necessary due to illness to apply cupping, or for custom, then we administer it each hour at the beginning of the month, or at the end, and every time.
For there are some who, when they need to be cupped, have a heavy head;
And there are some who find fullness and redness in their face, and in their head, and neck, and darkness as well;
And there are some who find a drop of blood in their mouth, and have a swollen tongue, and spit blood; And there are some who faint, and see by night blood and sorrow and death and similar things.
And when we see these signs, and especially when it is less than a month old, we order him to be cupped after three hours of the day.
The juice of the mulberry helps with the heaviness of the head ... that comes from it, and it is not right for this to be after the evacuation of all the body;
And this cupping is done in place of the bleeding from the head veins, and it is not suitable for those of cold complexion to use, or who have diarrhea, for it does them great harm.
And therefore it is not suitable for the elderly to use it, nor those who have or primarily cold diseases.
And those who recover often become stiff, and therefore it is necessary to put the cupping glass a little lower because of the risk of stiffness.
Cupping on the neck is in place of bleeding from the head and the basilica vein, and therefore it is good for the constriction of the breast, and for the rupture of the anal canal, and for all coughs, and for repletion.
And it is not good to leave it on too long, for if it holds too tightly it can cause prolapse or obstruction of the stomach and the heart.
Cupping on the two ribs of the neck is good for headaches, and ophthalmia and migraine, and for strangulation, and for pain at the roots of the teeth, and it is in place of bleeding from the basilica vein.
And it is necessary that you order the patient to press his hand at its placement so that he does not strike the artery and blood does not flow.
Cupping below the chin is good for diseases of the mouth, and decay of the gums, and similar illnesses that are in the mouth; and it is placed on the two lips.
Cupping of the shoulders is good for illnesses that come from heat and swelling.
Cupping on the thighs is as good as three veins in the arms, for it draws blood from these large veins;
and order the patient not to make too much effort, for the flesh is thin and under it are nerves and arteries.
The cup placed on the rump is good for hemorrhoids in the buttocks and illnesses below, and it is necessary that the cup be large, and be made of horn, so that it draws well; and by chance, if it were delicate, it would break and it would make large wounds.
The cupping glasses on the legs bleed freely because they draw blood from all over the body, and are good for old pains of the loins, and of the bladder, and soften inflammations.
and they are placed on the two thighs and the two ankles; moreover, they weaken the body after a long time, and cause emaciation in several conditions.
The way to apply a cupping glass is that you first put it empty and suck gently, then place it quickly and move it evenly, and do not stop doing this until you see the place red and swollen, and see the redness of the blood.
Then let it rest and put the cupping glasses back on, and take care in the disposition of bodies, because there are some who have thick flesh and clear pores. if it is necessary to strike once only, and it is necessary to make large wounds, and a deep puncture; and suck lightly.
And if the blood is thick, it is necessary to strike twice: the first time to make subtle the way of thick blood.
And if the blood is very thick, it is necessary to strike a third time;
and when we want to draw blood drop by drop, we only make one incision. And if we want a lot of blood, we often restart;
and if the blood is thick, we strike deep, and the end is that the heart be pierced only slightly, and it is necessary for those who have thick and hard skin, and who have few pores, that you moisten the rims of the cups with oil that is stimulating and dissolving: If it is so, with oil of violets, or with oil of sweet almonds, or with oil of pumpkin seed;
And if it is in winter, with oil of watercress, or lily, or chamomile, or another similar one.
And if the superfluity is large and cold, then take oil of marjoram, or balm, or oil of anise, and the like.
And if the person whom one heals has tender flesh and large pores, it is not fitting to put any oil on them, but they should be washed after cupping with rose water, or cold water, or water of blackthorn, or water of pumpkin, or water of porcelain, or other similar.
And those who have a lot of moisture, should rise with rosemary, or myrtle water, and sumac, and similar things.
And those who have large superfluities may rise with old wine, or vinegar water, or a decoction of anise or chamomile, or other similar ones;
And it is not suitable to apply a cupping glass before the bath nor in the bath, but after the bath one hour or two;
And do not sleep after cupping, and it is necessary that he washes himself when he is about to be cupped and when he has been cupped.
And beware of those who are being treated if they are choleric, and if the skin is too raw and inflamed; it is fitting that he takes cold things, such as pomegranates and endives and lettuces in the summer, and similar things and eat little, and meat from a young animal, and moist meats.
and eat little, and meat from a young animal, and moist meats. And he who has a cold complexion, should take syrup of honey, and fragrant wine midway between old and new, and eat little, and eat little and small birds and pigeons;
and on the day he will bleed, he should drink more than eat;
and it is fitting to give some men at times three-spice or nutmeg before the bleeding, or after, to strengthen the main limbs; and let the wine be subtle, but it does not suit those who are hot to drink it.
The cupping glasses that are put without cutting are those that are put on the liver, and on the thigh, and gout, and on the belly and the buttocks and the loins and the hip, for these members do not suffer to be cut on them, and we only do it for attracting blood from one member to another, just as we put them on the breasts when a newborn bleeds;
To remove the viscosity that is in the member, as we put cupping glasses on the belly and on the shoulder to reduce the limb;
and remove the pain, when there is an inflammation or stone, it removes by its attractive virtue perhaps the inflammation, or dislodges the stone from its place.
And it does so when you put it on the liver and on the thigh when there is retained windiness, and these cupping glasses are administered empty to only suck. And sometimes they are administered together with fire, and sometimes full of hot water, as in illnesses of the pleura, and in such a way one fills the cupping glass with hot water alone, or hot water in which herbs suitable for this have been cooked.
The form of the cupping glass administered with fire is thus:
And it has two widths and a half palm of length, and has at the cost side around the middle a small hole, as for putting in a needle, and is made of horn, smooth beforehand so that it does not hurt the patient when placing it on the limb;
and have a rod of wood or iron in the middle, to put a candle holder on it, and they are big and small according to the illnesses and the age of those who take them
for the cupping glasses for children are different than those for the old, and for the thin than for the fat.
And one must thus put this cupping glass upon the limb:
Take the candle holder of wax or linen, and put it through the cupping glass through the rod which is in the cupping glass, so that the flame is at the bottom of the cupping glass so that it does not burn the patient;
and then put it upon the limb, and your two hands must be upon the part that we have said, so that when you want to remove it, if the steam goes out, one takes off the cupping glass
and take the linen as before and start again often, if you need to.
For the cupping glass which is administered in the illness of pleurisy, for all acute conditions, it has neither a stem nor a perforation, and is only applied when full of water, and is placed upon the limb only.
And this is its form:
Cupping glasses are only applied to limbs where one cannot apply cupping glasses due to their small size, such as lips and gums, and similar places. And in those places devoid of flesh, such as the bone or nails, and other similar ones.
And the quality of the cupping glass is such that when you find cupping glasses which are in a sweet and clear liquid without any impurity, then take them.
And place them for one night in a sweet liquid, so that they become familiar and have nothing inside their bellies. And then let it be bled by vein and cupping glass, then rub the limb until it is red, and put on bandages.
And when they are full and begin to shrink, if it is a place where one can put a cupping glass, then put it on, for this is worth much afterward.
If not, lift the place gently, and then sharply, very well, and then splint it.
And if the bandages become too tight after the body swells under them, moisten a linen cloth in cold water and put it on top until the bandages are loosened.
And if there are many bandages, put powdered vitriol or alum, and similar things on top until they loosen.
Or you can place half a handful of peeled beans on the spot and leave them until they burn there, this will stop it now.
and if you need more, take other herbs.
And if the herbs do not want to be taken, rub the place with fresh blood, or stick a needle in it until the blood comes out, and then put them on, and as soon as they feel the blood, they will burn;
and when you see that they are falling off, powder a piece of aloe and salt crushed up, or ashes, then they will fall off now.
Here begins the book of fractures This chapter is often necessary in the art of medicine, and it is the restoration of fractures and dislocations.
Know, young son, that the crazy things I write in this chapter, you will never see them in any of the old books, nor read about them in letters;
and for this reason the science is strange in our land, because I never found any good one.
and I don't know anything else except by the knowledge of the old books, which I have studied so much that I have treated them with science, and through experimentation, and through the custom of my life.
and I have described in this chapter what is contained, and I have summarized it at the end, and have clearly shown the forms of the instruments that are needed, as I have done in these two previous chapters.
It is fitting then that we say in the prologue of this book the sums of speech and the chapters where the wise man puts his understanding, and stays upon virtue, so that those who are experienced know and learn this noble art, and teach it to others.
I say that when fracture or dislocation or torsion or sprain comes to anyone, it is fitting that you hasten to heal the patient on one side and the other, unless something prevents you, such as weakness of body, or infancy, or old age; or if the time is very bad, or too cold;
and avoid cold foods, that is to say cold stews, and broth of birds and goats, and do not drink wine, nor eat any fatty meats, and do not fill yourself too much with meats which fill the veins with blood, until you have no doubt of a hot abscess, or spreading of matter in the limb;
if the patient returns to his first government which he had used.
And when broken bones begin to heal, it is fitting that one nourish the patient with foods that promote fattening, or have viscosity, such as cooked wheat in broth, rice, and peas, and veal feet, and cow's udder, and eggs, and fresh fish, and strong wine, and similar things. For at half breaking it can return to its place more quickly than a fracture.
And know that broken bones of the old and infirm cannot be well set or rejoined according to their nature because of the dryness of the limbs, nor can those which are too tender, such as the bones of small children;
but have no care, set upon the broken bone large splints which bind and join the limb together, until it is strengthened as it was before; and do not stop his work, and for this, it is necessary to nourish him with large meats as we have said.
And know that fractures are diverse in many ways.
For a fracture of the head is different from a fracture of the foot or leg, and I will tell you in this chapter all kinds of fractures. For there are fractures that go to splintering, and others to sharpening, just as the point of a pen for writing.
For there are fractures that go to splintering, and others to sharpening, just as the point of a pen for writing. And if there is a break with a wound, and a break with just a small crack.
And in every manner, let him have his engine and his own instrument for restoration, according to what the memory comes to its place;
and it is known that the bone is broken because the limb is twisted, and appears clearly by itself, and makes a sound when pressed with the hand;
and when there is neither crookedness nor sound at the touch, and the patient does not feel great pain, there is no fracture.
But there may well be crookedness, or a crack, or a small fracture. It is not fitting that you move it with your hand, but put on the medicines that come hereafter, and then now subtly extract it.
And know that the fracture which goes in a direction, and are the two parts separated, it is necessary now to put them back together equally, just as boils heal.
And if a boil comes hot, let it be left alone for a day, until the boil is calmed;
then put it equal to the pus that you can lightly and gently draw out, and know that the restoration of it is lighter than the restorations of those where there are pieces.
Then remove it, as is appropriate afterward.
And if the bone is broken into two pieces, whether it is an arm or leg, or at the hand, if it is a small limb, or two tendons, or one tendon and at the hand;
and set the limb according to its natural shape so that when the broken parts of the limb are freed, you will reset all additions in their places as much as you can, and be careful that your work does not cause injury or pain to the patient.
and properly adjust the two ends of the bones according to the best forms.
And feel it well with your hand if it seems to you that it is not quite right:
if it is set well, do not force it too much, nor press as those who cause boils, heat and contraction in the limb through their work, as we have often seen.
And when the limb is set properly, warn the patient well not to move it, neither while awake nor asleep, nor while turning, nor in any other way; and be sure that the limb is so secure that he does not feel any pain. For when he feels no pain, except perhaps a little, it is necessary to put him in a position where he feels no pain.
and be sure that the limb is so secure that he does not feel any pain. For when he feels no pain, except perhaps a little, it is necessary to put him in a position where he feels no pain. And be careful that he is placed straight so that crookedness does not occur when it is being restored.
And the quality of the broken limb is according to what I tell you.
Know that broken limbs are diverse in size, shape, and severity.
For there are small limbs, such as arms and legs and similar ones: it is necessary to wrap them in soft and fine linen cloths; and those that are large, such as thighs and legs:
it is necessary to wrap them in a wide and strong bandage, because wide bandages embrace the whole large limb and restrain it equally on all sides so that there is no indentation.
Then tie on top light strips of linen, three or four turns according to the limb, and tighten your hand a bit on all the bandage, then go above the break and tighten it less so that the break is then moved away a little from the break.
and soften the ligament bit by bit, until you grasp a large portion of the healthy area, then take hold of the other ligament and turn it back around over the broken area
then return to the part below the break, and extract it moderately, neither too strongly nor too gently, as we have said in the first place above;
then place between the ligaments strips of linen or cloths, as long as they are all equal, then bind everything above with bandages, and then apply your well-made splints on top, if there is no abscess or swelling.
And if there is swelling or an abscess, put something soothing and hot on it to remove the swelling, and leave it like that for several days;
then remove your splints, and they should be half the width of a walking stick, or made of wood from which shingles are made, or palm ribs, and they should be according to this shape:
but it is fitting that the star that one puts on the fracture be a bit larger and wider than the others
and it should also be as long as is fitting for the limb, whether small or large; then remove it from the stars as you did in the first hour, then tie a thread over it neatly, as was done in the first hour on the fracture; the tighter it is bound, the less pain there will be;
and it is fitting that the thread be of medium thickness, not too thick nor too thin, and made of soft linen;
for if the thread is thick, as I have seen in the works of fools who make their ligatures with twisted linen cord, it is a great error, for the ligature cannot be even if it is too fine, and it is not fitting that there be less than two fingerbreadths of space between each star.
And if the patient is sore from the heads of the bones after tightening them in their joints, put under them cloths of flax, or wool scraps, so that they do not bleed.
When the wound is with the fracture, and the heart is broken, I will say its cure hereafter.
And know that it is not fitting to set all broken limbs on the first day. For when the limbs are large, it is not fitting to put strong splints on before 5 or 7 days, or more according to your judgment of the hot abscess which appears;
And see here this manner of ancient plasters for restoring fractures, dislocations, and twists:
And it is that you take flour which clings to the walls of the mill, and mix it with plenty of egg, and make this mixture neither too thin nor too thick, and use it, for this is the common way to make a plaster for restoring fractures in many positions, as well for women as for young children, for it is not too harsh nor too cold.
Another way to make a plaster for restoring fractures and dislocations and twists: Take 3 drachms of frankincense, myrrh, and asafoetida, and gum arabic and mastic, each 10 drachms. Myrrh and aloes, each five drachms. Alkanet, nine drachms. And make them into powder, and mix them with the white of an egg; If the man's complexion is hot, use this plaster, for it is of good composition and quickly restores broken bones, and is worth much to many men.
Another kind of plaster that is good for sprains: Take mugwort and betony, each ten drachms. Myrrh and aloes, each nine drachms. Agrimony six drachms. Boiled Armenian bole ten drachms, and grind well, and cook with vinegar or the white of an egg, and apply it.
Another kind of plaster for joints and bones separated from their places, to ease pain arising, and they use this plaster on the bone and break. Take a new linen cloth, and moisten it with oil and boiled oil, and place it on the area.
This plaster does not heal, but it is good for calming a hot abscess, and properly removes pain.
Another way to make a plaster that restores broken bones: Take dried fig leaves and common poppy leaves, and grind them together, and make a plaster.
Another manner of plaster for the restoration of a bone fracture and to soften the remnant of an abscess. Take marshmallow root, chamomile, violet flowers, wheat flour, of each one part;
and grind it, and mix with wine, and if the limb is heated, mix it with moist coriander water or plain water, and use it.
Another kind of plaster stronger than the first, when a hard abscess comes to the restoration of the limb. Take marshmallow root, flax seed, betony, melilot, and tansy, and violet flowers and chamomile flowers, of all one part; and grind it, and steep with salt water, or fresh water, or with wine according to the heat of the limb, and its rest.
Hippocrates says in his book that one should not put anything on a broken limb for restoration except cerate made of wax and oil, and nothing else more, and he says it should be between two, neither too soft nor too hard.
And it seems Galen says that one must put on the broken limb, to restore things dry a hot poultice, such as myrrh and aloe and frankincense and similar things, as we have said.
Another way of plaster which is good for injury and pain: Take mugwort and horsehair cut off, or bird feathers, and visnaga, and grind them equally, and make a plaster and bind it.
And then unbind it a little while after, and take care that the patient does not feel any pain, nor that the bone has moved from its place; if not, do not unbind it for several days. And if pain comes to the place, or itching, or lack of rest or swelling, then hurry and unbind it, and remove the plaster now;
and take light linen cloth, and a damp sea sponge, and dip it in water, and lift the place, until the itching stops, and the pain is calmed; then let the limb rest for an hour, then put dry linen on top, soaked in water or rose oil, and tie it over a bandage, until you are sure of a warm abscess;
and rest the inflammation of the limb, and remove the pain, then resume the subtle binding, and apply a bit of plaster, and do not bind it as tightly as before. and subtly until it is healed.
And if you see that an abscess grows and reddens and has pain and swelling is gone entirely, and you need plaster and bandage, if it starts again as you did first equally.
And if nothing comes to the limb from what we have said, do not unbind it for more than three days or four or five or seven. And never leave it for twenty days, according to what you see, until the fracture heals and approaches the adjustment of the flesh.
Then restrain more than before, and thicken its flesh, as I have said before.
And if you see the place drying up more than necessary, know that nourishment cannot come. Therefore apply a hot compress, every time you unbind it, and this be every third day, and loosen the bandage a bit.
Through this work therefore cut the bindings on the limb, and quickly amend what the foolish mirror does, that twists the limb back again.
It is evil, and if the work is dangerous, I see no other thing than to let it be and do it straight.
There are many ways of fractures, and diverse figures, and the causes are destined.
For there are fractures that are made from the percussion of a sword, and the neck breaks all the bone up to the sinew that is beneath the bone, as a hatchet or club does. And because of this, this manner of fracture is called “hatchet blow."
Or the sword strikes the bone above without piercing, and this manner of fracture is called "absolute".
And the wound from these two fractures is large or small.
And if there is embedded percussion, or a crack, or chips of stone, or a chair on stone, or other similar things.
And if there is a fracture penetrating close to the membrane which is under the bone, or on the bone, and this wound is either large or small.
And if a wound that is rejoined to the bone as fine as a hair, and the fissure is small, and for this reason it is called this fracture "capillary";
And if the wound is made by striking with a stone or by falling, or by a similar thing, and it causes the piece of bone to go down, and the edges are shaved like the way blacksmiths shave when they sharpen on anvils; if the stone enters inside.
And this happens more to those who have soft bones, such as children's skulls;
and it happens in all these kinds of fractures that small pieces are separated like tiles. And I will speak about them in their place.
And we know all kinds of fractures by traction on them, and inquiry with probes, and by the corrupted flesh which is upon them.
The likeness of hair is known by this, that when one has uncovered the bone, and rubs strongly upon it, if the fracture appears black.
In the treatment of a fracture, pay attention to the patient's conditions, and if you see any bad signs, such as vomiting of bile, loss of consciousness, spasms, pallor, fever with chills, and the eyes coming out and reddening, and other similar things in various states, then it cannot heal without doubt.
And if you do not see a hopeless situation, and you hope for salvation, then begin the treatment.
And when the nettle rash first comes to you, and it is in winter, then it is necessary to remove the bone before the fourteenth day at the time that you can.
And if this is the case, hurry to remove the bone before the seventh day, so that the cloth under the bone is corrupted, and accidents come as we have said.
And if the fracture of the bone comes up to the membrane that covers the brain, it is necessary that you split the fractured part thus:
and it is that you take the head of the sick person nearby and uncover above the bone in all the ways that you can and above the figure of the wound more often than you can and if discharge of blood comes to uncovering the bone or abscess forms, then help him with what is necessary and it is that you fill the place with cloths softened in rose oil; and make the wound rest until the abscess forms are appeased and be sure of discharge of blood; then begin around the bone to remove it, and this is done according to two manners of work:
one manner is if you cut a narrow incision in front, and this is the form:
And then I put another incision larger than the first one.
And the second manner is if you have a number of diverse incisions, some narrow and others wide, and they are pointed and are of hard iron.
And work lightly so that you do not bruise the head.
And if the bone is strong and hard, it is necessary that you pierce it around, so that you administer cuts with chisels, but make sure they do not pierce beyond the bone of the tester, and it must have a margin or circle on top so that the point does not pass beyond the bone.
And you must have several of them so that each one comes into its place according to the type of bone, so that you have chisels for all types.
And this is the form of the three kinds of chisels:
The quality for piercing around the broken bone is that you place the chisel on the bone and turn it back and forth until you know the bone is pierced.
Then put the chisel in another place a little after and do the same all around, then cut with chisels the space of bone that is between the holes, and do this more subtly than you can, and lightly, as we have said, until you draw the bone to your hand or to any of the instruments that you have such as tongs, pincers;
and guard that you do not touch the brain or the spinal cord.
And when you have pierced the bone and treated it, it is fitting that you restore the instrument which has remained from the bone to all the other instruments resembling an incisor, but it must be more slender and more subtle than the other incisor.
And if there remains nothing of the small bones, nor any scales, then gently remove them with instruments. Then treat the wound with dressings and ointments as we have said.
And the other manner of working is that which Galien mentions, which is safer; and he praises it very highly, and that is his word. It is necessary first that you uncover a portion of the bone, where the fracture appears to move, so that when you have uncovered that part, you will place beneath the head of this lentiform incision tool, which has this form:
And do not cut from one side, but divide the part into two sides so that the cutting is towards the bone.
Then strike lightly with a small mallet on top so that you gently tap the bone all around and be careful of the cloth underneath.
If it is near the bone, strike lightly, for one can strike the bone well without harm and without fear.
And if the bone fracture does not pierce through to the cloth, and the bone is cut only on top, and there are small pieces, then you must grind behind that roughness, and remove the scales with a subtle razor which you must have in various quantities, so as to administer the most suitable one in each place, according to the work and the shape of the fracture.
If you shave before with great razors, and afterwards with more subtle ones, and do not cease to do this until it is good.
In each of the other delicate cuttings and breaks, it is fitting that you administer aid according to its direction;
and this is something that cannot be answered by one who has not put their study into this art.
And if the break is exposed, it is fitting that you take a linen cloth, according to the quantity of the wound, and moisten it with rose oil, and place it upon the wound; then take another cloth doubled in two or three, and moisten it with wine and rose oil, and place it upon the first cloth; and do this as lightly as you can so that you do not strain the suture then apply another bandage over it and do not bind it too tightly just enough to hold the wound;
and leave it like this for one or two days until the abscess has subsided then untie it and apply medicines such as lily roots, vetch flour, frankincense powder, birthwort, and similar things
and make a powder from these things and put it on the wound and then apply cleansing medicines without biting.
and make sure the wound is always clean and do not leave any ointment on it nor allow pus to gather because when pus collects on the bandage covering the brain it will run and harden and cause the patient great harm;
for when you put something biting on the suture it irritates it above. Take care then, if any bad accident happens to the patient, as we have said, it is doubtful without doubt.
And if blackness does not come except for the medicine that has been put on it, so that its virtue may have effect, then you must take one part of honey and three parts of rose oil and in this glue one cloth and lay it upon the surface. Then cure it in ways that are fitting until it is healed.
Know that sometimes both parts of the nose above are broken, or one by itself, for these are two bones.
And the one below is cartilaginous and does not break, unless it is forced to bend or twist, and then it heals.
And if one of the two parts is broken, it is fitting that you bind your little finger or thumb to the nose and put the broken part equally inside your index finger, and in the pouch by force, until the nose returns to its natural shape. and do this gently, and make sure the patient does not feel pain from your work.
And if the fracture is in the part above the knee, and the bone cannot come back into place, then you must put it equal to the head of a nail, a large prick.
And if the break is in two parts, redo it in the same way, and hurry to restore it on the first day, if you can;
if not, after the seventh or tenth day, when the abscess that has formed is calmed, then bind at the head of the two ends with linen cloths, if the break is in one part.
Or you bind the other side, if the break is there; and let the bandages be so thick that they fill the openings of the bone.
And some healers say that one must soften the bandages with butter and change them every day. It does not seem right to me, but it is necessary that they are softened in a mixture of egg yolk and mill dust; then leave the bandage on until the bone is firm and the cartilage hardened.
And at no time should one put goose feathers in place of tents, and if a cloth bandage is wrapped around it, hold the fracture, and let the patient breathe. Or do what you see fit.
And if abscesses come up while you are working on them, put cerate or moistened cotton in rose oil, or in a drop of diammonium.
And if an abscess does not come to a head, apply a plaster made from chickpea flour and frankincense powder, mixed with egg white, then place it on light cloths, and do not bind it tightly.
And if the fracture of the bone is small, and it is broken into small pieces, extract it with suitable instruments for this purpose, then stitch the wound and treat it with things that promote healing flesh and bones, such as plasters and ointments suitable for this.
And if there is no wound inside the bone, treat it with tents and apply splints of wood until it is healed.
When the mandible is dislocated below, and there is no external wound, and the fracture is only superficial, and not broken in two, but pushed inward, so a connoisseur can slightly recognize it.
It is necessary, if the fracture is on the right side, that you put your index finger in the patient's mouth; and if the fracture is in the left jawbone, then put your right index finger and gently push the fracture inward, and hold it with the other hand by pressing, and set it equal.
And if the fracture of the mandible is separated into two, it is necessary that you administer extension of two parts, so that it is equal.
And if movement of the teeth occurs, or breakage, then bind them with a thread of gold or silver or silk, then place cerate on the broken jawbone, and place a double cloth on top; and place on top of the cloth a large well-made splint, or an equal piece of leather, long and wide according to the jawbone, and tie it up at the points that you can, and instruct the patient to rest, and eat light foods.
And if you see that the shape changes, then untie it on the third day, and then reset what has changed; and put plaster on top, made from flour from the mill with plenty of egg or sesame flour after you have removed the cerumen.
and put light wool on top of the plaster, and if the plasters dry out and the patient's condition does not change, leave it until it is healed; It is often healed in three weeks.
And if abscesses come, do as we have said many times.
And if there is a fracture and wound together, see that no part of the bone is removed; if you are removing it subtly, use suitable instruments for this.
And if the wound is narrow, enlarge it with fire according to your need.
And when you have removed all these pieces, and none remain, if the wound is wide, and put on it bandages suitable for that, to promote flesh, until it is healed.
The clavicle breaks several times in front of the shoulder and the fracture can be in three ways:
either it is broken and detached into two, with fragments, and this is the easiest to restore;
where there is a fracture with a wound.
And the work is this when the fracture is without a wound, that you have two assistants, so that one holds the shoulder where the broken bone is. and the other extends the neck towards the side.
Then set the fracture to your liking, so that the form is as it should be, and there is neither appearance nor protrusion.
And if you need to extend further, place under the patient's shoulder a round sphere of cloth or wool, and make it large according to your need. And extend and lift the broken bone, and remove the sphere with your hand, so that you set the fracture as it should be.
And if you cannot draw the head of the shoulder back out because it has come in perfectly, then it is fitting that the patient lies often on his backside, and puts under the shoulder a medium pillow, and have the assistants push the shoulder down, until the bone of the shoulder is raised.
Then straighten the fracture to your liking, and if you find it broken apart, it is necessary that you cleave open.
and treat the parts lightly, and if the bone cannot join for any pressure, then use the blade of one of your incisors. but put under it this instrument, to hold the joint:
and it resembles a spoon, and is not sharp, and should be as wide as the bone requires, according to the size of the bone and the strength of the work;
and it has two jaws, as you see, one wide and the other narrow, as is the break in the wound that you made when treating the bones.
And when you are sure of the hot abscess, if the wound is large and the break is small or if you doubt the hot abscess, then cover the wound with bandages and splints, according to its quantity.
And if an abscess comes, soak a cloth in rose oil and vinegar and wine, and put it on.
The binding of the bone, when it is without wounds and without fractures, is that you put on the bone a plaster of flour from the mill and egg yolk, and put light cloths on top, and put a splint below the armpit if you need it. Then take a very large bandage a palm wide, then put two layers of linen on the cloths and plaster; Then take a slender splint three fingers wide and long, and wrap it around the bandage so that the end of the bandage hangs down; And place the splint on the fracture, and wind the bandage up the neck, and below the healthy armpit, and below the injured armpit; And bind each part well, and when you see that the bandage holds the fracture properly, and you clearly see that the splint does not move on the broken bone, then leave it alone for a day, and when the bandages loosen, retighten them;
and make the patient lie on his back, and when he sleeps put a small bolster under the armpit to raise the shoulder. if it lightens the fracture of the collarbone by lifting the shoulder, then you bind his arm to his neck and do not untie it until 20 days have passed so that no evil accident occurs.
then you begin the plaster again, if you see he needs it, and take it off and leave it like that until he is restored.
And it is restored at most in 28 days, and less for some men.
From the breaking of the shoulder
Sometimes the shoulder breaks or dislocates so badly that it cannot be set straight except by touch.
If you set the limb according to the shape of the fracture and reset it according to its natural form in all ways that you can.
Then put on the place powder from the mill with plenty of egg white, and light bandages, and put a double cloth on top. Then put on a wide and fine splint, a little wider than the shoulder, and if below the splint there is hair in any place of the shoulder, use that hair as a bandage of linen, so that the splint sits evenly.
And then bind it all tightly with a large bandage, so that the splint does not move from its place, and examine the binding each day.
And every time it loosens, bind it again and set the splint equally if it has moved from its place, and have the patient lie on their side.
And the shoulder will be restored in 20 days or 25.
And when this number is fulfilled, untie it and be sure, for it is not bone that moves lightly.
And if a piece of bone sticks out before, and not below the heart, then lift it up, and bind it with splints, and do what we have said in the fracture of the collarbone to soothe a hot abscess.
of the fracture of the foot
The bone is sometimes broken in two, but this rarely happens. But it often breaks at the ends.
And when it is broken below, it declines downward, and the patient feels great pain, and shortness of breath, and everything else, and perhaps vomits blood, and opens the hair in the broken bones, and they see it well.
And the restoration is such that the patient lies often on his back, and he puts a cushion between his shoulders, then presses on the shoulders, and assembles the ribs of the two sides with his hands, and subtly tries to make them equal in all ways as much as he can, so that the shape of the bone is as it should be;
then he puts on plasters and bandages above the bone with a fine powder of salt or some other light substance, and wraps it in a cloth and ties it over the broken bone so that it does not move. And he turns the bandage around the back and removes it carefully, and examines the bandage every hour and if it is loosened, he tightens it.
and if it is necessary to loosen it, due to corrosion or itching that comes to the place, or pain or an abscess, then hurry and loosen it, and remove the plaster, and treat what has come there in ways of healing.
Then reset the plaster and remove it until it is healed.
Of the fracture of the ribs
Know that a fracture of the ribs only occurs in their thickness after the back, and they only bend because they are slippery; and one feels it well upon inquiry as it should be.
And the restoration is such that you put the break straight as it should be. And then put on a plaster, and remove it with a spatula, if you need to.
And if the fracture of the ribs is inward sloping, the patient feels great pain and pressure, as well as from pleurisy, because the bone pierces the membrane. And it sweats profusely, and he coughs up a large amount of blood, and this is dangerous illness, and the ancients have put much effort into it.
And if some say that it is necessary to administer meats that swell the belly, in order to drive out the fracture.
We do not make this, so that hot abscesses may not come, if they have not already come. And if there has come, so he is healthy.
And they say that one puts cupping glasses on the place to suck out the pus, and it seems reasonable. Nevertheless, there is doubt that the cupping glass does not draw the superfluities to the place because of the weakness.
And they say one should cover the place with linen moistened in hot oil, and put tents between the ribs to keep the bandage even, then it is cured by the cure of pleurisy, meat, and medicine.
And if the patient feels great pain that he cannot suffer because of the bone which points at the cloth, and there is doubt for the patient, then it is necessary to cut on the place of the broken rib, and it is necessary to put under the instrument to keep the syringe.
And then one must cut the bone and drain it slightly, and then sew the two edges of the wound if it is large, and treat it with poultices until it heals.
And if boils come out, put on cloths moistened in rose oil, and place them on the area.
and treat while the place of that which it belongs to an abscess, and let it lie often on the side where it should be until it is healed.
and also in the spine of the back.
And when this happens to someone, and you want to know if he will be healed or not, take care if you see his hands softened and swollen and dead, and he cannot move them nor extend them, and when you prick them with a needle, he does not feel it.
Know that it is deadly in several positions, and if he moves them and feels well when they are extracted and do not move, know that the junction of the bone is saved, and that the patient will be cured, if care is given.
And if similar things come to the spine of the back, and you want to know if it will heal or not, see if its flesh is softened, and if the accidents are in hands, and on the back there is flatulence and discharge without volition;
and when one turns it on its stomach, if there is discharge without volition. And when he is lying on his back and he wants to get up, he cannot. Know that it is mortal: if one does not labor in its cure.
And if this mishap does not befall him, the thing is easier.
And the cure is that you consider if there is a hot abscess, if you put rose oil or egg yolk oil on the spine until it is appeased;
Then put on one of the comforting and drying plasters, and bind it with a bandage, and instruct the patient to rest. And do not sleep on that part where he feels pain, until he is healed.
And if any bones are broken, it is fitting to cover them over the heart; and remove the bone, then bring together the two edges of the wound, if it is large, with stitches, then treat it with ointment that hardens flesh, until it is healed;
and if the head of the bone is broken, which is called the "head of the cow," put your left hand pouch under it and set it equal to the other hand with your power, then apply the plaster and splint on top, if you need them.
Then remove it, and if there are broken bones, set them, remove the bone, and treat the wound until it is healed.
of the fracture of the bone of the hip
Sometimes it happens that the bone of the hip is broken, and if it does happen, there would only be a slight reduction in height at the head; and extending along its length, and sloping downwards, and coming to the patient with pain in the area, and tingling, and swelling where it is broken.
And the restoration is such that you extend your hand above, as far as you are above the fracture; and know which is the fracture and its shape;
and if the fracture is only at the head, you put that fracture back together, as long as it is in its natural shape.
And if the break is long, or it declines inwards, then make the patient lie on their stomach until the restoration of that break appears to you. And when you have put it back together equally, put plaster on it, then put a splint of wood or horn on top, and immobilize the fracture so that it does not move;
and apply the place below the ribs, as long as the ligature is equal. And instruct the patient to sleep on their healthy side, or on their back.
And if a boil comes, do not touch it, until the boil is calmed down, and put what we have said before on it; and then return to the restoration, and remove it as is appropriate, if there is no bad accident;
of the fracture of the shoulder
The shoulder joint is that which is between the shoulder blade and the head of the shoulder, and if it is broken, you must restore it according to one of two ways:
one of which is that you take a smooth stick of medium thickness, according to this form:
And tie the two ends with two ties, and hang them up high, and place the patient on a seat;
Then let the patient's arm be broken on a stick, until it reaches the armpit, and put a bend in the stick, then lean it on some heavy object or have someone hold it down.
Then place the splints at the break so that they are equal in both hands, as long as the break returns to its proper position.
And the other way is that one sets the patient on their back, and ties their hand to their neck, then commands two ministers that one hold what is above the fracture with his hands, and the other holds below at all the ligature, and each extends at his part.
And if you see that the extraction is more forceful, extract the ligature below the fracture, and above the fracture, and extend each of the ministers to their part.
And if the break is near the head of the shoulder, you must put one splint below the armpit and the other towards the elbow, below the break.
And also if the break is towards the elbow, it is necessary to put a splint lightly, without effort, as long as the break is equal on the place and on the elbow.
Then set the break equally, as it should be, and remove it, if no abscess comes.
And if a boil comes, do not extract it until seven days have passed, and place softened linen soaked in rose oil upon it until the boil is soothed.
Then extract it, and the way to extract it is that you put a plaster on the breaking point, then bind the arm onto the shoulder joint, and place your hand on the shoulder or on the breast.
And place the cloth, and extract it on the shoulder joint, and on the arm so that the arm is in its proper place, if nothing hinders it, or if no bone is moved.
And if you doubt that the bone might move, then use splints and place on the fracture a splint wider and stronger than the others, and have two finger spaces between each splint, and let each splint be so large that it passes the fracture three finger widths on each side.
Then pull on the splints, as I said at the beginning of this chapter about fractures, stronger and less distant.
And if you see the seat of the splints and the tightening, as we have said, in the hour that you set the broken limb, and you doubt the hot abscess, leave it to be tied until the seventh day, as we have said.
Then look at the bandage every three days, so that itching does not occur, or swelling comes to the place, where the nourishments cannot come to the limb because it is too tight. If the address, as we have said.
And if none of these accidents come, do not untie it except after three days or more, and let the patient sleep on his back with his hands on his stomach.
And put a cushion of plain wool equally under the shoulder, and look every hour of the day or night that the shape of the broken limb does not move, or the bandages are loosened.
If it is treated by the power of medicine, and given the meat we have mentioned before in part so that the meat is first subtle; And when it begins to regain strength, let it be thick.
And it is customary that the shoulder and the leg should be recovered in 40 days altogether; and then one must untie them and administer baths and ointments for healing the place.
And if the stricture is ugly and obstructed, it will remain for one day or two months.
Of the breaking of the arm
The arm is composed of two bones, which are called the two "humerus", one of which is small, and this is the one that enters the shoulder socket.
And the other is large, and this is the one that is below, towards the little finger.
Sometimes only the large humerus breaks, or only the small one, and sometimes both together.
When small bones are broken, restoration is easy, and healing.
And when large bones are broken, healing is difficult, and more grievous than when they are broken together as one.
If it is the small bone that is broken alone, then it is necessary to gently extend it, and set it straight.
And if it is a large bone, it is necessary to bind it tighter;
and extend it on a cushion, and hold the pouch of the hand higher than the others, and the little toes lower than the other toes, and let the patient be crossed upon himself, and the cushion in front of him higher up so that the patient does not suffer any pain.
Then extend the minister's arm below his hand, or at the joint, and another minister above.
And then put the sights equal, according to its best form.
And if in the fracture there are pieces, put each one in its place, and if there is any that is detached so that it holds onto the heart, and you cannot restore it to its place, then do as we have said before, on bone and sinew.
And if there is a break with a wound, I have spoken of it in a separate chapter. If you take the care.
And if at the beginning of the restoration boils arise, then apply a poultice made of rose oil and white wax, that is neither too hard nor too soft. And bind the poultice on subtly, until the boils are soothed.
And then remove the wax, and apply a plaster of mill powder with plenty of egg yolks, then place the splints, and let the splint of the fracture be stronger now, and a little wider than the others.
And know that it should have six splints or braces in several positions: Whether the fracture is in one of the bones, or in two.
And apply more pressure above the fracture than elsewhere, and every day less as you move away, as I said at the beginning of the chapter. And let the cloths that are upon the fracture be soft and moist, and not hard nor rough;
And let the cloths that are upon the fracture be soft and moist, and not hard nor rough; And let the thread with which it is bound be of linen, not too thick nor too thin, as we have said.
And watch over the limb and the joint after a few days. And if any bad accident comes to the limb, such as itching that comes to the limb, it is fitting that you wash the limb with hot water, until the itching is appeased;
and let the limb not be tightly bound while resting.
And then begin again the tightening, and if the ligaments are softened and the bone loosened, and similar things, if so address.
And if you are careful so that the nourishment cannot reach the limb, because it is too narrow, then you must soften it a little and leave it like that for several days, until the nourishment comes, and then remove it.
And if none of these things which we have said happen to the patient, do not loosen it for up to 20 days.
When you are bandaging, then let him keep his hands at his neck, and let his collars be equal, and let him beware of movement and shaking, and let him sleep on his back;
And know that this fracture is restored in XXX days or in XXXV, and perhaps in XX days, according to the constitutions and complexions of the humors.
Of the breaking of the hand
Know that on the back of the hand and like us we have two fingers which have a bit of splintering, and there is nothing else but weeping many times.
And when the palm of the hand is broken or bent, it is necessary that the patient sit upright and straight in front of him equally;
Then put his hand on the table extended, and extend the ministers the broken bones, and put them equally the benchmarks, as long as they are well joined;
and put the plaster and bandages, if abscesses do not come, then he puts a splint according to the quantity of the place; and it is wrapped in a linen cloth.
And if the fracture is at the base around the belly of the palm, make a sphere of cloths, and instruct the patient to squeeze it onto his broken palm; and then strain it with a long cloth, and let the splint be of hard wood as large as the palm of the hand, and strain it, as it is necessary.
And if the fracture is below, it is fitting that you place a splint above and another below on the palm, so that the hand is open and straight, then tie it tightly around the hand and bind the ligature between the two.
And if the fracture comes to any of our bones, it is the one that pushes out, then he must set it equal as it should be. And he extracts it with the palm, and if you see it put a small straight splint to lift the fracture, and it does not move.
And if the fracture is in other bones, such as the index finger or one of the others, then he sets it equal and binds it with the healthy bone that is next to it. Or you bind them all together, as much as they are worth, or you put them on a splint, such as a pouch.
And take care in the restoration and arrangement of hot abscesses, and cure those who come to you, as I have said.
The bone of the thigh is often broken, and one can see it well when it turns forward and backward;
And the restoration is one ties above the fracture, and another below. And the patient lies on his face, then each minister extends his tie to his own part equally;
and this is when the fracture is near the bone.
And if the fracture is close to the root of the thigh, one of the bandages should be towards the hip, and the other bandages below the fracture.
And also if it is near the knee, then let the ties be below the knee, and let the extension be downward;
then place the splints against the bone equal to his two hands, as long as it is according to its natural shape, and then put on the plaster, and the tie, if abscesses do not appear.
And if there is a hot abscess, let it subside, then return to your work and your care; The binding is done in a partial manner.
It is necessary that you wrap it on the fracture with a bandage doubled two or three times, and leave the excess, then turn the leg until the heels come to the root of the thigh, and put a long thread between the thigh and the leg, below the knee, and bring the head of the thread above;
then turn the bandage on the leg and thigh, then put splints on the fracture, and put a splint on the bone of the leg;
then fill the space between the leg and thigh with soft cloths to make the constriction even, then begin to tie three or four turns on the fracture; and when you go further up the fracture, tighten it less;
then take the two ends of the thread that you have put between the leg and thigh, and tie three splints that are above it, then go back down to the head of the thread until you reach below the foot;
and hold it so that it does not move from its place, then leave it like that, then so that there comes neither an abscess nor swelling nor any other such thing. And if it happens and it loosens, and corrects what comes, as we have said many times;
and if there are pieces of bone that protrude, it must be removed if possible; and if it is not possible, it is necessary to split the area and draw out force; and treat it as we have said until it is healed.
And when the thigh is broken in this way, one puts splints on it as in the shoulder and arm;
in all ways, the patient does not sound a bell when restoration is done like this.
And know that the thigh is restored in one day, or a little less or a little more, according to the diversity of complexions.
Know that on the street of the knee there is often no fracture, but it bends many times.
And if it breaks, unless it is but a crack or a hole, and occurs in every wound, and in every wound, and this is well known.
And restoration is done when one puts together what is broken with its due parts, as long as it can be assembled and moved.
Then apply a plaster, and put a round splint if needed, and remove it as appropriate. Then observe all the arrangements that we have mentioned for other fractures, such as abscess cautery and other similar things. Apply to each injury what is appropriate until it is healed.
of a leg fracture
Know that the leg has two bones, one of which is called "musculus" and the other is called "fibula".
And all other fractures occur as they do in the arm, and for this reason, restoration is the same as that of the arm, and the operations are the same. And if both bones are broken together, the leg turns in all directions.
And if the slender bones are broken, turn them forward.
And if the large bone is broken, then there is great pain, and it is clearly seen. and turns downward.
Then apply extension, and set it equal, and tie the splints evenly;
but nevertheless, if the break is severe, and there are several pieces, the extension should be less and lighter; and the alignment according to your skill.
And when you have completed all your work, take two bandages of unbleached linen that can cover the leg on one side and the other, and let them be as long as the leg from the knee down;
then wrap them around twice above and below, and tie them in the middle as well, and at this binding the leg cannot decline to the right or left, and thus it is good;
and no one should administer herbs of the length of the leg, and if it is wood, and he puts it on the leg to prevent movement, and properly do this in the fracture where there is a wound
and move each day the leg, to see if there is a hot abscess or another incident; if the healer so much as he is healthy.
Of the breaking of bones of the foot
There is no fracture at the ankle, but the bones of the foot sometimes break and there are two possibilities, and there are no other conditions except in several positions.
And if it happens that a bone in the foot is broken, and you see these bones rise against each other, put the patient's foot on the ground, as if he wanted to walk, and then put your foot now on his, where the bones are raised, then press it so much that they return to their places;
then put the plaster and bandages on top, and put under the belly of the foot a small board with two inches thick, then straighten the foot carefully, and after you have wrapped cloths around it, and other things that you need.
And when three or four days have passed, untie the bandage, for you will find the bones equal, whether they are broken or dislocated.
And if any of the two bones are broken, then restore them, as we have said for the bones of the hand. Then put a splint on the broken bone according to the length of the bone, and make it a little wider, then put the footboard under that splint as I have said, and bind it tightly.
And if there are two or three, or more, broken bones, then put a splint on each bone according to its size, wrapped in a linen cloth, and bind the splint under the foot. And let it be resting on the top of the splint above the belly of the foot so that it holds it well.
And you must not forget the other things I have said about other fractures, as we have already discussed. And treat each injury according to its needs.
of the breaking of the bone by the dagger
When the bone of a woman by nature is broken, make her sit enlarged, then incline her to the back part, and let her be held from behind.
Then fill the hollow of the patient's nature with cotton, and put in it as large as I stand.
Then raise the woman, and lift her back little by little, and then the cotton jumps, as far as it comes to the entrance of the nature, and return the bone with the stick.
And when she wants to urinate, remove the cotton, and when she has urinated, put it back in, and thus do for seven days or so. Then the fracture will be restored, and if you see, take a bladder of a lamb, and tie to the opening a cane, and insert the whole bladder into the nature. Then blow into the cane, so that the bladder swells inside. nature will heal the fracture;
then it should be filled with cotton, and left like that for several days, until it is healed.
And when the bone of a man or woman's shoulder is broken, restore it as we have said for the hip bone;
and these nearby fractures are not hidden from those who apply their study and use, and understand my book.
For the fracture indicates in several positions the right way of restoration: understand then.
When the penis is broken, take a goose's gullet and insert the penis into it; then wrap cloths around it, and leave it for three days or so, and it will heal quickly.
of fracture with wound
It is necessary for one who has a fracture with a wound, even if it is large, as the bone of the thigh or shoulder or similar, that he be cleansed now, so that the cleansings which we have said testify to it.
And if the wound is healthy, and you have no other remedy, then start again to restore the fracture in the same hour or day, so that abscesses do not form.
And if an abscess comes there, leave the restoration until a new day, as long as the abscess is calmed, and do not touch it on the third day or the fourth, for you will cause bad accidents.
And if the broken bone is visible on the chest uncovered, it is fitting that you set it straight lightly with your hands, with little extension.
And if the extension does not appear to you to put it evenly with your hands, then use this instrument made of iron, which has seven or eight inches in length, and its width is according to the quantity of the wound; and therefore it is necessary for the doctor to grasp three or four, according to what he needs in each treatment of a fracture
and let it be round and one thick piece so that it does not fold under pressure on the limb during your work, and let it be sharp in front, and thick from the middle forward, like this:
And it is called a "splint", because it is necessary that the curved head be placed on the top of the visible bone; and the end at one time, so that it returns to its place, and is equal on both sides. And if the fracture is subtle, and the instruments cannot properly grasp the bone, then it is necessary that you cut off the head of the bone, as long as the instruments have power.
And if you cannot bring the bone back as we have said, if the edge of a suitable instrument for this, either an incision knife or saw, is at your disposal;
then remove what remains in the bone of sharpness and small splinters.
And when the bone is put back, and the patient feels great pain afterwards, know that it is not in its natural place.
Do as much as you can so that it is in its place, then moisten a cloth with black balsamic vinegar, and do this properly if it is summer. And do not put any wax or anything else on the wound that has oil, lest it cause decay and corruption.
Then administer splints when you have restored the bone, and leave the wound uncovered, and put a covering all around according to the size of the wound, and be careful that the wound is not strained with the break.
And many times this has been done foolishly, and has brought death or corrosion upon the patient sometimes. And let the binding be looser and softer than for other fractures.
And if the wound is bad or large, and you doubt that evil accidents might come, as we have said, and you find pain in the place, then it is not right to put on splints. But wrap around it, instead of bandages, hard cloths, and bind them.
And when you see after one or two days the gut in the wound begins to move, remove what you have put on it with all wine, and apply healing ointment, such as Tetrafarmacon ointment and similar ones.
And it is necessary that you loosen the limb twice a day, in the morning and in the evening, until it is healed and sound.
And it is necessary that the limb be aligned in such a way that the bone runs down slightly.
And if every day it passes and it cannot be soldered but continually bows back, know that there are small pieces of bone, for which you must want the wound with a tent, and remove all these detached pieces that cause this pain.
And if a fistula comes to the place, or some other manner of corruption, it is fitting that you cure it according to what he says in his chapter before this one.
And when the bone is broken and appears on the limb, such as the bone of the thigh or shoulder, and other similar large bones, do not pull it at all, for many times death comes, but leave it until it rots.
It may fall off by itself after 20 or 30 days, then treat the wound if you can.
And if you cannot, leave it.
It often happens after the healing of the fracture, especially when it is near a joint, and it is a sorry thing to see the shape of the limb. And perhaps the limb cannot perform its natural functions.
Therefore be careful if it is fresh to us: If he administers astringent medicines, such as aloes, frankincense, and myrrh, sarcocolle, acacia, and similar others, so that you take any of these things, or all together, and mix them with astringent wine or with the white of an egg or with oil; And put them on the wound in bandages, and bind it well, and do not unbind it in any way.
And put them on the wound in bandages, and bind it well, and do not unbind it in any way. And then loosen it, and begin another one, until the swelling is removed;
Or you bind on a well-made piece of linen; For the property of linen is that it removes all swellings from the limbs;
And if the swelling has already become hardened like stone, and it is necessary to remove it, apply a cup over it, and make the excess appear; Where you shave it with any razor, until it is removed, and heal it until it is cured.
the limb which is weak after healing
When the bone fracture is restored and the limbs remain weak and delicate afterwards, it happens for many reasons. One reason is because it was tied too tightly and was not bound as it should have been. Or because there were too many bandages, and nourishment could not reach the limb. Or because of a great deal of agitation. Or for too much movement at the wrong time. Or because he has little blood in his body and is therefore weak.
And the cure is that you make the patient eat, and soften his body, so that his blood is multiplied within him. and he administers a bath, and gives him joy and relief;
then he puts pitch on the limb, so that the pitch draws out great numbness, and he often warms it with hot water, until the numbness goes away from the limb; and it returns to its natural shape.
a crooked limb after health When the limb is twisted after restoration, and the broken bone is open, and the shape of the limb is ugly, nevertheless it does not lose its natural function:
do not believe the fools who say that one must break the limb anew, and many a fool has done this in our land;
and this work is blamed, and it leads to great evils, and by chance death;
however, if the nodules and the tortures are fresh, it is necessary that they be warmed with hot water, or soft herbs be cooked, such as leaves of mallow, and roots, and melilot, and similar things;
and apply a softening plaster, such as well-made diachylon, and take the mucilage of mallow, and mix it with gelatin fat or sesame oil, and make a plaster on top;
or you take fatty figs, and crush them with bran, and similar medicines that reduce swelling.
And never is the dislocation removed by continuous and prolonged rubbing with wet hands. And let movement be administered to the limb every hour.
And if the crookedness is old and hardened, like stone, and it is necessary to remove it with an iron, then carefully cut to the bone with a fine chisel. and apply caution and diligence in the treatment.
Dislocation occurs when a joint moves out of its place, which prevents it from moving, and the limb is misaligned, causing the patient great pain and injury.
When dislocation comes to anyone, it must now be brought back without delay.
For if you delay, the flesh will swell, and it may be put back in its place with difficulty;
therefore it is not right to move it while it is swollen: Many times it brings forth spasm and other pains;
In any case, when this happens, if you make the patient well, then leave him alone until the abscesses are appeased;
Then raise the limb with hot water and oil, then reset it lightly, and treat each member as it comes into its place.
And I have ordered the chapters on dislocations from the head to the feet.
It sometimes happens that both jaws are dislocated, and the dislocation of both is according to two manners: where they are at one time removed from their places, and softened a little bit; or they are completely dislocated and hang toward the chin, and cut off the saliva from the mouth so that he cannot hold it, nor can he close his mouth, and envelops his tongue with speech.
When the dislocation is small, it returns through several manipulations.
And if it is whole and complete, then you must reset it quickly and do not delay;
and in such a manner that the assistants hold the head of the patient, and put the point of a mirror into the root of the jaw dislocation in the mouth, if the dislocation is in two parts; and the other hand should be free, to put it equal;
and instruct the patient to soften his jaws and move them in all directions. And let him look at the same spot until it returns to its place.
And if the reduction is difficult, even if both jaws are together, apply hot water and oil until they soften slightly;
do not delay the reduction as we have said.
And when they are reduced evenly, and the patient's mouth closes well without softening, put soft cloths dipped in cerate made of rose oil and wax, then bind it lightly with soft bandages;
And let the patient lie on his back, and his shoulders be placed between two cushions, so that he does not move either to the right or to the left, nor does he try to raise himself, but takes light food, as long as the pains are removed, and the jaws are bound;
And then let him eat what he wants lightly, and do not work at opening his mouth to eat or drink, as long as the jaw is well bound and clean.
And if the two jaws cannot be put back in place within an hour and are not converted to their places, fever and accustomed colds will come, and possibly loosening of the belly, and possibly vomiting of pure bile.
And when you see this, then know that it is lost; and many times they died in nine days.
The cautery cannot dislocate from within the continuation of the leg and foot, and it is dislocated sometimes by force, and one feels it well.
And the restoration is that the patient lies often on his back, and extends his arms; and then press the place with your palm, and it will return;
Then put on the plaster and bandage it, and remove it;
And the head which is towards the knife cannot dislocate; If it does, and if it dislocates sometimes, reset it in its place, as we have said;
Then put on the plaster and bandage it, and remove it, and instruct the patient to rest until he is healed;
And in the same way, reset the head of the shoulder when it is dislocated from its place.
Of shoulder dislocation
Know that the shoulder is only dislocated according to three manners:
Of which one is when it dislocates at the part of the armpit below; And the second is at the part of the breast; And by chance it dislocates at the part above, and this happens rarely;
and do not dislocate it behind for the shoulder, and do not dislocate it inwards for the nerves;
and many times dislocate it downwards towards the armpit, especially for those who have a short neck, for this salt must be forced quickly;
for those who have enough neck, the salt is taken with difficulty, and put back in with difficulty.
And it sometimes happens that some men experience a bruise or fracture, and their shoulder swells with a hot abscess, and they think it is dislocated because of it.
Therefore it behoves you to test it until you are certain of it; and then begin the treatment.
And it is known that the dislocation occurs when it falls towards the armpit and puts a difference between the sick shoulder and the healthy one, and you will find a clear diversity between them. And you will find at the head of the shoulder a hollow, and below the armpit at the buttock the head of the shoulder, as if it were a bone. and the patient cannot return his hand to its place, nor move it in any way;
And also, if it is dislocated at the top, unless it is hidden, for you will find it manifestly by touch;
And this manner of dislocation is not very difficult to reset, when it is new, or if the child's arm is ill.
And the manner is that the attendant lifts the patient's hand upwards, then puts your fingers under the armpit, and lifts the joint forcefully upwards to its place; and the attendant lifts the hand and extends it upwards, then puts it underneath; it will come quickly.
And if it does not come as we have said within three days, it is necessary that the patient be bathed in hot water; And give him a softening and soothing ointment, such as a decoction of marshmallow and fenugreek and melilot in water, and let it be applied.
Then have the patient lie on his back, and put under the armpit a cloth of wool neither too soft nor too hard. Then place the mires (a kind of bandage) with the patient's heel on the cloth, and gently lift the head of the shoulder, and pull the patient’s hand;
and another assistant should hold the patient’s head so that it does not move down. This shoulder will now return to its place, and if you see that the resetting according to this manner
and have a man larger than the patient present. And he should stand straight towards the side, and put his shoulder under the patient's armpit, and lift the armpit upwards so that the patient hangs by the arm. And another minister will pull the patient's hand down towards their belly. And if the patient is too light, he can hold something heavy with him, and the dislocation will return now.
And one can reset it in another way:
and this is done by sticking a long iron rod into the ground, whose head should be as round as a pestle, and not too thick nor too thin; then it should be placed under the patient, but with soft cloths underneath, and the patient should lie lengthwise along the wood;
then their hand should be extended downwards on the other side, and the joint will quickly return to its place;
and if it does not want to return because of all these things that we have said, then do this treatment: Take an iron rod two arm lengths long and four inches wide, which has a round head to easily enter underneath the armpit, according to this shape:
Then lay upon the head of the wound cloths underneath so that the wound does not bleed on the patient, then put it under the armpit of the patient.
Extend some arm upon the wood of length, and tie the shoulder upon the wood, and the arm at the head of the hand, then put the arm upon the shoulder-blade of a ladder of width, and let the hand be extended downwards, and let the body hang down on the other side: The joint will return to its place while being held.
And when it is in place, no matter how, you must put a sphere of equal wool under the shoulder, then apply plaster mixed with powdered mill flour, incense and egg yolk, over the entire shoulder and around it. Then tighten it under the shoulder carefully and turn the bandage on top of the plaster, embrace the hand to its neck, and let the hands remain thus.
And it is fitting that he rests a bit, as long as the limb is comfortable, for it will heal more quickly;
and then rest more afterwards for five or seven days, and move it; And if it is firm and not softened, then it is healed.
And if the joint is out of place due to moisture or some other cause, you must administer cauteries at three points, as described in the chapter on cauteries.
And if you do all this, and it loosens after VII days, and the joint does not hold, and cannot raise its arm up, then know that the nerve at the top of the shoulder is cut or stretched or softened. And know that the joint was never fixed in its place.
The dislocation that is towards the back, and the breasts, or buttocks, if it is done by impulse, and extension of the hands, and administered in another place.
And cure it as long as it is healthy.
And if after healing comes stiffness in the limb, and slow movement, then let the patient bathe many times, until the stiffness is relieved and it returns to its original nature.
Of dislocation, what is done.
Know that the joint of the elbow is dislocated at points, and at points it returns.
And if it is dislocated from all sides, and the same in front and behind, and the dislocation is not answered, for one sees it well and feels it well. and it dislocates according to each shape. And when you join the sick knife with the healthy one, if you can see it openly. For the joint is lifted, and cannot bend the arm, nor touch his shoulder at all.
And you must reset it so that abscesses do not come, for if abscesses were to come, it would be harmful to reset.
And by chance it cannot be completely reset, especially when it is at the back; it is worse than other dislocations and causes greater pain, and by chance death may come.
And the restoration, when it is such that you can reset it, is done by extending your hand with both hands. And his arms should be spread, and both hands should look according to the turn of the wound, above and below, and push the joint into its socket, or at the base of his palm, until it returns to its place.
And if the dislocation is forward, it returns when he doubles his hand onto his hand, and touches the root of the palm or the costal which is dislocated.
And if it does not want to return to its place, apply strong extension;
and when the minister extends the arm, and holds it so that it does not move during the extension.
then turn the arm from each side, once you have wrapped a long and wide double cloth around it;
and when the minister joins the joint with his hand, if oil is needed to soften the joint, then push the joint into place, until it returns.
and when it is in place, put dry plaster with egg yolk on top and bind it firmly, then rest the arm against the patient's neck and leave it for several days, then unbind it.
And if the joint is firm in its place, untie the bandage and leave it.
and if you see that the joint is not set well, start the plaster and bandage again, and leave it like this for several days until it is firmly in place. Then untie it.
And if he feels pain after the joint is reset and it moves, then bathe and rub it well, and press until it is relieved. Or put a fatty sheep's wool on the joint, then leave it for a day and a night, then bone it, and make it enter the bath. And when he sweats, if he rubs the joint moderately, then put the wool back on and then enter the bath. And do this two or three times until he is healed.
and if you see it, put cow dung moistened with heated butter on it, and bind it up.
It will return to its position.
the dislocation of the hand
The joint of the hand dislocates, and its return is easier than that of other joints. Nevertheless, it is necessary to quickly return it to its place, in the same hour that it is dislocated, so that the flesh does not swell or become hot with an abscess.
And the return is done so that you put the ailing hand on a table and extend the fingers of the hand; then look at it and align it evenly, so that it puts its palm on the appearance of the joint and pushes it until it returns.
Nevertheless, it is necessary that you look to see if it is well in place; Then put the patient's back of his hand on a table for stretching and pulling. And if the dislocation is at the back of the hand, have the patient place the back of their hand on the table, and the doctor put his hand on that part of the joint.
If it returns now, it is good. If not, apply soothing poultices for abscesses and leave it thus without restarting.
And if he cannot endure it, and you cannot put it back in place after a few days, the joint will remain crooked;
and it does not harm the patient further than that his hand is weakened and he cannot grasp anything at all: then know that the nerves are cut, or the artery;
if there is no other remedy than to burn it with a cautery in this case, and perhaps nothing else will do.
And when the hand is in place, put on the plaster that we have said, then bind it and leave it for 5 days, then unbind it and leave it like that.
And if he cannot move it well, and there is some pain, then apply hot water, and rub it until it is healed.
of the dislocation of the shoulders of the hand
Sometimes the two bones of the hand are dislocated in each direction, sometimes at the back of the palm or on the belly;
Then hold the pain, and push the dislocation towards your pouches as much as it returns, then support the head of the joint, and bend it towards the part where it is separated;
and leave it for two days, and then set it equal that day;
and bind it at night as we have said, and unbind it during the day, and make it move, and bind it at night;
and do this often, until it is tight, and also do this if it is dislocated in the belly of the hand, and do as you have done before, until it is healed.
And do the same when it is dislocated elsewhere.
Concerning the dislocation of the shoulder blade from the back
When the shoulder or neck is dislocated, or there are several dislocations, there is no cure, for death hastens the patient.
And the signs are that movements jump strong without will, and he cannot hold them, and many times some limb is softened, whether it be both thighs or both arms or one.
And often the shinbone is broken into four parts;
that which breaks in the back is called "gilbositez"
The treatment is that you will consider if the gilbositez came from childhood: if there is neither cure nor healing at all.
And that which comes from falling or blows or similar things, the ancient manners of treatment are said in great words, where there is not much profit in all;
but I have shortened it according to my intention, and have formed instruments in various ways.
I say that for the gilbositez which comes at the front of the foot, there is neither remedy nor healing;
and also that which comes straight on both sides, and one cannot cure except that which properly comes to the back, as I say.
And it is necessary that the patient be laid flat on his face in an even place, and have a support underneath him so he does not blanch.
Then place one coal at the head in earth form, and the other at his feet, and tie a strap under the patient's buttocks, and another at his thighs, and at his shins, and at his ankles.
And two assistants should hold the straps, one at the head and the other at the feet, between the two coals.
And they should be well secured, the coals as we have said, and the healer should place his palms on the spine, in a straight line, until it returns.
And if it does not return by this treatment, then take a board three arm's lengths long, and place it under the wall, and have the patient lie on his side, and push his head from the board under the wall, then place the middle of the board on the spine. and put your feet on the other end of the table, and press hard, until it returns to its place;
and if you see it, do it with the screw that turns the hand. And place two embers at the head of the patient's arm, and two others towards the feet, and between each ember, above and below, a palm's breadth in length.
And make a hole in each ember where the screw runs, and set the embers firmly in the ground so they do not move.
And between each two embers place a turning ember, with which the limbs turn, and place in the two turning embers two small embers a palm's length long to turn the screw.
And then tie the cord which is among the splints to the screw towards the head, and the other cord to the screw towards the feet, and each of the assistants turns his screw on the whole cord, and the master puts the spine straight as we have said.
And when they are equal, put a drying plaster on them with plenty of egg, and then bandages, and then the stele of a tablet three fingers long, which covers the place of the gibbosity and the healthy part of the vertebra, then tie it with a linen cloth, as we have said, and use the patient with subtle nourishment until he is healed.
And if anything comes at the end of health, it is necessary to administer softening and soothing medicines, with the stele that we have said before. And sometimes one administers a plum stone, and sometimes the appearance comes in the back vertebra of the back, and one thinks that it is a dislocation. And it is the bone that appears, for which one should not have presumption. By chance death might come.
Know that the joints of the hip and the joints of the shoulder only come out of place by dislocations, not in the same way as the other joints.
And the joint of the hip is dislocated according to four parts: inward and outward, and in front and behind.
And more inward than others, and rarely dislocated in front and behind.
And the recognition of this inward dislocation is that when you join the sick leg with the healthy one, it is longer, and the patient's knee appears more open than the healthy one, and the patient cannot bend their knee towards the fire. And there is a swelling below like a hot abscess, because the head of the thigh comes there.
And the sign of one who is coming to death is if this accident is contrary to those before.
And the signs of one who has it beforehand, if they are well their leg according to its completion. Nevertheless, do not bend the knee twice without pain, and if one wants to make it go, it cannot beforehand, and it retains its urine, and swells the ankle, and when it goes, it passes on the heel.
And the signs of someone who has it behind are that he cannot straighten his knee or bend it, and that leg is more twisted than the other, and the angle is softened, and the head of the thigh is at a place below the ribs.
The reduction of this kind of dislocation is such that you consider if the dislocation is old, and it stays according to its disposition, there is no cure. and it is not fitting for him to have presumption.
And in that one whose dislocation is fresh, and it is of four manners of dislocation, hasten yourself so that you return the joint, and extend it inwards and outwards, and move it to the right and left. perhaps it will return, and needs no other remedy.
And if it does not return in this manner, then you must prepare a strong assistant, and hold the leg strongly with two hands, or with a bandage tied above the knee; And another assistant extends his hand on top in such a way that he puts his hands under his armpits, then he binds it tightly with a rope above the thigh; and another holds the head of the rope;
and they stretch upwards and downwards all at once, so that the patient is lifted off the ground at once, and remains hanging.
This manner of extension is common to four resemblances, and if the dislocation returns, as we have said, it is well.
If this does not work, then it is necessary to treat it in a similar manner.
When the dislocation is in the thigh, it is necessary that you lay the patient on his healthy side, then put the bandage at the root of the thigh, and the place which is below the groin, then stretch the bandage upwards towards the groin, and towards the knee-cap;
Then take another minister and have him embrace the thick part of the sick person's thigh with his arms, and extend it towards the fire. It will now return to its place.
And this method of dislocation is lighter than the others.
And if you cannot hold it in this manner that we have said, then it is fitting that you bind the two feet of the sick person together with a strong band, tightly above the two heels and above the two knees, and let the sick leg be extended two fists more than the others;
then it is hung on the top of a pole, and is above the ground by two arm's lengths.
Then command one minister to embrace the top of the thigh, and let another minister hang with the sick person, who embraces firmly the thigh, for the joint now returns quickly.
And when the dislocation is outward, if the patient lies down as we have said for one with gout, and tighten the bandage on the affected leg properly, and on the foot also.
Then place two pieces of burning wood, one at the head and the other at the feet, then insert one piece of burning wood between the patient's thighs in the shape. And put cloths soaked in water around it so that they do not burn the patient, then extend each of his limbs towards him and have him place his hand on the dislocation.
If it returns, it is good.
If not, put him on a table, and press as we said in the guild.
And when the dislocation is forward, it is necessary to extend the affected leg quickly and according as I have said. And put his hand on the pain of being on the affected angle and then press with the other hand, and extend it down towards the knee.
And if the dislocation is in the shoulder, it is not fitting to stretch the patient out, nor raise him up, but he should be as when his hip was dislocated in the shoulder, as we have said about childbirth on both hips. And he should be on his face, and the bandage extended as we have said before, and one must press on the joint at the table; and it will be in place when the patient stretches his legs, and they will be equal; then adjust the thighs, and apply the plaster, and bind it with a bandage so that the hip does not move; and rest for three or four days, then unbind it, and apply plaster on top;
and if you see that they are equal, bind it as before, and leave it for three days;
Then untie it, and make it move smoothly, until the limb is comfortable.
Of the dislocation of the knee
The knee is dislocated according to three manners: That is to say, inwards and outwards, and backwards;
and it does not dislocate forwards.
And the signs are such that you command the patient to bend his leg at his thigh, and if it does not bend at his thigh, know that it is dislocated;
and the restoration of all such is that you make the patient sit upright, and extend his leg if he can, and put your back on his face, and put his foot on your feet;
then take his knee in your palms, and draw it between your thighs, then bend the two sides of the knee joint; and another assistant extends his foot, until the knee returns to its place, and the sign is that he bends his leg at his thigh easily;
and put the plaster on it, and let the leg air dry at the thigh, and bind them together tightly for three days or four, then unbind it.
And the patient should not be troubled to go until the limb is comfortable.
And if the limb is not set, then administer strong extension, as we have said in the treatment of the hip, until it is healed.
Of the dislocation of the heel
The heel is sometimes strained, and sometimes completely dislocated, both inside and out.
The signs are that the ankle is swollen and tense before the part where it is dislocated:
the reduction is slight, and one must extend the finger slightly towards their hand when it is only loosened.
And when it is completely dislocated, it is fitting that you make the patient sit upright and hold them firmly by the leg above the ankle.
Then pull the foot towards you with your right hand, and then to the left twice, then extend it upwards, and push the foot beautifully upward.
and do this twice, as we have said, by pushing and pulling the foot;
if it returns, it is good;
if not, start the work again, for it will return;
and if it cannot return this way, have the patient lie on his back on the ground, and insert a firm stick into the ground between his thighs, and tie cloths around so that he does not bruise the patient;
then have one assistant hold the thigh, and another assistant extend the foot with his hands or a strap which he ties around the ankle; then have each assistant extend equally, and let the stick be now between the patient's thighs to hold the patient when he is being extended;
then place the assistant's hands equally on the dislocation, and have another assistant hold the healthy leg below, and the dislocation will return quickly.
And when it is at the point, put the plaster and bandages on top, and bind them firmly, and tie the foot to the leg, and guard the nerves that are on the ankle behind, so that the bandages are not too tight.
Then leave it for two or three days, and if the bandages loosen, bind them again.
Then untie it on the third or fourth day, and forbid the patient from walking for four days. And if he goes before that time, it is not certain that he will not dislocate again.
And if an abscess comes, it is necessary that you soothe it, as we have said elsewhere, until it is healed.
of two When the two are dislocated, if they are nicely extended without effort, it is a light thing.
And if the dislocation is in any of the joints of the back of the foot, it is necessary that you make the patient sit on a flat surface or table straight, and put your foot on what appears of those joints, then press firmly with your foot until it returns.
and when it is equal and there appears nothing, then place under the sole of the foot a table with two legs, then bind it tightly and leave it for three days, then unbind it. And let it rest until it is healed.
of wound and of dislocation together
When a wound comes with the dislocation and one wants to restore it, many times it happens that the patient dies:
If you are not presumptuous in the cure, if you are not wise in the art and have not used it for a long time, and if you are not pitiful and merciful and slow, do not dare;
And at the beginning use soothing things to draw out the abscess heat, and leave the patient in the hand of God, if you do not see hope of health; And when you see hope, then reset the limb in its place, so that the abscess pus may come out.
and when the limb is in place, administer soothing things to the hot abscess, and heal the wound as it should be, with drying ointments;
and if the dislocation is with a fracture, and small bones are broken off, let the surgeon do what we have said in simple diseases;
and beware of entering the way of fear, as I have said, for this is worth more according to your creator, and for the safety of your soul and body.
