Oh you, my very dear sons, I have completed this book which is the last part of the science of medicine together with its fulfillment, and I have made the end by its expositions and by its declarations. And it came to me in a vision that I should complete it with this treatise, which is part of the work of hands, that is to say "surgery".
And because the work of hands is treated in our region and is foreign throughout, so it is lost and decayed, and nothing remains of its power except small descriptions in books of the ancients which the hands have moved. And from this came error and vanity, and understanding is closed off, and knowledge is driven away.
It seems to me that I will revive it together with the ordering of this treatise according to the way of exposition and declaration and abbreviation. And I will bring together the shapes of the cautery irons and the other instruments of the work with the adjustment of the explanation and preparation of them, as it is necessary.
And for the reason that no good masters of hands are found in our time, the art of medicine is prolonged. And it is fitting for anyone who undertakes this to study the science of anatomy, as Galen says, so that he may know the arrangement of the limbs and their shapes and connections and separations, and have knowledge of the bones and nerves and veins and the number of them, and the movement of the veins moving and resting, and the place of their origin.
And because Hippocrates says that knowledge without practice is much, and with practice is little; and likewise in the art of the hand.
We tell you in the introduction of this book that whoever is not knowledgeable about the things said before, if he takes care that he does not fall into error and harm people.
As I have often seen many of those who meddle in this science abandon themselves to their lack of knowledge and experience.
For I saw a foolish barber who cut an abscess of scrofula or a boil on the neck of a woman, and cut the arteries in her neck; for which so much blood flowed out that the woman died between his hands.
And I saw another barber who treated a stone of a man in pain, and the stone was large; he took out with it a piece of the bladder, and the man died within three days.
And I had already been called to treat him, and saw the patient's condition and the size of the stone, and knew well that if it were cut out he would die.
And I saw another barber who took in care the Duke of our land who had a broken leg, and with the fracture he had a wound;
and the barber, full of ignorance, pulled out the fracture on top of the wound with strong force, and did not leave to the wound any dressing, and he left it thus in the end;
and he commanded him not to unwrap it;
and delay so that the leg was all swollen and the foot and came to ruin.
I am called to come to him, and I hastened to come untie the leg; and when I loosened it, it was so easy and he felt no pain.
But all the way the corruption was already confirmed or limb, and I could not heal it;
and the corruption did not cease to go through the limb until the limb was completely lost.
And see another marvel which drained the inflamed abscess, and then it became swollen through the malice of its lord.
For a chancre, when it is pure of melancholic humor, it is not right to touch it with iron unless it is in a part where one can remove all that is corrupted.
And for this, dear son, it is necessary that you know that work of hands is divided into two divisions: namely, work where there is danger in several positions;
and I will show you in each place of this book where there is fear and danger.
For which it is necessary that you guard yourself, so that the foolish crowd cannot speak ill of you.
If you take up your instruments in good conscience, and treat your patients lightly and firmly, and use the best way so that through the grace of God you come to salvation and be praised.
And leave curable diseases without delay.
And remove your instruments from those who make you doubt, and have faith in yourself so that you may come from this world to the other of glory.
Galen said in some of his admonishments: “Do not undertake a bad illness unless you are called by a wise master.
I have devised this treatise according to three chapters.
The first chapters are of fire cauteries and of cauteries of medicinal waters, and the chapters are ordered from the head to the feet;
and of the forms of instruments, and the fastenings of a cautery, and of everything that is necessary in the work.
The second chapter is about cutting and piercing, and cupping and wounds, and the extraction of arrows, and similar things;
and the chapter is arranged and the forms of instruments.
The third chapter is about restoring dislocations and sprains, and similar things;
and it is arranged from the head down to the feet, and the forms of instruments.
Thus as we remember the work, it is fitting that I say the quality of help and harm of each complexion.
I say that the qualities of help, and harm, are the longest speech and subtlest science and secret answers;
and many wise men spoke of this, and agreed on it.
and I am content with few of their words, for I fear length.
I say that cautery helps universally to all complexions where there is matter, except two complexions: This is to know hot complexions without matter, and dry complexions without matter.
In hot and dry complexions together with matter, they divided and said that the cautery is of great help; And the others said the opposite: That the cautery is only worthwhile for illnesses that come from heat and dryness. For the nature of fire is hot, and should not be cured with heat nor dryness.
And those who said otherwise stated that the cautery is of great help for hot and dry illnesses that arise in the bodies of men. For when you compare the body of a man and his moisture to the complexion of fire, you find the body cold.
And I agree to this statement. For I have found it several times by experience.
And in every way, do not interfere unless those who have experienced it, and who know through long practice the chapter of cauteries, and the diversity of complexions of men, and their dispositions and the causes of their illnesses, and the outcomes and the space of time.
We do not fear other complexions, even cold and wet diseases. And all the mire gathered together and agreed to the cautery.
And know, son, that a fire cautery together with fire is of greater secrecy in cures and of greater benefit than a medicinal burning cautery.
For fire is simple, and does not come forth except to the member that is cooked, and does not harm another member if it so happens.
Burning remedies come from one member to another in banishing, and they bring to the member diseases of grievous healing; and by chance kill the sick person.
Fire, because of its heat and the goodness of its substance, does not do this, unless there is superfluity.
And this I have found by experiment and through the length of service and study that I have put into the art, and it is upon the truth of things;
and for this I excuse the length of speech, because it does not please me that I withhold from you the secret which is entrusted to fire, and the quality of the work, how it defeats diseases of the body, as the philosopher says in demonstrating; Or receive it in your thoughts.
And know, son, that they agreed on what time cauteries should be done, and they emerged entreating.
And I say that a cautery is suitable at all times, because the harmful things arising are lowered by the help of the cautery. And likewise, if the cauteries are for necessary and urgent pains that cannot wait for the time when greater harm comes to the limb.
And never think, dear son, as foolish doctors do. For a disease that is healed by a cautery does not recur. And they say it thus.
And they say it thus. But it is not so as they think, because cauteries are only a medicine that changes the complexion and dries the humors which are the cause of pain, and are worth more than medicine for its quick effectiveness, and for the virtue of its work and power.
And it is possible that the illness comes at times according to the patient's complexion, the location of the illness, and its virtue.
And if the superfluous humors are gathered in him through the consumption of foods and similar things, then cauteries should be administered in the place where there is an excess of superfluities and moisture, such as cauteries of density for pain, and similar things, so that the pain does not return. But this rarely happens.
And many people do not understand why cauteries are called the last resort of medicine, and it is this:
But they do not believe that cauteries are effective after other medicines, but their understanding is false, and cauteries are the last resort of medicine because when we administer remedies for any illness and they are ineffective, then we administer the cautery, and it is effective.
Then understand well that cautery is the last resort of medicine, not according to the intention of foolish minds.
The ancients said that cauteries of gold instruments are gentler than those of iron, and they said this because of the quality of gold and its highness of substance;
And they said that the burns from a cautery do not cause putrefaction, but this is not true because I have experienced it and found that it is true in some men;
And gold cauteries are worth more than those of iron, as they said. And nevertheless, when you heat an instrument of gold, you do not know when it is hot by the color of the gold, and it cools quickly.
And if you heat it too much; it melts in the fire; and thus there are enough obstacles.
Now I have ordered this chapter from head to toe so that the way may be easier to find.
This cautery is good for moisture and cold on the brain, and there are two that are made because of an illness called "soda", and because of many humors that descend from the head to the eyes, and ears, and because of a multitude of dreams and toothache and sore throat, and also for all illnesses that come from cold such as paralysis and soda and apoplexy and similar illnesses.
The form of this cautery is such that the patient should be purged by a dissolving medicine modifying the head III or IV, according to what the virtues and the age and the custom of the patient can bear. and then make the head of the patient fall back.
And then have him sit cross-legged between your hands, and put his hands on your thighs;
then place the root of your palm on the root of his nose between his two eyes; and where your two thumbs will come, if it bleeds afterward cauterize with the iron called “olivare,” which has this shape: And place it on the spot marked with ink, and move downward while squeezing your hand slowly and turning it; then lift your hand gently, and look at the spot again to see if the bone shows a little; and if you don't see it, begin the cautery again until you see the bone as I have told you;
then take a small piece of thread and put it in soft cotton, and place it on the spot, and leave it for three days;
Then place it on cotton softened in butter; And leave it there until the burn is gone. Then treat the wound with an ointment called "tetrapharmacon" until it is healed.
And as the ancients said, the longer a wound remains open, the more it purges; and therefore it must be helped to close.
And they say that one should leave the cautery on until a part of the bone is burned, and then remove what has been burned from the bone, and it should be cured.
And others say that the cautery should be left on so long and pressed so hard that it ablates bone as wide as a spindle that women put in their spindles so that the humors are quickly expelled.
And the wound should be left open for a long time; Then it should be cleaned and soldered.
And these two ways of cautery do not seem good to me in every respect except in some men who have a way of fearing
and move I believe that I should leave it;
for the head is weakened by the continuous humors of nature, as we witness in other members;
and likewise when the head of the sick person is weak by nature, and the first appearance of cautery is more healthy and moderate for me, and from this I work in consequence a safe healing.
When in all the head comes chronic pain, and lasts a long time, so should the patient use herbs and pills which are called "cochie," and purging of the head and oils and plasters; and if one does the cautery as we have said before, and it is not worth it. Take care if the head of the sick person is of strong nature, and that it is not too cold; Then the cauterizer underneath that cauterizer makes a spot as we have said above. Afterward make a cautery on each horn of the head down to the bone, as we have said before, and make a cautery where it is called "vessels"; and these are the places where one puts cupping glasses; and align your hand so that you do not see down to the bone: the patient feels much more pain in this cautery than in others, and I will speak of it later;
and it is fitting that the cauteries of the horns be more delicate than those with which one cauterizes the middle of the head, and this is its form:
For the cautery of the head When sudden pain comes to one part of the head, and the illness is extended to the eye, and the humors are purged by purifying medicines, and one has done the other cures that I have said in the division of illnesses, and all this does not profit: Then he makes cauteries according to two manners, namely of sharp iron and fire.
The cauteries of sharp iron are such that you take a piece of alum, and remove the bark and cut it into two pieces as the size of the bone, and then make a temple where the pain is in two ways so that you can place the piece of alum beneath the skin;
and when it will be placed, bind it well and leave it thus for twelve hours; and then unbind it and apply a piece of garlic over it, and leave the wound thus for two or three days; then put linen soaked in butter on top as much as possible until it dries.
After the cure with ointment until it is healed;
and if you see, do this with some burning medicines that I have written or else treat of burning medicines.
The iron cautery is done in this manner. Heat the cautery which has this shape:
And it is called "closed" because the head is made in the shape of a bell or it has a beak with a curve, and in the middle there is a small appearance.
And put it on the painful spot, and hold your hand and turn the iron a little lightly, until half of the thickness of the heart is burned.
And lift your hand so that the artery does not burn, which is outside, and an abundance of blood flows.
Afterwards put cotton in a bundle, and put it on the spot for three days. Then put cotton softened in butter, and then treat the spot with ointment until it is healed.
And if you want to cauterize this migraine with the cautery that is called "culter," at the very tip, and be careful not to touch the artery in this migraine which is not old.
From migraine
When you treat migraine as we have previously said in the division of diseases, and it does not improve, and you see that the cauteries previously mentioned from medicine and iron do not suffice, then it is necessary that you heat the cautery which is called "cultellare" until it is white.
And then draw a line half a finger long on the painful spot, and remove your hand once, and hold it so that you do not cut the artery and do not go as far as the bone.
And be careful of the jawbone which moves when one chews, and do not pay attention to the movement and that spasms do not come to the patient, and be careful of the flowing of blood from the artery when it is cut, for cutting causes great fear, both to him who does it and to the one who does not know it, and who is not a student and experienced. and leave the work halfway;
but I will tell you how to staunch blood when an artery is cut, and I will show you its location in this book.
And if you see that this cautery is not sufficient for the illness, and the patient is suffering, cauterize him in the middle of the head as we have said, and treat the wound until it heals;
and if you see fit, administer the cautery that we have mentioned in the chapter on extracting an artery, along with a cautery that has two knives; and this cautery is better than that one and more helpful.
of the pain of the ears from cold
When pain comes to the ear from cold, and one has worked on it with dissolving medicines and other cures as we have said in the division, and the pain does not change, then heat this cautery which is called "point," of which this is the form:
After pointing to all around the patient's ear, or around both where the pain is held on both sides, and you remove a bit from its root since you have marked the location for incision; and put 10 points around each ear;
afterwards treat the place until it is healed.
From the torture of the mouth
Torment that should be treated with fire cautery is only of those that move by phlegm, as we have said in the divisions of disease.
and do not perform cautery on things that resemble those coming from dryness and spasm of nerves.
When you treat this kind of torment that moves from phlegm by hydrates and purges from the head and gargling, and it is useful, then it is fitting that you cauterize the patient with 3 cauteries. one at the root of the ear, and the other a fire point by the temple, and the third at the joint of the two lips.
and place the cautery in the part that appears healthy, and make a cautery point on the head of the ear above a point below the horn of the head, and another on the temple as long as a thumb. and leave the cautery upon it until half of the core is burned.
And this is the form of the cautery:
And it resembles the knife that we have shown before, but it is a little more subtle and it is necessary for the knife to be a little larger.
After you have cured the place as I have said before, until it is healed.
When the apoplexy is old and you cure it as we have said, and it does no good, and the patient has no fever, then make him four cauteries: Two on the two horns of the head, and one on the back of the head, and one on the place that is called “vessels” as we have said before, and the last cautery on the mouth of the stomach.
And let it be treated as we have said before.
Of languor
For this disease, give the patient large herbs and purifying pills for the brain;
Then after you have raised the head of the patient, and place mustard plaster on the back of his head as is written in the treatise on plasters;
And this is the manner of the cautery: If you do as I have said.
If it is healed thus, it is good; And if it is not, make him three cauteries starting from the top of his head and descending to his neck, with a space of two finger-widths between each cautery.
And treat it as the others, and if you see that a boil has developed and the patient is suffering, make him one cautery in the middle; and if it is necessary, two others on the two horns, and heal it as long as it is healed;
And let the cautery be called "olivary," as I have said before.
It is fitting that the head be cleansed of herbs and of what we have said before;
after you shave the head of the patient, then apply the cautery around the head and on each horn, and the back and three on the spine of the neck;
and if you need more, and the body is moist and the patient suffers, and the illness is severe, then apply four cauteries on the spine of the back; and leave it until the innermost part burns, and lift your hand; after the cure as long as it is healed, and let the cautery be called "olivary" as we have said before.
Of epilepsy
Those who are suffering from excessive hair growth should only use the cautery if they are phlegmatic, and it is necessary to first modify the brain with herbs and other treatments that we have mentioned in the section on when the patient is large and suffers from a lack of medicine.
And if it is a child who cannot suffer it, have him do gargles and chew food that modifies the brain often with good meats;
Afterwards he raises the head in the middle, and he applies the cautery as we have said before, and the cautery on the vessel, and on each horn; And if the patient is strong and suffering, he applies cauteries as I have said to one who has paralysis and softening of the body, on the spine of the back and neck, and let the cauteries be olive according to the manner that I have said.
If the patient is feverish, he shall make a subtle cautery according to this manner:
When by reason of melancholy are the superfluities or moist humors corrupted and thick phlegm, then the cautery of iron cauters as we have said to him who has paralysis.
And if by the cause of melancholy the superfluities are declining towards melancholy and the body of the patient is moist, then let him drink things by which the brain may be purified, according to what has been said before in the division.
After raising the head of the patient; then make a well-made linen tourniquet, also like a circle, and place it around the head;
and have the patient lie down with arms crossed, and be well held on all sides;
After presenting the linen, and apply poultices of old butterbur; and heat it gently over fire so that the patient can bear it; After emptying the circle inside, immerse the head, and let it cool;
And do this to the patient once a week with another good regimen until they are healed.
Or if you see it being cauterized, making several punctures with all of the cautery.
This method of cautery softens the brain properly;
And then put softened cotton in butter and jelly fat.
from the eyes of the arrows When awe first comes by the signs that I have said in the division, then begin and make the patient drink things purifying the head, and guard him from all moisture, and make him sweat or bathe several times on an empty stomach.
After he commands him to put back his head, and he makes a cautery immerse the head, and he makes two cauteries on the two temples if the descent of the awe is at both, or one if the descent is in one;
and cauterize all the veins and arteries that are below the heart, and let the cauteries be long according to the width of the temple;
And guard against blood loss; and if you see too much blood coming out, then stanch it as best you can.
And I will teach you in the extraction of arteries and in the incision, how to stretch it.
And never make a cautery or burn below the two bones behind.
and we see that it is a cold, phlegmatic superfluous matter, then do the cautery as I said at the beginning of this chapter descending towards the eyes: I cauterize the head, and two cauteries on the two temples, and two cauteries or burns below the two bones. And if there is further need, let the cautery burn above the eyebrow with all the small cautery.
When you give him medicine according to what we have said in the division, and he does not profit, then give the patient three nights of chickens broth. After you raise his head, and make a cautery with half an olive's worth of oil. And make two cauteries with the cautery called "clavilis" on the two eyebrows, a bit below the hairs.
And be careful of the artery so that you do not cut it.
And this is the shape of the cautery which is called "clavilis":
When the membrane of the eye is softened by disease and moisture, then the cauterization of this cautery which is called "olivare". from which this is the form
And if you see fit, make two cauteries on the two eyebrows as long as the eyebrows are.
And do not remove your hand except until the third part of the paper is burned, according to the way I have said.
when a hair pricks the eye Sometimes it happens that the hairs of the eyes are converted to a reddish brown, and prick the eye, and one does cauteries according to two manners: That is to say, with fire, or with burning medicine.
For a fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
When they are grown and even, then put the patient in a healthy state; then draw on paper a shape like the leaf of myrtle, and let the beginning of the sign be near the hairs;
then he puts softened cotton in egg white and parsley mucilage on the eye, then heats the cautery which has this shape:
After cauterizing on the face that you have marked dot by dot many times, so that the heart is burned at the spot;
And the signs of the success of the work are that you see the paper pull back, and the hairs rise at the point of the needle;
then lift your hand, and leave it so for three days, then put cotton softened in butter until the burn is removed; after the cure of ointment until it is healed.
And if after this the hairs come, and the paper is softened, then begin the cautery on the same spot as you did first;
and if the hairs are gone out, then cauterize as long as the paper is raised to its natural place and is even, and does not prick the hairs at the eye.
The burning medical cautery is that you instruct the patient to let the hairs grow until they are large and equal, then make a shape from parchment like the leaf of myrtle.
Then take French soap and quicklime, of each one dram, and grind together well; And make it quickly so that it does not cool down, then spread it on top of the shape you have made like a myrtle leaf, and put eye drops on the paper. And if the sickness is only in one eye, you should work on that one, and if in both also. And put moistened cotton under the eye soaked in egg white.
And let the patient's head be in your healthy hand and put your index finger showing on top of the medicine, and press the spot and the pus every time the patient feels a bite from the medicine, for he will feel it as if from fire.
When you have done this for a long time, then remove the medicine from your hand. And when the bite has passed, lift the area away from the water and see if you notice the skin raised as though it were raised by the constraint of fire or by incision. And if it is so, it is well.
If not, apply more of the medicine to the area where the medicine has not worked, until your works are equal and your eyes are aligned.
Then apply softened cotton soaked in butter until the burning heart is healed; afterwards cleanse the area of the ointment which is called "dyafenis" and others, until it is healed.
And if it is necessary for you to be careful about your work with great care so that it does not fall from the medicine, nor these.
And if the skin becomes soft afterwards, and the hair pricks in the eye, begin the medicine again on that area which is softened by the skin properly, just as you have done before. after the healing as long as it is healed;
and this is the form of the mortar of myrtle:
And know that the eyes of men are diverse in size and smallness, and according to that are your constraints;
and let not the right way be answered to he who is the study of this art.
Of the cure of a fistula by cautery
When you treat a fistula as we have said in the division of diseases, and your treatments are not effective, then it is necessary that you make a cautery according to this manner.
Instruct the patient to put his head in your lap; and hold the ministers' head between your hands in such a way that it does not move, nor does he lower his head;
afterwards put softened cotton in egg white or in parsley juice on the eye;
afterwards heat the cautery which is like this:
and is shaped at the head as the shape of a dove's feather, together with which is the cautery;
If you see it, if it is pointed from one head to the other, and if you see it, if it is also like a tent
But nevertheless, this which is cut off is worth moving for your work.
After press the fistula if it is open, and in treat the decay, and dry it; And if it is closed, so work it, and treat beyond the intestine;
After put on the hot cautery iron, and hold your hand to the cautery at the part where there is no bone above the eye, so that your hands do not shake; And put the cautery in the grease of the oil, and corrupt it.
If you come at the beginning of the cautery down to the bone, it would be good. If not, so start the cautery again yet once more, and another if you need it, and leave it 3 days;
Then he puts softened cotton soaked in butter on it, and cures it with a drying ointment until it is healed, and if 40 days pass and it is not healed, he puts a corrosive aqueous medicine on it until the bone is exposed; and the king according to what he would bring in his chapter.
And there is a way of cauterizing a fistula that none of the ancients said. Understand it is a fistula, and make the place; Then put in the fissure a subtle linen thread of which this is the form: and make it to the quantity of a three-fingers length of thread and hold your hand or the linen firmly, and do not let the patient move at all, so that the melted threads do not run into his eye;
and it is necessary to put softened cotton soaked in wine vinegar or in water on the patient's eye.
If a stone is inserted into the place of a fistula, and the healthy tissue heals miraculously.
And if the fistula is healed by the cautery as we have said, it is good. If not, it is necessary to administer an opening to the nose, and bring the fistula back to the body through the nose according to what is appropriate in its own proper place.
of cracks in the lips Many times fissures occur in the lips which are called "hairs," and likewise in the lips of children.
When you treat these fissures of those that we have said in divisions, and the treatment does not profit, then heat a small surgical cautery according to this form:
And put it hastily in those crevices until it reaches the font.
Afterward, treat the place with wax until it is healed.
When an abscess comes in the root of the throat or in the eye, or on the palate, or at the roots of teeth, after it is decayed and rotten and has aged and becomes a fistula; And you treat it as we have said in sections, and it does not help at all. Then you must have the cautery according to the quantity of the fistula. After making the hole or opening in the fistula, hold your hand until the hot iron reaches the bottom of it, and wherever there is last place.
And do so once or twice, after the treatment of what we have said in treatments, until it is healed.
And if it is treated thus, it is good. And if not, you must uncover the place and remove the corrupted bone according to what you will find in its chapter.
When the gums are softened by moisture and the teeth move, and you treat it with medicine and it is of no avail, then place the patient's head in your lap. Then heat the cautery, which will be described later, in such a way that you place a cane on the tooth.
And quickly insert the hot cautery, and hold it as long as the patient feels the heat coming to the root of the tooth.
Then lift your hand and repeat the cautery as you wish.
After the patient fills his mouth with salt water, let him hold it for an hour and then spit it out.
And in this way the tooth that was moving is fixed, and the softened gum is restrained, and the corrupted moisture is dried up.
Of the pain of the teeth
When toothache comes from cold, or there is cold or wind, and medical treatments are ineffective, then it is necessary to use a cautery in two ways: and a butter cautery and a fire cautery.
A butter cautery is done by taking cow butter and putting a bit of it in an iron or silver spoon; then take cotton and wrap it around the point of a tent peg, dip it in boiled butter, and place it hastily on the aching tooth and hold it until it cools;
and do this often until its virtue reaches the root of the tooth; and if you see that moistened wool and cotton in cold butter are placed on the aching tooth, and hot iron is applied until the fire reaches the top of the tooth.
The fire cauteries are such that you take a cane of iron or wood, and it is large enough so that the fire does not reach the patient's mouth.
After you heat the cautery, from which the shape will come afterwards, and put it on the tooth and hold your hand until the cautery is cooled.
Do this often, for the pain will be removed that same day or the next.
And it is necessary that the patient fills his mouth with good butter at the time of this cautery, and then refresh it strongly.
And this is the shape of the cautery:
And make a cautery of whatever shape you desire, and according to what you are able.
And this is the shape of the cane:
of scrofula When scrofula is of phlegm and cold humors, and is not obedient to digestion by medicines, then heat the cautery with hair, and make two openings for the smoke to escape from the other side.
And place the hot cautery on the abscess once, or where it is needed, until it reaches the bottom of the abscess.
And if the abscess is small, apply the cautery according to the size of the abscess and leave it thus for three days. And place softened cotton steeped in butter on it until the burn is gone.
Afterwards treat the area with ointments and bandages until it is healed.
When humors overcome the channels of the body, and especially when it comes from a cold complexion, then the patient should first be purged by dissolving medicines.
After you apply the cautery to the root of the throat, be careful not to go near the throat itself and only burn a small spot.
After you apply the other cautery at the junction of the neck and the head of the spine, it should be called a "clavile" because we have that shape in front.
And treat the area as we have said before until it is healed.
When all and every disease of the pormon is from cold moisture and the patient has neither fever nor thirst and the illness is old, you should apply two cauteries on the armpit. And another cautery between the breasts.
And these cauteries should be called "claviles" according to the shape that has been said before.
And if you see it, make a cautery by pricking with the entire cautery called "point" whose shape is shown before in the ailment of the ears.
And let the points be up to thirty or more.
After curing the place according to what is said before, and let the cautery be 3 hands in length according to this form:
And for this reason are the cauteries lighter, because you make three at a time.
of the dislocation of the shoulder
When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first reset the dislocation. Afterwards lay the patient on his back and on his side. Then lift the heart which is inside the nipple with the two fingers of your left hand.
And if the jointure is dislocated within, then heat the cautery which has two nerves as shown here:
And cauterize the heart until it pierces to the side, and the figure of the cautery will be together with four cauteries.
And for this is made a cautery with the cautery which has three nerves, so that the figure of the cauterization are six cauteries.
And the nerves are according to the subtlety of a tent, and it is the shape of the cautery that has three nerves.
And never is it placed upon this nerve, for which there are eight cauteries.
After put the cautery on top of bruised herbs with thread; Then let the patient rest and do not move the limb for a long time until it is well fortified.
And if it is dislocated above, which rarely happens, then make a cautery on the thick part of the clavicle, or many cauteries by pricking.
For the joint is closed, and the moisture is removed, and the patient is healed.
When cold and much moisture come into the stomach until it is extracted to its complexion, and phlegm is multiplied in it, and customary methods of cures are used and they do not profit, then it is necessary that the patient be turned on his back, and extend his legs and hands. Afterward make three cauteries one below the spoon of the foot for the quantity of two, at all the cauteries clave and two cauteries behind the two sides so that the figure of the cauteries is at three angles, and has half space between the one and the other so that they are not joined together when they will rot;
And let the cauteries be so perfect that they penetrate both parts of the heart and let the shape of the cauteries be according to this form without adjustment.
And if you see someone cauterized with a large cautery iron in the stomach according to this form;
and he who will fear this cautery, cauterize by pricking and marking on the stomach a point according to the quantity that you see of encroachment; then cauterize with the whole cautery iron which is called "point.
After the cure of the cure that we have had before, as long as it is healed.
When the liver comes to have pain from cold and moisture and excessive flatulence, as long as it is forced out of its natural complexion by superfluities; and the patient is cured of this as we have said in divisions, and it does not profit him, then it is necessary that the patient be treated according to his nature; and sign of encroachment three cauteries according to this form and figure and quantity on the liver, deflecting the hypochondria, where the sides of the spleen come.
and there should be a space between each cautery the thickness of a thumb; and let the cauteries be as long as the body, and do not press your hand too hard on all the cauteries;
and only half of the heart should be burned, and the patient should be straight on his feet;
and if he cannot, let him lie down, extend his legs, and lift his arms;
And if you wish, you can cauterize these cauteries with a knife, if you are skillful and wise in the art, and be careful not to burn the whole heart, for you would dry up the whole body; and let it not come to a boil, for the heart is very delicate in that place, and you will see it by looking.
When there is an abscess in the liver, and you want to know if it is in the flesh of the liver or in the membrane: If it is in the flesh, the patient feels pain not too severe;
and if it is in the membrane, he feels intense pain.
And when this treatment requires purging, it is necessary that the patient be raised up on his head;
and then mark the place where the abscess is, and then heat the cautery which resembles a ray, in this way: And cauterize with the cautery until the core is burned and comes to a boil, until the pore is entirely open;
after the treatment according to the treatment of the abscesses until he is healed;
and it is not fitting that anyone other than he who has studied long in the art of medicine and whose hands have cured these illnesses many times use this cautery.
Then he can boldly work, and nonetheless it seems to me that letting it be is better.
For the cautery of pleurisy
The ancients said that one should make several cauteries from aristoloche roots, and in this way: Take a long aristoloche root, the largest you can find, and let it be dry, and as thick and as long as your arm. And moisten it in oil, and hold it in the fire, and cauterize with it between the collarbone and the neck, and two small cauteries a little lower on the part below the beard.
And two cauteries between the fifth rib and the sixth, declining a little behind. And one cautery under the breast, and another on the stomach, and one between the two shoulders, and two as far down the sides from the breast as the cautery is between the two shoulders.
And do not press your hand, but make it openly as if smelling.
And some ancients say that no man should use a fire cautery resembling a razor, and heat it and put it between the ribs, until it comes to that abscess. And then the pain will cease, as we have said in the liver abscess.
But in this work there is fear where the patients now die, or a fistula comes which cannot be healed.
of the mouse
When you cure the disease of the mouse according to the divisions of the cures we have said, and it does not profit at all, then apply three methods of cautery which are all good.
Of these, one method is that you make III or IV cauteries, aligning according to the length of the mouse, according to the shape of the liver cautery that we have mentioned before;
and do not press your hand on the entire cautery, and let the patient often turn on his back;
and another method of cautery is that you heat the cautery which has II points, as we have shown in the shoulder dislocation;
and lift the heart which is located near the mouse, or where the sides of the patient come towards the left, and let the elevations from which you lift the heart be according to the heart, according to the length of the body, and the cauteries be according to the width of the body.
After he puts the two inflamed nerves so that the heart is pierced from the other side, and then draws fire from the cautery, and thus he will have four.
And if you see, that cauterizing the whole cautery to three nerves.
After the treatment when it has festered for a long time, this is worth more than the other treatments mentioned before.
Cauterization is of no use for dropsy, except in the manner called "asclytes".
When you cure it according to the manners that we have said in divisions, and your cure does not profit at all, then it is necessary that you make four cauteries around the shoulder blade, and one on the stomach, and one on the liver, and one on the thigh, and two behind the back on the spine, and one at the breast; and let the cauteries be very close to the species of the heart.
After leave the cautery uncovered for a long time to prevent putrefaction, and do not leave the patient's care after the cautery; And healing would hasten, and both intentions would be fulfilled with the help of God.
The shape of the cautery for the belly is the cleaver that we have shown before; and the one for the back should be oval-shaped, according to what has been mentioned before.
When the feet are swollen in one who is dropsy-stricken and are full of yellow water, it is fitting that you cauterize on the back of the foot between the little finger and the ring finger; and apply your hand with the cautery without turning.
And do not enter too deeply with the point, lest you burn the surrounding flesh excessively, and let the cautery be according to this form:
Afterward, make two cauteries on each leg at the point of the knife; and let the cauteries be long, one below the knee in front and the other behind, midway up the leg;
and let the cauteries lie long without cleaning so that it may rise.
after the cure of the other cures that we have said.
When a solution of the stomach comes from cold and moisture, as long as the retentive and digestive powers which are in the stomach and intestines are weakened, and cannot be cured by ordinary methods; and you see the patient suffering greatly and of strong constitution, then make a large cautery on the stomach according to what has been said before or a stomach cautery, a circular cautery; and four cauteries around the belly subtle and all the cauteries subtly pinned, and two cauteries on the hips.
And if you see abundant moisture and the patient suffering, make a cautery on the wrist, and a cautery on each arm, and two small cauteries on the stomach below the navel, for the cure is beneficial when there is good help.
of the treatment of hemorrhoids
When hemorrhoids are at the fundament, one or several, and they are old and made up of thick cold and damp corrupted humors, and they are treated as we have said in divisions, and it does not profit, then make cauteries. III on the spine of the back, which is all behind below the armpit bit by bit in a triangle, and I the cautery below the shoulder II must.
And if you think that his stomach is cooled, and the meat does not cook, and one sees the face swell, then on the face one puts a large cautery on the stomach, as it is previously said, and another on the liver, and another on the thigh with all the cauteries clavile. And let the cautery stay open for a long time. After healing the place until it is healed.
When you cut an althelul (likely a type of bandage or dressing), if it is heated so that it seems like a razor, and then put all inflamed on the said althelul. And you leave it so that both your hand and the cautery come to the beginning of the vein, so that the blood is cut.
Do this once or twice, and if there is a lot of swelling, cauterize each one as we have said. After the treatment of wounds, make sure they are healed.
And if you cauterize a large area with a large cautery, it will be more helpful.
When the patient cannot endure cutting or opening, which we will describe in their place, then there comes a disease that cannot be healed except by cautery.
When a fistula comes and is aged and has putrid rotting moisture, then you must test its depth with a delicate probe, and be careful that you know the entire depth of how many parts it has.
After heating the cautery which resembles a razor, insert it into the fistula according to the amount that the tentacle has entered, and start again with the cautery until those corrupted and rotten bodies are burned once, twice or three times depending on the amount needed.
And be careful not to burn the nerves that are there, and the large veins.
If the fistula goes to the body of the bladder and the intestines, be careful of these areas, and do not cauterize except in a fleshy place, and remember that it is not a piercing.
After treatment the place until it is healed, and if the wound is closed and the matter is removed for a long time, then know that the wound is completely healed.
And if the matter is not removed, know that the wound is bad, and it corrupts the bone at its base. And as one of these that we will say in its place.
When pain from cold comes as rain, and from great windiness, and does not take solace from a woman, then it is fitting that you make a cautery on the reins on one side and the other with the pointed cautery that we have previously said.
And if we cauterize them in the middle, there will be three cauteries in a line, and they will do more help.
of the bladder When the bladder is soft and weak from cold and moisture, so that the patient retains urine, then make a cautery on the back part above the bladder where the hairs begin at the hipbone, on the right and left, and let each cautery be as long as the tip of a thumb.
And make him fire the cautery on his back wherever you need it.
Let the cautery be sharpened according to the shape previously mentioned.
When the matrix is cold and moist, and does not allow conception because the flowers are corrupted and their ends are delayed; and when they come, there is great pain: then it is fitting to make three cauteries around the buttocks as we have said of the bladder cautery, and two cauteries on his back.
And let the cauteries be sharpened as we have said.
When viscous moisture descends to the hip joint and for this reason it moves from its place, and the signs are that the thigh is longer than the other when measured together
and the place of separation is found on two sides, it is necessary that you cauterize the patient on the bone of the hip in a circle-shaped burn, and mark in front of the place around the bone as it turns, so that the bone is inside the circle.
And let the cautery be such as those with which one cauterizes the stomach.
And if this cautery is not present, make three large olive-wood cauteries, and let the cautery be as perfect as all the others.
and cauterize it until it is healed.
Of the pain of the hip When pain comes to the bone of the hip, and it is from cold and moisture, and the patient is cured by what we have said in the division and the cure is ineffective, and the illness is old: Then it is necessary that you purge the patient of gross humors with foul-smelling pills, or other good-seeming pills. Afterward apply the cautery;
and the manner of applying the cautery is according to two methods: that is to say, together burning medicaments and fire cautery.
Fire cautery is according to many methods, of which one is as follows:
that you cauterize on the box of the hip three triangular cauteries according to this form, and make them deep and large, and put between each cautery a space the thickness of two fingers, and let the cauteries be olive-shaped.
Once done, make one cautery in the middle above the head of the hip, so there are four according to this form:
And if you see, if the cauterizer with a cautery makes a circle as we have said before in the dislocation of the hip;
But make it in such a way that the circles encompass the whole hip, and all the flesh around the heart be burned.
And this is the way it is done for sciatica, when the pain stays in the hip, and does not reach as far as the thigh or the leg.
And if it comes up to the thigh and leg, make two cauteries there where the patient says the pain is strongest, and one cautery above the ankle four times, on the left side a prick.
And let the cauteries be sharp-edged, and burn through the thickness of the flesh.
And if the patient feels that the pain extends to two fingers of the foot or nearby, then cauterize him there where he feels the pain three times or four times with a cautery called "point". And if it is necessary, make them more;
and if he knows that the pain is below the knee towards the thigh, make a cautery with a knife-shaped or circular cautery, and take great care in all your cauteries that you do not leave it so long that you burn the nerves and large arteries, and that you do not cause the patient more pain and contraction.
And I myself have seen many who have done cautery on the ankle of the foot, and they let it until the leg was all swollen, and the foot also, and it was pierced and corrupted all the foot. After a purging of the belly from which he had death.
And if the pain is in two parts together, make a cautery on one and the other, according to this manner.
And the surgeons say about cautery of the hip, which is the manner: make such a tool and at its head as thick as a nail, or a little less, and it should be grooved, from one groove to the other with a space the size of a thumb's knot;
and let the grooves be facing in two parts, and also be like knots, and it should have a well-made iron handle;
And this is the form:
And it should be heated until it is all red and feels hot, and then put it on the box of the bad hip, and it should be turned on the healthy side;
and the cautery one time when the cautery is red hot and leave it for III days; And then make a plaster of butter, and leave the wound open for a long time; after the cure with ointment until it is healed.
Albucasim says that we use this cautery little because of the fear of its appearance, and we rarely see anyone who uses it;
and nevertheless it is a good cautery, for whoever can endure it, and where it is applied.
The cauteries of burning medicine are such that you make an instrument with crossbars in which the edge of the door descends, and it is made of iron or steel with a long handle, and at its height there are two knobs, and between each knob there is the thickness of a finger; and they should be opened with fire and above, and joined together according to this form:
Then place the box of the hip on the patient lying on his sound side, and immediately put your hand very firmly on the box of the hip; Then place between the two circles of a hot awl that has been heated in the fire for one hour or so, and let the patient suffer the heat and burning sensation.
For there is a biting sensation as well as from fire.
And when the biting sensation has passed, lift your hand with the instrument and remove the hip awl gently, and leave it like that for three days, and apply butter until what is black from the burn is removed. And let it stay for three days so that putrefaction is drawn out;
and this would be the last help after the treatment of ointments until it is healed
And if the pain has extended to the thigh or leg, you must make the instrument that holds tight according to what you have done in the hip properly;
and this is the way of the hot awe, and I wrote it or treated it in the treatise on the correction of medicine. Take alkali and quicklime, as much of one as of the other, and grind them together, and put them in a new pot. where there be a small opening so that the point of a razor can enter;
where there be a small opening so that the point of a razor can enter; and put that pot on top of another pot well sealed, and put alkali and lime and soft heat on top until there are two handfuls of powder and you will have prepared it well in your hand;
and leave it like that until hot and thick vapor descends into the sealed pot, then take all that vapor, and pour it onto heat and alkali as before.
And then it will be very acute and is administered in soft work of medicine and cauteries on other members.
For it performs other work like fire, and if with other medicines which one cauterizes well the hip thus turpentine and honey of sumac and chalk with soap, all these things mixed together.
And Galen tells us of a remedy by which a man was cured of the pain in his hip and sciatic vein, and he praised it greatly, saying that no other remedy was done, and that he was healed at one time when this remedy was done, and he bathed himself as he teaches here after.
And say in this manner that you take two drachmas of fresh green litharge and grind it very much with a bit of fat and put it on the hip and on the thigh and on the leg where the pain lies and bind it.
And leave it for three hours and by the quantity that the patient no longer feels the burning.
And then make it enter or bathe so that its body is a little aroused, and make it enter or bed, and the pain will go away entirely and it will be healed.
And know that no one should use a cautery of such medicines, unless it is after the evacuation of the body.
And Dioscorides says that when the sciatic vein is cauterized with goat droppings, it helps a lot.
And it must be done in this manner. Take linen cloth and soak it with old oil and put it on the hollow between the thumb and the finger which is called the fossa.
After you take goat horns that are dry, and burn them until they are charcoal, then put them on wool, and leave them until they are extinguished.
And do this again likewise, and do not cease to do so until you think by feeling that it reaches the hip, and that the pain is gone.
And this manner of cautery is called "goat horn cautery".
of the pain of the back
When pain comes to the back, whether by falling or by percussion or by excessive evacuation, or by similar spread of cold matter, none of these cases are worth cautery except for that which comes from the infusion of cold matter.
It is fitting that after this the patient is purged with fetid pills or other similar things, and that they are made on their back, where the pain lies, three lines marked with an inch, and in each line five cauteries or more according to the strength and quantity that the patient can endure.
And let the cauteries be made according to the cautery that is called "points".
and if you see it, make three or four cauteries with a medium-sized fire cautery according to this form:
This disease often comes to young children, and the signs of its onset are that they have a tight throat when they wake up, and fear; and you find in the last spine of the back and in us the appearance that comes upon the other spines.
When you see this and you want to cauterize it, then cauterize it with a branding iron according to this form. So that the cautery properly burns each part of the spine equally.
And if you see, if you cauterize around the spine with a pointed cautery making two or three lines, and the points are close to one another.
After healing the place until it is healed according to what we have said, and be careful that you do not apply the cautery in a gibbosity which is in the spasm of a nerve.
of the pain of the joints
When joint pains are from moistures that are spread to each limb of the body, and when pain comes in the feet, which the doctor properly calls "gout," and when it is from a cold cause and medicines cannot cure it, then it is cured by cauteries in this manner:
Make many cauteries around the joint of the foot, and let the cauteries be olive-shaped according to this form:
And if there is need for you to grasp the face of the foot, if you burn it with the whole cautery we call "point". And if the pains come to the knees and other joints, which happens often, then make a cautery on each knee three or four cauteries on each side, with olive oil.
And if you need more, do more, but do not hold your hand too long so that only the thickness of a kernel is burned.
And if the pains descend as far as the knee and back, apply the cautery that we have described in our chapter.
And if the pains are in the hands, make points around the wrist two lines.
And if there is any pain left in the arms, make points on each joint and on the hair of the hand.
And if the pains come to the elbows or shoulders, cauterize each part, and give good governance to the patient and take medicine.
For if you give it good governance and purge phlegm, it will be healed with God's help.
When a rupture comes in the groin and the bowels descend to the buttocks and it is recent, it is necessary that when you see it cleansed, he should not eat anything that day. and let him use things which loosen the belly so that the bowels descend from his belly
afterwards make him sit on his back between your hands and command him to hold his breath while the bowels are repaired and set them right at your will, and press down below the break on the bone of the shoulder blade and at all one sign that resembles half a circle above the body
then heat the cautery which has this shape
as long as it is white and it drips pus. Then reset the bowels to their place and have the assistant hold his hand so they do not return backwards
and work well on the patient's thighs and put a cushion under him and a sergeant on his thighs and another on his foot who holds his hands
then put the cautery on the sign with all your hand and hold it straight and hold it until you reach the bone and if you do not reach it the first time start again another time until you arrive at the bone and carefully guard so that the eye does not weep when you do the cautery. so that you do not burn it. and so that through this, the patient does not die or suffer other ills.
And know that when you do not reach the bone with the cautery, your work is worth nothing.
And it is fitting that the cauteries for children be subtle according to their age, and those for adults as large according to theirs.
After three days, treat the area of the cautery with butter until the burning is removed.
Afterward, treat it with other remedies until it is healed, and let the patient lie on his back for forty days so that the wound heals well.
And it is fitting that his bandages be loosened gradually, so that the eye does not weep when he prepares to go into rooms.
And after forty days, when he wishes to rise, give him a well-made bandage and have him wear it for forty other days.
and let him have good rest, that he work little and guard against too much drinking and eating, and too loud shouting;
and when he follows this instruction he will be completely healed.
And I will say here afterwards the treatment of cutting in this chapter.
When tumors come in other bellies and are known, and you see that they no longer grow, make a cautery with a cautery according to its quantity, and burn one-third of the core; after the cure according to what we have said;
and none of the ancients have said that one should cauterize it with a three-angled cautery according to this form:
But first mark the place of the incision and make a line across the width above the break, and another behind it, and hold your hand steady with the entire hot iron.
But the first cauteries are lighter and gentler.
of ancient pain in any limb When pain comes in any limb, whether from falling or being struck, and this pain lasts a long time, and medicine does not help it, then it should be cauterized with the cautery that is called "points," and let the cautery be according to the length of the limb and its smallness and weakness and strength and its location of twists and turns and its pain.
if it is healed from the first cautery, it is good;
if not, start another cautery on top of the first one, because it is customary that it should change to the member that is closest to it, so it is necessary that you make the cauteries until the patient is healed.
The mesentery is helped sometimes by cautery with great help, and the same disease that comes from the putrefaction of phlegm and melancholy.
If you see it cauterize, take care if the disease is at the beginning, and if it is cured according to what we have said in the division, and does not spread nor remain, and you doubt that the corruption will spread throughout the sick person, then do V cauteries on the head: I smear the head with new [ointment], and the other towards the forehead at the end of the hairs; and two on the two horns, and one behind on the nape;
and I leave as long as your hand that the cauteries reach to the bone, and as long as the scabs come out so that the vapors of the thick humors can escape;
and cauterize above the mouse according to what is before it.
And if the misery is everywhere scattered; and it loses visibly, then you must cauterize with those cauteries that we have said or the chief one and two cauteries on the spine of the neck and six cauteries on the spine of the back and one large one on the rump and another nearby and two on the two shoulders; and two on the elbows and two on the tendons of the foot and one on each joint of the hands and feet and on the pits of the hands;
and beware of the nerves that are on the heel bone, so that you do not burn them;
and never make a cautery on the bone of the elbow and one other on the bone of the stomach and one other on the liver.
And know that when you do more cautery, you help more, and it increases the benefit.
And know that sick people do not feel pain from the cautery as healthy people do, because the body is already all corrupted.
And it is necessary that the cauteries be large and small according to the limbs and joints, according to what you will find in the manner of irons.
After healing, cover the wound with flour mixed with honey and other remedies until it is healed.
When swelling comes in a limb and is treated with medicine and oils and plasters, and it is not healed, then make cauteries on the limb according to its size.
And let the cauteries be a prick entering into the thickness of the flesh. Then cure it with unguents until it is healed.
And sometimes one makes a cautery on the hand and foot and back, at the point where the nerve moves the limb, and thus the swelling is removed.
And nonetheless no one should interfere with it unless they know the limbs and the outlets of the nerves that move the body.
When the illness which is called "albaras" is old, and the engine of medicine is worthless, then cauterize a perfect spot with a cautery, according to the quantity of the species of the heart, until the whiteness is removed, and its color is changed.
Then make a plaster of flour of vetch and lentils with rose oil and plantain leaves, and blood of dove and blood of almond, of each one part. And mix everything together, and bind it with a cloth, and air it in place until it is healed.
The cure of a chancre by cautery
When a chancre first appears, and you see it stopping, then cauterize it with a cautery iron that resembles a circle, encircling the entire chancre.
And nevertheless the wise say that one should also cauterize in the middle of the ulcer;
and nevertheless it does not seem good to me, because I fear that it will be ulcerated and corrupted, and I have already seen it happen several times;
and further back it is necessary that he be cauterized around with the cautery which is called "circle," as we have said in the discourse of cauteries.
When someone has an ailment which is called "adubelati," and it delays in dying either because of the superfluity it causes or because of the weakness of the patient when he is decrepit (that is to say, too old) and he has little blood, or because of time; and you wish to hasten its death: then cauterize around with many small cauteries by pricking. afterwards leave it thus. For she will hasten to die.
And if you see it pierce through all of the cautery, heat the cautery as follows.
And put your hand in the middle of that illness which is called "adubelati" as long as the cautery has pierced the heart, and let the cautery be such that the patient feels it burning in this way so that the course of the rot is relieved.
After the treatment until it is perfectly healed.
There is another kind of illness which is called "corrodens," and it is nothing other than a gnawing away of the limbs, for it eats at the limbs just as fire eats at dry wood.
If you see this ailment in a place which can suffer cautery with fire, then heat the cauteries very small and large according to what suits the place where the ailment is;
After cauterizing all sides so that you eradicate all the corruption and nothing of it remains, so that everything which is corrupted is removed.
Then leave it for three days and put on the wounds cauterized soft bread crumbs with oil until the burns from the fire are removed, and all corruption.
After the cure of wounds engendering flesh.
And if you see after three days that healthy flesh does not grow, it is good;
and if not, begin the cautery again on what remains of the corrupted flesh.
And this ailment has sometimes been cured with a hot medicinal wash in place of fire cautery;
but nevertheless fire cautery is of greater help, and I have already mentioned the cure with a hot medicinal wash in the division: take it when you need it.
Of the leeches that come to the feet Many times it happens that with fire a disease arises which is called "closed" according to our understanding, and it is a large evil thing which bleeds the foot.
And the cauteries for this disease are according to two manners. This is to know fire cautery, and hot iron cautery.
Fire cautery is when you heat the cautery iron as hot as a goose feather quill and make it of good iron to the measure that it can burn the nail on all sides, and that it has delicate edges.
After placing it all hot on the nail, turn your hand around the nail until it comes to the bottom of the nail. And leave it like that for three days until it begins to rot. Then make a plaster of wild mallows ground with salt, and leave the plaster on all night, and the nail will fall out and be uprooted from its roots.
Then treat the place of cautery by anointing it with fat until it is healed.
And if they are converted by fire the body, and it often happens in hands and feet, then it is necessary that you administer a hot iron cautery. And it is in this manner: Take a cane of iron or steel, or a feather of an arrow, and put it on the nail and the surrounding flesh, that is to say warts. And put the cane on so that it surrounds it entirely, then apply a piece of hot coal, and hold your hand firmly, and press your hand in turning so that the edge of the cane reaches the root of the nail, and the hot iron can find its way deep to the root.
and let the patient suffer a bite from the hot iron for an hour; then leave it like that, and all its roots will be pulled out.
Then do one after another, until you remove all those that are on the body, then treat the inflammations which produce flesh.
When someone trembles from cold nerves, or a quartan fever or another, it is fitting that you make them four cauteries or four on the spine of the back, one cautery between each vertebra; and one cautery on the foot, and one on the stomach with an olive cautery;
they will stop trembling, and their health will quickly recover from the cold illness.
Sometimes appear by fire burns on the body, or stinking pustules, which come from corrupt large matter.
it is fitting, at first when they appear, that one make a cautery on each head of the pustule: a subtle cautery from myrtle wood, in which the point is grasped by fire, or a long aristolochia root, or a lentil cautery.
And never apply cautery at the beginning when they appear, according to this manner, and they cannot grow further in front, but the superfluity from which they come is broken, and they are healed.
But it is necessary that this be done after the evacuation of blood.
Many times there are great outpourings of blood from the artery that is cut at the wound which comes to the firebrand, or at the incision of an abscess, or at the cauterization of a limb, and similar things; and it is a very grievous thing to staunch.
And nevertheless when this happens to anyone, if you hurry to put your index finger on the wound of the vein and press it very hard until the blood is quieted beneath your finger and no drop issues forth;
Then put several small and large olive oil cauters on the fire until they are all red.
Then take one, large or small according to the wound and the place where the artery is located, and put the cauter on that vein where you hold your finger, and keep the cauter on it until the blood is stopped up.
And if it leaps forward when you lift your hand from the vein, and the cautery is extinguished, then quickly take another cautery that is in the fire.
And do not stop doing this one after another until the blood is stopped up.
And be careful that you do not burn the nerve which is nearby, and that no other harm comes upon the patient;
And know that when blood flows from an artery, it cannot be well stopped up immediately, especially when the artery is large, unless it is by one of the four ways that we have said. either by cautery, or by extraction when it is not treated, or by a strong ligature of thread, or by medicines placed on top which have the power to stop blood. and let it be bound and restrained tightly.
Who would apply a bandage tightly with cloths or put burning things on it, or other similar things, it will not help and will do harm.
And if this happens to anyone and they have neither mirror nor medicine present, they should put their index finger on the wound of the vein as we have said, and press well until it is rested upon the wound and upon the vein; and do not move it but moisten it with cold water often so that it is very cold until the blood is frozen and thickened and rested;
and make inquiries beforehand about those who need to cauterize and those who need medicine.
We have told you in the first chapter all diseases in which it is necessary to use fire cautery or burning medicine, and the uses and causes and instruments and forms of cauteries;
and I have put this chapter from the top to the bottom, and I will go in this chapter by the same way so that those who wish can find it more easily.
And thus as I begin this one, it befits, dear son, that you learn that in this chapter there is more danger and fear than the first of the cauteries, and for this reason it requires greater caution.
For in the work of this chapter there is often evacuation of blood when opening a vein and incising an abscess and in the treatment of wounds and in the extraction of arrows and in cutting into stones and similar things where there is doubt and fear and many die.
And I warn you that you do not undertake folly. For many kinds of people come for treatment. if there are some who torment themselves so much with their illness that they die easily because of the fierceness they find in their illness and its severity and from these one must have fear.
And there are some who give you their sense and say: “wait, I am cured” and the illness is spiteful.
It is not fitting that you consent to those who come to you who have this manner, but put greater caution in your honor than in your greed, and do not act foolishly but wisely of those of whom you are certain and of whom you can take oaths.
and use prognosis and indication in the treatments of your patients so that health may be converted.
And this will help you to acquire good reputation, glory, and long remembrance.
Very dear son, Our Lord gives you good understanding and uprightness, and if you wish to aspire to the holy inspiration of his hand, amen.
Or I have ordained this chapter in divisions by chapters, according to that which is before it or the chapter of cauteries, that I have devised from the head down to the feet, so that you may more easily find that which you shall need.
Know that this ailment often comes to children at birth, and when the midwife pulls the baby's head too forcefully;
and sometimes it comes from a cause unknown.
And I have never seen this ailment except in children, and all those I have seen hastened towards death; and for this reason it seems to me better to leave such treatments to others.
And I saw a child whose shoulders were full of pain, and whose head grew larger each day until it could no longer support it;
and the moisture grew so much that he died, and this moisture gathered below the bone above the shoulder blade, between the heart and the bone;
and the works are such if moisture is between the flesh and bone, and the abscesses are small, that you split between the head a wide fissure;
and it be also as long as two fingers, while the moisture flows;
and see this shape of a spatula:
If the moisture is more abundant and the abscess is larger, make two cuts in the shape of a cross, like this:
And if the moisture is below the bone, and the signs that you see are the corners of the head open on each side, and the sharp pain leaps forth when you press it with your hand inside, and this is not answered by you: then it befits that you split between the head three fissures according to this manner:
And after the incision, extract all the moisture. Afterwards, remove the fissures with cloths and powders, and he puts wine and oil, and leaves it thus until the fifth day;
then he unbinds it, and heals the wound with bandages and ointments, and leaves the head to be straightened equally, and let the patient eat dry meat free of moisture until the limb is strengthened and healed.
And another way of incision is that you look where the size of the abscess appears, and the gathering of the point;
for it is never in front; never behind; never to the right; and never to the left.
Therefore cut there where the abscess appears, and the gathering of the point, and make the incision according to your power;
and be careful not to cut an artery; and a vein flows blood so that the patient dies from the flow of blood and evacuation of moisture.
When there occurs in someone an ailment called "catarrh" in the eyes or in the breast and the ailment is old, and the cure of medicine does not profit at all, then the last resort is cautery with which one severs the two arteries.
Therefore it is necessary, when you see them cut, for the patient to turn their head back; afterwards rub the place with a rough cloth until the arteries appear, then pull the patient's neck to the whole cloth; Then look where the vein flows, and the temples on each side are behind the ears, and they are filled.
Then mark the temples with a notch, then cut one and the other with a sharp knife of two parts, until the vein reaches the bone, and this should be done across the breadth of the head.
And if you see it, put the spatula below the artery and the cup above, cutting as much as it must through.
And when the vein is cut, if the blood flows continuously upward.
And if the artery does not open to the touch, it is necessary that you measure the quantity of space of three fingers, then mark a notch and cut down to the bone;
and as much blood as is needed to withdraw should be six ounces, and perhaps a bit more or less, according to what the patient can endure and the fullness of the artery.
Then look at the wound: If it remains on the bone and there is a pustule, cut it so that pus does not flow in, then drain the wound and bandage it, and treat it with ointment until it is healed.
from migraine When an old migraine comes, and acute catarrh, due to moisture from tears and the heat in the temples and a strong ancient humoral imbalance and similar things, and it is treated by medical remedies and all of this does him no good, then we extract the arteries of the temples and cauterize them, as we have said.
And the manner of extracting them is such that the patient should make a fist with the hairs of his temples and listen to the artery which opens in the temple for it opens well by its beating and is less full outside than in some men who are too cold;
and if it is full, the patient should tighten his neck with some cloths, then rub the place with a rough cloth and raise the place with hot water so that the artery appears clearly. Then take the spatula of which this is the shape: then scrape the skin slightly until you reach the artery, then lift it up with pincers and carefully remove the membranes that are below it from each side.
And if the artery is thin, turn it to the point of the hook, then cut from that part according to the quantity of the two ends. For if it is not copied, it will not jump at all altogether.
And draw blood from the sixth rib to the third.
And if the artery is large, it is necessary that you tie it in two places with a strong doubled silk thread, so that decay does not come before the wound heals, and blood flows.
Then cut away the excess that is between the two ties at that same hour, and then, if you wish, cauterize it with a cautery blade down to the bone so that the flesh is cut.
And this is the milder operation if the patient does not have a fever and is of hot complexion. For cauteries help to finish off moisture: Therefore it is of greater help against moisture.
When it is necessary to extract arteries, one should fill the area with old cotton and place well-made tents on top.
and when they are loosened, let them be treated with dry medicines that promote flesh growth, and with bandages, until they are healed.
and if without cutting the artery as much as you work, hurry to cauterize it or apply vitriol to the area and hold it with your hand until the blood is stopped. and if you don't have it available, put your thumb on the area until the blood freezes, and apply cold water to the area until the bleeding stops, and extract it as needed.
There should be a space of one finger width between the two blades, and then when you have marked the two spots, place the hot iron on them until it reaches the bone, and cut the vein in two places. And let them be spaced apart between the two heads for it is not soldered together at all.
And this is the form of the cautery:
and the best and easiest way to extract an artery is to cauterize the vein of this two-pronged cautery, but make sure the prongs are well spaced to hold their heat longer. For when the instrument is too thin, it holds less heat.
of tears When the tears of the eyes are descending from the veins that are on top of the head of a feverish person, and no cure of medicine profits them at all, and you see the face of the patient reddening, and feel their forehead pulsating like a tremor; and if they are tense and moist so that the hairs of the papers fall out, and the papers are heated and scorched by the ardor of the tears, then this cure is necessary. And they called it the ancient "bruised cure," and what you do is shave the hair from the back of the head of a patient with this illness, then make three incisions on the forehead equally according to the length of the forehead;
And they called it the ancient "bruised cure," and what you do is shave the hair from the back of the head of a patient with this illness, then make three incisions on the forehead equally according to the length of the forehead; And let one of the incisions be as it should all go down the forehead by swallowing until the nose, and the others you shall make with the ribs above the papers, and beware of incising the arteries that are on the sides above the papers.
And remove your hand from the continuation of the two mandibles, and let each wound be the quantity of three fingers across the joints.
And have ready a piece of sponge and much linen for wiping the blood, then put in the spatula sharp on two sides as follows is its shape.
from the incision which is above the temple to the second incision. And scrape out all the flesh which is between the two incisions until all the fat which is on the bone, then make another cut from the middle incision to the other second one, and then pull out this spatula. If you put the instrument called "cultellaire" into the first crack, it is very sharp on one side and blunt on the other.
And put the sharp edge towards the flesh that is burned at the heart, and the blunt side towards the bone, and push until it comes to the middle fissure.
And cut all the vessels that descend from the head to these parts so that the incision is continuous until you reach those that open onto the heart, and then again make another incision in the middle fissure until the other side.
And then extract the blood equally, and press the place for the blood taken.
Then put in each fissure a tent of old cotton, and place on it cloths softened in wine and oil and alum, and guard that no boils come there.
And on the third day untie the bandage, and bring a large poultice of hot water, then the ointment cure with rose oil, and other cures for which we cure wounds, until it is healed.
When some acute catarrh comes along customarily, and you see these things small and weak, and dim the sight, and burn the papers. and the hairs fall out, and his head is filled with sharp pain, and the patient sneezes; then know by these signs that those humors and phlegm do not come from a single vein, and the remedy for it is this.
And you must instruct the patient to lie on his back, then make a large incision between the forehead and a second one at the width of a finger's breadth. And begin at the left temple and cut to the right temple, and let the incision be down to the bone; and remove your hand from the nerves of the temples that move when chewing;
and when the bone is uncovered, wipe away all the blood with a sponge, and then insert between the two edges of the incision cotton wool and linen bandages; then bind soft cloths soaked in wine and oil over it, and be careful not to let an abscess form there.
When it is removed, you must rub the bone until it starts to produce flesh, and then treat it with drying agents which will promote the growth of flesh.
In this manner: Take two parts of wheat flour and four parts of colophony, and make a plaster. And administer it to these wounds to draw out the flesh.
Of the stuffing of ears
Everything that falls in the ears is one of four things: Either grain, or beast, or a stone from a mine or similar things such as iron. Or seed, such as acorns, beans, peas; Or flowing things such as water and easily flowing things.
When a stone or any other object lodges in the ear that does not fit into the ear and does not grow in it, then put the ear in the sun.
If you see the stone, then distill some oil of violets or sesame oil, and then administer an extraction. And make it sneeze vigorously, and stop its nostrils when the sneezing comes, and put around the ear pieces of cloth or wool. and raise the ear above.
Many times strength comes by this treatment.
And if strength does not come, administer extraction with subtle pincers, of which this is the form:
If it jumps with strength with the pincers, that is good.
If not, administer extraction with a subtle awl of small diameter.
And if it does not jump with that, make a cane of iron and push the head of the cane or the hole of the ear hard, and plug what is around the cane with soft wax so that the veins cannot enter with the cane. Then the treatment will come forth strong, for many times strength comes as we have said.
And if it does not come forth in any manner, take glue of which one takes birds, and put some instrument that is suitable for doing so in the middle, and put a piece of cotton around. Then press the hot iron on the stone or whatever it may be, and draw hard.
And if it does not flow out from all the things we have said, then hasten to cut the ear as if it were an abscess with hot blood, and spasm.
And the manner of incision is such that you first bleed the patient from the cephalic vein and draw out blood according to the measure of his strength. Then have the patient sit between your hands and turn the ear upwards, making a small incision at the root of the ear in the fat or wherever it depends; And let the incision be shaped like a crescent moon until you reach the bone, then press the stone according to your power and suck it quickly into your mouth.
And continue the treatment until it is healed.
And if it is a grain that is inside and it swells, then administer extraction.
and if he cannot urinate, give him a thin, delicate spatula according to this form: and make an incision of that grain.
But do not do this when you think the grain is wet from moisture of the ear until you have made many pieces of it.
Then extract it with delicate pincers and a sucker, as we have said, so that the extraction is aligned.
In acute pain then when a bone is in the ear it is necessary that the patient uses a sneeze first of all, and widely fill the ear with old cotton. And let him lie on that same ear where the pain is. If she jumps far because of it, it is good.
If not, take many stones according to the length of your finger, light and slender, and heat them a little in the fire; and place one or two of them on the patient's ear, and press upon it from their feet on the other side, and strike with another stone upon the stone which is in the ear; and do not cease to do this stone on stone until the sharp pain is entirely gone, and thus it will all be gone.
and if you see it, take the joint, and put one of its heads in the ear, and grasp the other head with fire until the softer joint is burned.
Then redo another part of other joints until the sharpness subsides entirely, as we have said regarding stones.
In the extraction of a beast, if it is of small size, such as a flea and similar things, treat it as we have said in the division;
but if it is of large size that one can feel it, then administer extraction with pincers; and this is the lightest thing to remove that is in the ear.
In the extraction of worms embedded in the ears, when you treat it as we have said in the division and where we treated distillations, and the treatment does not profit at all, then it is necessary that you look at the ear in the sunlight: If there are any worms, take them out with fine tweezers; and if there are none, take the cane whose shape is this:
And it is narrow below and wide above. Insert the smallest end into the ear according to the amount of suffering of the patient, then suck up all the cane. Do this often until all the worms come out.
And if they do not obey and come out, stuff cotton around the cane as I have said in the stone.
And if they do not come out as we have said, administer distillations that the ancients have proven in the killing of worms, and you will find them or treat distillations.
And if you distil your oils and medicines into the ear with all this instrument, of which this is the shape as you see. And whether of silver or iron, it is three below at the small holes, and above it covers to distil.
And to press within the distillation is an instrument of iron well made for it, and if you see take the razor and wrap around the point with cotton. Then it drips your oil or juice, and whatever you see of your medicines in the tube, and the tube is in the ear.
Then put within the razor all the cotton, and press your hand moderately until the oil is distilled or comes out of the ear. And let the patient smell it within, and whether the distillation is a little heated over the fire so it is distilled in the ear. And take care that it is not too cold, for the medicine would not be as good.
Of the stuffing of ears
No child is born who does not have some perforation in their ears;
And the same thing happens to adults through a wound or a splinter lodged in the ear, and this damage sometimes comes perfectly inside the ear so that it cannot be seen;
And sometimes the hole widens because of fire, and one sees it well.
That which comes perfectly and cannot be seen is of a healing grievance in several ways, and in this case it behoves you to put the patient's ear in the sun; and look inside: If you see an apparent obstruction, then the work has this whole form of which this is the shape:
It should be sharp and cutting in front and behind entirely flat so that it does not wound the ear;
If the ingrown hair is from flesh near the ear or the cartilage of the ear, hold it with fine tweezers and gently pluck it until all the hair is removed.
And if the operation is performed perfectly in the ear, then take a very subtle razor and heat it slightly over the fire, then apply it to the body of the ear.
If you feel the ingrown hair that the patient feels pain near the ear, pierce it gently, and be careful not to damage the nerves of the ear.
Then place a tent in the ear according to the width of the piercing, and moisten it with Egyptian ointment. Do this every day until the wound is healed, or you take a tent and moisten it with rose water and powdered vitriol.
And if you see the ear swollen, it is necessary that you draw out the tent and insert another tent moistened with cerate made from rose oil and wax, until the swelling is removed. Then treat it until it is healed.
And if bleeding occurs, plunge a sponge and cloths into cold water, and place them on the ear, and use other remedies that stop bleeding, which are found in treatises on distillations.
This is the tool that comes from papers of the eyes when they are moist and dry, so it is fitting that you extend them with pincers and forceps, and the cup of a spatula from its roots. Then put on the place crushed vitriol.
And if without it being cut off, then cauterize with a subtle lentil-shaped cautery, and cauterize after the incision is made.
And many times they repair themselves, so that nothing remains of their roots. And when they are cauterized by fire, those roots are burned and do not return at all.
of gravel Many times come in papers of the eyes some things that resemble hail in their form and hardness, and for this reason this illness is called "hail," and it is a gathering of thick moisture in the paper above and below. The works are such:
The works are such: Take care if the hail moves from one side to another, and it is a light thing to know.
Make the donkey's skin wide then lightly scrape each part, then take it with pincers and cut.
If you cannot cut it without piercing a bit of paper, do not worry about the patient.
And if the fissure is large, sew it together with a stitch and treat it until it heals.
And if it is small, do not apply any pressure, for ointments will soon restore it and generate flesh.
And if the hail descends into the ear towards the upper part, turn over the paper and hold the hail with pincers, cut it and press on one side and the other.
and if the paper is removed by incision, it does not matter.
and when the hailstone is removed, wash it with warm salt water and treat the place where it entered as long as the patient is healed.
of the fat of the eyes Exinach is a grease that accumulates on cloths and papers, and it happens more to children than to adults, and it grieves their eyes greatly, and they get catarrh in the mornings and cannot look at the sun because tears rush to their eyes.
And for this reason they lie down on their faces and sleep on them, with their papers under their eyebrows, so wet that the swelling and appearance are covered by the exinach which appears in the eye. And when you press the place with your fingers and feel the bone coming out.
And the way to do the work is that the patient puts his head in a healthy place;
And then take a linen cloth, and prepare a tent in the shape of a circle according to the quantity that it contains, exiting from each part, then put it on top. And press with both your hands on one side and the other so that the exiting matter is gathered within the circle.
Then make in the middle of the moisture a sharp incision with a knife, a slit no wider than the wound that one makes when opening a vein.
And cut through the skin completely until you reach the exiting matter. And in several configurations, matter will exit the incision, according to the form of a white piece of fat.
Then extract it all at once with a piece of clean cloth between your hands, turning your hand to the right and left until it is spread out.
and guard that you do not insert into the fissure so that you reach all the way to the eye, lest you bruise it.
And if the pus does not appear at the beginning of the fissure, then widen the fissure slightly until it appears.
Then extract it as we have said, then moisten cloths in water and vinegar, and place them on the area, and bind with bandages.
And if there are such men who grind flaxseed and put it on to corrupt that moisture which has remained.
Then treat it until it is healed.
And if it comes to the site of a hot abscess, then apply soothing plasters until it is healed.
of hairs of paper When hairs grow from planted paper and are aged, they harm the eyes, and bring about manners of illnesses such as accustomed tears and softening of the eyelids, as long as it is the cause of the destruction of the eyes.
And the treatment is according to four manners: either by fire cautery, or by sharp medicine according to what is before it or chapter of cautery, and it is done either by incision and suture or by canes, according to what I will say.
It is necessary that you place the head of the patient on your knee, then turn the paper from the eye to your left hand.
If it is converted, it is good; if not, if you insert a needle along its entire length. and let it be below the margin of the paper where the hair grows from those hairs, and draw the thread along the top of the entire paper, and turn it to the razor;
then make in the part below the paper, below the added hairs, along the entire spatula, from the large tear duct to the small one.
Then extract the thread and place below the paper a small tent of cotton and linen; then draw upon the paper a shape like a myrtle leaf, and in all ways it is necessary that the shape be according to the quantity you see raising the paper which is divided into parts.
And if there is need for someone to have a large quantity of paper according to how soft the paper is;
Then make all along the two lines that you have marked, and begin from large tears to small; And let one of the cuts be near the natural hairs in the thickness of a root, then insert the lancet into one of the two angles of the heart, then flay it all;
Then bring together the two lips with a stitch from a needle with all fine woolen thread, and wipe away the blood, and let the excess of the threads dry on the two eyebrows without using any gluing substances if you see fit to do so;
And if not, do not worry about it, then leave the suture and threads until three or four days;
Then heal the wound without stitching with drying and constricting things, for paper comes alive at the sewing of the wound and its assembly, but stitching is slow (as the ancients say), and this is work without fear. And if there's another way:
And if there's another way: And it is that you sign the paper in a shape like the leaf of myrtle as we have told, at 3 ounces dried according to the form which is here:
Then let him who has little strength do it equally according to the form that is here.
And if you cannot hold the pliers and the thing is not even, take a needle where it has one thread and put it in the shape. And put one other thread behind the large tear, and the second thread behind the small one, and assemble between your two hands the threads equally.
Then lift your hand equally and lift all the skin on which you have signed, as we have told, then assemble the two lips of the wound by stitching and cure it until it is healed.
And if an abscess comes to your incision, soothe it with cerate and similar soothing ointments;
And it sometimes happens that the hairs of the paper are converted:
Then you must use what we have said about incision;
But the suture in one and the other is more artificial.
The cure of boils is according to this form: And that you convert the paper and insert it within according to what I have said, and then make two boils by art, and two subtle ligatures as long as the paper and the width of a spatula is; And cut as two ends where you hold the threads;
Then assemble one and the other subtly upon that which rises from the paper of the oil, and strain the two boils from the two parts they form; and leave it like that for several days, and the skin which will be stretched will die and harden and bear, as long as it wishes by itself.
If it is delayed, if the head has some strength, then treat it until it is healed;
and when the wound is closed and the paper is lifted, and the hairs no longer grow;
and this is the shape of the two canes that you will make according to this figure and according to this quantity of length and width:
the works are such that you take a fine needle, and put a thin silk thread through it; then join the heads and tie them subtly, and let the length of the threads be a palm long;
then arrange in the chase another thin silk thread quickly, and tie the heads of the threads;
Then put the patient's head on your lap;
and let it be in the sun so that the work is illuminated, for this is a subtle and delicate work, then insert the needle at full speed into the root of the hair closest to the joint, and make it pierce quickly through the skin following the natural direction of the hair.
Then pull out the hair up to the joint and insert it into the joint if there are one or two or three or more hairs.
Then withdraw your hand so that all the hairs come out of the joint along with the skin following the natural direction of the hair.
And if the joint is treated and the hairs do not come out with it, you will pull the joint downwards along the thread that you have ordered, until the joint comes out through the hole above and you see it with your eyes.
Then you should treat the flesh and the thread, and close the eye and leave it closed for two or three days, until the hair grows back in its place and the flesh grows up over it;
And if the hairs are small, accompany one long hair from a horse's tail with it, and let it grow together with the one you are leaving it with until it is elongated and then remove it.
Of the rotting of the eye When this illness which is called "aleacratio" or rot comes to the eye, there are two ways:
one natural, and the other unnatural.
And it occurs through a wound incision, or by cutting with a cautery, and similar things.
And the way to treat it is that you cut the suture, and separate the lips of it, and put flax tents in it, and bind it until it heals.
And it is not fitting that you use things in its treatment that dry and constrict. For if you do this, the illness will return worse than the first.
But work with softening things, such as fenugreek; And rose of aquilegia or allspice and flaxseed are cooked, and ointments of diachylon melted in any of the oils, and it wraps a tent, and cures it from this.
And the treasures of your cure are that you take care that it does not fuse according to the form it was before;
And this work that we have said is nothing more than the direction of this disease, so that it does not return according to the form it was before.
This sickness which is below, which is truly called "axacrati," and is natural and accidental.
Accidents come from wounds and fissures and cauteries and similar things;
And the way of working it is that you take a needle with a double thread and stick it into the flesh and make it pierce from the left tear duct to the right so that the threads come out on both sides of the flesh.
Then the flesh is cut above all the needle, and the cup at the spatula wide. And if the shape of the paper returns according to what is necessary, it is good;
If not, take the razor and put it in the slit, and turn the paper, and make two slits or cuts on either side within the paper;
and let the heads of the two slits be at the two angles of the incision that you have cut, and make one angle so that when they are joined together, the shape is like the shape of a Greek letter “Y”;
Then remove that flesh, according to the amount its sides are affected below, so as not to tear the paper, then rejoin the two separated parts and sew them with a thread of wool;
then apply the care that we have mentioned of softening medicines and bandages, until it is healed.
And if the ailment comes from a fissure or suture or cautery, it is fitting that you make a full incision below the hairs of the skin, and according to what has been said before. Then separate between the two leaves of a tent, as I have said.
Then separate between the two leaves of a tent, as I have said. And one must do the work according to the form of the ailment, for it is very diverse in form, and wise masters prepare all sorts of tools so that they can make the shape return to its natural form.
And the patients themselves, according to what is fitting for work and instruments are in several positions.
When this suture occurs in the hands of men in such a way that the skin above is stuck with the white of an egg and cannot move or perform its natural works, then you must put the point of a razor under the skin and lift it up.
and hold them like pincers, as long as you grasp that which is airy with a subtle spatula, which is neither too sharp nor too blunt, so that the patient can only suffer from the spatula being too sharp and not bleed.
And let your incision, by which you scrape off the assembled skin, be slightly made so that the paper revives according to its natural form.
And heal all that is assembled, and do it sometimes in the sharp saline eye, and raise it with sweet water, and with broth.
Then place a tent of linen between the paper and the eye, and put woolen cloth soaked in abundance of egg on top of the eye. And after the third day, use warm broth and similar things until it is healed.
Know that the nail is according to two manners: It is nervous and appears like hard fat, and another which is not nervous but appears like white frozen moisture, that when you touch it with iron and think to pinch it, you cannot.
And both kinds begin toward the great tear duct and grow bit by bit until they cover the whole eye and all the light and the movement of the eye.
And the manner of incision is that the patient puts his head on a sound pillow, then he opens his eyes; and lift the paper to your hand, then hold the needle with small forceps and extend it above; then take a needle and put a hair of horse, or cow, or ox, with strong thread; and double the point of the needle a bit and stick it in the needle, and pierce it through with the whole needle, and tie the needle with thread and extend it above, and flay all the hair on the side of the needle that touches the caruncle and silk to the hair up to the head, then cut the rest at the root of the tear duct with a very fine spatula and small forces, and leave the flesh natural or tear duct, so that through the incision does not come the accustomed body fluids;
And sometimes they have fastened the nail to the awl alone, as we said. Then, having skinned it, one takes all the spatula smooth of which this is the form:
And be careful that the spatula does not touch the fleshy cloth and tear it, and that the kernel is not pierced.
And after the incision, put a piece of silk thread into the eye, and make a collar out of silver, and leave it until the next day. Then heal what is necessary so that it may be healed.
And if the nail is not nervous, and you cannot put in the needle, and the awl cannot enter, many times this kind of nail is cured by medicine.
And they grow as I have said in the division, and if you see it covered, work on the eye of the patient, and take a light sharp piece according to this form. And lift the bone subtly, and if you see that it decreases not and the reason hastens it, then distill from your mouth into the eye a collyrium made of litharge and red lead, finely ground, and keep the eye until the next day.
If nothing opposes you in the eye, such as an abscess, then milk it, and first treat the hot abscess until it is healed, then resume the work as before, until it is healed.
Then begin the other work according to this same work, until it is all removed.
And if the appearance of the flesh from the tear harms the eye greatly, suspend it at the corner, and cover part of it and not all, so that fluid does not enter.
Then distill into the eye red collyrium which is made of litharge.
In some men a red flesh never is born, and cover the prunes and restrain them on papers and turn them in the fire, and they resemble a rose of baluster.
and the works are such that the patient puts his head in good health, then he works the eyes, and all the flesh with suitable needles for this, and supports it with strength;
then cut the first flesh, and go cutting all the way with the razor to the end, and be careful that you do not bruise the eye during the work;
and let the incision be along the spatula that we have said in the incision of the nail and with small force by which one removes the splinter, as the shape after this chapter demonstrates;
and when the incision is complete and all the flesh is removed, apply oil of cypress or you distill red cochineal and similar corrosive medicines, and put hot cotton oil with a little egg white on top so that it is well assured against a hot abscess;
and if it remains there and the sock covers it, and you doubt a hot abscess, leave the eye and treat the abscess with soothing things for a hot abscess.
Then return to your work until it is healed, and do the same when a splinter is lodged in the eye.
But nevertheless, it is necessary that you relieve the treatment of each weak eye by its natural path; and from accidental paths in ironwork.
And do not put your hand into any of these works until you see that this limb is suffering from this work.
Blood vessels are red veins that are covered on the eye, and tolerate their work to sight and weaken the eye every day.
It is therefore necessary in the first place that you look to see if the eye is weak or strong, and there is no other illness except pain. Then proceed in this manner:
Command the patient to put his head in a healthy position, then suspend those veins at every inch according to his wisdom, and let the inches be subtle double according to this form.
And let them be applied in degrees throughout the body according to this form:
Then one coils those veins subtly, and wipes the blood hour after another, until you see those veins move away from the eye;
And be careful that you do not prick the eye with the points of the spatulas, and do this work at noon in front of the sun, and be very fervent in your work so that you only sever those veins;
And when you have done this, if you distill green and red collyrium into the eye to corrupt what remains of the humor.
And if you cannot collect all of this in that hour, then make a plaster on the eye of soothing things to ease the pain of the eyes, and leave it for some days until the pain is eased and you are sure of a hot abscess, then start again according to this manner which is before until he is healed;
and this is the form of forces:
The one called "arissati" makes a fistula:
When you treat it by cautery and by burning medicine according to what I have said before, and it is not healed, then cut into the abscess, where it should dwell, and draw out all the moisture that is there until the bone is exposed.
And when the bone is exposed, and you see the decay and blackness, then take all the instruments with which it is made.
and it is called "sharp point," and is made of iron at the front end, and is pointed like a file as it is in the present form:
And put it on the place of the corrupted bone, then turn it between your two fingers, and press your hand a little until you know that this corruption is removed.
and do this several times, then restore the place with drying medicines.
If the wound is sealed, and flesh grows, and the body of the gut is sealed, and remains thus for 40 days, and it does not reopen and is not abscessed, and no bad accidents occur, know that it is healed;
If this is not the case, if there is no other remedy than to return the fistula to the anus opening according to this form: and it is that you uncover the bone a second time with an iron instrument, and with sharp medicines, and when it is uncovered, take a drill according to this form, and let the head of the drill have three angles, and let the shaft be tapered down to a point as you see here:
then place it on the bone near the tear duct, and remove your hand from the oil one finger's breadth away, then turn the drill completely until it pierces the bone, and let the patient feel this by the vein that flows out if they hold their hand on their thigh;
and then restore the place with dry medicines, as I have taught you, and when the flesh grows and hardens the place, the matter goes to naught. This is an easier thing for the patient.
When the eye opens entirely and there is no hindrance in the nose or decrease, then it is fitting that you bind the patient.
Then the healthy one, then put on leeches or a cupping glass without iron to suck, then put on the eye a bandage made of acacia and aloe and incense and sarcocol, and then strain the eye, and plaster with bandages and cloths.
And the manner of the cloths is that you take cloths soft enough and fold each one into four, and then put one on top of the other according to the quantity the eye needs.
Then strain it with a hard bandage, and start again the cupping to suck without hurting.
Then remove the cupping glasses and leave the oil strained day and night, and if the ligaments soften, then you must strain it a lot.
Then remove the ligament after a day and night, and if you see the oil recover, it is good.
If not; start again the plaster and cloths and the ligament and cupping glasses until it is healed.
when rupture of cloth with When a disruption comes in the woven fabric, then open it up, and remove strips of paper as fine as grains of resin, and it is astonishing to see.
Then if you see it covered, the work is such that you thrust a needle into the root of the lower part up to the upper part, then thrust another needle where there is a doubled thread from the tear duct. and let it pierce, and leave the first needle according to its position;
then take the place of the doubled thread and tie one part of the eye around it, and pull it tight, then remove the needle and put a softened linen cloth soaked in plenty of egg white on top;
and leave it until the thread loosens with the eye, then treat the eye with comforting things until the wound is healed;
and once the wound is restricted by the eye on each side with a circle of cloth, until it is healed.
And if the eye has a large appearance, pierce it with a fine spatula that comes perfectly from the eye, and correct the whitish moisture and remove the eye, and it will heal quickly;
then remove it until it is healed.
This disease which is called “alcunnati” is nothing but a bowel assembled in the eye, resembling descending fire, and it is not fire;
And the manner of performing the operation is such that you make the patient sit upright on a suitable seat, then take the head between your hands in two parts, and move it so that you see the bowel come up above your eyes; then let it be fixed, and not descend, and relieve the light, and let the patient see things as he used to;
and if it does not descend below, know that it is fire, and if the descending of the bowel is not as we have said.
If you make the patient sit between your hands, then take a subtle spatula and cut on the horny membrane one spot along the continuation of the conjunctiva with the horny membrane and the cornea, as long as the bowel rises;
And when it is drawn out, distill into the sharp hot oil mixed with honey, or hot water or fenugreek boiled and honey, then let it be cured by another cure until it is healed.
of sharp points of the eye We have seen the resemblances of needles in the division, and what it is fitting to pierce. If in work according to health.
It is fitting that you make the patient sit between your crossed hands, away from the light of the sun, and bind his good eye tightly.
Then place the paper from the eye in your left hand if the eye is left, or in your right hand if the eye is right.
Then take in your right hand, if the eye is left, the instrument which is called “almagda,” or in your left hand if the eye is right.
Then place the point of the instrument near the crown through the thickness of a reed at that part of the eye where there is least tear gland. Then push the instrument which is called "almagda" skillfully, and turn your hand until it pierces through the part of the eye, and feel that the almagda enters into the empty space.
And it is necessary that the measure of the almagda passage be exactly equal to the space from the pupil to the end of the black part. and this is the crown of the eye;
If you see the bone in this paper due to the clarity of the corneal veil, then put the instrument as far as where the point is, and then press it out below, one way after another.
If it is sharp now, the patient sees it in front of him and the instrument in his eye.
Afterwards rest a little, and if the point goes back up the second time, put force on it with the instrument, and when it is firmly fixed and does not rise, gently withdraw the almagda by turning your hand bit by bit.
And then put back into it a drop of gemstone juice, and lift from it the eye within. Then put a cloth or linen moistened in rose oil and plenty of egg yolk on it, and tie it with healthy oil.
We, and those who are of our time, put on a common poultice with plenty of egg.
And if the almond cannot enter the eye because of its hardness, for there are some men who have their eyes too hard, then it is necessary that you take the instrument which is called “alberit”, of which this is the form:
And so pierce only the conjunctiva, and do not go too deep, but make the place subtle, then put in almond, as we have said;
And for the completion of the work, prepare the patient a sleeping doctor approaching, in which he sleeps on his back in a dark place;
And let it be devoid of all movements, and take light meats, and do not move his head neither to the right nor to the left, and let it be bound according to its position until the third day;
Then untie it in the same dark house, and test its sight, and make it see some things, and then tie it back until the seventh day;
And it is not fitting that you do this in the hour of the cure or after the incision now, but it is fitting that you delay this, because the humor rises quickly.
When an abscess comes, loosen the bandage before the seventh day, and apply what dries up the abscess.
And when it is appeased, loosen the bandage and put a linen cloth over it to cover for several days, and keep it in a darkened room.
Then gradually go outside little by little, and return to your normal activities.
And know that no disciple should interfere in this case. A man from Yrach came to us who told us that in his homeland they made an almond cake which causes a sharp pain, but for all that I have never seen any such thing in our land, nor have I ever read about it in the books of the ancients. And perhaps it is a new thing.
And these are the appearances of almond shapes so that those who do not know them may recognize them.
and let them be of good iron And let the heads of these be of the same subtlety, and the last one in three sharp angles.
Sometimes there are born or found diverse joined chariots, from which some appear like scorpions with many feet;
and if there are such that have a chariot enchanted of fox color, and if a chariot seems of good color. In that then of these chariots which is of good color and not enchanted, it is fitting that you make the sick person sit between your hands against the sun;
In that then of these chariots which is of good color and not enchanted, it is fitting that you make the sick person sit between your hands against the sun; and open their nostrils, and put the ointment on those chariots, and draw them forth; for as much as you can sustain it at a subtle sharp spatula on one side, until you know that chariot is all taken out.
And if there remains any thing which one cannot take out, then work with all the subtle instruments lightly, so that nothing remains; and if without overcoming it, or an abscess arises, so cut it as it is necessary;
and if they are malignant abscesses, hasten and cauterize them so that the pus is dried up and all the humors are removed, then apply fresh wine vinegar. If it works and moisture comes up to the palate, know that it is healthy.
And if the moisture does not pierce as it should, know that there is a humor in the bone above, to which the instruments do not come to cut.
Then it is necessary that you put a linen thread a little thick, and knotted with our hands, and have between each knot a space of one inch or less. And put the patient's shoulder on the thread in his nose at its bottom, and draw it while smelling as much as it comes through the nose into the mouth.
And many times they do so to children at schools, and it is a light thing for whoever wants to do it.
Then hold the head that comes through the nose with one hand, and the other head that comes through the mouth with the other hand, and draw them out one after the other as we are who are skilled at it.
Do this until you know that the worms have corrupted the flesh, then draw out the thread, wipe away the blood, and moisten the thread with Egyptian ointment, and put it back into the nose as before.
Do this for three days or more, until the ointments corrode everything that remains of the flesh;
and then insert into the nose a cane of lead for several days until it is healed, and if it needs drying medicines, use them.
and this is the form of the instrument for purging the head, into which one distills the oils and medicines or other things
And it is made of silver or iron, resembling an open lamp, like a cane, and conducts it as well;
and if you wish, make a closed cane, and the instrument is full to purge the head;
and it has a handle at the head to hold it when one heats the oil or any liquid.
From the flesh comes the nose
Many times there arises in the head a disease called "telul", which grows and becomes large over time, so much so that it is a fearful thing to behold;
and for this reason, you must cut it at the beginning and remove all of it, then apply the cautery or burning medicine to the spot.
and if one delays covering it until it is large, take care if it is hard, of dark color, with poor sensation:
Do not touch it with iron because it is a festering abscess, for when one covers it even once, great harm comes to the patient;
And if the abscess is soft to the touch, not dark in color, and you see that it can be completely covered, empty the patient and cover it without fear, treating the area with drying and binding agents.
Know that when a solution of continuity comes in one of these cartilaginous works, it profits little, except in some men.
Therefore, when this happens to anyone, see if the wound is fresh and full of blood; and then bring the two edges together with stitches, and treat it until it heals.
And if the edges are already separated on one side and the other, it is necessary that you scrape all the parts of their core until they bleed, then bring the two edges together with stitches, and remove them, and sprinkle with powder of dragon's blood and ground incense. And put on the powders a piece of strong plaster or another soldering plaster, and leave it until it discharges by itself, then treat it with ointment until it is healed.
The way to suture is that you bring the edges together: either with needles, as we have said in suturing the abdomen; or with thread, as I have shown you.
of abscesses of the lips
Within the lips there often appear hard abscesses, resembling grains of millet, some smaller and some larger;
then you must turn back the lips and cut open each pustule, take them with pincers and remove them in each part.
Then apply the area after the incision with powdered vitriol, until the blood is stemmed.
And then cover it with linen and treat the area with dry things until it is healed.
Many times there arises on the gums swollen flesh which the ancients called "albulus"
it is necessary that you hold it with forceps and cut it at its root, and let the pus or blood run.
Then put ground vitriol, or other restraining and drying powders on the spot;
and if that flesh returns after the incision, which often happens, then cut it a second time and cauterize it. if it does not return after the cautery,
Sometimes there are assembled at the head of the teeth, within the mouth between the gums, crusts that are ugly and rough. And sometimes the teeth are black and citron-colored and wormy, as long as the corruption comes to the gum, and the teeth are foul-smelling.
it is necessary that you make the patient sit between your hands, and his shoulders are in your lap, and hold the bones or the splinters visible, until there remains nothing; and then make the blackness and the greenness, and the yellowness and the other stains, until they are cleaned;
and if one removes that which is at the first reason, it is good; if not, one begins again on the second day and the third, until you have raised everything;
and know that teeth need various shapes of instruments for raising, according to what the work shows, for which the rasp with which one raises front teeth has other shapes than those with which one raises between teeth; and these shapes and others should be prepared with you.
It is necessary when you treat a tooth for its pain that you delay drawing it out as much as you can, for this ought not to be done. For it is a very noble substance so that one has no excuse for drawing it out.
Then when the patient is constrained to be treated, it is necessary that you are certain of the tooth that is painful. Often the pain deceives the patient, and they think that it is a holy tooth, and have a good tooth drawn. And nevertheless the pain does not depart because of this, as long as the bad tooth remains, for we have often wanted to do this to these saints.
And when you are well certain of the aching tooth, it is necessary that you scrape around the tooth at all points, and spit forcefully to keep the gums from all sides.
Then move it with your two hands or use subtle forceps at the first prick and prick, so that it is well loosened, then firmly grasp the forceps. and let the head of the patient rest upon your thigh between your knees, and hold it well so that it does not move.
After extracting the tooth straight without breaking it, and if it does not come out easily, take one of these instruments and insert it into each side gently, and move it as you did at first.
And if the bone is pierced and gnawed, it is fitting that you fill it with cloths where the holes are; and if you extract it subtly with tweezers so that it does not break when extracting it;
and it is very wise to work around the gum to loosen the tooth.
And take good care that you do not break it, and a part remains, and returns to the patient by the ill will of the root greater pains than the first.
And beware that you do not act like ignorant barbers who by their haste and boldness often break the carriage and do not accomplish what we have recounted;
but often bring great illness by the extraction of these roots that remain, or by the carriage they break, as we have often seen;
and when the tooth is drawn, wash the wound with wine or vinegar and salt;
and if blood flows from it, which often happens, apply powdered vitriol to the place.
and if that doesn't work, cauterize it.
The shapes of the instruments with which one pulls teeth should have long points and thick handles so they do not bend when you pull the tooth.
And these are the shapes: And they should be large limbs so that they do not bend in the opposite direction, and they should be made of good iron, and they should have teeth to hold the pieces.
from the root of the teeth When the root remains after pulling, you must put moistened cotton with butter on the place for one or two days until the gums are softened, then insert the tongs called "algefri," whose head resembles a bird's beak.
And their inside should be made like a file and this is its shape:
And if the roots do not want to come out with all these forceps, then you must expose the flesh around the root, and put in the instrument which is called "althali," that is to say, a small plane, of which this is the form:
It must be strong and thick so it does not break, and if the root comes out with these, that is good.
If not, then help yourself with all the instruments, from which the forms come hereafter:
And if one uses this instrument which has two handles, of which this is the form: and other instruments which are in front in the manner of teeth, and of this instrument which appears like large tongs, of which here is the form:
And let these instruments be such that they cannot break, and know that many instruments are made of dense material; and also other instruments, which are not so sharp;
and the wisest master craftsmen discover their own instruments according to what their work and the illness show them, for there are such illnesses where the ancients did not teach any instrument due to the diversity of others, so that they do not break either the chariot or the other bones, or it rots, if he seeks the instruments that suit him, as I told you, and help yourself with gestures, of which this is the form:
And let them be large and well-gripping to hold the bone so that it does not escape, but can hold and remove it;
and then restore the place with medicines suitable for this, and if there is rot in the bone, and it is small, so he has all these instruments:
When the tooth appears not according to nature, and its form is ugly, even in young women, it is necessary that you know if the density came after the tooth, and is not in its proper place, and cannot be filed or smoothed.
then the rasp. And if it is joined with the tooth, take this instrument whose shape is like a small beak, and is made of sharp steel.
And the tooth must be filed little by little every day for its hardness, and so that you do not move the others, and if it appears that one can file it, then file it with a part of a lime like this is the shape:
And it is also like the file with which one makes needles
And file the tooth little by little in the hand lightly, so that it does not move until it comes out.
Then the blade in the end should have no scraper, and if the steel is too sharp and it cuts the tongue, then file the sharpness until it is smooth so that it does not cut the tongue nor corrupt speech.
When the front tooth loosens, either by impact or by falling out, and the patient cannot press on what they are eating without it hurting, and you have treated them with astringent medications, and that does not work;
then it is necessary to restrain it with a gold wire, for silver wire turns green and rots, but gold never changes.
And let the wire be neither too thin nor too thick, according to the amount of space between the teeth;
And if you wish to straighten the teeth, take the wire and bend it double between the two healthy teeth, then put the ends between the crooked teeth, if there is one or more, until you reach the sound tooth on the other side; Then begin again the covering until the part where you started, and strain your hand subtly and wisely, so that it does not move.
And let your bandage be at the root of the tooth so that it cannot escape.
Then grasp the head with a file in tongs, and assemble them, and place them between the healthy tooth, and fix it so that it does not bite the tongue;
And then leave it tight as long as it can remain, and if it loosens, or the threads break, remove it with another thread;
If it remains and serves thus for its entire time, this is the form of the teeth and the arrangement of the two healthy teeth, and the two missing ones, as you see:
And when a tooth falls out, if it is put back in its place again and again, as we have said.
and let no one interfere who is not wise and experienced, and at no time make the shape of a cow's bone tooth, and put it in the place where the defect is, and extract it as we have said, and let it remain and serve for a long time.
Never is this ligament which comes below the tongue or natural, that one is born thus; or by an accident of a stitched wound;
and the works are such that you open the mouth of the patient and hold his head in your lap, and lift the tongue;
then grasp the nervous ligament widely, as long as the tongue is dislodged from its tenement, and if there is hardness or knot, and it is due to stitching of a wound, then he puts in the hook and grasps widely that ligament;
and guard that the incision not be too deep, for the artery which is beneath;
and when you have done so, lift the place with a sharp rose and ice, or with a sharp cold, then put under the tongue a tent of linen;
and let the patient chew each night, so that the gums may not stick together.
And if a flow of blood comes, put ground vitriol on the place; and if the bleeding does not stop, cauterize it with a lentil-shaped cautery, which is good for this; then cure it with another remedy until it is healed,
and if you see a scar of black or hard color that the patient does not feel, do not touch it at all, for it is a chancre;
and if it is declining toward the armpit, and there is moisture, then he cuts the sinew, and makes an incision with a subtle scalpel, and delivers it from one side and the other. and if the blood does not come to your work, then put ground vitriol on it until it is quenched, then return to your work until you draw out all the pus;
then lift the wound from its place and cleanse it with other remedies until it is healed.
of the abscesses of the throat Sometimes there come into the throat boils that are called "godaths," and we properly call them the two almonds, and when you cure them as we have said in the division, and they are not healed, then take heed:
if it is a hard abscess of small size and dark color, do not touch it with iron at all.
And if it is red and the root is thick, do not touch it at all with iron, also for the draining of blood. But leave it alone until it is dead, and then you will cut it away, where it would break on its own.
And if it is of a white color and the root is slender, prepare the instrument to cut, but first look to see if the abscess is quiet and calm.
Then make the patient sit facing the sun and let their chest be bare, and open the mouth and take the scalpel between your hands, and press the tongue down below with the instrument.
And it should be of silver or fine steel as a knife is:
While you press the tongue down with this instrument, and see the abscess, take the lancet and insert it into the almond, and draw it forcefully upward as much as you can.
and do not touch anything of the cloths with it, then put the cup on the instrument, which is its form, as it seems to have some force; and both the heads are curved and one towards the other, and are very sharp, and are made of tempered iron or steel:
And if you do not have this instrument present, take pliers as they are shaped like this: And it is sharpened on one side, and not on the other.
And when you have applied one of the almonds, apply the other in the same manner, and after the incision gargle the patient with warm water, clear and easy, and if bleeding occurs, gargle the patient with warm water, or decoctions of cooked pomegranate seeds, or myrtle leaves, and similar things, until the blood is stopped; then let it heal until it is healthy.
And if other abscesses arise in the throat besides the two almonds, apply them similarly as the two almonds were applied.
And I treated a woman for an abscess that was born inside her throat, to be exact an abscess of small size;
And it had almost completely closed off her entire throat, so that the woman could not exhale through the passage that was blocked, and she could neither eat nor drink, and she would have died if she had remained like that for one or two days.
And the abscess was so high up that it had to be pierced twice through the two nostrils of the nose.
I therefore hastened immediately and put in a small incision, then I let the pus out freely, and extracted a large amount of bowel;
then I made another incision in the other opening of the birth, and opened her mouth and pressed her tongue;
afterwards I put the incision into these abscesses, and cut out a part, and there only came out a small amount of blood; and thus the passage of her throat was opened up for the woman, and she began now to drink water and then wine, and I did not stop cutting from that abscess for a long time;
and the abscess would grow again, and fill the place that I had emptied, until it became very large;
then I lanced it and cauterized it inside the throat: afterwards it ceased to grow;
and I departed from those parts, and only God knows what happened after me.
of the eye
When the membrane covering the eye descends to the eye and it is swollen and elongated, it is called "perpendicular";
and if it is below large and round, it is called "uve".
When it is treated as we have said in the division, and the treatment does not help, and you see that the inflamed abscess is soothed and subtle, then you must cut it;
and the one which is round and assembled and not long; and it is of a bloody or yellowish or black color, so you must avoid cutting into it. For there is great danger for the patient.
Therefore, when you see it, according to the manner I have described, by its color and length, you should make the patient sit facing the sun, and press their tongue against the instrument which we mentioned before. Then insert the cautery into the eye, and draw it underneath, and hold it with one of the two instruments that I mentioned in the incision of the two almonds.
And you should not grasp it too forcefully, only the excess that is beyond the natural limit.
For if you grasp more, it will greatly harm the voice and speech.
And after the incision, use what we have said in the incision of the two almonds, and treat it until it is healed.
And if the patient is afraid of being cut, it is necessary that you use a remedy to quell their fear during cauterization.
And the manner of the cautery if it is sharp. And let the patient put his head in healthy ground, and then press his tongue to the instrument that we have mentioned or the chapter of cauterization, and bind it with sharp, lively thread, so that it is not too thick nor too thin. And in employing the wrapping of this instrument, of which this is the form:
And let it have on its head a covering where one puts the medicine, as the coverings of a spoon, and put the instrument over all the medicine on the eye.
And let the patient lie on his side, so that the saliva and mucus flow from his mouth into the medicine within, so that it does not descend to the throat, and make him choke.
Then hold your hand over all the medicine and press it on the eye for the quantity of half an hour, until you see it soften and the bites of the medicine are calmed.
And if you see it, take cotton and wrap it around any instrument, and moisten the cotton with the medicine, and push the instrument all the way into the cotton in the cane above it, until the cotton catches fire on top.
And do this often, until the cautery is perfect, then leave it to dry, and bind it afterward for four or five days.
And if you need to moisten the cautery with the medicine again, do so, and after the cautery wipe it around the eye with cotton soaked in butter, and cleanse what is around it from the medicine.
And let it be washed with cold water, and let it be treated with gargles until it is healed.
This treatment is safer than incision or cautery;
if it is cured by fumigation according to this manner, take calamint and hyssop and origanum and rue and chamomile and lavender and similar herbs, and gather them all or some of them in a pot, and put water in it, and boil it;
and the pot should be well sealed with strong earth, and in the middle of the pot let there be an instrument placed according to this manner: And it should be made of silver or iron, and let one of its ends be inserted into the patient's eye socket as far as the vapor rises to the eyeball through the tube, until the eyeball is mortified;
then repeat often until the eyeball dries, and be careful not to do this at the beginning of the arrival of a hot abscess, for many things can happen; and do not do this except at the decline of a hot abscess.
And if this instrument is not present, then take a cane and put an egg white inside the head, so that the patient's mouth is not too hot; For the egg white does not allow the steam to burden the mouth, and it is a good cure together with health.
Often a bone or fishbone, or something else, gets stuck in the throat;
So it is necessary that you pull out what you can see, and press the tongue against the sun with all the instrument, so that you see the thing move;
And what you do not see and is lodged in the throat, it is necessary that you make the patient vomit so that the meat is cooked in the stomach; perhaps if it is extracted by vomiting;
or the patient swallows a piece of sponge, or a piece of navel, or a lettuce root, or a piece of stale bread; And tie it to the sponge with thread, then transfer it. And when it arrives at the place, if it swells, then draw hard.
And if it does not come easily as we have said, then take the plunging instrument according to this form:
And let the instrument be curved at the head so that it can enter the throat more easily, and have the head raised upwards. And be careful not to touch the epiglottis, lest it should make you unwell, nor push any bone inside.
And it is better that the patient inserts the instrument, so that they know where the thing is swollen. If he pushes it down, then draw hard on the whole instrument equally, until it comes loose.
of the bloodletting of the throat
Sometimes medicine is without effect, as I have said in the division, by the treatment of medicines. And when this does not profit, then look in the throat of the sick person to the sun, after which you press their tongue with the instrument that I have told you.
And if you see the sinus, if it has all little hooks, or use fine tweezers that are suitable for this.
And if this does not work, take a pointed cane, and put it into the patient's throat, then push or drive the end of the cane with a hot iron, and do this often. And let the patient hold sharp water every day.
Then take a full draught of sharp cold water, and work the mouth open, and have it swallowed down, and move it in their hand often. And as soon as the sickness feels the sharpness, it will cease.
And if it does not cease as we have said, then fumigate the sick person with asafetida, at the instrument that I have mentioned in the fumigation of the grape.
Do this many times, for it will fall away without delay.
And the manner of fumigation is that you take a pot in which there are hot coals, and it be covered with a cloth pierced in the middle, and in that hole be placed the head of the instrument.
Then he inhales the fumigation, and the patient puts the head of the cane in his mouth, and closes his mouth so that the smoke does not escape, but comes to the sinuses;
And the sinuses will now fall, and if they do not fall, you begin the fumigation many times;
and the patient suffers thirst, and eats salty things and such, and does not drink water;
and then it is necessary that they go out by this treatment.
And the shape of the instrument with which one treats the sinuses, is, when one can see it, like tongs bent to enter the throat; and has the appearance of a bird's beak, and it has the roughness of a file, so that whatever it takes, it cannot let go;
Many kinds of abscesses are, according to what memory brings here after one and the other in this book, and they are diverse in perforation and size;
and it is in two manners, one of which is in its appearance itself, and from the moisture it holds.
And the second manner is for the ulcers when they are on the body.
For abscesses of the head are different from those of the buttocks, and abscesses in fleshy areas are different from those that come in joints, and each has its own judgment in the work.
And if abscesses one should not pierce, as long as the belly is healed according to its fulfillment;
and if there are such that it is necessary to pierce when they are ripe, and do not die according to their fulfillment, as abscesses which are near joints.
For when abscesses come near joints and it is left until it is ripe around, by chance they may corrupt the ligament and nerve of the joint, which causes contraction in that limb.
Where the abscess is near the principal limb, and if you delay the perforation until it is ripe, it will harm the principal limb;
or where it is near the fundament, if one pierces it even when it is ripe;
And it is not right that you pierce an abscess which is hard without complete digestion, except for the one which is near the fundament, lest it rot thoroughly, and be drawn out inside, and a fistula form; and it may not heal in a long time.
And you must know the hour of the perforation of the abscess which is dead according to its ripening, and it is when the pain is eased, and the departure of the fever, and the lessening of the pain and redness, and the softening and sharpening of the head of the abscess, and the other signs;
and you must make the perforation sit where there is the most dependent part of the abscess, and where it appears to be moving;
and let the perforation be along the length of the body, and if the abscess is in the hands or feet, or in joints and near nerves and arteries, and in all equal places where there is no weeping. In cases where they bend, according to the member.
And when an abscess is in fleshy place, it is better that you leave the perforation until it is confirmed to be digested completely, as we have said.
For if you pierce it before this, its body will be lengthened by the venom within it, and it is full of much filth. And perchance the lips harden and the depth of it.
And if there is an abscess which is pierced according to the width of the body, according to what the limb requires.
And it is necessary that you administer small abscesses, small perforations; and in large abscesses, large perforations, and many fissures according to the appearance of the size of the abscess;
and if there are such abscesses where it is necessary to sever the core, and cover; When it has become as yellow as drapery, and is dead, then it is necessary to do as one does with boils:
and if there are such that are split into three angles, and if there are such that one cuts as the leaf of myrtle, as abscesses of anger;
and if it has such things where one makes a round incision, and other incisions and similar cuts.
Those who do not have a head, such as a superficial abscess, it is fitting that you pierce them completely;
and it is fitting when the abscess is large and has collected a great deal of pus, and you pierce it, do not draw out all the pus in that hour but draw out a portion; then open the abscess until the next day, then draw nothing further. Do this many times in succession, until all the pus drains out.
In the same way if the patient is of weak constitution, or a woman carrying [a child], or small children, or old men debilitated. For the spirit sometimes leaps with the exit of the bowels, which by chance kills the patient, and you do not notice it.
Therefore avoid this chapter with great caution, and when you have pierced your abscess, wipe the wound clean, and look to see if the wound of the abscess is small. and if it is a clean wound, apply bandages of linen or fine cotton. and if it is a large abscess and there are many openings, you must put a bandage in each one so that they come together.
and if you have covered a part of the skin in the abscess and have sewn it around, you must fill it with old cotton or linen tow without moisture and bind it until the third day.
Then the bone will heal, and the ointment dressing will continue until it is healed.
And if bleeding occurs during your work, apply cold and fresh water, moisten a cloth, and place it on the bleeding area many times.
And if the discharge of blood persists, apply dressings and treatment, and the powders that I have mentioned in this book to the area, and if it is a time of winter, and the wound or abscess is very sensitive, you must put on bandages and cloths soaked in warm wine and oil;
and if it is in summer, and the flesh is fleshy, it behoves that you put wet cloths on it with vinegar and oil, or with wine and cold oil, until the third day, as we have said;
and then untie the abscess and wipe it and heal it, as is fitting, until it is healed.
And this is universally known in the treatment of abscesses:
I have told you how one should proceed before treating abscesses, and see this chapter.
Where the head of the shoulder comes small abscesses, and are manners of us that are in webs, just as the jeweler's file of a ring, and many are like it.
There are some that are fatty and others that have moisture as well as pus;
and if there are such that are hard and stony at the waist, and there is no doubt that the artery does not oppose it.
And the works of the hip are such that you should try all instruments called "dilator," of which the form comes after this, what it contains.
For if it contains moisture, so let it pass over for a long time.
And when the moisture is drained, if you scald without leaving the skin that contains it, because it returns immediately when you leave nothing;
Then plunge cotton in Egyptian ointment, if it is present; If not, in water and salt, and apply it to the wound, and leave it until the next day; and do what remains of the night.
And then begin again with cotton as before on the second day, and the third, until you know well that it does not remain for a night;
Then treat the wound with suitable ointment until it is healed.
And if an abscess is full of thick pus, treat it according to this form for a long time; and apply your ointments and scrape it from all sides, and put all your treatment of milk where it lies;
and if the artery opposes you, do as I told you afterward.
And also do for an abscess if it is pierced, and of the waist and of the cure as I have told you.
And the incision on the abscess softens and the moisture, it is lighter for they are drops of blood. And if some of these abscesses or head where there is no moisture, and of these were I abscesses that I copied or the head of an old woman;
And I found the abscess just like a hard stone, rough and white, and could not break it; And if one had done so, they would have done just as well to make a wound from a stone.
In other abscesses coming on the head, those which come on the heads of children and at the roots of the ears, the opening should always be in the lowest part, so that the pus can flow out;
and the cure should be done as is appropriate.
Many times this abscess occurs at the neck and below the armpits, and in the angles, and sometimes it comes to other parts of the body, and they are very painful and intertwined with each other.
And each scrofula is properly within its rib, just like the nodule and the abscess on the head, as we have said; And the appearances of these scrofula are many.
And the appearances of these scrofula are many. There are such things that contain moisture, and some that are so bad they will not obey health.
In the one then that you see of good disposition to touch, and it seems like the color of the body, and moves from each part and is not near the nerves of the neck nor at the artery nor at the duct, and is not deep;
it is fitting that you cut it above, and scrape it from each part, and extend the two edges of the heart to ointments, if you need them, as we have said in abscesses of the head;
and treat it little by little, and be sure that you do not cut the nerve or vein, and let the scalpel not be too sharp nor cutting, so the hand does not slip, and do not go too far ahead lest you cut what you should not.
And if you cut a vein or artery, and it does not let you work, then put into the wound powdered vitriol, or some powders that staunch blood, and draw out the wound; And let it remain until the abscess is appeased, and the wound is softened, and begins to fester.
And when the blood has been drawn off, you may return to your work until you have completed it;
Then you must be sure with your index finger whether there remain any small scrofulous ulcers, and if so, clean them.
And if it has in the root of the scrofulous ulcer a large vein, you must not cut that scrofulous ulcer at its root, but tie it with a strong doubled thread and let it fall off by itself without harm.
Then dress the wound with old cotton dipped in Egyptian ointment, then bandage it.
And if you scrape away the whole scrofula, it is necessary that you bring together the two edges of the wound and sew them now, since there is no longer any excess due to the size of the scrofula. It is necessary that you know how to cut the root of it, and draw firmly, and sew as we have said.
It is necessary that you know how to cut the root of it, and draw firmly, and sew as we have said. Those scrofulous ulcers which retain superfluity, pierce them where it appears dead;
and pierce them as the one previously mentioned, hanging down, then apply tents with ointment and similar things so that it corrupts what remains of the corruption. and when the wound is well cleansed, apply an ointment promoting healing flesh until it is healed.
The ancients said and spoke of the cutting of the throat; but I never saw anyone in our land who did it, and this is the writing of their words.
For those who have strabismus, it is necessary that the cleft of the throat which is called "epiglottis" be cut out; and one should not help him by this means, for all the veins and the throat of the sick person are affected in those who have a hot abscess in the mouth, or in the throat, or in the tonsils.
When the sickness is in the channel of the throat, it is fitting to lift the epiglottis to avoid the peril that comes from choking.
It is therefore necessary, when we wish to cut the epiglottis, that we cut it below III or IV circles a small incision across, between the II circles or according to the quantity of the incision of the pharynx, not in the cartilage;
And those are suitable for cutting the epiglottis because there is no cartilage and the vessels are long.
And if the master is fearful, it is necessary that he extends the skin of the throat to all the edges, then splits the heart until it reaches the sternum. And avoid the blood vessels, if you see anything, and then cut the symphysis, as we have said;
and it is demonstrated by the section of the phlegm from the sternum which flows out through the place that is broken, and by the loss of voice.
And leave the wound open a while.
And when the hour has passed in which we doubt strangulation, bring together the two lips of the wound of the heart, and sew it all alone without the cartilage.
Then administer medicines that produce flesh, until it is healed.
Albucasim says that one should not do this until the throat is completely torn open and the patient is judged to be dead, and the defect is apparent. Then cut the epiglottis so that the patient can breathe, and he breathes through the wound, and thus is saved from death;
And because the ancients commanded to leave the wound open until the evil of the disease has passed, and it passes in three days or four. And then they commanded to sew up the wound and clean it, until it was cleansed;
And I will tell you what I have seen. I saw that a young woman took a knife and stuck it in her throat, and cut part of the channels of the windpipe;
and I was called to heal her, and I found her as dead as can be.
I uncovered the wound, and found the blood which had flowed out of it, and although it had not opened a vein nor run any further than the throat, the veins were ruptured by the wound.
I hurried and sewed up the wound, and cleansed it until it was healed;
and it did not happen to the damsel that she was red of voice, and she returned afterward to her disposition;
for this reason I say that in the cutting of the epiglottis there should be no fear.
This abscess is called "hernia of the throat", and it is a large abscess in the color of a yellow hue, and it is very common in women;
and it occurs in two ways: by nature, and by accident;
where the natural one has no cause.
And the accidental one occurs in two ways, of which one is similar to thick phlegm, and the other way is similar to an abscess that comes from our arteries; and there should be fear, and it is not fitting to work with fire except in those that are small, and prove and search all the way through: If you find it as we found ours, and it cannot be opened to any vein, then cut it, just as one cuts the nails, and treat the hair with all its down, if there is any. And enclose it well from the beginning, and care for it as is fitting until it is perfectly healed.
There are many ways known to us, of which I will speak of all the resemblances;
and it is fitting that I say all the difference that is between nail and issue.
I say that an issue is hot and feverish, as long as the boiling is not passed, and the corruption is completed. Then the fever and heat subside.
With a nail there is neither heat nor fever nor pain, and it contains the pus, which is its own bag and is according to the color of the body, and it begins just as a pimple, and grows large.
and they are according to two appearances, either greasy or moist, and their color is as I have said in the division.
It is necessary, when you come to the treatment of a new wound, that you examine and inquire first with all the instrument which is called "introductory" according to what its form will be or the chapter which is after.
And the manner of inquiring into abscesses of us is that you take the moistest place that you find in the abscess, and turn your two fingers little by little, until you know that the instrument has pierced the center, then according to the size of the abscess.
Then extract the intruder, and take care in case it springs out.
If moisture runs, whatever color it may have, do as I have said for the other abscesses;
and if after the intruder no moisture comes, know that it is greasy, so do it then in a cross shape and take it with pincers, and lightly scratch it on each side and watch the coat where it lies so you draw it out cleanly with the new.
and if you cannot draw it out whole, do so piece by piece so that nothing remains.
For if anything remains, the pain will return many times.
And if a small piece remains and does not bother him, apply the wound with some strong corrosive powders, cleanse the wound, and put soothing things on the hot abscess, and treat it with other remedies until it is healed.
And if the pain is great, sew the two edges of the wound together and treat it with what promotes flesh.
And if the pulsating vein is against you or something else hastens you, apply powdered vitriol to the place and leave it for two or three days until the wound rots, and relieves the boiling of blood. Then return to cauterize what remains in the pain.
See here the forms of instruments for insertion, and they are of three kinds: large and medium and small;
and there are three square ones which are called "albaret," and one which is called "breb," and there are three kinds: large, medium, and small, to encircle abscesses of fistula;
and they are also like the needles with which one sews charms, and they are made of yellow brass, or iron, or silver, and those which are yellow are worth more, and are better proven for black lead to encircle the curves of fistula;
and they are of three kinds: large, medium, and small, according to the quantity of the width of the openings.
The shapes of the lancets are very similar as you see here:
and if it has two curves in three ways also;
and if it has three curves, and are also of three ways;
and if it has two curves, and those with one curve only, and are of three ways;
and all this is necessary in their place.
The heads of these are what they do with sharpening, and some of those that cut only from one side are used for scraping, so that we don't cut the vein or nerve.
And of these instruments are the lancets set in handles, so that the patient doesn't feel it when opening abscesses.
and they are of three ways: Great, small, and medium, as you see;
And do not use any but in fleshy places, such as legs, arms, breasts, and angles, and similar places;
And never make another instrument small, resembling the husks of walnuts, according to this form, with which one staunchs blood: and put it back in place which heals by cutting veins and arteries
Sometimes men's breasts swell when they begin to be corrupted, so much that they appear like women's breasts;
and remain ugly and swollen, and those who wish to cure them, if it is necessary, should proceed according to this form from line .b. to line .g.: Then scrape off the fat and fill the wound with medicine mixed with charcoal, then bring together the two edges of the wound with stitches, and treat it until it is healed;
and if her breast hangs down, and is softened by its size as it often happens to women, then make two cuts on the breastbone, through two similar incisions. so that one is joined to the other at the end of one and the beginning of the other, so that the larger line contains the smaller according to this form, from this line .b. up to the line .g.; then flay the skin between the two lips, and remove the fat, and apply what we have said about suturing and powders, and what is necessary for healing, until it is healed;
and if it is not healed, or the incision is not completely made because the patient does not want to rest, or because of bleeding, then you should fill the wound with softened cotton soaked in corrosive ointment; and let it until it softens the remainder and the fat, then heal it until it is healthy.
These abscesses that come below the armpits are hard kinds of scrofula where there are ribs and some contain moisture.
Therefore those containing moisture must be cut according to this form, from line .b. to line .g.: And when all the pus that is in the abscess is emptied, then apply the wound with old cotton and leave it until the next day. Then remove all the cotton and treat it with an ointment suitable for this until it is healed.
And if the abscess is similar to scrofula, then make it like we have said in making incisions for scrofula, and if the wound goes inward, apply a cautery as we have said before.
When the artery is cut and the skin above it is sewn, many times abscesses occur, and the same thing happens to the swollen vein and abscess.
and if the one who knows cuts when it is for the artery, the abscesses are long and perfect. and when you feel it with your fingers, you sense the separation.
and when it is for a vein, the bones are seen to be further apart.
and it is foolish to cut this abscess, and especially when it is under the armpits and at the angles and neck and many other places, and it is very large. It is therefore necessary to avoid the cure with iron, and he who is in charge must also avoid it, and on the one who has a swelling from an artery running under the skin for a long time.
Then work the incision as directed with one-inch marks, and cleanly separate the artery from the surrounding tissues until it is exposed.
Then insert a needle beneath it and pass it through to the other side, and extract the artery with a doubled thread in two places, as I have taught you in the extraction of the two arteries that are in the temples.
Then cauterize the area between the two ligatures with an intro Mitter until all the blood has been released and the abscess is drained.
Then apply a bandage that promotes healing, as long as the ligatures hold. Then dress this with an appropriate ointment until it is healed.
And if the abscess is at the size of the vein, it is necessary that you hold onto what you can grasp from the abscess to all the surrounding skin, then insert a needle beneath the area that you are holding and pass it through, using a doubled thread so that you draw it out on the other side. Then tie the abscess, as I told you, with a thread from one of its two sides to the other.
And if you doubt that the thread will come loose, put another needle through all of the thread under the whole abscess at the incision of the first needle, and pull out the threads in four parts.
Then cut the abscess until the excess comes out, then cut the excess of the heart and leave that which is tied.
Then put a cloth softened in wine and oil on top, then give him care of bandages and ointments until he is healed.
Just as abscesses come in arteries and veins, abscesses also come to nerves when they are overworked, or from too much work, and similar things.
And this happens most often in the shoulders and arms and in all their places where there are joints, and it is a grievous abscess, and its color resembles the color of the body, and it is in several conditions without pain.
And when it is removed formed, the patient feels pain, and it is not perfectly matched to the body, but below the heart.
And it moves well in all directions and does not go forward nor backward, nor below nor above; and the one that is in the joints should not be covered by iron. For fear it might contract. And if it is on the head or forehead, cut the skin with a scalpel.
And if it is on the head or forehead, cut the skin with a scalpel. If the abscesses are small, take some tweezers and grasp them at their root.
And if it is large, suspend it to the lancet and flay it, then the surgeon and bind the wound with stitches, and cure it until it is healed.
Sometimes it happens in the bowels and nowhere else, and it is a disease called "fungus" because of its appearance like mushrooms, and it has subtle roots, and thick heads.
And there are small ones and very large ones.
And I saw a man who had two in his belly which were more like fungi than anything else, and there was no difference between them, and they were white, and they had small roots, and they were easily cut, and moisture continually flowed from them.
I weighed them and found that one weighed eighteen ounces, and the other six.  And when performing surgery, if you see that the patient is moist, and the color of the joint is white and moist and has fine roots; if the incision is made wide, and there are fire cauteries present.
if the incision is made wide, and there are fire cauteries present. For at the hip there often comes excessive bleeding, and if the blood goes too fast, then hurry and cauterize it.
And if you see the patient fainting and fearful of the incision with iron, then take a well-made linen thread, and bind the joint as we have said, and leave it for two days.
and then restrain it, and do not cease to pull the thread of linen until it catches the artery, and flows through by its labor.
And if the roots are thick, it is feared to cut them immediately because of the belly, but you can well cut half of it and then cauterize it so that it does not grow back.
Then dress the wound, and be careful not to cut the tendon which is of a fox color, poor in feeling, and milk-like in appearance.
For this is an inflamed abscess, and I will come to the treatment of chancre later.
when the arm is strong If the appearance of a boil comes from cautery of a wound or a fissure in the flesh, and is on the belly and in some of the bowels, as it happens in other ruptures, or from blood that flows from veins or arteries according to what is present, or from windiness;
and if it is by the rupture of the flesh and by the issue of the bowels, then the color of the abscess appears like the color of the body, and it is a light matter without pain, and it opens from different issues. And if it is due to the exit of the intestine, then it is more diverse; and when one presses on its sides it springs back, and then returns, and by chance if it is tightened, it greatly enlarges at the entrance of the bath and through hard labor.
And if it is due to moisture, it is a light thing, and opens well when you press it with your hand, but do not constrict it.
And if it is due to blood, it opens with these signs: large and hard abscesses, and fixed according to a certain quantity. And if it is due to windiness, it is soft to the touch, and the work is such that you look to see if the appearance is due to blood from an artery or vein, or windiness.
And if it is due to windiness, it is soft to the touch, and the work is such that you look to see if the appearance is due to blood from an artery or vein, or windiness. It is fitting that you leave the treatment. For there is doubt and fear, as I told you in the chapter on abscesses, for the artery and for the vein.
And if the appearance is due to the intestines or bowels, it is fitting that you instruct the patient to hold his breath and be stretched out straight, then grasp all around the elbow. Then command him to grasp often between your hands, then go around the place that you have grasped with all of the spatula, then extend half of the abscess above to the whole large one. Then bind it around with a strong thread, or a cord of strong silk firmly, and let the knot be loose.
Then work on half of the abscess extended above the ligature, and push your index finger in and grab the intestines; If you find it caught by the ligature, loosen it and push the intestine out of the belly;
And if you find pus, grasp it with forceps and cut away the excess.
And if an artery or vein opposes you, bind it well then return to your work and take two needles, thread them with strong thread, and push the two needles around what you have already done so that they pierce through.
Then stretch the abscess in four directions over the needles, and if you see pus, remove the needles and leave the ligatures until they rot and let the dead flesh come off by itself. when you cut it when it is thin and rotten, then the care of what suits it, and open the abscess as we have said;
when you cut it when it is thin and rotten, then the care of what suits it, and open the abscess as we have said; and extract the blood or moisture that you find, then treat the area with what suits it, and suture the area.
about a sore We have said in the division the likenesses of a chancre, and how one should work with medicines, and how one should avoid the treatment of iron;
and say that the chancre spreads into the marrow, and great caution is needed in its treatment, and they said the ancients that when a chancre is in a place where it can be scraped, such as a chancre which is on the breasts, and on the thighs, and in similar places, it should all be removed when it is in the beginning;
No one has ever healed without me before.
And the works, when it is in place or can be removed, as we have said, are that you purge the patient of black bile once;
Then make him fast if he has manifest repletion, then put the patient in a good place to do the work;
Then gather your ointments or poultices, and hair from all sides, and bone from all sides without leaving anything out;
And let the blood run freely, and wipe the area with your hand or some other thing, and if the flow of blood prevents you from cutting the artery or vein, then cauterize it until the blood is stemmed. Then cure it with another cure until it is healed.
Of dropsy We have already said in the division the resemblances of dropsy, and in what manner the gathering of water is made, and the signs of each resemblance, and the cure which is made by medicines, and that which is cured by iron:
and one should not touch it with iron in these two cases: that is to say, tympanites and ileus, for it is a deadly thing;
Therefore when you treat this kind of dropsy which is called "cracked" with medicine and the treatment does not help, consider whether the patient is weak or if he has another disease than dropsy, such as cough and loosening of the bowels and similar things; do not touch it with iron, for there is doubt;
and if you see the patient is of strong constitution and he has only dropsy and is not too young nor too old, then you must proceed as follows: lay the patient straight on your hands, and have the attendants press the belly by pushing the point at the lowest part below the hip, then take the sharp pointed spatula in this manner: And let it be cut in two parts. At a point, and however it is not so deep that it can reach the intestines when inserted, and it cannot be broken.
Then look if dropsy is drawn towards the intestines: If it is necessary that you cleave within the bowels, three fingers breadth below on the left side of the buttock. And if dropsy is due to liver disease, then your incision should be on the left side of the bowels, three fingers breadth below.
And if it is due to the spleen, then it should be on the right side, and it is not necessary for the patient to lie on the incision so that the superfluities do not flow into that weak spot.
Then pierce all the skin with the instrument and push it in, and lift your hand on the whole length between the skin and the fascia as far as when scraping to the quantity of a nail or so.
Then pierce the thighbone until the spatula arrives at the eighth place, and this is the place of the needle, then pull hard, and push this instrument which has this shape: And it resembles a subtle silver cane, and is made of iron or brass light, and has at the bottom part a small hole. And on one side, there are three holes. And two on the other side, and one on the other.
And the head is shaped like a pen, and this is the shape of the incision which scribes use to cut their pens.
At the top there is a handle, so that when the instrument arrives at the point, it now rests on the instrument.
Then empty out half or a third part, because if you empty more than is fitting at that time, the patient might die due to the resolution of his spirit from the limb, or his head might become numb, or he might approach death.
but according to its quantity of virtue, and according to what the patient's disposition signifies in relation to virtue; and his pulse;
Then treat the instrument and hold the point, and it is now held by the heart which pierces the opening that is on the syfac, of which I have spoken, that you pierce in this manner;
Then restart the instrument the next day, if you see the patient suffering thus, and treat the point with a small quantity;
Do this every day, and be careful not to press as long as it remains but a prick of a point.
And if you doubt the patient, and leave much of a point there, if the treatment involves burial or hot sand, and through much sweating or bathing and in the sun, and if he drinks; and the cure of drying medicines until he is healed, and cauterize on the stomach and on the liver and on the spleen after the extraction of the point, as I have said before.
Sometimes children are born without a hole in their penis, or the hole is small, or it is not in its place.
If it is necessary, as soon as he has not pierced all the spatula very subtly according to this form:
then put or make a small subtle plug of wool, and bind it and hold it thus for III days or IV and when he wants to urinate, remove the plug so that he may urinate, and then replace it;
and by chance it is not necessary, for the urine which comes will not allow it to be closed.
Those whose opening is small, if it is treated with a clove of garlic, as we have said, it will enlarge.
Those who do not have the opening in its place are unfortunate, for no one is born with the opening at the head of the penis, so they cannot urinate before lifting their penis upward; and they cannot copulate because the matter cannot come up to the bladder, and it is a bad disease.
And the manner of the work is such that the patient lies often on his back, then they extend the head of the penis and the cap as the size of a quill, so that the urethra hole is in the middle, as it should be;
And beware of the discharge of blood that often comes, and if it happens, let the one who stops blood stop it, and treat the wound until it is healed.
of the pimples of the penis Often these boils come on the penis, and they are an unsightly appearance of flesh;
and there are malignant and non-malignant ones;
it is necessary that you take them with a subtle lancet, and cut and cleanse all of them, then put moistened cotton with Egyptian ointment on top; then treat it with diachylon ointment until it is healed.
And if the wound is malignant, of a foul color and discharging, then it is fitting that you apply a cautery to it.
When you have caught it, and if the foreskin is partly on the penis and partly inside the skin, then you must remove the part that is inside first. And when it is joined together, the treatment is outside.
For when you treat it all together, unless the head of the penis is surely secured so that it is not pierced, blackness and decay will come to the penis and the groin.
It is necessary to remove everything that is black and corrupted, then apply a plaster of honey and flour made from pomegranate bark and vinegar, then treat it with other treatments until it is healed.
And if a flow of blood comes, apply the lunar cautery according to this form:
Cauteries assist in two ways together: that is to say, in the stopping of blood, and in counteracting corruption.
and if the head of the penis is corrupt and retracted, it is necessary that you draw or insert a cane of lead into the penis and have the patient urinate.
and when the hairs grow around the head of the penis which happens to those who have not been circumcised, whether it is due to a wound or an abscess, then it is necessary that you scorch it with a sharp instrument, until the bonds are loosened and the head of the penis is delivered from all sides.
and if this is a difficult thing to do, it is necessary that you scorch it with a spatula at several points around the head of the penis and the skin.
Then carefully separate them, and apply a thin linen cloth soaked in cold water so that it does not burn again.
Circumcision is not a loosening of continuity like other wounds; Whenever we perform this work of our own volition, and especially on children, it is necessary that we make the best work, and the lightest for their safety.
I say that the ancients did not speak of the circumcision of their children, for they did not use it in their law, and we have nothing more than what we have acquired by experience.
For I want the greater part of the masters and surgeons who performed circumcisions used to do it with a sharp knife, with force, and with all their might.
This would split the heart because there are two membranes, and by chance if one cuts this one above it remains below. Here it is necessary to cut, and the pain is doubled, and at the cleansing which is of the two membranes, the point of the member is not reliably secure.
And at the cleansing of the one membrane, by chance the iron slips, and ruins the work, and many times they are born so that they do not need cleansing and I want it so.
About the modification which is made to all the strength of the thread I have found the goodness of experience for the strengths cut just as well above as below.
For when you press your hand, if you cut equally in I all at once; but let the threads be well twisted around the leather;
and let the manner of the first work be such that you make the child think, if he understands, that you are only doing it to tie the thread around his penis, and then comfort him in all ways that you can;
Then make it come out straight between your hands, and put the force between your hands or below your feet so that the child does not see them, nor any of the instruments;
Then put your hand on the penis and blow where the heart is, and pull it up until the head of the penis is in; Then cleanse it well from the filth that has gathered there, then tie the place with a doubled thread, then tie it below the other ligature;
Then cleanse it well from the filth that has gathered there, then tie the place with a doubled thread, then tie it below the other ligature; and hold it with the second ligature to the scrotum and index finger, and grasp between the two ligatures, then lift the heart quickly above it and pull the head of the penis; then let the blood run drop by drop, for that is the cure; and put powder on top and on the powder lay a cloth soaked in half an egg yolk cooked with rose water, mixed with good and fresh rose oil, and leave it on until the next day, and cure it with other cures until it is healed.
The form of forces for purification is this:
Let the two blades be held and sharp, and let the blades also be as large as the handle equally:
The error of purification is when the heart flees within the incision;
Therefore it is fitting that you extend it to your fingernail, just as the sharp face of an abscess does:
And the cup equally, and if you cannot hold it to your fingernail, then hold it with tongs, and then hold the cup.
And if they pass three days, and that which is under the foreskin is swollen, then leave it until the abscess below is appeased, and scrape it lightly;
If the cup moves as you can, and beware of the part of the foreskin, for it will not harm anything.
Therefore cure the place of things within a wound with powder as we have said in our treatise on powders and if one sews too much and it goes above it will not hurt.
Therefore cure it as we have said until it is healed.
regarding retention of urine
The retention of urine is from obstruction by stone or congealed blood, or bowel, or flesh, or similar things, as we have said in the division.
And if the urine is not released and you see that the retention is due to a stone at the neck of the bladder, it is fitting that the patient be bent on his knees. And let his feet be placed on his back and extend his belly above the back, and restrain the patient as much as he can. And then the neck of the bladder is constricted to expel the stone above so the urine is released.
and if it does not come, as we have said, and the patient feels great pain, then you must administer an extraction with any instrument called a "syringe," which has this form:
and it should be of fine silver, light and thin, like the feather of a bird; and the tube should be one and a half palms long, and be fine at the head.
The method for draining urine is such that you take a doubled thread and tie a piece of wool or cotton to the head, and insert the head of the thread into the syringe;
and cut off the excess wool and insert it up to the head of the syringe, then grease the syringe with oil or butter and egg white, and make the patient sit on a stool, and anoint the bladder and penis with moist oil and olive oil and lukewarm water;
Then gently place the syringe into the penis, as far as it reaches the root of the penis, then double the penis over towards the buttocks.
Then push the syringe forward until it reaches the bladder, and let the patient feel it coming up to the empty place, and this is not done according to this order unless the one who guides it where it goes is crooked.
Then stretch the thread all along the wool bit by bit, and the urine follows the wool, then pull it out and let the urine flow.
And repeat with the syringe until the bladder is emptied, and align the patient.
When scorches or blood comes into the bladder, or putrefaction is gathered there, and you see sharp waters and medicines distilled, then make with all the instrument which is called "clepsedre," and it is of this form:
It is closed, and if it has 3 openings: Two on one side and one on the other, as you see.
And the veins are cut so that the medicinal court is such that it cauterizes the penis well without additional pain, if one can draw out the moisture and inject when necessary.
and when you see your medicines settle in the bladder, put the head of the cautery into the moisture and draw it out with the instrument that is within.
if you draw the moisture to the cautery, and then pull strongly on the instrument within; the moisture will enter within and come to the bladder immediately so that the patient will feel it.
and this is the form of the subtle enema with which we enema the bladder
And it is made of silver or boxwood, and the head is higher;
and below at its side where the linens are tied;
then take a sheep's bladder and put the moisture that you see used to enema the bladder in it, then tie it between the two sides with a good strong thread doubled, and heat the tip of this moisture over the fire.
Then put the head of the syringe into the penis, then hold your hand over the bladder so that all moisture comes out, until the patient feels that the moisture has come to the bladder.
And if you don't have a bladder, take a piece of parchment and make a circle out of it, and pierce it round about. Then put a strong thread through these holes, then assemble the circle like one assembles a bowl, and put in it what you see of oil and moisture and vinegar, and tie it to the instrument.
And do as you did with the bladder, press with your hand until the moisture comes to the bladder.
of the stone
We have already said in the division the ways of stone and its extraction along with medicine.
And we have said the difference between a stone embedded in the reins and all the signs, and which stones one should operate on. and in the bladder;
And I will tell you openly and briefly.
I say that the stone that is lodged in the bladder happens more often to children, and it is a sign that the sharp point of the stone resembles a sharp point in its subtlety;
and it opens the urethra and scratches the patient's penis, and bends it many times, and then stiffens; and many of these points dissolve.
And the healing is light for children until they are four years old, and it is very grievous in the elderly, and it is in the middle for those who are between adolescence and old age;
and the cure is easier for those who have large stones than for those who have small ones.
And when we come to the treatment, it is necessary first to purify the patient by enema, to draw out all the phlegm that is in the bowels. For it hinders sometimes to seek the stone.
Then take the patient by the feet and push them down so that the stone descends to the bottom of the bladder, and sometimes it comes out from there.
Then make him sit between your hands evenly balanced, and let his hands be below his thighs so that his bladder is entirely inclined downwards.
Then grasp it and press it inside.
If you feel the stone in the space, hurry now and cut above the stone.
And if it does not budge at all when touched, moisten your index finger with oil from the left hand if the patient is a woman, or your middle finger if the patient is a young man who is fully grown. Insert it into its base and grasp the stone, and when you feel it with your finger, bind it at the neck of the bladder.
Then press on top of your finger, and insert it at the opening where you see you must cut.
And instruct the assistant to press the bladder with his hand and command him to extend his right hand upward with the testicles, and with his left hand remove the skin that is below the testicles in the area where you are making the incision.
Then he inserts the spatula, cutting, with this form: And he makes an incision between the buttocks and the fundament, not in the middle but on the side of the left buttock;
and it shall be straight upon the stone, and your two hands shall be right there by the fundament, and the waist shall be made so that it is wide outside, and inside narrow, according to the quantity of the stone, not too large;
by chance the press with the hands which are by the fundament shall jump out without work;
and know that there are some stones which have angles and margins: if it is grated to come out;
and if there are some which are underneath, resembling a lentil, and round, from which the issue is easy.
Therefore when there are angles and edges, make the incision larger;
And if it does not come out, you must pull it out with tongs that are like a file at the head, to extract the stone so that it does not escape. Or you insert a subtle instrument bent at the head;
And if you cannot bring it out this way, widen the hole a bit, and if the sinew is cut, remove it with vitriol.
And if there are more than one stones, insert the largest one first into the neck of the bladder, then those above it, and treat them forcefully; then the smaller ones afterwards if there are several.
And if it is very large, it must be sewn, and a larger wound made. For two things happen to the patient: Either he dies, or his urine comes out immediately because the veins cannot bind.
but nevertheless force yourself to pull it out, or to break it up with pincers, so that you pull it out piece by piece.
And when you have completed your work, apply the wound with frankincense and aloes and dragon's blood, and extract it, and put on top a cloth moistened in oil and wine, or oil and rose water and cold water, to soothe the hot abscess; Then bind the patient under his neck, and do not untie the bandage until the third day.
And when you loosen it, if it rises very well in the place of oil and water, then cure it with ointment diafynacon and ointment basilicon until it is healed.
And if abscesses come in the wound and corrosions, and blood clots in the bladder, and urine is retained by it, which is known in part that without straining with the urine: Therefore apply a poultice to the wound and extract that blood, for if it remains, it will corrupt the bladder, and rot it;
Then raise the wound with a needle and thread, and help it in all ways that you know until it is healed.
And it is necessary that every hour that you treat it, you bind his two thighs together and apply the medicines on the site.
And if the stone is small and it is lodged in the urethra and stuck so that urine cannot pass; if the cure I have just described is performed many times, one can be excused from cutting due to this treatment. I have already tried this way.
Take a piece of iron according to this shape and fix it at three angles in the fire:
Then take a thread and tie it around the penis below the stone so that it cannot go back into the bladder;
then carefully insert the borer into the penis until it reaches the stone; and turn the borer in your hand against the stone bit by bit, until you can pierce the stone through to the other side;
If urine comes soon, then press your hand on what remains of the stone that is inside the penis. If it is soon broken, and jumps out with the urine, and the patient is healed;
and if you cannot do this for anything that prevents it, tie one thread under the stone and the other above, then cut the penis where the stone is between the two threads, then extract it, untie the thread, and clean the frozen blood that is in the wound; and treat it until it is healed.
from the stone of women
It can happen that a stone is lodged in women, and if it happens sometimes, the treatment is difficult, and it is forbidden for three things:
one is that perhaps the woman is a virgin;
and the second is that one cannot find a woman who is well-informed and who will reveal herself to the doctor, even when she is chaste.
And the third manner is such that by chance one cannot find a woman well-knowing in this art of hands;
And the fourth manner is such that the stone of the woman is more deeply embedded than the stone of the man, for which it is necessary to make a deeper incision, and there is great fear. And if necessity compels you to this, it behoves you to take a midwife well-knowing, and with difficulty one finds her, and if you do not find her, then you should use a sharp, subtle knife;
and present a midwife well-versed in the lives of women, or a woman who knows part of the art, and command her to do what you command her regarding the inquiry into the stone; and look very closely whether the woman is a virgin:
and look very closely whether the woman is a virgin: then it behoves you to put your finger or thumb on her fundament and seek the stone;
and if she finds it, she should constrain it below her finger, and instruct her to push her finger where the patient is, and want and press her left hand on the bladder.
If she finds it, it is necessary that she moves it quickly from the entrance of the bladder down below, as far as it reaches the root of the thigh;
then put it on the stone at the root of the thigh against the middle of the buttock, where it is moved together, and feel the stone in that part; and do not move her finger above the stone or below, and let the size be small at first;
and do not move her finger above the stone or below, and let the size be small at first; then put the knife in the incision, if you feel the stone, enlarge the wound as much as the stone can come out forcefully, and know that there are many kinds of stones:
These are to know, small and large, sharp and dull, long and round, and those that have barbs.
if you know the similarities to know the outcome.
And if the arrowhead remains, put ground vitriol on it and hold it for an hour until the arrowhead is extinguished;
Then return to your work, as long as the stone is strong, and have instruments that I told you in the extraction of the stone from men to help you in your work;
And if the arrowhead remains and it is from an artery that has been cut, put powder on the site and bind it with tents and bandages, and do not touch it anymore, leave the stone and do not pull it out, lest the patient should die by chance. Then treat the wound.
And when the heat of the blood is appeased, and the flesh tightens, then return to your work, as long as the stone remains hard.
The watery substance is nothing other than an accumulation of moisture or white phlegm, which is below the heart of the testicles, and which contains the seed.
And it is called "syfac", and never properly in the web of the egg, if one thinks that it is another egg. And it is the skin from which the white syfac comes as we have said.
And this did not happen by chance. And the generation of this branch is so weak that it comes to the joints, and it spreads that matter.
And never does it come from striking the testicles, and this moisture has many colors: it is yellowish, or without red, or black, or white watery, and more happens.
And these are the signs to know this assembly, for if it is white syfac as we have said, it is the boil of the testicles; the pain lasts as long as the shape of an egg and does not open the testicles because it has moisture all around.
And if it has moisture in the web itself, it is a boil of the testicles with part of the egg, and therefore one thinks it is another egg.
and if moisture is between the skin of the testicles and the white sinew, then he will feel it well.
Therefore, when you see the color of the moisture, test all the instruments which are used for insertion beforehand, as its shape was before. According to this which comes after the introducer, judge what is inside.
And when we treat it with iron, it is fitting that the patient be cleansed according to our ability and the repletion of his body;
then lay him on his back, upon something a bit high, and put a lot of cloths under him;
then sit on his left, and command the assistant to sit on his right, and extend the instrument toward one of the two ribs near the heart of the testicles;
then take the sharp spatula and cut the skin of the testicles along their length down to the pointy end, and make your incision perfectly straight by dividing the skin of the testicles up to the white sinew, and delicately scrape it according to your ability;
Then pierce the syfac full of sharp points at a large hole, and extract all the sharp points, and then put your ointments, and extend the syfac upwards;
and do not touch the heart of the cones, but only the syfac alone; Cut all or by pieces immediately the side of it subtly, that if you do not cut it wisely, it will return sharp.
And if the egg leaps from your work, so reset it in its place when you have completed the work of the syfac;
Then join the two leaves of the heart of the cones with a stitch, then heal it as the other wounds, until it is healed.
And if you find the egg corrupted by another illness, it is necessary that you tie the vessels that are suspended, in doubting the outflow of blood.
Then cut the scrotum with all its suspensory ligament, and extract the testicle, and treat it as we have said.
And if the pointed object is assembled in two parts together, know that they are two branches; If you cut the other part as you have done the first equally, then wipe away the blood, and place in the wound linen soaked in rose oil;
If you cut the other part as you have done the first equally, then wipe away the blood, and place in the wound linen soaked in rose oil; And place another linen soaked in wine and oil, and put it on the two testicles, and put double cloths on top, and tie it all with a bandage according to this form:
Then take two cloths and fill them with shredded linen according to this appearance and let them be assembled by stitching in the throat of the breeches, and one side takes on the fundament up to the back, and the other at the part of the groin;
and the other two chiefs on the two angles, and let all the assembly be gathered in the loop of the arm;
And it is never medicine this branch of cautery in place of iron cutting, and it is that you take the cautery knife subtle, and peel the skin of the testicles, and let it be heated as we have said, so that the white fascia containing the sharp point is uncovered;
If you take the cautery according to this form, and pierce that fascia with it, and scald it with this subtle hot cautery:
And the peel in all the ways that you can, as long as you uproot everything;
and be careful that the fire does not touch the testicle;
And know that this work is safer; and watch out for the outflow of blood, and it is better than the works of cutting.
And if anything opposes you, whether an abscess, discharge of blood, or something else, treat what opposes you, according to what has been said before.
And if the patient is fearful and does not want to wait for this work because of its horror, then administer a perforation as I tell you, and know that when you are well-assured by the signs we have mentioned that the watery humor is there, then make the patient sit on a raised seat; then pierce the abscess at the bottom part, as wide as a span, and make the perforation as long as the body;
and let the opening be wide so that all the pus can flow out;
then place cotton on the spot and bind it, and let it stay to drain the remaining pus, then treat it until the wound is healed;
and if the white cloth does not let the humor escape into the mouth of the wound, then you must put a feather or the instrument with which one treats the humor of dropsy in it, its form being as shown before;
and enlarge the wound a bit, and know that the humor will return and gather again after six months or so, and when it gathers as before, then the patient will spend his days like that.
Know that in the section of this branch, fear has many dispositions, for which it seems to me better to leave it.
And I will tell you the work and the resemblances of an abscess.
I say therefore that many abscesses come on the body, and likewise on the testicles; and it is by many causes.
This is to know by excessive sourness and sharpness, which is spread to the joints, or from percussion.
And the color of the abscess according to the color of the body; And find no pain, and it is an abscess of sorrow.
And by chance there are abscesses grievously porous and pierced, and of a dark color, and sometimes it comes from the new growth of an artery, or swelling of a vein.
When it is from the new growth of an artery, it is known by the hot disposition of the abscess when you press it with your fingers. And it is not fitting that you touch it.
That which is made from swelling of the vein is known by its disposition at the touch of the fingers, and one can well make an incision on this type, and on the other types. And it is that you cut the heart of the testicles, then lift up the egg, and pull out the cord from white fat, and deliver the suspensory ligament from all sides of the egg.
If the egg is already dried with these fresh charcoals, then it is fitting that you pull out the egg and cut it.
And if it is adhered to the fat, or in that which is within the vessels, then it is fitting that you deliver all of that tendon, and cut it roundly.
And if the birth of the flesh is behind or further back, it is fitting that you cut it all, and extract the egg, as we have said.
And when your work is completed, apply the wound with wool moistened in rose oil and wine, then treat it with other remedies until it is healed.
This is an abscess wrapped in an envelope resembling a burr, with the softening of the testicles, and the patient groans when he goes.
And the treatment for this disease is as dangerous and difficult as this one before it, nevertheless we will tell you its work according to what the ancients did.
It is fitting that you make the patient sit on a raised seat, then you put the suspensory of the testicles down to your thighs, to all the vessels that are near the penis, and bind them tightly, and extend them.
Then cut with a sharp scalpel in a wide place so that the vessels are exposed, and then flay on each side, as we have said in the extraction of arteries which are in the temples;
Then insert a needle with a doubled thread and tie it at the first place where the vein appeared and tie it securely to the other end. Then cut them straight down the middle according to the length of the body, and extract the corrupted humors.
Then dress the wound as other wounds where one injures bowels so that no vessel bleeds which nourishes one of the testicles.
for through this there comes no harm, and if all the vessels are seen, then it is fitting to draw the veins of all the vessels; so that the bone does not lose its nourishment through the incision of the vessels, and they dry up and cannot be helped.
The occurrence of this branch is through the section that comes or arises, or the extension on the belly in the part of the intestines, for which the intestines descend from that rupture to one of the veins;
and this rupture is either at the symphysis or from the extension of it, and these two manners come from much of the same causes:
either by percussion, or by a jump, or by a struggle, or by lifting something too heavy, and by similar things;
and the signs when it is from the extension of the symphysis are that it happens little by little, over a long time, and does not come suddenly; And the abscesses are equalized until towards the end, so that the pus hastens the intestines.
And the signs are when it is of the section of the gut, that it brings at the beginning sudden pain, and there are various abscesses appearing underneath the skin nearby, and this is due to the exit of the intestine and the body being outside the gut.
And never pull out the intestines with the hernia, and it is held back there, and causes great pain to the patient, especially when it is pressed.
And in these iron treatments, because of fear, one should avoid them.
And the manner of the work is such that you instruct the patient to knead the intestines with his hand inside the wound if he can enter. Then let it be rubbed on his neck between your hands and lift the thighs.
Then stretch the heart above and cover all the skin of the testicles from length. Then put inside the folds of the waist a knife according to what you need to open the wound, and let it be such that the bones can come out.
Then flay the pus that is under the skin of the testicles until the white pus hard is uncovered from all sides.
Then put your index finger in that which follows the testicle, in that which is between the white pus that is under the skin of the egg, and between the second pus, and part that which is behind the egg, and between the second pus.
and then place your right hand inside the patient's buttocks and instruct the minister to extend the egg upward, and untie what is aired behind the ligature;
and inquire at your leisure if there is any intestine wrapped around or white sinew hard, and if you find nothing, put the end in the belly below;
then take a needle with a large thread made of ten threads, and put it in the back part near the sinew, which is after the skin of the testicles; after the waistline, then cut the flesh that appears from the threads, as long as there are four threads; then assemble them one upon the other in the manner of a cross, and tie the sinew, of which we have said is below the skin of the testicles, with a strong ligature of two parts; then wrap the flesh around the threads and tie them in two parts, so that none of the vessels that nourish it can enter within, so that no abscess may come there. and put a second bandage over the first, twice as long as it, and after these two bandages leave two fingers' breadth below the heart of the groin. and then all the rest according to the roundness that the egg carries.
Then bind in the part which is below the skin of the groin as long as the sinews and bowels are bound, as we have said before.
Then apply wool softened in oil to the wounds and bind it with the bandage we have described. And never are the white sinews cauterized as we have said, after the incision, for fear of stopping the flow of blood. For this happens often and leave the bandage on until it oozes through it;
and if it is slow to drain, raise it with hot water and place it on top of what we have said until it drains.
Then treat the wound with another dressing until it is perfectly healed.
of a fleshy hernia
In this branch I never saw anyone who dared to make the cure with iron.
And the ancients said that it is made like a branch which is together with the screw, in such a way that you tie the vessels, after the incision on the thigh slightly below.
Then sew it to me, and heal the abscess of he who works, as long as the vessels weep;
And heal it as we have said, until it is healed.
Sometimes rupture comes in anger, as we have said, and open the veins;
and do not draw out any of the intestines like onions, and if some are drawn out, it is bad, and repair every hour;
and nevertheless if it remains too long in this place, the wound or fistula grows, until the intestines are drawn out;
and this happens because of the extension of the fistula which is at the anger, as we have said, for it is extended, then softened and swells the veins and opens them;
and its treatment is by cautery, as we have said before;
and it is sometimes cured with iron in this manner: and the patient lies frequently on his back between your hands, then cover the place of the rupture swollen about three widths;
and then pull out the sinew which is below the skin than usual, then take a red-hot iron and place it on the exposed sinew spot;
and press down to the deepest part of the belly, then cauter the two spots exposed by the sinew on the top of the iron and cauter one and the other;
then remove the top of the iron, and do not cover the sinew nor extend the wound or anything else, as I have shown you in the cure of a rupture of the intestines; Then cure it with the cure of wounds.
Then cure it with the cure of wounds. And when you cut the threads, let the patient cleanse and care for the wound until it is healed.
The sinew is constricted, and has no appearance in the fracture, and the cauteries are milder in this place, and closer to salvation.
of the softening of the skin of the testicles
Many times the skin of the testicles is softened in some men because the flesh that is inside is softened, and it is made to be seen.
And it is necessary, when one wants to cure it, that one makes the patient lie on his back and cuts away the softened skin onto the natural skin.
Then bring the two edges together with one stitch, and if you see, sew the excess of the softened skin at three or four stitches firmly.
Then cut between the stitches and cure it like the other wounds until it is healed, and remove the thread.
Through chastisement
Know that castration is forbidden in our law, and for this reason it would please me not to speak of it in this book.
and it is necessary only in two ways:
one of which is that the patient in his reason responds when asked, and knows the treatment;
and the other, because we often need to castrate some animals to help us, such as goats and sheep and cats and other animals.
I say therefore that castration is done according to two methods: either by attraction or by incision.
In that which we do by attraction, we make the beast sit in hot water, until the testicles are softened and hanging; then take them with your hand, until they are withdrawn and you no longer feel them.
Of castration of the tail: it is necessary that you hold the beast, and press the skin of the testicles with your left hand, then tie the suspensory ligament, and cut above each testicle one cut, when you have well skinned them;
And he leaves no mark or subtle mark which is on the vessels;
And this manner of castration is better than that which is done by attraction, because in attraction there may remain by chance some parts of the testicles, by which the beast desires lust.
Then heal the wound until it is healed.
of hermaphrodites
Hermaphroditism occurs in two ways for men: One is that between the two testicles there appears also a shape like that of a woman's nature, or it may have hair, and sometimes urine flows into it.
And the other way is for women, and it has on the belly like a rod and two horns.
And the treatment for both men and women is that you cut off all the added parts and treat them like other wounds;
In the second manner, of men whose urine flows through the skin of the testicles, there is no cure.
A splint is a piece of wood added to the natural part, as long as it is too ugly to see; And some women have it as large as a hand, and that is the cure.
It is necessary that you hold the excess of the splint in your hand or at your elbows, and bind it lightly;
and do not bind too tightly, so that blood does not flow, then treat with another treatment until it is healed;
and to another splint that grows at the mouth of the marrow and the bone, and by chance jumps out, and according to its appearance it is like a cow, and for this reason the ancients called it "cow disease". It is necessary that you cupping it as we have said the tenting, and heal it until it is healed.
It is erratic if the nature of the woman is not perceived, or if the opening is small; And it is natural by birth, or accidental through illness that it has come.
And it is natural by birth, or accidental through illness that it has come. Or it is by chariot added, or through subtle force or hope, and it is made perfect in the marrow, or in the ribs, or below, or wherever it may be.
And they differ in conception, and childbirth, and by chance having flowers.
And the knowledge of these is through the gaze of the bailiff.
If the splinters are near and visible, whether on the left or right.
If it is through subtle force, and it is close to two leaves, if you hurry, they will come thus.
Put your two index fingers together, and the woman should be on her back, spreading her legs;
then extend the two leaves until the subtle force is gone, and the swellings are over.
Then take wool, moisten it in oil, and place it on the spot, and let the woman stay at home each day so that she cannot solder.
And if the synovial membrane is hard and thick, it behoves you to cut it with a scalpel resembling a myrtle leaf.
If the splinter is of oak wood, then suspend it at the onion and the copper.
And have the medicines steeped in blood, such as acacia, dragon's blood, incense, all together with egg yolk.
Then apply a leaden cane wide enough so that the wound cannot close up.
And thus for a long time, and apply a tent of dry linen.
Then it should be cured with other remedies until it is healed.
And when a boil comes with flesh, if it suits to cover according to this manner, except for ulcerated abscesses. For an inflamed abscess in the marrow, one must not use fire.
of hemorrhoids Hemorrhoids are openings of veins which do not usually bleed, and when hemorrhoids are old they become hard.
And we have said in the division the resemblances of others, and the signs, and I will say here those which receive cure.
I say that hemorrhoids and fissures when they are completely embedded in the anus, and do not appear to the touch, unless they are cauterized by iron.
Those who are at the mouth of the ulcer, one can feel, are those one can cleanse.
Therefore it is necessary that you put the woman in a cold house, then extend the hemorrhoid with tongs and copper on its roots, then sprinkle powder of blood-stopping medicines such as acacia and dragon's blood and incense, and similar things;
Then put its feet to the wall for an hour, then put it in cold water.
And if blood flow comes, then place it in a decoction of sumac and pomegranate bark and gall nuts and similar things, and then take barley flour, mix it with honey and oil, and make a plaster on its back.
And if it goes out, it is good. If not, apply cupping to its back and breasts without injury.
Then take wool, soak it in plantain juice or hawthorn juice with old wine, and apply it to the area.
And when the abscess subsides, treat the area with ointment until it is healed;
and the one called "albathir" is red and resembles a rough head, so cover it as I said for the thelul. and then cure it until it is healed.
Many kinds of abscesses come in the sea, such as ulcers and piercing abscesses and herpes and swellings and fistulas and hemorrhoids and hot abscesses, and many other diseases that I have mentioned in the division.
It is therefore necessary that I say in this treatise about the hot abscess which comes to the marrow, which is not among the abscesses which they call boils;
and if you wish to know the work of iron, see if the abscess is sharp at the beginning of its arrival, and full of heat and fever, and if it becomes red when you can see it. Then do not hurry to pierce it, but let it mature until the pain is eased;
and then have the patient sit on a stool, and have two small stools where he can lean, and support himself on his back and bring together his feet at the farthest part from the leg;
and let his thighs be spread apart, and put his arms under his knees, and tie them well with a good bandage;
Then suck the jawbone towards the left side, and bring the instrument with which one operates the mouth of the wound, from which the form will then come.
And it is necessary that when you see this instrument administered, you insert the point first to know the depth of the wound, so that what enters the instrument does not go any deeper than it should and does not injure the patient. And if the instrument is larger, it is necessary to cover the depth of the wound with cloths so that the instrument does not injure it.
And it is necessary that he put the funnel of the instrument above and hold the instrument.
And when the abscess opens, and one makes it with the hand soft, then if it is necessary to cover it at the head, at the spatula left.
and when the bowel is emptied, it is fitting that you put into the wound tents softened in oil of roses, or in oil of green vitriol.
and put the tent firmly from the wound to the edge of the marrow, and put by outside on the marrow and on the point wool clean softened in water where agrimony or mullein are cooked;
then cure afterwards every two days with ointment suitable to this, until it is healed;
and at no time raise the marrow and the wound by an enema of water and honey, and then of water or long roots of lily and birthwort are cooked; then return to the ointment.
And if the wound is healed in the marsh, it is necessary that you refrain from using a hot iron, but treat it as we have said in the division.
of childbirth It is necessary first for the midwife to know the form of natural childbirth, and the signs if it be so when you see the woman press down below, and desire to smell vinegar:
Then hasten to let the child's breath out; Then know that such a birth is according to natural form, and the issue is below its head, and the second twin with it;
And when you see these signs, it is fitting to press its belly lightly so that the child issues quickly;
For when it descends upon its head, then the second twin comes with it, and the mother is delivered of her superfluities by good purification;
And this which comes otherwise does not come naturally.
For it sometimes comes upon its feet, and the body or the head and hands come first, or it comes upon its belly, or often, and is turned by chance out of its neck, and by other bad figures;
It is necessary for the midwife to be wise and subtle in these matters, and to beware of error and deception, and I will show you all the figures how one should help her.
If the child comes out on its own through natural birth, and the woman gives birth easily, and her strength is weak, then have her sit on a saddle where women hold her.
And let oil or fenugreek be cooked according to its nature, and then put the ball between her thighs the small spatula of which is this shape: And split the second fingernail, and scrape at its corner until the moisture that is within runs out;
and press the woman's belly until the child descends, and if it does not descend, then you must give the woman a clyster of fenugreek mush with sesame oil;
then have her take and sneeze repeatedly, and hold her mouth and nose for an hour: If the child is now delivered.
And if the two hands come out fully, then you must reset them lightly bit by bit; and if they cannot enter, place the woman on a seat and raise her feet. Then raise the seat from the ground, and hold the woman so that she does not fall when it is raised.
And if her hands cannot enter and the child is dead, cut her hands with a knife that has been placed beforehand and extract the child and reset it equally.
of the issue of the child upon its feet When the child comes onto its feet, it must be pushed upward; and then turn it back and forth until it is equal.
Then take it by the feet and extend it back and forth.
If it jumps up to its thighs, command it to grasp and make it sneeze from being restrained. If it jumps further, may God will it.
And if it is not as we have said, turn it little by little until it is according to its natural form. For then it is light.
And if it does not come strong as we have said, take a mixture of hawkweed, and oil of sesame, and melted gum, and crush everything in a mortar. And put it on the nature of the woman inside and heat this ointment, then have her sit in hot water up to below the ribs.
And when she is softened underneath, make a plaster of myrrh for her and put it underneath, and leave it for an hour. Then have her sit on a stool, then make her sneeze and pull out her mouth and nose, and lightly press her belly, for the infant will now leap.
of the issue of the child upon its knees When the infant comes in this form, if he puts his hands on it bit by bit; then be careful and hang him by his neck, and let his feet dangle down, and let him lie on the bed. and fold her hands little by little, then take her hands upon the belly, and remove the cushions underneath, until she is exposed below; and if her child does not jump, then he takes her feet and moves them upwards, then he moves the belly up, then he puts his hands in; and draws out the child little by little; and instructs the woman to hold still until her child emerges.
From the delivery of a child who comes forth with one hand extended It is necessary to engineer to return the hand: if one cannot return it, then make the woman stand up and walk;
if she cannot walk, then make her sit on the bed, and unbend her legs upwards;
then apply the poultice that I have described;
and if she does not give birth, then make her sit on a chair, and then study to return the hand; And take the child according to its natural form and make it sneeze, and command her to hold herself as long as the child remains still.
of the delivery of the child upon its neck, and has spread its hands, and its face turned towards its mother's back It is fitting that the healer has their hand, then turns it a little at a time, and takes it lightly;
and when it is equal, put on the natural muscle oil and oil, as we have said, then command her to move a little at a time;
and when you have done this, make her sit on a seat, and command her to hold herself; and make her sneeze. In the same manner for all the second
In the same manner for all the second When it comes strong in this manner throughout the entire second joint, grasp the second joint with your fingernail, as long as the moisture is drained;
and if the child can lean on its face and neck, grasp it from below, so that it is not held back, and the child dies;
Then put the child inside as long as you have placed it as it should be, and instruct the woman not to move at all:
from the removal of twins Know that twins are born many times, and sometimes three or four are born: and this is not a strange thing, and it does happen. Two are a strange thing and do not live if they are named:
Two are a strange thing and do not live if they are named: I know that they be multiplied and are delivered by the suture which divides them, which is tied to the belly button:
and sometimes they are also born naturally as one under all, as we have said.
And if they are born in a difficult way, the care is as we have said, and let the midwife be subtle, and do quickly and lightly what she does: and do so as it is necessary for salvation. of several children
Sometimes they are formed in the marrow I or II or III or IV or V or VI or VII, or several up to XV, and they are all formed in the shape of a child by the measurement of the glorious sage, and it is fitting that the bailiff knows all this, for by chance similar things may happen; if you do according to what is necessary.
of the dead child
When you treat a woman for a dead child in the womb, as I have said in the division, and it does not come out, and you are forced to work with your hands; it is fitting that you know whether the woman is of sound constitution, and does not have an accident or fear of death;
it is fitting that the woman be placed on her back, with her shoulders inclined downward, and her legs raised;
and the midwife takes hold of it in two parts, where it is tied to the bed so that it is not treated until the child is delivered;
then rub the mouth of the womb with wet oils mixed with marshmallow and fenugreek seed and linseed, then anoint her hands with these oils and these mixtures;
then gently insert them into the womb, then wants the place where she inserts the fingers to be convenient for this, and take care that if the infant is attached it descends on its head;
if she inserts her fingers into its eyes or neck or mouth or palate or under the beard or into the nape of the neck or near the ribs, and if the descent is on its feet, she inserts them at the hip and middle ribs;
and it is necessary that she holds the finger in her right hand, and puts the curve between her fingers of the left hand, and inserts it with all her hand gently, and inserts the finger into any of these places we have mentioned, until it reaches the empty thing;
then insert against the other lancet, or the third if you need it, so that the extractions are equal.
and then extend them equally by moving back and forth, to make it come out, and let the lancets have teeth to hold it, as the shape is like this:
And if a part remains, anoint the base with some of its oil, and put them in that part, and draw out the other part.
And if none remains, put this lancet or higher up, and do this until it all comes out.
And if one hand comes forward over the other and it cannot be brought back by tightening, then it is fitting that you wrap a cloth around it until it all rises. Then apply the cup to the joint of the foot or at the knife's edge, and so you must do with the other hand, and for both feet.
And if the child's head is large and it is stuck at birth, or if it has a sharp point assembled, you must put the splintered spatula between your fingers and cut the point and extract it. or you will return it to the instrument which is called "almidach," of which the form comes with the instruments or chapter that follows this one.
And in the same way do so if the infant has a large head naturally;
and then draw the bones with tongs, and if the head jumps out and is extracted forcefully, it should be split, so much that the moisture which is in the bad delivery is removed.
and if it cannot come out, cut it into pieces as small as you can.
and if it is swollen in the belly or below the ribs, it must be pierced so that the moisture runs out.
And if the infant is on its feet, the attraction is light, and the straightening at the mouth of the uterus is light.
And if it is embedded in the belly or the breast, it must be extracted wrapped in a cloth upon the hand; and pierce the belly or the breast, so that the moisture within runs out;
and if the other members are removed and the head remains, put the hand of the patient into a pot of warm water, and pull it up to the mouth of the pot. Then put in one or two ounces, and boil it hard;
and if the mouth of the pot is constricted due to a hot boil that has come, then it is not right to work on it, but rather administer moist and fatty things. And let the dispenser apply plasters, which are soothing and moistening.
And if the infant is on its side, and you can put it straight, apply what we have said in the living child;
and if there is no way, cut the flesh into pieces and leave nothing of the afterbirth.
And when you have done this, apply what we have said for abscesses that come in the marsh;
and if bleeding occurs, apply a strong astringent bandage and administer other remedies.
And I saw a woman in whose womb a child had been dead, then she conceived another upon that one, and the other was also dead. After a long time, a boil came on his arm, and it swelled so much that it burst, and began with great discharge.
I was called to heal, and I thought for a long time, and could not close the wound.
I put on a plaster of strong attraction, and one bone came out, and after some days another. I marvelled greatly, because it has no bones in its belly.
If I thought they were the bones of a dead child.
I treated the wound and set the bones until the woman was better; and I kept the woman like this for a long time, so that there would be just a little swelling in its place;
and I have only recorded this chapter so that when the masters encounter a strange thing they know what to do.
Here follows the form of the presser, with which one presses the books.
and at two turnings are the heads of the two linen cloths. Nevertheless, the horns should be more slender than those of the restrictor, and should be made of ebony or boxwood;
and the mouth of the spindle should be two fingers wide, and the margin of the trees one finger, and a length of a palm and a half; and between the two linen cloths there should be two adjustments of this same spindle, which are fastened on one side and the other, a half palm in length or a finger more.
And these two adjustments are inserted into the mouth of the press to open when one turns the two horns.
Another form, more slender and lighter in appearance, should be made of ebony or boxwood spindle, according to the appearance of tongs. and it has two arms for adjustments, as you see, one palm long and two palms wide.
And when you see the vulva open to all instruments, have the woman sit on the bed with her feet dangling and legs open, then insert both arms fitted together into the vulva, and hold the head of the instrument beneath between her thighs. Then work your hand on the whole instrument as you did with the forceps equally, according to the quantity that you see opening the mouth of the vulva, so that the woman does what she wants.
These instruments are all assembled and are multiplied in their likenesses. And when she sees them matched, the work is all the more hasty, and higher are men for their quantity.
If you do not despair of the instrument until you have prepared it, for its necessity is not excusable.
When the afterbirth is retained during childbirth, instruct the patient to hold her breath, and then make her sneeze deliberately, and remove your hands from her mouth and nose; and if it comes out that way, all is well.
If not, take a pot and make a hole or lid in it, and put herbs that can open the mouth of the womb, such as calamint, rue, anise, chamomile, cassia lignea and centaury; all these herbs, or some of them, are cooked in a pot with water over the fire;
then put a cane or tube in the pot, and the other end into the mouth of the womb, and let it steam until the vapors enter the womb;
then make her sneeze, as we have said. If the second bone leaps quickly.
And if it remains after this treatment, and is not strong, command the patient to moisten her left hand in sesame oil or mallow poultice, and then plunge it into the wound, and hold it there for a while. And when she has found it, grasp and extend it little by little straight, so that the marrow does not break during extraction.
But you must move it slightly to the right and left, and then draw it out. It will come and loosen.
And if the opening of the marrow is constricted, we have said the cure is sneezing and fumigation with herbs.
And if it is not from all of this which we have said, be careful that you do not pull against the grain.
But it is fitting that what is at the opening of the marrow, you tie it to the thigh of the woman, then apply an enema with tetrapharmac ointment. if he carries it and puts it back, and will come strong;
but all the same, when it is carried so it comes with bad smell to the stomach and head, and harms the patient. So therefore proper fumigations are needed for this:
None of the ancients have proven fumigation of watercress and dried figs.
The form of the instrument with which one fumigates a woman to retain her flowers and her secundines is this:
And it seems like a reed, and one puts the subtle head in its nature, and the heads wide on the fire;
and let the fumigations be on the coals, and the scab as long as it is gone, and start another.
Many children are born who do not have the foundation pierced, but rather have a subtle tool: so it is necessary for the midwife to pierce that tool with her finger, and not pierce it with a sharp spatula, and guard against touching the opening.
Then put it on linen soaked in wine and oil, then treat it with ointment until it is healed.
And if you doubt that it will stay in place, insert or put a cane of wood and leave it for three days, and let it be removed when the child wants to go into its chamber.
And sometimes this inflammation comes from the suppuration of a wound or abscess; if it is necessary to cover that suppuration: If it is healed as we have said of the cane of a plum tree.
Fistulas that come below the buttocks are nodules and swellings that come from beneath the buttocks or in the space between the two parts, whether it is one fistula or several;
And when that nodule is old, if it works and still gives off white or subtle pus, and sometimes these fistulas are persistent;
And they are known by the fact that there is either discharge or flatulence when the patient has a bowel movement, and perhaps one jumps out.
And if there are fistulas that extend to the bladder, and to half of the penis; and they reach the junction of the thigh, and to the knee.
And thus one recognizes a fistula penetrating the fundament, and not penetrating. And it is that you stick your index finger or the fundament, and insert a fine needle of steel or iron into the fistula when there is no tortuosity.
And if there is tortuosity, then you insert a tent of fine silk thread, or a horsehair, until you feel the tent or hair with your finger.
And if you do not feel it, and there is no discharge of pus, flatulence, or worms as we have said. Know that it does not penetrate. if you hasten to cure
And when the fistula extends as far as the bladder or as far as the urine channel, then if the urine escapes and cannot be stopped by medicines.
If it is pierced as far as the joint of the thigh, so the attempt comes as far as the place. If there is no crookedness and the invention of pain turns inward, so it is that he will go there now, and no medicine or ointment by application is worth.
And in these persistent fistulas there is no cure except toil, and vanity of foolish sights that interpose themselves.
In that which is not persistent and is not ancient, there is hope of healing by iron, as I have experienced, and it is that the patient lies between your hands on his back.
And he lifts his legs up to his thighs, and puts his thighs inclined toward his belly. Then put in a tent of iron, or lead if there is crookedness, as far as you know where the tent comes.
If the patient feels it around the base, it is fitting that you put your index finger there, and if you then feel that the tendon has been pierced;
and whether it is uncovered or you feel between your finger the sinew or flesh, then know that it has been pierced. If there is no work to be done on it, it cannot be healed.
It is said that one can heal anyone well, but this happens rarely
and the help that is done, if it is heated according to the width of the fistula as it has been said before. And put the whole hot cautery into the fistula, as long as it comes out at the base; and do this two or three times until you know that these faulty flesh are burned, which resemble a bird's feather.
And then the cure of softened tents with butter until that which burns is extinguished, then the cure of ointment spreading and healing.
If it is healed like this, it is good.
If it cannot otherwise be healed;
And if the tent enters and does not pierce through to the bone which is at its foundation, and between your finger and the tent there is a thick covering of flesh or sinew, and you see the fistula under that which covers the core; If the opening of the beginning of the fistula is found and pushed forward before the tent, then apply the cautery afterwards until it reaches the head of the tent; And the tent will be delivered and will fall away.
Then cleanse those charred parts which resemble a bird's feather and leave none remaining.
And if the blood comes, and cuts between you and the work, then cauterize it with fire or medicine.
For fire cautery accomplishes two things: This is to know, the cautery of these added meats, and the suppression of blood and the drying of moisture.
Then the treatment of softened tents in butter or in crushed hazelnuts, as long as the embers burn well, and it becomes stronger when the meats are burned in the bowels.
Then treat the wound with ointments of boiled dried herbs.
For when it is restored, it is healed and does not return.
And if a fistula comes all the way to the foundation and is far from the body, it should be treated with a poultice or foundation, and inquire about this.
If you feel the tent and between II is the cloth or the silk or meat, where it is about to pierce, if there are no other ways of faith and hope except through the administration of one of the III manners:
either you cauterize it as we have said, or you cut it to the bottom, or if you can put tents and treat them as first.
And do not go too deep so that you do not cut the ligament that holds the foundation, and the evacuations come through the intentional sense. then the cure, as we have said;
then the cure, as we have said; perhaps it will be healed, or you remove that covering and cleanse it once it is cut away from the base, either by hand or by another pointed instrument; then cleanse that corrupted flesh which is in the wound, as much as you can; then study to restore the wound, and to keep the fistula in the part behind the base:
then study to restore the wound, and to keep the fistula in the part behind the base: if it were a lighter thing for the patient.
And fistulas are never made in this manner: and when you put the tent into the fistula, and it is near or touches the base under the skin above, then take a tent pierced at its head according to this form: And I bend the thread twice, and put the tent on all the thread into the fistula until it is at the head.
If it is passed through the edge of the base inside, then pull out the thread from that pierced spot, so that you put your finger or thumb in the base;
and treat the head of the thread, and bring the two ends together, and separate one from the other, and leave it for one or two days;
and restrain it several times, until the thread catches these bars that are between the two, and they click;
then treat the wound until it is closed and healed.
If the fistula does not open, make it pierce through all the ways that you can, as long as it is not too constricted. For it is not fitting to treat for placement or covering with a bandage so perfectly, and then cure as we have said, until it be healed.
The shape of the pointed spatula with which you make a fistula must be very sharp on one side and cutting; and on the other side not sharp, so that you don't cut what you shouldn't cut, as you see here:
Hemorrhoids are according to two ways: where they are inside the buttocks, like grains of rosin, and there are small ones and large ones, and they often bleed, and there is one or several, and they protrude from the buttocks and at the top of the buttocks;
But those that are heated have a little moisture, and still again or a little bit of sharp citrus or a little bit of blood, and they have the color of the body.
And the treatment for those who have them in the foundation, it is as if you instruct the patient to stretch himself out so as to go into chambers until the foundations dry up and the threads appear; If you hurry, and can grasp it with tweezers, or hold it with your fingernail, then cut it at its roots.
And if the tweezers cannot hold them due to their moisture, take them with linen, or cotton, or a piece of chamois. And pull them out at your leisure, then cut them off and sprinkle some hot powders that are in place of a cautery. Or cauterize them as it is said in the chapter of cautery, then treat them with other remedies until he is healed.
and if the foundations cannot come out, then give the patient a harsh and pungent enema to cleanse what is in the foundation so that it may come out openly. and if the patient can be pressed, and if the threads are strong from the foundation, then the treatment is easy.
and if the patient can be pressed, and if the threads are strong from the foundation, then the treatment is easy. and you take them with your fingernail or forceps and cut them off, then treat it as we have said until it is healed, and he fears the incision by iron. If it is necessary that you administer a suture according to this manner:
If it is necessary that you administer a suture according to this manner: Take a twisted thread and put it in a needle, and then pull the thread over and make the needle pierce through the other side, and turn the two ends of the thread under the needle, and it should be wide.
Pull the thread tight, then tie a knot in the thread and remove the needle, and do the same for all the others, and leave one to drain off excess blood.
Then put on the bandage softened in rose oil or cerate, and put it on the bandage, and instruct the patient to rest.
Then leave it until it heals, and when they are healed, apply ointment and other treatments until it is healed.
for the drying of wounds or foundation Many times there occurs drying up of the intestines, and by constriction of nature, and when the illness is old and medicine does not help. It is necessary that you hold the tip of a spatula or your fingernail on top of it so as not to let it get wet. Then treat it until it is healed as needed.
And if it cannot heal, shave it again more forcefully than before until it heals completely and is scraped. Then treat it until it is healed.
Where it trembles A boil is a small faulty appearance near the body, and it spreads quickly.
And sometimes you find the cold there, and one feels it also like a deathly shiver, and it comes throughout the body, and most of all in the hands than anywhere else.
And the remedy is that you take a cane from a goose feather or a strong vulture feather, and place that cane upon the shiver, until the circles completely encircle the shiver; then turn your hand all the way around the cane until you encompass the whole shiver, and put it in perfectly, and pull the shiver out from its roots.
And if you see, make one of a chain of iron or according to this form, and let it be subtle below and sharp above: Do not pierce, but hold on to the pain, and press.
And if you see it, cauterize the shiver, as it is described in the chapter on cautery.
Sometimes one makes an enema of silver or artichoke, or melted iron or malleable iron;
And at no time are these instruments made small or large, according to those to whom they are administered. Those then who minister to children in their care and are weak and painful, are small.
Those then who minister to children in their care and are weak and painful, are small. The form of the small and large enema is wide on top, where the belly is bound according to this manner:
And if there is a separation where the stomach is tied as you see it and the flesh is pierced inside.
And there are two holes on one of the sides and one on the other.
And the stomach where one puts medicines is made from a beast's bladder or parchment and pierced all around with small holes, with one finger's width of space between each hole, then threaded through these holes with a thick thread, twisted in an X shape or round about, and the belly is assembled like a goat. And when the medicine is inside, tie it to the instrument with a strong thread in front, then administer an enema.
And this is the shape of the circle:
And let the medicine be neither too hot nor too cold, and anoint the head of the clyster with oil or yolk of egg, or something similar, then insert it gently. Then he presses the ministers with his two hands together, until it is all full, then extracts the clyster, and lifts the patient's legs to the wall, and if the medicine wants to come out, let him hold it as long as he can; And if he sleeps a whole night like that, it is of greater help.
And if you cauterize it for a disease of intestinal flux, and the medicine hastens to enter, then resume until it is healed.
And if the hemorrhoids are on the fundament or an abscess, let the clyster be as subtle as for a child;
and this is the form of the subtle clyster where the skin is drawn out:
We have already said in the division the treatment of wounds;
We will tell you the cures of hands and of medicine, according to accomplishment.
I say that wounds are diverse according to how they are made, and according to the places or the wounds are made, and of what they are made.
The things by which wounds are made are by the striking of stone, and the cutting of sword and knife, or of spear or of gun or of arrow, or of similar things;
or they are made according to the places of the body, such as a wound that falls on the neck, or on the head, or the foot, or the belly, or the liver, and similar limbs;
and I will tell you the cure of each wound, and begin with the wounds of the head that are simple, for the remembrance will come in its chapter.
I say that when a simple wound comes to the head, and the bone is not broken, if you take care that it is from the striking of stone or similar things, and the skin is completely torn and the wound is large, and you slightly doubt a hot abscess: If it bleeds readily from the cephalic vein itself, and only a little blood comes from the wound, and the bleeding is on the opposite side of the injured part;
and have the patient abstain from wine and rich foods.
And if it does not bleed, reduce their food intake, do not let them drink wine, nor eat meat.
And place on the wound, if an abscess begins to form, cotton moistened in rose oil alone, or in astringent wine.
And if there is no heat in the abscess, apply to the wound, if it is fresh and bleeding freely, and not moved by air, a powder which I will mention a little later.
And if the wound has been disturbed, apply ointments until it is healed.
And if the wound is large like that of a sword cut and similar, and the lips cannot be brought together by stitches, then bring them together with sutures, as I will say for wounds in the belly, about suturing.
If the wound is uncovered from the bone, and can move, and only holds by a point, then cut it. Then dress the wound with medicine, and restore hard flesh in place of skin, and instruct the patient to eat large meats, such as testicles and cooked wheat, as well as poultry, and similar things.
And if you find rotten skin, and it does not reach the bone, cut out all the rot thoroughly, and pour strong water over it, then dress it.
And if it has an artery in the wound or vein that cannot be stopped without cutting, and it cannot be staunching by medicine, then tie off the artery, and if you find it loose, tie it with a thread. And if that does no good, then cauterize it.
And if these wounds are small and simple, then the dressing is light. And put this powder on it so that it welds just as if the fire had moved it.
And the manner of the powder is: Take incense one part; Dragon's blood two parts; Live lime three parts, and powder it subtly, and apply it to the wound, and hold it firmly, until it burns well and joins with all its blood;
And then bind it well, and leave it unbound, if it does not swell; For one does not remove the medicine until it is healed.
And never is this done with chalk alone, when one does not have incense nor the blood of a dragon, but that the fire has heated the wound.
And if the fire has moved the wound, put this powder on it immediately;
But put some digested ointments, or poultices of barley flour made with water and honey, until it runs clear; Then let him be treated with other treatments until he is healed.
And if the bone fracture comes with the wound, and it is small, extract it with fine forceps;
and I will tell you about skull fractures later.
from the wound of the neck
If a wound comes to the neck and it is simple, it has no difference between it and that of the head, but if the nerves of the neck or the artery are cut.
If it is nerves, there is nothing else to do but leave the treatment alone and not put anything binding on it, for it harms the nerves and makes them retract; and do not put anything cold on the wound, for the substance of nerves is cold, and their connection with the brain, which is the highest member,
but let the medicine be under it, such as chamomile steeped in warm water and mixed with rose oil, and chamomile washed also in warm water, and other mine stones according to this manner, and moist ointments.
And if the wound is large, sew and bind it with bandages, then treat it until it is healed.
And if the wounds are deep and it is covered and full of pus, then pierce it lower.
And if the artery is cut and blood flows, then loosen it, tie it off, and cautery is necessary.
And if the spine of the throat is cut or the heart and the conduit that carries the flesh are preserved, then sew the heart onto the bone of the throat, and do not touch the throat but put it back into its natural shape. Then carefully remove it and leave it for a few days, then treat it with drying ointments until it is healed.
And if the wound has made an impression on the bone, then scrape it. And if there are bone fragments, remove them all if you can, and if you cannot obtain them, leave them until the wound festers and is cleansed, aligning the opening.
And if the wound is fresh, put powder on the powder that I have said. And if there is bone in the wound and there is a fistula, treat it as I have said in its chapter.
If it is a cut from a lance or knife, and the wound is deep, look to see if the wound has a foul odor that makes the patient faint: Then you know the wound is mortal.
And if it is not deep, and it is fresh with all its blood, do not put any powder on it in the first hour, nor bind it because the blood will not flow freely and return to the heart, and kill the patient. But apply an attractive ointment, and bind it twice a day.
And if you do not have ointment, put old cotton in the wound to absorb excess moisture, and make the patient sleep on the wound for three days, or four, or more. if there will come no spasm, nor bad trembling of heart nor strangeness from elsewhere; and when you see the good signs, know that the wound is saved. Treat it then with bandages and other treatments, until it is healed;
and if it cannot heal, and works, then know that there is a fistula;
if the treatment is as it should be. And if the wound is from an incision of a sword or knife, and it is simple, whether on the leg or the back, treat it like those that are in front. If it is large, stitch it;
and if it is small, with powder, and if it is embedded in the bone and has broken into pieces, clean the wound, and treat the foreign bodies if they are loose; and if they are not weaned, leave the wound to fester, which will lighten the extraction.
And for other wounds on other limbs, judgment is as we have said.
of rupture of the belly
The ruptures of the belly are great, medium and small;
from the great wound sometimes the intestines or nerves of the intestines protrude, by which the introduction of others;
and the suturing is more difficult, and sometimes the small wound is worse than the large one because they put the intestines back in more carefully, if they do not put them back hot against hot;
because the intestines swell quickly when they feel cold, and enter more carefully, and for this reason, the medium wound is better because they put back the intestine in its place more easily than the others.
And know that a rupture of the belly is according to four manners:
The two common sutures occur in the suture of the belly, and the suture of other wounds of the body and two other proper sutures are common to other wounds.
And nevertheless they are more appropriate with the suture of the belly, and I will say each one and declare it.
I say that when the wound is small, and nothing of the intestine is outside, and easy things are put back in place, this is done in one of two ways: either because of the smallness of the wound, as we have said, or because the intestine is swollen from the cold.
And when it is cold, warm it in two ways: moisten a sponge or a soft cloth in warm water only, or you boil in hot water squill and cypress and saffron, and rub the intestine until the swelling is gone
And at no time make this wine restraining, and it is better to have only for drawing out swelling.
And when you see the swelling subside, moisten the intestines with hot or lukewarm water, for by this is opened up the entry to little things;
and if it cannot enter, then make a small cut in the wound with an instrument used to cut hemorrhoids
and the first treatment is better than cutting, that no one should cut except in great necessity nor if there is not.
And these are the instruments for splitting it:
If you cut inside the curve and remove nothing, and see this form: And when the wound is enlarged, and the intestines protrude, if you return them to their natural form in their proper place, if you have the power, for this is worth more.
When the wound is wide, and it is in the part below the belly, it behoves you to have the patient lie on their back, and put their legs higher than their head; and if it is in the part below the belly, then put the head and breast higher than the parts below, and also if the rupture from the belly is in one of the two parts, then put your mind to this that the injured part be higher than the other.
and thus it is necessary to administer what I say in large and small wounds.
In small wounds put what appears to you, then have between your hands one who has all the rupture in his hand, and bring together the lips;
and this is the common way of stitching, and it is that you take a needle or several, according to the quantity of the width of the wound, then leave from the head of the wound a finger's space, and put in a needle where there is a good strong thread; and pierce the two edges of the skin with the two edges of the sinew, which is under the skin inside, so that you make it pierce from that part, and bring together the two edges of the sinew and the four together;
Then strain a doubled thread onto the needle in two parts, then bring together the two sides of the wound evenly, and then leave one finger's breadth of space, and insert another needle.
Then tie on the thread as you did with the first needle, and do not stop doing this according to how many needles you need, until the whole wound is restrained.
And let the needles be medium-sized, between thin and thick, for thin needles pierce all the flesh, and those too thick cannot enter well. Therefore it is fitting that they should be medium-sized.
And it is not fitting to drive the needles too far beyond the flesh and leather so that they pierce and open the wound before the suture.
And then bind the sides of the needles so that they do not bother the patient while sleeping, and put bandages or cloths on the sides of the needles to hold them in place, and leave them until the wound is healed.
And this manner of stitching with needles is more suitable for small wounds, because it requires only one needle or two.
The second suture is common, and it consists of bringing together the two edges of the skin and the two edges of the sinew together on one needle with a strong medium thread.
And when you have pierced all four edges together, pull the needle back to where you started, in the manner that one sews clothes.
And leave a space between each stitch the thickness of two grains of barley.
This suture heals a man well and I sewed up a wound on a man's stomach or belly, which was cut by a knife and the wound was more than a handspan in size, and the intestines protruded for two handspans, and the wound was in the middle of the belly.
I put the intestine back in after it had been out for 24 hours and the wound healed up to 15 days, and I treated it, and it was cured.
And those who saw him thought he would die, and it was a miracle.
And I did not treat him with any ointment, for I was in a place where none could be found, nor any medicine. And I put nothing more on the wound than old cotton twice a day, and washed it with honey water until it was healed.
Here I will tell you the two proper ways of stitching:
Take the needle and thread it from the outer part to the inner.
When it has pierced the center straight through, take the thread from the tip of the needle, and make it pierce from the inner part to the outer.
The understanding of this stitching is that you sew just as furriers do with furs, and you leave the thread once on one side, and take it up again on the other, until the stitching is all complete.
The second way of sewing, which Galien properly calls, is as some do, who join the two parts together naturally, and apply one of the heads of the suture to the other head, in this manner:
Insert a needle or the head of the silk thread nearby, and make it pierce that place only, and leave the two heads of the suture; Then turn the needle, and make it pierce from the outside part to that inside one, along with the two heads of the suture;
Then make one and the other pierce from the outside part to that inside one, in two other heads of silk thread that are on the other side;
And this is the gentler way of sewing and the most common.
Galien said these words, and some testify to it, that one must sew the belly with two needles, where there is thread in each;
And one must put one needle from one side, and the other from the other side, in the manner of those who sew straps.
And know that when the rupture is in the middle of the belly, the suture is more grievous than those in other places of the belly.
The judgment of the wound is such as the judgments of other wounds:
and it is that when you find the wound fresh with all its blood, so that the fire has not moved it, then put the intestines back in place, and the seam.
Then put charred charcoal powder on top, and if the fire has moved it, put any ointment that is present on it, until the wound swells. And stitch the thread, and let the sinews and the muscles be joined. Then treat the wound as the others, until it is healed.
and if you have no medicines, put on it as soon as it begins to boil over old cotton, and stir it twice a day until it is healed
For you do not need other medicine for several positions unless the wounds are simple
and if you doubt that the wound will cause commonality with the principal members, it is fitting that you moisten linen lightly in tempered oil, or in rose oil, and place it around the wounds, and under the armpits;
and if he feels pain or putrefaction in the bowels, which often happens, then enemas of warm red wine, and likewise if the putrefaction comes up to the intestines;
and pierce it within, and know that when it is the large intestine, it is easier to heal than the small one.
The intestine which is called "jejunum" cannot heal when it is wounded, and this is due to the fineness of the veins that are there, and the subtlety of the whole body, and its resemblance in nature to the nerves.
And if the splinter jumps from the wound, put it back as you would the intestines, while it is fresh.
And if it is old and has become green or black, you must bind the place that is black so that blood does not flow into it, for there are veins and arteries.
Then cut what is between the ligature, and place the two ends hanging down from the part below the wound until it loosens for easier extraction when the splinter comes out, and the wound gapes.
from the breaking of the eye
When the intestines are round, and the wound is small, some men can restore it, for I have seen a man who was wounded in the belly by a spear.
And the wound was to the right of the stomach, and it became inflamed and turned into a fistula, and from it issued excrement and flatulence.
I have put it to care according to what I could, and did not cease to refine until it was healed, and the wounds joined.
And when I saw it joined, I doubted that the patient might have pain in his belly. And he had no pain, but remained in better condition, and ate and drank;
and some experimenters said that when he has a small wound in the intestine, it should be bound in a certain way: Take bristles at large heads, then bring the lips of the wound together, and when the bristles have opened their mouth, put them on the two lips so that they squeeze their mouths shut;
and then he cuts off the head, and this remains so that it cannot be untied, then put another bristle afterward in the same manner as before, until the wound is completely closed; And sew the wound.
If those hairs burn in the intestine and cause no harm to the patient, one can tie the intestine with a fine thread cut from the intestine of an animal, in this way:
Take the head of this intestine thread that is well stripped and then tie to the head of this thread a fine linen thread twisted together. Then thread it through a needle and sew the intestine, and smooth it at the break.
And this manner of sewing is only according to the way of trust and hope.
And if the wound is large and wide, especially when it is in one of the intestinal folds, there is nothing but subtlety.
of a fistula or wherever it may be Know that any wound or abscess, when it grows old, is called universally "fistula," and the same when it is healed and bows inward.
And a fistula is according to its greenness, a hard and white knot where there is no pain, and it is also raised like the feather of a bird.
And sometimes the bowel is clear and sometimes thick Sometimes spotted, and sometimes enough;
And as I have spoken of it in the section on wounds, any wound that is not healing and there is no flesh, it is only due to one of nine causes: namely, by the smallness of blood or flesh; or its wickedness; or because there is hard flesh inside and on the lips, that does not allow new flesh to grow; or there is too much bowel; or the veins are spoiled and the matter is of bad quality; or the medicine is not good in the treatment; or because the corruption is a type of pestilence; where by its nature, digestion is slow in the region, and feeling is slow, and it swells naturally; where there are veins or bones:
and I have already shown all these causes, and the signs, and the cures of medicine in the division.
Now it is fitting for me to make you aware of the treatment of fistula which is done by handwork.
Know that a fistula occurs in all the members of the body; for there are fistulas that come from large veins, and arteries, and nerves, or in the bladder, or to the intestines, or to any of the ribs, or to the spine of the back, or to any joint of the hands or feet; and if it comes to the nature of the principal member, and similar things.
And all fistulas that are in this manner are due to poor healing, and there is nothing but labor, and ignorance;
and if there is a fistula that does not come to the place I have said, and you are confident of the cure and have seen it, then take a tent of linen or iron, if the fistula is straight.
and if the fistula is crooked, then use a subtle tent of lead, for the lead bends easily around the curvature.
and if the fistula has many openings and you cannot well encircle it with tents, then irrigate it through one of the openings, for the moisture will travel from one opening to another and cleanse it.
then have it bleed freely as much as you are able, so that you know if there is bone or nerve, and it is well cleansed beforehand, and ask the patient carefully about the pain he feels when you press with your hand, and the place where he feels it.
And when you truly know the place where it is, and if it is far from a joint, or nerve, or artery or vein, or in any of the places that I have told you, then treat it according to what I have told you, and remove the corruption and corrupted humors that are within;
And then treat it until it is healed, and if the fistula is deep and straight, it is necessary that you cut deeply as much as you can, then put softened tents soaked in medicinal water, and push them up to the head of the fistula, so that the medicine corrodes the excess that remains at the bottom;
And then put ointments that promote healthy flesh, until it is healed.
And if it is not healed by this, then cauterize it as we have said, and if the bone is corrupted by the fistula, then cut it.
If a vein or nerve does not trouble your principal limbs as we have said;
and if the bone is exposed and there is corruption and blackness, then clean out all the corruption as much as possible, and then treat it with things that promote healing until it is healed.
And if it is not healed and returns as before, know that you have not gone far enough.
Expose and scrape out as much as you are at the bottom and remove all the corruption, then restore the place.
And if it is healed in this way, it is good. If not, know that the corruption is too deep for you to reach. There is nothing else to do but leave it to nature.
And if there is a small corrupted bone and you can remove it with forceps, extract it with an instrument suitable for this purpose, and if there are many bones, treat them all and leave none behind.
and if moisture opposes you, and there is no error or fear, cut both moisture and flesh, and deliver the bones.
And if you cannot remove them in an hour, put something promoting decay on the wound, and leave it until the flesh is rotten around the bones, and then you will remove the bones more easily;
and if it is a large bone, such as of the leg or thigh, only promote decay until all the blackness is removed, then restore the wound;
and if there is a large part that has decayed and reaches as far as the marrow of the bone; you must sew and cut everything until the decay, and then treat it until it is healed;
and I will tell you about a fistula that happened to a man in his leg, so that you can take example from it and help in your work.
There was a young man around thirty years old who had pain in his leg from a cause that came from within the body, so that the materials came to the leg, and it swelled with a large abscess, and he had no reason to open it.
But his doctors in their folly worked so much on it that they opened the abscess and corrupted many materials, and it became a fistula, and there came many openings that all flowed with pus and moisture from the body.
And many doctors treated him for two years, and there was no one skilled in the art of hands, until I was called to him, and I saw his leg and the medicines with which they were treating it, and what flowed from the openings into a large container. And the young man's body was turning red, and he had a citron color.
I put a tent in one of those holes, and then I examined all the holes, and I found that some came against each other from all parts of the leg.
I hastened therefore and probed into one of the holes until I discovered a part of the bone, and found it corrupted and pierced, and the corruption came as far as the bone inside.
I saw what appeared to me of the corrupted bone and thought that there was no other corruption except for that which I removed.
And I began to restore the wound with hot medicines for a long time and could not solder it.
And then I began again and discovered the bone as before, and found the corruption continuing into the bone, and I saw it and removed it, and I tried to solder the place. But I could not do so until I probed around a palm's length of the bone and cut it away entirely, then I restored it with medicines. And it was healed and soldered quickly, and there was no need to begin the work again except for the weakness of the patient, who could not endure, and for the fear of death that I had of him. For the evacuation often bled, but it was healed completely, and in place of the bone a hard flesh grew, and was of good disposition and had neither harm nor any contrary at all, either coming or going.
And if the bone is broken in any place in the body, then it must be treated in this manner: Take a ligature and bind it to the head of the bone that appears, and instruct someone to extend it upwards; and place another ligature of wool larger than the first ligature, and tie it upon the flesh that is below the bone, and extend the head, so that you draw down the corrupted flesh, and expose the flesh on the spot where you wish to sew, so that the silk does not stain the flesh;
and place a coal or a board below the bone to move aside the corrupted flesh.
And it is necessary to treat as much as one can see and feel the corruption, and to treat again another time.
And if the bone is corrupted and does not appear, and the corruption is in the middle or in one part, then uncover all the flesh.
Then put a coal underneath, and then treat from one part to the other the corruption, and let the treatment be as long as the corruption is a finger's breadth, as we have said.
And if the corruption is in the joint, then cut the corrupted joint and treat the bone where it contains from the other side.
And if the corruption is in the continuation of the two joints, there is no other remedy than to cut.
And if the corruption is or in a point of the hand, or or in a point of the foot, then it is very serious, but nevertheless you must inquire into that corruption, how it appears to you. and cleanse it in all ways that you can, but let the vein or nerve not oppose you.
And know that the incisors and saws for cutting these bones are many, according to the setting of the bones and their appearance, and their thickness and subtlety, and their size and smallness, and their hardness. And for this reason, it is necessary to equip each kind of work with its instrument.
And know that the work will show you the instrument you will need, according to the knowledge of this art and the testimony of the manners of diseases. So prepare the instrument you need according to what is fitting.
The shoulder may dislocate inward or outward.
And when you have medicine that corrodes it through the treatment of medicines, and it profits nothing, then it is necessary to cut that member up to the place where the corrosion comes, so that the patient escapes death, or the greater malice, which is worse than the loss of the limb.
And the signs are that the limb becomes black, as if it were burned by fire, and after the blackness, then comes the corruption of member to member, and takes hold throughout the body.
If it is from a bite of copper, and if it is by the sting of some venomous beasts, such as sea scorpion and viper and similar creatures, if the corruption is at the head of the toe, cauterize it, and do not give it space to come up to the hand.
And if it comes up to the hand, cauterize it at the joint so that the corruption does not come up to the arm;
and if it comes to the arm, cauterize it at the elbow;
and if it passes the elbow, death is certain, and there is no remedy except for the quantity of its virtue;
and do the same when the gangrene comes or foot: if it comes in the first joint, then cut off the limb after the other joint;
and if it comes to the foot, then cut off the whole foot; and if it rises in the leg, then cut it at the knee joint;
and if it comes above the knee, there is no other remedy than to leave the patient to die;
and the manner of cutting or sewing the limb is that you tie it above and below, and extend one minister's ties downward, and another minister's ties upward, and you sever the flesh that is between the two ties at a spatula's width, until the bone is exposed;
then cut or sew, and put on each side a sheet of linen, so that the sew does not touch the healthy place, and bring to the patient other wounds and abscesses.
And if a flow of blood comes when you are working, quickly cauterize the area, or put on some restraining powders.
Then return to your medicine until it is complete, then bind the injured member with a suitable bandage, and treat it until it is healed.
And I will tell you what happened to a man in his own foot:
He had a blackening that looked like a burn from fire, and this corruption first came in the back of his foot, until it spread throughout the whole foot.
And when the man saw the corruption, he quickly covered the foot and it was healed.
And a long time afterward the corruption returned to the back of his hand, and he came to me, and I put things that repel on it after cleaning the body, and I could not stop the corruption.
And he said that I should hold his hand, and I did not want to, because I had hope of recovering the matter. And I also doubted that if I cut his hand, he would not die, because the strength of the man was weak.
And he despaired altogether and returned to his land, and hastened to hold his hand, and was healed.
And I only tell this story because one might do the same thing if there is need.
Sometimes an abscess comes in fleshy areas and remains so long that it forms a large collection of pus. And then it bursts and discharges the pus, and the wound remains open, like some vessels. And the skin above it is as delicate as a thin cloth and does not extend down to the bone or to the nerve; such an illness is called "healthy" and is not called "fistula."
but if it is so elongated that it reaches the bone completely, it is called a "fistula";
and the cook is such that you cut around that skin, and just the same when it is subtle, like a cloth; and it does not spoil because of its corruption.
And if you believe that the skin will burn, and the corruption is not completely gone, and the skin is thick like leather, then treat it with an enema like this:
look to see if the breasts are large, and the bowels that come from it have a foul smell, then give an enema of Egyptian medicine which is made like this: take alum, and oil, and litharge, equally, and put them in a vessel over the fire until the medicine is red, and becomes as thick as honey;
and then take of this according to your need, and make it with vinegar and honey, and in an enema put it into the breast, and draw out the fistula; and let the medicine remain for two hours, then remove it by squeezing;
do this many times, until the breast is softened and the pus is removed;
and sometimes put in an enema of vinegar ash, when this medicine is not present, and take ashes from vine wood, and pour vinegar over it, then strain it, and use as an enema, until you know that the breast is well cleansed.
and if the patient cannot tolerate it, neither the Egyptian medicine nor the vinegar ash, then use an enema of vinegar and honey or add a pinch of powdered litharge. where you cleanse it with honey and mead wine, so that the honey has the property of purifying and cleansing, and the wine makes the body breathe.
And when you have done this and are confident that the breast is well purified, then cleanse it with something that produces flesh in it, and take a diaphoretic plaster and make it with rose oil and wine;
or you cleanse it with certain medicines and ointments, whose properties I have described or will treat in the discussion of ointments;
And if the opening of the breast is small and the nozzle of the clyster cannot enter, enlarge it a little with an iron instrument and put in a tent of Egyptian ointment or basil ointment until it is enlarged.
And if the wound is too large, sew it up so that only the place where the clyster can enter remains open; and if the opening that leads to the bowels is above, sew it lower than where it is.
And if you cannot cover the breast below as you see it, arrange it in such a way that the belly runs to the lowest place where it is; for when the belly is perfect, do not allow flesh to grow and if you cannot cover the breast below as you see it, arrange it in this way. Let the belly run slightly downward and do not leave anything of the belly.
Let the belly run slightly downward and do not leave anything of the belly. And take consolidating medicines to put over the breast, and spread them on a linen cloth that covers the whole breast. Then cover the sore place on the breast as forcefully as possible making the hole larger than the first, then spread ointment often on the other cloth according to the size of the hole, and put it on the sore place on the breast to align the belly, and do not remove the large cloth except after many days once;
and he who is outside the belly from the breastbone, often removes it to remove the bowels, and know what flows from the bowels, whether it's poison or pus or enough, digested, or undigested.
and take care whether the patient feels pain or not, and if there is an abscess or not, and when your medicine has spread halfway and you see the nature that leaps up on the breastbone, know that the breasts are already healing, and approaching health.
And then untie it in the morning, or on the third day, and when you untie the wound, if you change another bandage, and renew the ointment.
And if subtle poisons come after a long time, do not despair at all of health, for healing approaches.
For there are men whose wounds heal slowly, and some who do the opposite;
and if undigested bowels leap from the breast after many days, know that the breasts are not healing;
and if the breasts are slow to heal and are inflamed, apply drying medicines that are moist in substance and dry in effect, such as diachylon ointment, for it contains a large portion of vitriol, and this is the last resort medicine;
Take diachylon ointment, and make it with rose oil, and the rose of old wine equal in substance;
then cook it down and use it;
and the same made with honey makes it thicker, when diachylon ointment is not present, or you can take myrrh and aloes and frankincense, grind them, and sprinkle the powder on the honey when it has been taken off the fire;
then make it into a paste and spread it over the breast, and administer twice daily aristolochia longa and roots of orchis, which are also like flour of vetch and centaury; and in the use of simples or compounds: crush them, and make a powder, and put it on the honey that I have said, and use it;
and if the sore is prolonged, and is not cured by this treatment, then know that the corruption is fully embedded, and makes an impression on the bone, or hard limbs, or limbs; if the cure of the fistula, as we have said before.
A felon is an abscess that arises under the nail of the hand or foot, or perhaps arises in other places;
and when it is inflamed and no heed is paid to it, then it becomes a large abscess, running and oozing pus so much that it runs to the root of the nail, and perhaps runs all through;
And corruption comes to the bone, until there is a foul-smelling pain, and the flesh around it becomes wide, and the color is dark.
When you treat it as we have said in the division, and the treatment does not profit, then it is necessary that you cut out all the superfluity which has remained from the nail, then cauterize the wound afterwards. Cauterization is a great help if the bone is healthy, and the nail is healthy;
and if the nail presses on the flesh and begins to grow in, and the sore starts, then you should put a wedge under the nail that points at the flesh, lift it up, and cut away this thin flesh subtly and lightly. Then put burning and corrosive medicines on the remaining flesh to remove it all; then treat it with ointments until it is healed.
And if the corruption is in the bone, cut it out and treat it forcefully, for as long as the corrupted bone remains, it cannot heal;
and if you see the pain corrupting it, so that the wound is shaped like an I as mentioned before, then treat it until it is healed;
and if it is inflamed and swollen, and it causes great pain, then you must first heal it;
then cut the inflamed area with a sharp scalpel, slicing across it, and be careful that the cut does not reach the flesh beneath the inflamed area, for the patient would feel too much pain;
and if it happens, apply something soothing on top of it.
The two nails that are born in the hands of some men by chance are all fleshy, and by chance there is sinew where there are bones, and sometimes there is a nail, and none of them are born at the root of the joint, or its birth is in some parts of us.
Those who are born with no pain in any part of the body do not move, and those who are born at the joint of the body may possibly move.
The cut of one who is fleshy should be light, in a measured way: Cut it at its root with a wide scalpel.
Those who are born at the root of the joint are hard to cure. If you hold them tight.
For one who is born or about to be born soon, it is fitting that you first shave the flesh roundly down to the bone, then cut the bone to a suitable size for this, and then heal it until it is healthy.
The solderings that come to two bones together come by birth, or by soldering of a wound, or by burning of fire, or by similar things.
It is fitting that you bind that wound so that it may heal according to its natural shape. Then place it between two soft cloths soaked in rose oil, so that it does not stick together. Or you may place it between two thin pieces of lead, until its flesh is healed, as it should be.
If soldering comes to any of his joints with the palm, then bind that soldering as it is fitting.
Veins are large vessels filled with superfluous melancholies that come from various parts of the body.
And it occurs more in the legs of those who walk and work and carry things than in others.
Therefore it is necessary that you administer to him purging with colocynth, and then apply basil to him.
The treatment with iron is done in two ways: One is to bind them and strongly draw out the black blood. And the other way is that you lift the vein, and treat it completely strongly.
The incision is according to this manner: First raise the leg with very hot water so much that the flesh becomes softened, then strain the leg of the patient from above the thigh to the part below the knee;
Then cut the vein in one place, or two or three, with a wide incision, then loosen and strongly treat the black blood with your hand from one side to the other, as much flesh is released as the strength of the patient can endure.
And then tie it, and order him to abstain from meat containing black bile;
and repeat the evacuation and cleansing when the veins are full, and benefit the patient.
The lifting of the limb is according to this manner: Place the leg of the sick person, if there is much hair, then put it in a bath and raise the leg with hot water until it becomes red and swells the veins.
And if you do not have a bath, heat it by fire and then cauterize the place near the vein along the length of the knee or in the part below the ankle.
Then cut the skin with an awl and flay the vein from each side until it appears when touched.
And one sees it red and black, and when it enters the skin it also appears like a white cord;
Then put the tip underneath, as long as it is raised from the skin and then gently cut it with an awl and cauterize it in another place above the three toes.
Then flay the skin above the vein until it appears, then ligate it with a ray, just as you have done, and bind it to another hook, just as you have done first.
Then cut another incision, or several if you need them, then ligate it, and bind it to the second toe, then draw and ligate it up to the second incision.
Then extract it from incision to incision until it comes out entirely, then cut it.
And if you cannot draw and lift it, insert a needle through the whole thread doubled, tie it and draw it up, then insert it under the ray and turn your hand on one side and the other until it comes out. And be careful that it does not cut, for if it cuts, you cannot draw or lift it, and the patient will be harmed.
And when you have treated it all, put on the wound a cloth soaked in wine and rose oil. And dress it until it is healed.
And if the sinew is contracted and twisted and wrapped together, and it is not straight, as we have said, then you must split it crookedly but do not cut it. And treat it as we have said before.
The shape of the iron with which one cuts the sinew is curved and does not cut except it cuts a vein.
And it is of a large curve, for if it were subtle, it would cut the vein, but let it be thick as we have said, and this is the shape:
This vein is embedded in the legs, in hot places where neither herbs nor trees grow, and in earth where there is no moisture.
And by chance it arises elsewhere than in the legs, and this happens from the rot that comes under the skin, as it comes into the body snakes and worms, inject between skin and flesh.
And if the signs of the beginning of this vein are such that a very large inflammation comes in the leg, then the color changes, and the vein begins to come out, just like the root of a plant.
When the shoulder is open, it is fitting that you wrap around a piece of linen from three and a half to two and a half fingers, and tie it, and leave the linen hanging on the leg, and every time it begins to come undone, wrap it again around the linen and tie it.
And if it is too long, cut off a part and wrap the remainder, and do not cut it at its root, as long as it is all coming out. For if you cut it, it will go back into the flesh and cause an abscess and rot or pus and bad sickness.
For this reason, it is fitting that it should be treated bit by bit until the end, and nothing remain in the body.
and there are times when this vein, when treated, is X palms long, or even more, and one man came to me whose was X palms long, and when you cut it, if it bursts into I rays or holes, and pierce it to the bottom so that everything comes out;
and let the matter inside be emptied, and apply to the place medicines that prevent putrefaction at any time, then treat it as you would an abscess.
And sometimes this vein has few rays, and even when it opens at the joint of the foot or the ankle, and many holes come out and it spurts rays;
then treat it as we have said before.
of worms that are born between skin and flesh This ailment is called in our land "the ox disease," because it often occurs in oxen, and it is a small worm that is born between the skin and flesh, and goes throughout the body ascending and descending, and the man feels it well from limb to limb, as long as it runs under the skin where it goes, and jumps strongly;
And it is caused by putrefaction of certain humors, such as worms and serpents and lampreys or ascaris in the belly.
And one doubts its wickedness, for when it goes through the body and rises to the head, and comes to the eye, it may perchance enter and destroy the eye. And this happens many times.
When you see it healing and draining, one cannot know for sure that it is gone except when it goes:
Therefore it is necessary that you bind the place above and below with a strong tight ligature, then cut above it and drain it well, and if the worm is completely embedded in the flesh and you do not find it, then cauterize it with fire until it dies.
And the greatest harm that it does is that it can corrupt the eye, as we have said.
and if you see it coming or the head near the eye, remove the eyebrow below it, then cover above and treat strongly;
and it is necessary for the patient to cleanse the body with dissolving medicines for corrupt humors, and avoid meats that cause putrefaction.
of the pain which comes from windiness This illness is called "shaking" in our land, and it is a pain that comes in some limbs, and then can move from limb to limb;
and I have seen what I tell you. I was called to a sick woman, and she revealed her arm to me, and I saw a small swelling in the vein of her arm;
and soon after, I saw it rise as quickly as a worm to the shoulder, faster than anything, like living silver when it cuts from one place to another;
The pain departs from that place, and goes into the shoulder, and then a little while after it spreads throughout the body, until it reaches the other arm.
Then she told me that it turned back around the body, just as I saw it.
I marveled greatly how it moved thus from limb to limb, for I had never seen this illness in this manner. Nevertheless, I had seen many who well believed they could move pain from one place to another, but I had not seen it myself as I did in this woman.
And I thought it was because the woman had a dry body and exposed veins, and that is why this constrained windiness appeared.
And it does not appear according to this reason in those who are delicate and have moist bodies and full veins.
And when you see this illness being cured, and the patient feels the pain, if it appears to you as we have said, then apply a poultice above and below quickly, and then cup upon it until this constrained windiness at that place is gone. and cauterize the place;
and if you do not see it in your eyes, then the cure of those who expel windiness, such as foul-smelling pills, and serpent pills, and similar others.
Arrows are diverse, according to their appearances and according to the places in the bodies where they lodge.
The diversity of theirs is that there are some which have large points, and small ones, and hairy ones, and smooth ones; and some which have two angles, and those which have tongues, and those where it has parts;
and the one which falls in any limb falls according to two manners: where in a principal member it falls, such as brain, heart, liver, lung, reins, intestines, bladder, and similar members. When it falls then in any place of these members, and the signs of death, which I will tell you here afterward, appear to you: So it is necessary that you are wary of the extraction of this arrow, for death comes afterward in many situations; And when this bad sign does not appear to you and the arrow is not completely embedded, then treat it and care for the wound.
The sign of the brain when an arrow penetrates and pierces the bone, and leaps the dura mater which is on top of the brain, is when there is darkness and drowsiness and greenness and redness in the eyes, inflammation and redness of the tongue, spasms and confusion of understanding, and vomiting of bile; and perhaps it is without force from the nostrils or ears; and perhaps loses speech and voice; and from the wound there appears white moisture resembling pus, and leaps also like burning charcoal;
And if these signs appear to you, take care of the treatment, and treat the arrow if it is not embedded.
The sign of an arrow when it has lodged or entered are that it is near the left nipple, and also it feels as if it were stuck in something hard, not hollow. And by chance the arrow also moves like a pulse, and in its course black blood comes forth, and coldness and cold sweat come, and fainting. Know then without doubt that death approaches.
And the sign of an arrow that has not been removed is that without any foam it leaps from the wound, and the throat swells, and the patient changes color, and sighs deeply and desires cold air.
And if the arrow has lodged in the covering of the hip, it is near the ribs; and there is great groaning and great pain and sighing. And all the limbs of the shoulders are moved.
And if the arrow sticks or lodges in the stomach, it may happen that something of the undigested flesh leaps from the wound.
And if the arrow strikes the gut or stomach, and it passes through the intestines without touching any fiber, there is no hope for a cure, nor for the extraction of the arrow.
And if the arrow has lodged in the bladder, and the urine leaps forth and flows out, and the patient feels great pain: Know that the wound is mortal.
The other member, such as the face and the neck and the throat and the shoulder and the armpit and the spine of the back and the forearm and the thigh and the legs, and similar members, are safe according to various positions. When an arrow is in the nerve or artery and it is not venomous as I will tell you so that you may do otherwise.
It happened to a man that an arrow fell or lodged in the root of his nose: I tried it and drew it out from the other side below the fat of the ear, and it was healed without pain.
And I drew out an arrow from a young man that had lodged in the fat of his eye below the eyelid, and the arrow was embedded, and one could only reach the point towards the fletching, and the arrow was large like that of a Turkish bow, all iron light without ears;
The young man was healed, and no bad accident befell him.
And I drew an arrow from the throat of a Christian, and the arrow was Arabic with ears:
I shaved the beard and worked subtly until I drew it out, and the Christian was healed.
And draw an arrow from a man who had it stuck in his belly, and thought he would die.
And then after thirty days, his condition did not change. I cut above the arrow and pulled it out forcefully and there was no bad outcome.
And if you see a man to whom an arrow has fallen in the back, and the wound is sealed over;
and the arrow remains inside him, and does not change his natural state, nor does he find any harm in any of his natural functions.
And if you see another man to whom an arrow has fallen in his face, and the wound is sealed over; and it remains thus without him suffering great pain;
and many other similar cases.
And I drew an arrow from a man of the prince, the king, that was stuck halfway through his nose, and there was a slight slant to the right side. And the arrow was all embedded.
I was called to treat her three days after she fell. If I find the wound very narrow.
I tried every subtle remedy on her, and did not feel her at all; and she felt numbness and pain below her right ear.
I thought it was from the point of the arrow. I put an atractive and digestive plaster on the wound so that the pus would not swell; and the pus from the arrow appeared to me.
and the pus from the arrow appeared to me. I kept the plaster on for three days, and sutured the wound deeply, and kept the patient a long time until he felt the arrow one day deep within his flesh;
and he told me so. I put a strongly corrosive medicinal liquid on the wound for three days until it was open, and I probed it, and felt the head of the arrow lift up in its place.
Then apply in the opening of the wound that medicine sharp, until the head of the arrow appears visibly to me;
and pierce well the edges around four months, and then enlarge if the wound so that I could put in the forceps, and the muscles from one side and the other, and it could not come out;
then I did not cease to refine and engineer various instruments until I took it one day with forceps well made, according to the form that will come at the end of this chapter, so that I could draw it out, and restore the wound.
And the wise judge that the cartilage of the nose cannot be restored: I restored it then, and the wound was sewn, and the patient was entirely healed.
Now I have told you the quality of the extraction of some arrows, so that you put your care on what I do not say, for the books cannot contain everything;
But the wise masters compare very little, and on that which is present and lacking, they find nine works, and nine instruments, for the removal of foreign things which happen in this art.
I say that arrows do not come out of limbs where they are stuck except according to two manners: either through the place where they enter, or through another part;
and that which comes out through the place where it enters is an arrow entering their flesh, and that rarely happens now.
And if it does not come out now, leave it until the flesh is rotted around it, and the exit is widened.
And also if it is stuck in the bone and cannot come out, leave it like that for several days, and move it every day.
And then it jumps, and if it does not jump, pierce around with a very fine instrument until the wound is enlarged, and then treat it.
And if the arrow is embedded in a part of the body where it cannot be seen, then search for it all over; and if you feel it, treat it with any suitable instrument;
and if you cannot due to the tightness of the wound and the depth of the arrow, and there is no bone, nerve, or vein, then enlarge it until the wound is large;
and treat the arrow if you can, and if it has ears by which it is held, remove the flesh that is stuck in two parts as much as you can, then break or bend the ears of the arrow until you can draw it out;
and be careful not to break the arrow, lest you draw it out more grievously.
And if you cannot do it at once, then leave it until the surrounding flesh has rotted, then treat it, for the extraction will be easier. And if the flow of blood opposes you, then apply what we have said about treating it in its chapter;
and beware of cutting a nerve or vein, and place something as you can so that you can draw the arrow out without danger, whether quickly or slowly, firmly or gently;
and put the patient in the form he was when the arrow fell on him for it is the greatest help that there is and if you cannot then put him according to what the signs show you
The arrow that comes from another direction, where it appears nothing of it, or the skin is swollen in a place if one sees or feels it apparently
cut therefore above as much as the forceps can grasp and then extract it if a jump is now.
And if it is held in the bone, turn your hand around until it enters the bone, and enlarge the bone, then pull it.
And if it cannot come out leave it still and then begin the extraction again as much as it comes out;
and if there were a part of the arrow  push it all the way in;
and if there were a point and you see it administering thrusting, if it administers the instrument with its head so that the point of the arrow enters into the head of the instrument
And then put force, and if the arrow is feathered, put the instrument with a pointed end inside, to make extraction easier.
And if the arrow is touched, it is fitting that you cut all the flesh around where the poison is, if you can, then treat the wound as is fitting.
And if the arrow lodges in the flesh or the belly or the bladder or the side and it is nearby and you can cut on top of it, cut.
And beware of cutting a vein and a nerve, and then extract it, and then stitch the wound if needed. And treat it until it is healed.
The shape of the forceps with which one treats arrows is like a bird's beak, and see here the shape:
And there are many ways to do this: large, medium, and small, according to the size of the arrow.
The shape of the end of the arrow is like the feather of a bird, for piercing at the point of the arrow, as it is shaped:
There are XXXI veins from which one heals, of which there are XVI leaders, namely: Two temples that are after the ears, called the two "herbechs"; and the two arteries which are apparent in the two temples and two veins which are in the two corners of the eyes, which are called "aspirers" and the vein that is below the forehead; and the vein that is at the top of the nose; and the two cords which are at the neck; and the two veins that are above the lips, and these are the veins that are called "augeherich"; and two veins that are below the tongue.
The veins which one commonly bleeds are five in each arm:
one is the cephalic, and it is on the left side, and the common people call it "vein of the head"; and the middle one is called "fascia," and it is composed of the cephalic and basilic, and the common people call it "vein of the heart"; and the basilica is either on the right or left side; and the common people call it "vein of the belly"; and it is above the fossa; and it is that one from which we bleed, which opens clearly above the pouch.
And the salvation vein is the vein which is between the little finger and the ring finger, and it has two branches;
and in the leg and foot there are three veins: one is below the curve of the pouch on the left side, and the second saphena which is at the ankle on the right side; and the vein which is called "nurse," which is at the ankle of the other side;
and in the other leg there are three veins below those.
Bleeding from the veins that are behind the ears helps with old catarrhs, and migraines;
and the qualities of the bloodletting, as I tell you, is that you raise the head of the patient, and rub the place where the veins are with a coarse cloth; then tighten the patient's neck with a screw, until the two veins appear behind the ears in two hanging strands from the head: where the thumb is at your own pulse, and wherever you feel the pulse below your thumb, that's where to cut in.
then take the lancet and insert it below the vein to the bone, then lift your hand along the entire vein upwards, cut through both the skin and the vein well with two strokes, and let the blood flow out as much as you see.
then strain and tie it, until it is healed.
And I have already said incision and cautery in the first book.
The cutting of the two arteries that are in the two temples is good for ancient migraines, habitual and customary ophthalmia, and for the body’s watery tears.
And the quality of the bloodletting is as I say: And it is that the patient tightens their neck, so that the two veins appear openly; And they feel the thumb under your hand, and then you make a sign with the knife.
Then lift the knife onto the vein above at your index finger, and put the lancet underneath, and lift the vein above and cut it, just as you did in the two other veins, and let the blood flow according to your need.
Then loosen the patient, and put your finger on the vein for an hour, then put cotton on it. and then form a bandage, and leave it until it is healed.
And we have spoken of them and their treatment and extraction, which begins at the start of the book.
The bleeding of a vein in the forehead is worth as much as the bleeding of the cephalic for old diseases of the face, and for migraines, and for redness.
And its quality is such that the patient tightens their neck by twisting, as long as the vein appears; then take the instrument which is called a "burin," of which here is the form:
And place the point on the vein, and press down with your hand or something else, and let the blood flow out according to the quantity that you see. Then untie the patient's neck and bind the vein until it is healed and never do the work with a wide flame.
In any case, it is not right for the flames to be too strong; and the angle should not be skewed, because the bone is close and might break by the flames when they are subtle.
The vein of the two tears that are in the two eyes helps with these things, and with inflammation, and redness, and the boil in the eye, and diseases of the face;
and the quality of their vein is such that the patient tightens his neck by twisting some cord, as before;
then the vein, and it should be a long vein, a small cut for a single flame a wide one And if the flames are subtle, they might break;
then let the blood run, as much as you need, and then tie it with cotton, and tie it well.
The vein that runs from the nose is good for water, and for strong thirst, and for diseases of the face, such as migraine and redness that comes to the face, even when it is old;
And the quality of the vein is such that the patient squeezes his neck, then pulls his nose with your left hand, and takes a thin flame long, and puts it in the lip in the space between the two nostrils, for the vein does not open well otherwise, and the blood will now begin to flow;
And do not go too far into the lip, and make the blood flow according to your need, then bind it for one night, because it is quickly restored;
The vein of the two temples helps with the tightness of the groin, and the beginning of measles, and many diseases, and impetigo, and corrosion, and herpes, and erysipelas;
And the quality of the treatment is such that the patient must pull his collar down on both sides, as we have said.
And let the master be standing above the head of the patient, and the patient sit on a stool, then cut the vein along its length widely, then draw out the blood temperately, or as much as is needed;
Then do the same in the other vein, then untie the ligature, and draw out all the veins moderately, so that the patient does not strangle. And leave him until morning, so that the wound is healed.
of the health of the liver The sinews of the veins above the lips help to hold together the mouth and are corrupted by gums, fissures of the lips, and teeth and gums.
And the quality of the treatment is to make the patient sit in front of you and pull down his collar as I have said. Then turn back the lip and look at the two veins, one is on the right lip and the other on the left, and recognize them by their blackness and because they have small black veins around them.
Therefore do one and the other, and if you do not know them and are in doubt, then cut the largest of each side, and do the same for the two veins that are above and below, for it is the same manner.
of the health below the tongue The bleeding of the veins that are below the tongue helps after the bleeding of the cephalic vein, and it is for the constriction of the throat, and for eye diseases, and for mouth diseases.
And the quality of the bleeder is that the patient sits between your hands in front of the sun, and lifts their tongue, and looks underneath on each side for a black vein:
Bleed one and the other, and do not go too deep, for underneath are the arteries.
The veins of the arm from which one commonly bleeds are bled according to two manners:
When you prick with all the flame, myrtle strong, or olive subtle as cutting trenches, and it is called "anesil"; And they are large and subtle according to the width and narrowness of the veins. The form of the flame myrtle is very renowned, and it is as wide as you see:
And it is necessary to open the veins raised full of thick blood evident, and that contain thick and troubled blood; and this is the form of the olive flame:
and is more subtle pointed, and it is for severing small veins, where there is subtle yellow blood.
The vein of the basilisk, which is one of those veins, helps with illnesses that are below the throat, and on the neck, and on the chest, and on the belly;
and it is necessary for the healer that he bleeds it, and that he guards himself from the artery which is below. And if he cuts the artery, and a flow of blood comes, then it is necessary to staunch it, as I have said; And the flame must not be piercing, but cutting like a knife.
And if the basilisk does not open manifestly, it is fitting that you extract it and change for another. Or if you want no vein from it, or you heal in its place the vein within the arm: it opens manifestly; and apply the cautery knife to the flame, as we have said.
And if you wish to know the place of the sinew, it is fitting that you extract the arm so that you touch the place until you know the pulse; then mark the place of incision, and then bind the arm, and apply the vein to the cautery knife flame. And be careful not to wound the artery when you see the swollen place, for it is of the artery: Avoid that then.
And if you see it protrude upwards like the urine of a child, and the blood is red and thin, know that it is blood from an artery. Hurry then, and put your thumb on the length of it, then remove your thumb if the blood stops flowing, which often happens. If it bleeds again, bind the arm, leave it like that, and tell the patient not to move it;
and be on your guard, and do not move it until it is healed.
And if the blood does not stop flowing and it is coming out at you, and medicine is not present to you, then grasp the artery if it appears, for the head of it retracts; and stop the bleeding.
And take a piece of ivy root, and cut it, and take one of the halves and bind it on well until the next day;
if his blood is staunch, it is good; if not, he should be treated as we have said with powders that staunch blood;
and the staunching is not hindered in several positions due to the small size of the wound and the strength of the bandage on the arm.
The vein in the middle helps as it draws blood from above the head and below the body because it is composed of the basilica and cephalic, as we have said;
and it is fitting for the phlebotomist to be careful of the nerve that is below, and if he pierces too deeply and finds the nerve, it will swell and the bleeding will be hindered, and perhaps it cannot heal.
and this nerve appears many times, and if it does not appear in some men due to its subtlety, then you should draw the blood with a blunt instrument. And carefully excise the nerve according to your ability.
And if he has a vein between the two nerves, then make the incision long.
The artery of the head helps by drawing blood from the head and helping these ones.
And it is best to bleed by cauterizing with olive oil flame or myrtle flame, for this is the safest of all veins, as there are no nerves nor arteries beneath it. Nevertheless, it is best to seek the lightest place and do not grieve if one misses the first time, and try again. And by chance some men's veins swell when it is missed the first time, but do not worry.
The quality of the lancing is according to your thought.
The first thing that you must know about bleeding is that it is only administered to preserve health and to ward off diseases to come.
And let the bleeding be done in one of the three veins which are as follows: These are known as cephalic, facial, and basilic. And one should bleed at the beginning of spring in young people, and in autumn and winter after eating, when signs of fullness appear.
And bleeding should be done on the first or third day, after two or three hours of the day.
Bleeding administered for illnesses has no set time, but is done when needed, day or night, at all hours and in all times.
And it is not fitting to bleed children until fourteen years old, nor women carrying a child from the fourth month until the seventh. Old men who have passed sixty years should not be bled.
And when someone wishes to be bled, in any manner, it is fitting that they cleanse their bowels with a mild clyster if they have retained much phlegm so that the veins do not draw harmful impurities from the intestines to the principal members.
Nor does he who is too full of meat heal well, nor he who is drunk until he is overcome, nor those with dropsy.
And he worsens from sickness after colic attacks, vomiting, discharge of the bowels, and multiplication of childbirth for women, and from labor, staying awake, and fasting, and from whatever drains strength, whether by weapon or by the body.
Then subtly thin the humors if they are too thick, by meats and drinks and by medicines if you have the skill.
Then bathe him if nothing forbids it, to thin the blood, and bleed from a vein near the wrist on the third day as we have said.
And keep him from work, exertion, and lust, and similar things that day.
And be careful and joyful, and let the tourniquet be higher than the one being bled, and rub his arm two or three times, then tighten the bandage moderately for the blood will not run if it is too tight or loose.
And then rub the place with your hands until the veins swell and can be felt.
Then moisten the linen with a drop of old oil, then place your left-hand thumb on that vein below the place where you want to bleed, so that the vein does not escape and fail when cut.
For there are veins that flee as swiftly as cords upon linen, and if one has such veins full of windiness, so that when the flame is placed upon it, it shrinks from the flame and cannot open the vein, then one is among these. And if he opens the vein, but the wound is too narrow, for this reason it is necessary that the linen-handler be knowledgeable in these things.
And if the vein opens the first time, it is good. If not, start again a little lower than that place or higher if the limb is not swollen.
And if the limb is swollen and the patient is afraid, leave it for one or two days and do not bind the arm. Perhaps some boils will form.
Do not bathe afterwards and then begin the setting again if it pleases him.
And if the puncture is small, or you cut the sinew subtly and doubt that as much blood as you see will not come out, then pierce in that puncture itself all the way through.
And work quickly so that the limb is swollen. For this often happens when the wound is small.
If you see the place swollen, do not begin the setting again and put a bit of linseed oil on it, because it draws the blood from the body and is gentler in that place than the oil.
And thus administer a ligature of oil into each vein that you open, to staunch the flow of blood.
And this same thing does act as a tourniquet and bandage when applied. If it is too thin, the blood will seep through; if it is too thick, it will impede circulation.
And if there develops a large abscess, which often happens even when the vein has only been opened a few times, or when the opening of the vein is small, if you hurry and apply a moistened sponge in warm water and salt to the area for an hour;
and it is necessary to do this after the blood has flowed from the vein, and if it remains in place for a few days without any blackness or greenness, it will not harm him. And if you see it, put some aloe or myrrh mixed with calamint juice, monsterwort, or something similar.
And often abscesses and appearances occur at the site of the basilic vein:
So put your hand on it, and if you find the area soft when pressed by your hand, then that appearance is bad. Therefore beware that you do not put any of what we have said on it, for fear of cutting an artery;
but apply a dry plaster to harden the area, then treat it with another remedy until it is healed.
And treat each blood according to the quantity of its virtue, and the color of the blood.
For if the blood is black, let it flow out until it is red; and if you see it thick, let it flow out until it is thinned; and if it is too hot, let it cool down.
And it is fitting for one who is ill and strong, and needs bloodletting, that they be made a wider wound, and the incision be wide.
And for one who is weak, do the opposite, and they should be bled little and often, and one should bleed them by cutting across, not by pricking.
And this manner of bleeding saves from the running of blood and the cutting of nerves, and is worth more than bleeding that is long or wide.
And for one whose body lacks for bloodletting, it is fitting to give them softened bread in pomegranate juice; if they are feverish, bleed them three or four times; and if they are of cold complexion, give them before the bleeding softened bread in thick syrup, or in honey syrup flavored with spices such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and chicory, and a fragrant syrup.
And if he faints after the issuing of much blood, it is fitting that he inhale broth of flesh and subtle aromatic syrup, and use other things as we have said in the division or chapter on syncope for the evacuation of veins.
And if he wants to increase his arm strength, and bleed again, it is fitting that when it is weakened by a great bloodletting, that he bleeds a little at a time, according to the amount of his continuing strength.
And whoever wants to drain his arm after the first bleeding, and he has strong flesh, then bleed him seven hours after the first bleeding, or after the ninth hour.
And whoever wishes to heal from another location, it must be healed on the second or third day.
For it has much blood within the body which is already heated, and brings fever; so it is necessary to draw a great quantity, and widen the opening as much as it will allow. Then when you have observed all the conditions of health, and place your hand upon his pulse while he is recovering, so that death does not come instead of recovery, for this happens many times when the healer is negligent;
and it is not fitting when you see the arm loosen and make blood come out a second time, and the opening is closed, that you press strongly upon it. If it is bent, let him straighten his arm quickly, for this would be bad;
but leave it until it recovers a second time; or apply the point of a flame, as long as the blood which is frozen at the opening of the vein comes out freely, and put upon it a piece of linen moistened in vinegar, and press lightly upon it.
And if the vein is swollen, leave it alone and do not constrict it, until the abscess is appeased.
And if it is necessary to draw blood a second time, then do so in the same vein, or in another vein, or in the other arm.
The vein under the arm is cut near the vein of the head because it is composed.
And the manner of the cautery is such that the patient plunges their hand into hot water, until the wrist is red;
Then it is loosely bandaged, so that the vein appears well, then the cautery is now applied crosswise, not wide nor long;
And the opening should be wide, and it should be cauterized very close to the joint of the hand, and if none can escape, then put the hand back into hot water, and let the blood run into the water, until you have enough;
And if it is summer, do not put the hand back into hot water, for it is put in more in winter than in summer;
And the cautery of this vein is safer than all other veins, for there is neither artery nor nerve.
The vein of the salvation of the right hand is worth for all liver diseases, and this is the manner:
Hold the hand, and put it in hot water, so much that the vein swells, if you see it. And if the vein is sideways, and if you cut it all around, it does not hurt anything.
And do not go too deep, because the nerves are underneath all naked of flesh, and then put the hand back in hot water if the blood is frozen in the wound and cannot come out.
And when you have treated the blood as much as needed, put oil and silk on the vein to heal quickly, and do the same for every vein.
The vein in the left hand is worth as much for the disease of the mouse, and do everything just as I told you on the right.
The cautery of the sophene is worth against all diseases that are below the body, such as diseases of the marrow, and retention of fluids, and disease of the reins, and of the thighs and legs old, and similar diseases.
And the quality of this vein is that the sick person puts their bare foot in hot water, and rubs on the vein until it breaks, and ties above the joint of the foot. And the vein is at the ankle, and above the foot there go many veins.
Heal then the bone or larger sinew, or at the ankle, that moves worthily.
And if you heal it on the foot, beware of the nerves that are underneath, and heal it by passing through as in cutting.
And let the flame be numbed.
And if the blood cannot come out, put the foot in hot water, and let the vein drain well.
And if the healing fails the first time, start the second time a little higher up, for the flesh is salty.
Do not doubt about the nerve as we have said, and do the same to the sophene of the other foot equally.
The vein of the sciatic nerve is at the ankle strong, and its bleeding is worth the pain of the hip, when it is for hot blood.
And the quality of this healing is that the patient enters a bath and squeezes above the ankle four times by twisting, for otherwise the vein will not open.
And if it opens, heal it in all ways that you can, and by crossing. And it is worth noting that you must copy it, for the flesh is safe, and it is very full of hands.
And it is worth noting that you must copy it, for the flesh is safe, and it is very full of hands. And if you do not find it, then any vein that appears or back of the foot, and towards the small toe, and beware of the nerves;
and let as much blood flow as you see, and then untie the ligature, and put cotton on top and remove it; It is now healed.
Cupping glasses are made of horn, or of glass, or of wood;
And cupping is done in two ways: either by cutting and drawing blood, or without cutting.
And this cupping that is done without cutting is according to two methods: either it is with fire, or without fire;
And bloodletting, which is done by striking and extracting blood, is done in fourteen places on the body, of which one is all over the head. And the others are along the neck; and two others on both sides of the neck; and the cupping glass below the chin; and the cupping glasses on both shoulders; and the cupping glass above the buttocks; and the cupping glasses along both arms; and the cupping glasses on both legs; and the cupping glasses on both ankles;
and bloodletting does not draw any blood, except for a few small veins that are scattered throughout the flesh, and therefore it weakens no one, as one does when drawing blood from a vein. And it is not fitting that it should be administered, neither with all fire nor without fire, in any illness which comes from repletion, until the whole body is emptied.
And if by necessity of illnesses it is fitting to cup, or for customs, we shall administer it each hour at the beginning of the month, or at the end, and in every time.
For there are some who, when they need to be cupped, have a heavy head.
And there are some who find repletion and redness in their face, and in their head, and at the neck, and darkness as well.
And there are some who find a drop of blood in their mouth, and have a swollen tongue, and spit blood. and if there are some who think, and see by night blood and wounds and death and similar things.
And when we see these signs, and especially when it is less than a month old, we order him to be cupped after three hours of the day.
The sinew of the thigh helps in the treatment of the head wound ... that comes to it, and it is not right that this be done after the evacuation of all the body.
And this cupping is in place of the sinew of the cephalic, and it is not right that those who are of cold complexion use it, or who have diarrhea, for it does them great harm.
And therefore it is not right that the elderly use it, nor those who have or head colds.
And those who heal themselves often become stiff, and for this reason it is necessary to place the cupping glass a little lower due to the doubt of stiffness.
Cupping on the neck is in place of the sinew of the head and the basilica, and therefore it is good for the constriction of the breast, and for the fissure of the canal of the lung, and for all, and for repletion.
and it is necessary to push a little, for if it holds too tightly, it will cause obstruction or blockage in the stomach and heart.
Cupping applied to the two ribs near the neck is good for headaches, ophthalmia, migraine, strangulation, and pain in the roots of teeth, and it is placed where the basil vein is located;
and you must instruct the patient to hold their hand while applying it, so that they do not press on an artery and cause blood to flow.
Cupping below the chin is good for mouth diseases, gum disease, and similar ailments that occur in the mouth; and it is placed where the veins of the two lips are located.
Cupping of the shoulders is good for illnesses that come from heat and fullness.
Cupping on the elbows is as effective as three veins in the arm, because it draws blood from those large veins;
and instruct the patient not to thrust too deeply, for the flesh is thin of skin, and beneath are nerves and arteries.
The cupping glass that is on the buttock is good for hemorrhoids of the fundament, and for illnesses below, and it should be large, and made of horn, so that it can draw well. and by chance, if it were thin, it would break; and it would make large wounds.
Cupping glasses on the legs draw abundantly, for they pull blood from the whole body, and are good for old pains of the limbs, and of the bladder, and soften swellings.
and are placed at the two thighs, and the two ankles, and nevertheless they weaken the body after long use, and cause emaciation in many constitutions.
The way to apply a cupping glass is such that you put it first empty, and suck moderately, and place it quickly, and move it equally, and do not cease doing this, until you see the place red and swollen, and appear the redness of blood.
Then take it off, and put the cupping glasses back on, and be careful in the disposition of bodies, for there are some who have thick flesh, and clear pores. If it is fitting to strike only once, and it is fitting to make wide wounds, and a deep prick. And suck lightly.
And if the flesh is thick, it is fitting to strike twice. The first time to make subtle the way of thick blood.
And if the flesh is very thick, it is fitting to strike a third time.
And when we want to draw out blood little by little, we should only prick once. And if we want a lot of blood, we should start again often.
And if the blood is thick, pierce deeply enough so that the points are felt and the ends should be such that the hearts are pierced only a little, and it is necessary for those who have thick and hard skin, and who have few pores, that you anoint the place of the cupping glass with stimulating and dissolving oil: If it is summer, use violet oil, or sweet almond oil, or pumpkin seed oil;
and if it is winter, use watercress oil, or lily oil, or chamomile oil, or another similar one.
And if the superfluity is large and cold, then take oil of marjoram, or balsam, or oil of anise, and such like.
And if the one whom one is treating has tender flesh and large pores, it does not suit to put any oil on, but it must be washed after cupping with rose water, or cold water, or mulberry water, or gourd water, or porcelain water, or other similar.
And those who have a lot of moisture should rise with bay leaf, or myrtle, and sumac, and similar things.
And those who have excess weight should rise with old wine, or vinegar water, or a decoction of anise or chamomile, or other similar ones.
And it is not advisable to apply a cupping glass before the bath or in the bath, but after the bath for an hour or two.
And do not sleep after cupping, and it is fitting that he wash himself, when he is about to be cupped and when he has been cupped.
And beware of those who are being treated who are choleric, and if the flesh is too painful and inflamed; it is fitting that they take cold things, such as pomegranates and endives and lettuce in season, and similar things; and eat little, and meat from castrated animals, and moist meats.
and eat little, and meat from castrated animals, and moist meats. And those who have a cold complexion, let them take syrup of honey and moderately spiced wine, which is between old and new, and eat little, and eat little and small birds and pigeons;
and on the day he will purge himself, he should drink more than eat;
and it is advisable to give some men three anise seeds or musk before the purging, or after, to strengthen the main limbs; and let the wine be subtle, but it should not be drunk by those who are hot.
Cupping glasses that are placed without cutting are those placed on the liver, and on the mice, and gout, and on the belly, the buttock, the kidneys, and the hip bone, because these limbs do not suffer from being cut, and we only do it to draw blood from one limb to another, as we put them on the breasts when they bleed.
to remove the viscosity that is in the limb, as we put cupping glasses on the belly and on the buttock to weaken the limb.
and remove the pain, when there is an obstruction or stone, it removes by its attractive virtue perchance the obstruction, or dislodges the stone from its place.
and it does so likewise when placed on the liver and on the breast when there is retained windiness, and these cupping glasses are administered empty to suck only. and sometimes they are administered together with fire, and sometimes full of hot water, as in pleurisy diseases, and in this manner one fills the cupping glass with hot water alone, or with water in which herbs suitable for this have been boiled.
The form of the cupping glass administered by fire is as follows:
It should be two handbreadths wide and half a palm long, and it has a small hole near the middle, as for putting in a needle, and it is made of horn, smooth in front so that it does not hurt the patient when put on the limb.
and have in the middle a rod of ash or iron, to put a chain on it, and they are large and small according to the illnesses and the age of those who take them.
For children's cupping glasses are different from those of old people, and those of thin people are different from those of fat people.
And one must thus put this cupping glass upon the limb:
Take the chain of wax or linen, and put it through the cupping glass via the rod which is in the cupping glass, so that the clarity is at the bottom of the cupping glass so that it does not burn the patient;
And then put it on the limb, and your hands must be over the opening that we have mentioned, so that when you want to, the vapor goes out, and one removes the cupping glass.
and take the bandage as before, and often start again, if you need to.
In the cupping glass which is administered for pleurisy, and sharp pain, it has neither stem nor hole, and is not administered except when full of water, and is placed upon the member only;
and this is its form:
Cupping glasses are administered only in members where one cannot put cupping glasses because of their small size, such as lips and gums, and similar places; and on those devoid of flesh, such as bone or veins, and others similar;
And the quality of the user is that when you find cupping glasses which are in sweet, clear water without putrefaction, then take them;
and put them for a night in sweet water, until they are familiar and have nothing in their bellies; and then let it be bled by vein and cupping, then rub the limb until it is red, and put on bandages.
And when they are full and have shrunk, if it is a place where one can put a cupping glass, then put it on, for that is worth much afterward.
If not, lift the place a little, and then sharply, very well, and then press it out.
And if the bandages are too tight after the body of the bandages, then wet a linen cloth in cold water and put it on top, until the bandage is softened.
And if there are many bandages, then put crushed vitriol or alum and similar things on top until it is softened.
Or you can put half of peeled beans on the place and leave them there until they burn at the spot so that it stops now.
and if you need more, take other ones.
And if the lancets do not want to be taken, rub the place with fresh blood, or stick a needle there until the blood comes out, and then put them on, and as soon as they feel the blood, they will burn.
And when you see that they are falling, sprinkle powder on a piece of aloe and salt mashed up, or ashes, then they will come off now.
Here begins the book of fractures This chapter is often necessary in the art of medicine, and it is the restoration of fractures and dislocations.
Know ye, son of thread, that the things we are telling in this chapter were never seen by anyone in old books, nor read in any letter.
And for this reason, the science is strange in our land, for I never found anyone good at it.
And I do not know anything else, except through the science of the old books, which I have studied so much that I have treated the science, and by experience, and by the custom of my life.
and I have described in this chapter what is contained and have summarized it at the end, and have clearly shown the forms of the instruments that are used, as I have done in these two previous chapters.
It is necessary therefore that we say or prologue of this book the sums of speech and the chapters where wise men put their understanding, and remain upon virtue, so that those who are experienced know and learn this noble art, and teach it to others.
I say that when a fracture or dislocation or torsion or sprain comes to anyone, it is fitting that you hasten to heal the sick person on one side and the other, unless something prevents you, such as weakness of body, or infancy, or old age; or if the weather is very bad, or too cold;
and eat cold meats, that is to say, cold dishes, and broth of fowl and goat, and do not drink wine, nor eat any fatty broths, and do not fill yourself too much with meats which fill the veins with blood, until you have no doubt of a hot abscess, nor spreading of matter in the limb;
If the patient returns to his first government which he has used.
And when broken bones begin to heal, it is fitting that one nourishes the patient with meats that promote fattening, or have viscosity, such as cooked wheat in broth, rice, and pies, and cow's udder, eggs, fresh fish, and red wine, and similar things. For indeed without nourishment muscles are replenished more quickly than a fracture.
And know that broken bones of the old and infirm cannot be well set or fused according to their nature because of the dryness of the members, nor can those which are too tender, such as the bones of small children.
But have no fear, set the broken bone with large splints that hold and join the limb together, as much as you can strengthen it as it was before. And do not delay his work, and for this reason he must be fed large meats, as we have said.
And know that fractures are diverse in many ways.
For a skull fracture is different than a fracture of the foot or leg, and I will tell you in this chapter all manners of fractures. For there is a break that goes to the bone, and another by sharpening, as the point of a pen for writing.
For there is a break that goes to the bone, and another by sharpening, as the point of a pen for writing. And if there is a fracture with a wound, and a fracture at all a small crack.
And in every manner, let him have his engine and his proper instrument in restoration, according to what his memory comes back to its place.
And a broken bone is known because the flesh is twisted and clearly visible from afar, and it sounds when pressed by the hand.
and when there is no crookedness or sound upon touching, and the patient does not feel great pain, there is no fracture.
But it may well have crookedness, or a crack, or a small fracture. It is not fitting that you move it with your hand, but put on the medicines that come afterwards, and then extract it now subtly.
And know that the fracture which goes awry, and whose two parts are separated, it is necessary now to put them back together equally, just as abscesses come to life.
And if a hot abscess comes, leave it alone for a few days until the abscess is calmed.
Then put it back together gently and wisely, and know that the restoration of it is lighter than the restorations of those where there are pieces.
Then remove it, as it should be done afterwards.
And if the broken bone is in two parts, whether it's a hand or foot, or a small limb, or two strings, or one string and a hand.
And place the limb according to its natural form, so that when the broken parts of the limb are freed, you reset them by all means possible into their places as you can, and be careful that your work does not cause the patient injury or pain.
And adjust well the two ends of the bones according to the best forms.
And feel it well with your hand if it seems to you that it is not quite right:
If it is set beautifully, and do not constrain it too much, nor press as those who by their work cause abscesses, heat and contraction in the limb, as we have often seen.
And when the limb is set properly, admonish the patient well that he does not move it, neither while awake nor asleep, nor turning, nor in any other way; and guard well that the limbs are so secured that he does not feel any pain. For when he feels no pain, unless it is slight, and it is necessary to put him in a position where he feels no pain.
and guard well that the limbs are so secured that he does not feel any pain. For when he feels no pain, unless it is slight, and it is necessary to put him in a position where he feels no pain. And be careful that he is placed straight, so that twisting does not occur when he is restored.
And the quality of the broken limb is according to what I tell you.
Know that broken limbs are diverse in smallness and largeness and shape.
For there are small limbs, such as arms and hands and similar ones: it is necessary to wrap them in soft and delicate linen cloths. And those that are large, such as thighs and legs:
it is necessary to wrap them in a wide and strong bandage, for wide bandages embrace the whole large limb and restrain it equally on all sides, so that there is no dislocation.
Then bind it with light bandages, three or four turns depending on the limb, and pull your hand away a little from all the binding, then go above the fracture and pull less, so that the fracture can move away a little.
And loosen the bandage little by little until you grasp a large part of the healthy area, then take the other bandage and wind it back over the fractured area.
Then go back to the part below the fracture and pull it moderately, not too hard nor too gently, as we said in the first lesson above.
Then place linen cloths or rags between the bandages so that they are all equal, and then bind everything over with bandages, and then apply your well-made splints on top, if there is no abscess or swelling.
And if there is swelling or an abscess, put on something soothing that heats the abscess and removes the swelling, and leave it like that for several days;
Then stretch them on your steles, and they should be half the width of a reed, or wood from which clefts are made, or palm fronds, and they should be according to this figure:
But it is necessary that the stele which is placed on the fracture be a little larger and wider than the others;
And it should also be as long as is fitting for the limb, whether small or large; Then stretch them on the steles as you did in the first instance, then tie a thread tightly over them, as in the first instance over the fracture; Tighter above, looser below.
and it is fitting that the threads be moderate, neither too thick nor too thin, and be of soft linen;
for if the threads are thick, as I have seen in the works of fools who make their ligatures with twisted linen cords, and this is a great error, because the ligature cannot be even if it is too fine, and it is not fitting that there be less than two fingerbreadths of space between each stitch.
And if the patient is sore from the heads of the bones after being bound in their bandages, then place under them cloths of flax, or scraps of wool, so that they do not bruise.
When the wound is with a fracture, and the heart is broken, I will say the cure hereafter.
And know that it is not right to set all broken limbs on the first day. For when the limb is large, it is not fitting to place stitches closer than after 5 or 7 days, or more according to your judgment of the heat and swelling that arises from the abscess;
and see here the manner of ancient plasters for restoring fractures, dislocations, and torsion:
and it is that you take flour that sticks to the walls of the mill, and mix it with plenty of egg yolks, and make this mixture, not too clear nor too thick, and use it; this is the common way of making a plaster that restores fractures in many positions, and for women and small children as well, because it is neither too hot nor too cold.
Another way of plaster to restore a fracture and a dislocation and a twist. Take three drams of saffron and of leadwort and of euphrasy and of asafetida and of gum arabic and of frankincense, each one. Myrrh and aloe, each five drams. Elecampane nine drams. And make powder of them, and mix them with the white of an egg. If the complexion of the man is hot, then use this plaster, for it is of good composition, and restores broken bones quickly, and is worth more than many men.
Another way of plaster that is good for a twist: Take frankincense and mallow, each ten drams. Myrrh and aloe, each nine drams. Here is the sixth chapter. Boil Armenian bole X, and grind it well, and mix with sharp vinegar or plenty of egg white, and administer it.
Another way to make a plaster for joints and bones that have been torn from their places, and soothes the pain arising, and the size breaks down the bone, and the fracture. Take new wool, and soak it in lye and boiled oil, and put it on the place.
This plaster does not heal, but it is good for calming a hot abscess and properly removes pain.
Another way to make a plaster that restores broken bones: Take dried fig leaves and terrestrial poppy leaves, and grind together, and make a plaster.
Another way to plaster for the restoration of a bone fracture and for softening the discharge of an abscess. Take mallow root, chamomile, violet flowers, wheat flour, of each one part;
And grind, and mix with wine, and if the limb is heated, mix it with moist coriander vinegar, or vinegar, and use it.
Another manner of plaster stronger than the first, when a hard abscess comes to the restoration of the limb. Take roots of marshmallow, and seed of flax, balm, melilot, and sanicle, and flowers of violets and chamomile, of all an equal part; And grind them, and boil with salt water, or fresh water, or with wine, according to the heat of the limb, and its rest.
Hippocrates says in his book that one should not put anything on a broken limb to restore it except cerate made of wax and oil, and nothing else besides, and he says that it should be between hard and soft.
And it seems Galen says that one must put on the broken limb, to restore it, dry things a little warm, such as myrrh and aloe and incense and similar things, as we have said.
Another way of plaster that is worth for injury and pain: Take mugwort and horsehair stripped, or feathers of birds, and marshmallow, and weigh them equally, and grind them, and make plaster and bind it.
And then untie it a little while after, and take care that the patient does not feel any pain, nor that the bone has moved from its place; if not untie it by hand for several days. And if pain comes to the place, or itching, lack of rest or swelling, then hurry and untie it, and remove the plaster now;
and take a light cloth, and a moist sea sponge, and dip it in water, and lift it up to the place, until the itching stops, and the pain is eased. Then let the limb rest for an hour, then put dry linen soaked in water or rose oil on it, and bind it with a bandage, until you are sure of a hot abscess.
and reduce the inflammation of the limb, and remove the pain, then begin a delicate binding again, and apply a plaster, and do not bind it as tightly as before. And gently continue until it is healed.
And if you see that an abscess boils and reddens and has pain and swelling are gone completely, and you need plaster and bandage, if it starts again, as you did first equally.
And if nothing comes to the limb of what we have said, do not untie it for more than three days or four or five or seven. And never leave it for twenty days, according to what we see, until the fracture heals and approaches the adjustment of the flesh upon it.
then restrain it more than at first, and thicken its flesh, as I have said before;
and if you see the place drying out more than is needed, know that nourishment cannot come there; raise then a poultice of hot water, every time you loosen it, and this should be done every third day, and leave one spot dry.
through this work then nourish the limb, and quickly amend that which the foolish mirror does, which leaves the limb twisted:
it is bad, and if it is work that frightens, I do not see anything else but to leave it and work straight.
There are many ways of fractures, and various shapes, and the causes are destined;
for there are fractures that are made by the impact of a sword, and the neck breaks all the bone down to the sinew that is below the bone, as a hatchet or axe does; and for this reason this manner of fracture is called "haichure".
Where the sword cuts the bone above without piercing, and this manner of fracture is called "absolute.
And the wound of these two fractures is large or small.
And if there is embedded percussion, or fissure, or chips of stone, or falling onto stone, or other similar things.
And if there is a fracture that reaches the membrane below the bone, or above it, and this wound is either large or small.
And if the wound that is joined to the bone is as subtle as a hair and the fissure is small, and for this reason this fracture is called "capillary."
And if the wound is made by a blow of stone or by falling or by something similar and drives the piece of bone inward, and the bones are close together like when smiths hammer on anvils if the stone enters inside
And this happens more often to those who have or heads with wet bones, such as children's heads.
and it happens in all these ways of fracture that small pieces are detached, like splinters. And I will speak about them in their place.
And we know all kinds of fractures by the traction on them, and the inquisition with probing, and by the corrupted flesh which is upon them.
Similar hairiness is known by this, that when one has uncovered the bone, and rubs quickly upon it, if it appears black breakage.
In the treatment of a fracture, take care of the patient’s accidents, and if you see any evil accident, such as vomiting of bile, and emission of understanding, and stretching, and trembling, and fever ague, and the eyes coming out and reddening, and other similar things in several dispositions, then it cannot be healed without doubt.
And if you do not see a hopeless situation, and you hope for salvation, then begin the treatment.
And when the navel cord first comes to you, and it is winter, then it is fitting to remove the bone before the fourteenth day at the latest that you can.
And if it is in summer, hasten to remove the bone before the seventh day, so that the cloth under the bone is corrupted, and the accidents come that we have said.
And if the fracture of the bone comes up to the membrane that covers the brain, it is necessary that you split open the fractured part thus:
and take the head of the patient gently, and uncover upon the bone in all the ways that you can, and upon the shape of the wound more often than you can, and if discharge of blood comes to uncovering the bone, or abscess rises, help him with what is necessary, and fill the place with cloths softened in rose oil; and let the wound rest until the abscesses that rise are appeased, and be sure of the discharge of blood; Then begin by taking out the bone around it, and this is done according to two working methods:
One method is if you cut a narrow opening in front, and this is the form:
And then he inserts another cut larger than the first.
And the second method is if you have several cuts of different sizes, some narrow and others wide, and they are pointed and made of tempered iron;
and in operation lightly so that you do not bruise the head.
And if the bone is strong and hard, it is fitting that you pierce around it, so that you administer cuts with augers, taking care that they do not pierce beyond the bone into the flesh, and it must have above the point a flange or circle, which does not allow the point to pass beyond the bone;
and you must have several of them, so that each one comes in its place according to the type of bone, so that you have augers for all flesh;
and these are the three forms of cauteries:
The quality for piercing through broken bone is that you put the cautery on the bone and turn it back and forth until you know the bone is pierced;
then put the cautery elsewhere a little after, and thus do all around, then cut with a knife the space of bone that is between the holes, and do this more subtly than you can, and lightly, as we have said, until you draw the bone to your hand, or to any of the instruments you have such as tongs, pincers;
and be careful not to touch the brain or the spinal cord.
And when you have pierced the bone and drawn it out, it is necessary that you use an instrument that remains from the bone for all other instruments similar to a knife, but it must be thinner and more delicate than the other knife;
and if any small bones or scales remain, remove them lightly with instruments. then treat the wound with bandages and dressings as we have described.
And another way of working is that which Galien describes, which is safer. and he praises it highly, and this is his word. It is necessary first that you uncover a part of the bone, where the fracture appears to move, so that when you have uncovered that part, you will put underneath the head of this lenticular scalpel, of which this is the form:
And do not cut from one side, but divide the part in two directions, so that the incision is towards the bone.
Then strike with a small mallet on top, so that you gently chip away the bone all around, and be very careful of the cloth underneath.
If it is attached to the bone, remove the bone lightly, for one can remove it well without harm and without fear.
And if the fracture of the bone does not extend to the cloth, and the bone is cut only on the surface, and there are small pieces, then you must file down that roughness and remove the scales with a subtle razor which you should have in various quantities, so as to administer the most suitable one in each place, according to the work and the shape of the fracture.
If you shave before large razors, and afterwards with more subtle ones, and do not cease doing so until it is well.
In each of the other fine cuttings and subtle fractures, you must treat according to its location.
and it is something that is not answered to one who has put his study into this art
And if the wound is uncovered, it is fitting that you take a linen cloth, according to the quantity of the wound, and moisten it in rose oil, and place it upon the wound Then take another cloth doubled in two or three, and moisten it in wine and rose oil, and place it upon the first cloth; and do this as lightly as you can so that you do not burden the wound, then administer another bandage over it, and do not bind it too tightly just so that it holds the wound only
and leave it like this for one or two days, until the abscess is calmed, then unbind it, and administer medicines such as lily roots, vetch flour, frankincense powder, birthwort, and similar things
and of these things make powder, and put on the wound, and administer immediately worldly medicines without biting;
and be careful that the wound is immediately clean, so that you do not leave any ointment there, nor allow any pus to gather, for when pus gathers on the cloth of the brain, it runs and spreads, and causes great harm to the patient;
for when one puts a mordant thing on the sore, it irritates above it. Take care then, if any bad accident comes to the patient, as we have said, it is doubtful without doubt.
And if blackness does not come except for the medicine that one has put on it, so that it has some virtue, then it is fitting that you take one part of honey, and three parts of rose oil, and in glue one drape, and put it on the sore; then cure in ways that are fitting, until it is healed.
Know that sometimes both parts of the nose above are broken, or one by itself, for there are two bones;
and that below is cartilaginous and does not break, unless it is forced to bend or twist, and then heals.
And if one of the two parts is broken, it is necessary that you insert your little finger or thumb into the nostril and place the broken part inside your index finger, and push it through a pouch, until the nose returns to its natural shape. And do this gently, and be careful that the patient does not feel pain from your work.
And if the fracture is in the part above the knee, and the bone cannot come back into place, then you must put it equal to the head of a nail with a large hole.
And if the break is in two parts, you must do it otherwise, and hasten to restore it on the first day, if you can;
if not, after the seventh or tenth day, when the swelling has subsided, then insert at the top of the nose strips of linen cloth, if the break is in one part.
If you put pressure on it from another side, if there is a fracture. And the tendons are so thick that they fill the holes of the nose.
And some healers say one should soften the bandages with butter and change them every day. It does not seem right to me, but it is necessary that they be softened in a mixture of egg yolk and mill dust; then leave the tendon, as long as the bone is firm and the cartilage hardened.
And sometimes goose feathers are put in place of the tendons, and if it is wrapped with linen cloth, and it holds the fracture together, and breathes for the patient. Or do what you see fit.
And if an abscess comes to a head while you are working on it, put cerate or moistened cotton in rose oil, or in a drop of diascordium.
And if boils do not come, apply a plaster made from sesame flour and frankincense powder mixed with egg yolk, then put light cloths on top and do not tie the nose.
and if the fracture of the bone is small, and it is broken into small pieces, then extract them with suitable instruments, then sew up the wound, and treat things that promote healing, and join together, such as plasters and ointments suitable for this.
and if there is no wound inside the bone, then treat it with bandages, and put splints of plank, until it is healed.
When the jawbone is knocked down below, and there is no wound showing, and the break is only outward, and it is not broken in two but merely pushed in, so a knowledgeable person can tell easily.
It is necessary, if the fracture is in the right part, that you put your index finger in the patient's mouth; and if the fracture is in the left jawbone, then put your index finger of your right hand and gently push the fracture inward, and adjust it with your other hand by force, and make it equal.
And if the fracture of the jaw is broken in two, it is necessary that you administer extension in two parts, so that it be equal.
And if the movement of teeth occurs, or a break, then bind them with a thread of gold or silver or silk, then put cerate on the broken jawbone and put a double bandage on it. And put on the cloth a large star well-made, or a piece of leather equal in length and width according to the jawbone, and tie it up on the cheekbones that you can reach, and instruct the patient to rest, and eat light meats.
And if you see that the shape changes, untie it on the third day, and then put back what has been changed. And apply plaster on it, made from powder from the mill with plenty of egg or rye flour, after you have removed the wax.
And put light wool on top of the plaster, and if the plasters dry out and the patient's condition does not change, leave it until he is healed. Many times it is healed in three weeks.
And if an abscess comes, treat it as we have said many times.
And if there is a fracture and wound together, see if any piece of bone has been removed. If subtle of the bone to remove suitable instruments.
And if the wound is narrow, widen it with flame according to your need.
And when you have removed all these pieces, and none remain, if the wound is large, sew it, and put suitable plasters on it, to promote flesh, until it is healed.
The collarbone breaks several times forward, towards the shoulder, and the fracture occurs in three ways:
Where it is broken and separated into two, and there are pieces, and it is the lightest to restore;
Or there is a fracture with a wound.
And the works are so when the fracture is without a wound, that you have two assistants, so that one holds the shoulder where the collarbone is broken; and the other extends the neck towards the side;
Then put the fracture equal to your two hands, so that the form is as it should be, and there is neither appearance nor indentation.
And if you need to extend more, place under the patient's shoulder a round sphere of cloth or wool, and make it large according to your need; and extend and lift the force, and extract the spear with your hand, so that you put the fracture equal, as it should be.
And if you cannot draw the head of the humerus out backward because it is embedded deep, then it befits that the patient lies often on his back, and put under the shoulder a half pillow, and push the ministers the shoulder down, so much as the bone of the humerus is raised.
And then straighten the fracture to your liking, and if you find it shattered, it is necessary that you split it up;
and treat the pieces lightly, and if the bone cannot join because of any swelling, cut it with one of the incisors that you have; but put this instrument under the splint to keep the fracture in place.
and it resembles a spoon and is not notched, and it should be as wide as necessary, according to the size of the bone and the strength of the work;
and it has two heads, as you see, one wide and the other narrow, according to the shape of the wound that you have made when treating the bones.
And when you are sure of the hot abscess, if it burns the wound, and the rupture is small, or you doubt a hot abscess, apply the wound with cloths and bandages, according to its quantity.
And if boils come, moisten a cloth in rose oil and vinegar and wine, and apply it.
The setting of the bone, when it is without wounds and without incision, is that you put on the bone a plaster of flour from the mill and egg yolk, and put light wadding on top, and put a splint under the armpit, if you need it; Then take a very large bandage a palm wide, then put two cloths on top of the wadding and the plaster; Then take a thin splint three fingers wide and long, and wrap it around that bandage, so that the ends of the bandage hang down; And put the splint on the fracture, and turn the bandage up the neck, and under the healthy armpit, and under the sick armpit; and the resetting of each part, and when you see that the bandage holds the fracture properly, and you clearly see that the bone fragment does not move on the broken bone, then reward it each day, and when the ligaments are slack, then loosen the restraint;
and make the patient lie on his back, and put under his armpit when he sleeps a small pillow, to lift the shoulder up; then the fracture will be relieved of its weight by the elevation of the shoulder, or you tie his arm to his neck, and do not untie it until twenty days have passed so that no bad accident occurs;
then begin the plaster again if you see he needs it, and remove it and leave it like this until it is restored;
and it is restored at most in twenty-eight days, and less for some men.
Of the breaking of the shoulder
It sometimes happens that the shoulder breaks or is dislocated out of place, and it is not healed except by touch.
If you fit the apparatus according to the shape of the break and reset it according to its natural form in all the ways that you can.
Then put on the place powder from the mill with plenty of egg whites and light bandages, and put a double cloth over it. Then put a wide and thin splint on it, a bit wider than the shoulder, and if below the splint any hair is found in any place of the shoulder, use linen bandages so that the splint lies evenly.
And then bind it all with a large bandage firmly so that the splint does not move from its place and examine the binding every day.
And whenever it swells, bind it again and put the splint back in place if it has moved and have the patient lie on their side.
and the shoulder is restored in 20 days or in 25.
And when this number is fulfilled, if it dislocates, be sure, for it is not a bone that is put back lightly.
And if a piece of bone sticks out in front, and not below the heart, then do this: lift it up, set the bone, and do what we have said about the breaking of a bone to soothe a hot abscess.
Of the breaking of the foot
The bone is sometimes broken in the middle, but this rarely happens; but it often breaks at the end.
And when it is broken below, it descends, and the patient feels great pain, and a lack of breath, and all at once, and by chance vomits blood, and opens the hair in the broken bone, and he feels it well.
And the restoration is such that the patient lies often on his back, and puts a cushion between the shoulders, then presses the shoulders, and assembles the ribs of the two sides with his hands, and subtly sets them equal in all the ways he can, so that the shape of the bone is as it should be;
then put on plasters and bandages over the thin layer of salt, or other light herb, and wraps it in a cloth, and ties it over the broken bone so that it does not move; and turn the ligature round to the back, and remove it carefully, and observe the bandage every hour, and if it softens, remove it;
and if it becomes necessary to untie it due to corrosion or itching that occurs at the site, or pain or abscess, then hurry and untie it, scrape off the plaster, and treat what has come about in a suitable manner.
Then soften the plaster and remove it until it is healed.
Of the breaking of the ribs
Know that a broken rib occurs only in the thick ones after the back, and chiefly inwards, and they do not break except because they are slippery; and one can feel it well upon inquiry, as is due.
And the restoration is such that you put the break back equal, as it should be. And then apply a plaster, and remove it with a spatula if needed.
And if the rib fracture is sloping inwards, the patient feels great pain and stabbing, as in pleurisy, because the bone pierces the lining; and a sharp pain, and everything vomits much blood, and it is a grievous illness, and the ancients have put great effort into it.
And if there are those who say that it is necessary to administer meats that swell the belly, to push the fracture outward.
We do not make this, that hot abscesses will come, if they have not already come. And if it has come, so be it healthy.
And they said that one puts cupping glasses on the place to suck out the form, and it seems reasonable. However, there is doubt that the cupping glass does not attract superfluities to the place due to weakness.
And they say that one should cover the place with linen soaked in hot oil, and put wads between the ribs to hold the bandage evenly, then it is cured by a cure of pleurisy, of meat and of medicine.
And if the patient feels great pain that he cannot suffer because of the bone pointing through the flesh, and there is doubt for the patient, then it is necessary to cut above the place of the broken rib, and it is necessary to put an instrument under it to hold up the skin.
And then one should cut the bone, and pull lightly, and then stitch the two edges of the wound if it is large, and treat it with poultices until it heals.
And if boils come, put them on cloths softened in rose oil, and place them on the sore.
And treat while the place of this which suits a boil, and lies often on the side where it should be, until it is healed.
and also at the spine of the back.
And when this happens to someone, and you want to know whether he will be healed or not, if you take care that if you see his hands softened and swollen and dead, and he cannot move them nor extend them, and when you prick them with a needle, he does not feel it.
Know that it is deadly in several positions, and if he moves them and feels well when they are removed and not strained, know that the junction of the bone is saved, and that the patient will be cured, if care is given.
And if similar things come to the spine of the back, and you see whether it will heal or not, if take heed whether his limbs are softened, and whether accidents are in hands, and on the back there is windiness and discharge without wanting;
and when he is turned on his belly, there is discharge without wanting. And when he is lying on his back and wants to raise himself up, he cannot. Know that it is mortal: if he does not labor in his treatment
And if this accident does not happen to him, the thing is lighter.
And the treatment is that you warm it if there is a hot abscess, and put on the spine rose oil or egg yolk oil, until it is appeased;
then put on one of the comforting and drying plasters, and bind it with a bandage, and instruct the patient to rest; and do not sleep on that part where he feels pain, until he is healed.
And if any bones are broken, it is necessary to cover over the heart; and remove the bone, then bring together the two edges of the wound, if it is large, with stitches, then treat it with an anointing poultice, until it is healed;
and if the head of the bone is broken, which is called the “head of the cow,” put a pouch from your left hand, and place it equal to the other hand in your power, then apply the plaster and splint on top, if you need it.
Then he extracts it, and if there are broken bones, he sets them, and dresses the wound until it is healed.
of the fracture of the bone of the hip
It may happen that the bone of the hip is broken, and if it does, there should be only a small reduction at the head. And setting it straight for a long time, and lowering it to its place, the patient will feel pain at the site, numbness, and swelling where the break is.
And for the setting, you extend your hand above it as long as you are on the break. And recognize what the fracture is and its shape.
And if the fracture is only at the head, you set that fracture equally until it is in its natural shape.
And if the fracture is long, or it slopes inwards, make the patient lie on his stomach until the restoration of that fracture appears to you. And when you have set it equally, put a plaster on it. Then put a splint of wood or horn on top and immobilize the fracture so that it does not move
And apply the place below the ribs, as long as the ligature is equal. And instruct the patient to sleep on his healthy side or on his back.
And if an abscess comes, do not touch it, until the abscess is appeased, and put on what we have previously said. And then return to the restoration, and remove it as is fitting, if there is no bad accident;
of the breaking of the shoulder
The shoulder joint is that which is between the elbow and the head of the shoulder, and if it is broken, one must restore it according to one of the two manners.
One of which is that you take a splint of moderate thickness, according to this form:
And tie the two ends with two ligatures, and bend them upwards, and place the patient on a seat.
Then the patient's arm is broken above the elbow, until it reaches the armpit, and one puts a bend in a stick, then leans on any heavy thing or a servant extends it down;
Then put the hands together at the break so that the break returns as it should.
And the other way is that one lifts the patient onto his backside, and ties his hand to his neck, then commands two assistants that one holds what is on the fracture with his hands, and the other holds below all the limb, and each extends to his part.
And if you see that the extraction is more forceful, extract the ligature below the fracture, and above the fracture, and extend each of the assistants to their respective parts.
And if the break is near the head of the shoulder, you must put one tie below the armpit, and the other toward the elbow, below the break;
and also if the break is towards the elbow, it is fitting to put a tie lightly, without strain, so that the break is aligned on the arm and on the elbow;
then align the break as it should be, and restrain it, if abscesses do not come.
And if an abscess comes, do not extract it until seven days, and put on moistened linen in wine and rose oil, until the abscess is calmed.
Then extract it, and the way to extract it is that you put the plaster on the break, then assemble the arm on the shoulder, and put your hand on the shoulder or on the breast;
and put the cloth, and extract on the shoulder, and on the arm, so that the arm is in its place of stars, if nothing prevents it, or if the bone is not moved.
And if you doubt that the bone moves, use splints, and put on the break a splint larger and stronger than the others, and have between each splint two fingers of space, and let each splint be so large that it passes the break three fingers on each side;
Then pull upwards on the splints, just as I said at the beginning of this chapter about fractures, pulling harder and less apart.
And if you see the seating of the splints and the tightening, as we have said, in the hour that you are setting the broken limb, and you doubt the hot abscess, then leave it tied until the seventh day, as we have said;
Then look at the bandage every three days, so that it does not itch or swell, or that swelling does not come to the place where the bandages are too tight. If it is dislocated, as we have said.
And if none of these accidents occur, do not untie it until after three days or more, and let the patient sleep on their back with their hands on their stomach;
and put a cushion of wool evenly under the shoulder and look every hour during the day or night that the shape of the broken limb does not move, or that the bandages are not loosened;
if he heals by virtue of medicine, and gives him the meat we have put before in such a way that the meat is first subtle; and when it begins to recover, it should be thick.
And it is customary that the shoulder and the leg should be recovered in 40 days altogether; and then one must unbind it and administer baths and ointments for healing the place.
And if the stricture is ugly and obstructed, it will remain tied up for one day or two months.
Of the fracture of the arm
The arm is composed of two bones, which are called the "two humerus," one of which is small and is that which enters the shoulder pouch.
And the other is large and is that which is below towards the little finger.
Perhaps only the large humerus breaks, or only the small one, or perhaps both together.
When the small humerus is broken, restoration is easy and healing is quick.
and when the large ones are broken, so is the healing bad, and more grievous than when they are broken together.
If it is only a small bone that is broken, then it is necessary to extend it lightly and set it straight.
And if it is the large bone, then it is necessary to bind more strongly;
and extend it on a cushion, and hold the pouch of the hand higher than the others, and the small ones lower than the other bones, and let the patient be crossed upon himself, and the cushion in front of him higher up so that the patient does not suffer any hardship.
then extend the ministers' arms below his hand or at the elbow, and another minister above.
And then put the sights equal, according to its best form.
And if it is broken into pieces, put each one in its place, and if there is none detached that you can grasp by the heart, and you cannot restore it to its place, do so with a bone saw, as we have said before.
And if with the fracture there is a wound, I have spoken of it in a singular chapter; then take care of it.
And if at the beginning of the restoration boils should arise, then apply a plaster of cerate made of rose oil and white wax, that it is neither too hard nor too soft; and I lay a cloth over it subtly, until the abscess is calmed down.
And then I remove the wax, and I put a plaster made from mill flour with plenty of egg yolks, and then I place bandages, and let the bandage from the break be stronger now, and a little wider than the others;
and know that it must have six bandages or arms in several positions: whether the break is in one of the bones, or in two;
and apply more pressure above the break than anywhere else, and always less as you move away, as I said at the beginning of this chapter; and let the cloths above the break be soft and moist, and not hard or rough;
and let the cloths above the break be soft and moist, and not hard or rough; and let the thread with which it is bound be linen, neither too thick nor too thin, as we have said.
And inspect the limb and the bandage after a few days. And if any bad accidents come to the limb, such as itching that comes to the limb, then you must pour hot water on the limb until the itching is appeased.
And let the limb not be tightly confined.
And then begin again the tightening, and if the ligaments are softened and the bones loosened, and similar things, so be it.
And if you are careful so that the nourishment cannot reach the limb because it is too tight, then you must soften it a little and leave it like that for a few days until the nourishment can flow and then remove it.
And if none of these things which we have said happen to the patient, then do not unbind him for 20 days.
Or when he is in pain, then let him put his hands on his neck, and let his necks be equal, and beware of movement and shaking, and sleep on his back.
And know that this fracture is restored in 30 days or in 35, and perhaps in 20 days, according to the temperaments and complexions of the virtues.
of the breaking of the hand
Know that on the back of the hand and as we have two fingers there are often small fractures, and they only bring weeping many times.
And when the sole of the hand is broken or bent, it is fitting that the patient sit cross-legged, and sit straight in front of him equally.
Then put his hand on the outstretched table, and extend the ministers the broken bones, and put them equal to the meridians, as long as they are well joined.
and put on a poultice and bandages, if no abscess forms, then he puts a splint according to the size of the place; and it should be wrapped in a linen cloth.
And if the fracture is in the middle of the sole of the foot, he makes a splint of cloths, and instructs the patient to bind it to his broken sole; and then he binds it with a long cloth, and the splint should be as wide as the palm of the hand, and bind it as is appropriate.
And if the fracture is in the forearm, it is necessary that you put a splint on top and another underneath on the palm, so that the hand is open and straight, then tie the whole hand around, and make the bandage tight between the two.
And if the fracture occurs in any of the bones of the fingers, if it is the thumb, he sets it straight, as is appropriate; and binds it with the palm, and if you see fit, he puts a small straight splint to lift the fracture, so that it does not move;
And if the fracture is on any other finger, such as the index finger or one of the others, set it equal and bind it with the healthy finger that follows. Or you tie them all together in a splint, which is worth more, or put them on a board, such as a pouch;
And take care in the restoration and arrangement of a hot abscess, and help those who come to it, as I have said.
The thighbone is often broken, and one can see it well when it turns forward and backward;
And the restoration consists in tying one splint above the fracture and the other below. And the patient lies on his face, then each minister extends his bandage to his share equally;
and this is when the fracture is in the middle of the bone.
And if the fracture is close to the root of the thigh, one of the ligatures should be towards the knee, and the other ligatures below the fracture.
And also if it is near the knee, then let the bandage be below the knee, and let the extension be downwards.
Then place the splints so that the bone is equal to his two hands, as long as it is according to its natural shape, and then apply the plaster and bandage, if abscesses do not appear there.
And if there is a hot abscess, let it cool down and then return to your work and treatment; The bandage is made in this manner.
It is necessary that you wrap the bandage tightly doubled two or three times, and leave any excess, then turn the leg so that the heels come to the root of the buttock, and pass a long thread between the thigh and the leg, below the knee, and bring the end of the thread above;
Then turn up the leg and thigh the bandage, then place on the fracture splints, and put a splint on the bone of the leg.
Then fill the space between the leg and thigh with soft cloths to make the constriction equal, then begin to bind with three or four turns on the fracture. And when you go further above the fracture, loosen the binding.
Then take the two ends of the thread that you have placed between the leg and thigh, and bind three splints that are above them, then return below to the head of the thread, as far down as the foot.
And loosen it so that it does not move from its place, then leave it like this, until no abscess, swelling or other such thing appears. And if one occurs, untie it and treat what has come as we have said many times.
And if there are bone fragments that stick out, it is necessary to remove them, if possible. And if not, it is necessary to split the area and draw out the force. And treat it as we have said, until it is healed.
And whenever the thigh is broken, just as one puts splints in the shoulder and arm;
In all cases, in such a restoration the patient does not falter.
And know that the thigh is restored in 10 days, or a little less or a little more, according to the varieties of complexions.
Know that in the passage of the knee, there is not often a break, but it bends many times.
And if it breaks, unless it is just a crack or a hole, and occurs in all wounds, and open wounds, and this is felt well.
And the restoration is done so that what is crooked is aligned with its peers as much as possible.
Then apply the plaster and a round splint if needed, and remove it as necessary. Then observe all the precautions that we have mentioned for other fractures, such as abscesses, cauterization, and other similar things. If it meets each situation, so that he may be healed.
Of the breaking of the leg
Know that the leg has two bones, one of which is called "mustelz" and the other "foscile".
And there are all kinds of fractures as they occur in the arm, and therefore the restoration is the same as that for the arm, and the work is the same. And if both bones are broken together, the leg turns in all directions.
And if the slender bones are broken, so turn them forward.
And if the large bone is broken, one feels great pain and sees it well. And it turns downwards.
Then apply extension and set it equal, and bind the splints equally.
But nevertheless, if the break is bad and there are several pieces, the extension should be smaller and lighter. and age according to your virtue.
And when you have completed your work, take two bandages of willow wood that can bind the leg on one side and the other, and let them be as long as the leg from the knee down;
then wrap them twice both above and below, and tie it in the middle as well, and at this binding the leg cannot decline to the right or left, and thus it is well;
and no one should administer sticks as long as the leg, and if it is of willow wood, put them on the leg to prevent movement, and properly make these in the fracture or where there is a wound;
and move the leg every day to see if there is a hot abscess or another accident; until the cure so that it is healed.
from the breaking of bones of the foot
The ankle does not suffer a fracture, but the bones of the foot sometimes break, and there are two ways this can happen.
And if it happens that a bone in the foot is broken, and you see these bones rise up against each other, then have the patient put their foot on the ground as if they were about to walk, and then place your foot on theirs where the bones are raised, and then press until they return to their place.
Then put on a plaster and bandages over it, and place under the belly of the foot a small board two finger widths thick, then straighten the foot carefully, and once you have wrapped it in cloths and other things that you need.
And when three or four days have passed, untie the bandage, for you will find the bones equal, whether they are broken or dislocated.
And if any of the two bones are broken, set them as we have said for the bones of the hand. Then place a splint on the broken bone according to the length of the bone, and let it be a bit wider, then put under the foot that board which I have mentioned, and straighten it carefully.
and if there are two or three, or more, broken bones, place on each bone two splints according to its size, wrapped in a linen cloth, and remove the table from under the foot. and let it be standing on the head of the table beyond the belly of the foot, so that it holds it well.
And it is fitting that you do not forget the other things that I have said about other fractures, as we have said. and treat each incident as appropriate.
of the breaking of the bone with a dagger
When the bones of a woman's nature are broken, make her sit wide, then incline her towards the back, and let her be held from behind.
Then fill the vulva of the patient with cotton, and put in it as large a piece as a fist.
Then untie the woman, and lift her back little by little, and then pull the cotton, until it comes to the entrance of the nature, and return the bone with the stock.
And when she wants to urinate, remove the cotton, and when she has urinated, put it back in, and do this for seven days or so. The fracture will be restored, and if you see it, take a bladder of a lamb, tie a cane to the opening, and insert the whole bladder into the nature. Then blow through the cane until the bladder is inflated inside. The body will set the fracture.
Then fill it with cotton and leave it like that for several days until it is healed.
And when the bone of a man or woman's shoulder is broken, restore it as we have said for the hip bone.
And these fractures are not hidden from those who put their study and practice into it, and understand my book.
For the fracture indicates in several ways the right way to restore it. Understand then.
When a rod is broken, take a goose's throat and put the rod in it. Then wrap cloths around it, and leave it for three days or so, and it will heal quickly.
of fracture with wound
It is necessary for one who has a fracture with a wound, even if it is large, such as the bone of the thigh or shoulder or similar, that he be poulticed now, so that the poultices that we have mentioned testify to this.
And if the wound is healthy, and you have no other remedy, then restart to restore the fracture in the same hour, or that day, so that an abscess does not form.
And if boils come up, leave the restoration until a new day, as long as the boil is calmed, and do not touch it on the third or fourth day, for you will bring about evil accidents.
And if the broken bone is apparent upon the chest uncovered, it behoves you to put it straight lightly with your hands, in small extension.
And if the extension does not appear to you to be equal with your hands, then the surgeon has this instrument made of iron, which is seven or eight fingers long, and the width is according to the quantity of the wound. And it is necessary for him to soak it in three or four [of something unspecified], according to what he needs for each fracture treatment.
and it should be round and one large lump, so that it does not flatten under pressure on the limb during your work, and it should be sharp in front, and thick from the middle forward, thus:
And it is called a "palainche," for which reason it is necessary that the curved head be placed on the head of the exposed bone; and the end is brought down once, so that it returns and they are equal to one another. And if the fracture is subtle and the instruments cannot well grasp the bone, then it behooves you to cut off the head of the bone, so long as the instruments have power.
And if you cannot bring back the bone, as we have said, if the head of a suitable instrument for this, either an incisor or a saw, is at your disposal;
then remove that which remains in the bone of sharpness and small splinters.
And when the bone is put back, and the patient feels great pain afterwards, know that it is not in its natural place.
Do this so that it is in its place, then soak the bandage in black stiptic wine, and carefully if it is summer; And do not put any plaster or other thing on the wound where it has oil, lest it bring forth rot and corruption;
Then administer splints when you have restored the bone, and leave the wound uncovered, and bind a covering all around, according to the quantity of the wound, and take good care that the wound is not strained with the fracture;
And many times this foolish error has been made, and has brought death upon the patient or corrosion some time; and let the constrictions be softer and gentler than other fractures.
And if the wound is bad or large, and you doubt that evil accidents may come, as we have said, and you find pain in the place, then it is not right to put splints on; but bind around, instead of splints, hard cloths, and tie them.
And when you see after one or two days that the wound has begun to swell, remove what you have put on it altogether and apply a healing ointment, such as tetrapharmacum ointment and similar ones.
And it is necessary that you loosen the limb twice a day, in the morning and in the evening, until it is healed and sound.
And it is necessary that the limb be aligned in such a way that the bone runs down lightly.
And if every day they pass through and it cannot be soldered but keeps coming back down, know that there are small pieces of bone; for which you must want the wound with a tent, and remove all these loose pieces which cause this pain.
And if a fistula comes to the place, or another manner of corruption, it is fitting that you cure it according to what it says in its chapter before.
And when the bone is broken and exposed on the limb, such as the bone of the thigh or shoulder, and other similar large bones, do not draw it out at all, for often death follows, but leave it until it rots;
perhaps it will fall off by itself after 20 or 30 days, then treat the wound if you can.
And if you cannot, leave it.
Many times after the healing of a fracture, especially when it is near a joint, it is a sorry sight to see the shape of the limb. And perhaps the limb cannot perform its natural functions.
Take heed then if it is fresh: if you administer astringent medicines such as aloes, frankincense, and myrrh, sarcocolla, acacia, and similar others, so that you take any of these things or all together and mix them with astringent wine or with egg yolk or with oil; and put them on a new bandage, and remove it well, and do not untie it for any day;
and put them on a new bandage, and remove it well, and do not untie it for any day; And then dislocate it, and start another, until the nodules are removed;
or you strain on a well-made plank; for the property of the plank is that it removes all swellings from the limbs;
and if the nodule has already turned into hardness like stone, and it is necessary to remove it, then put a cup on top of it, and make the superfluity appear; or you shave it with a razor until it is removed, and care for it until it is healed.
the limb which is weak after healing
When the fracture of the bone is restored, and the limbs remain weak and subtle afterwards, it happens for many reasons: For one reason it is because it was tied too tight, and it was not tied as it should have been. Or because there were too many bandages, and the nourishment could not reach the limb. Or because of a multitude of irritations. Or because of too large movements, not at its proper time. Or because it has little blood in its body, so it is weak.
And the cure is that you make the patient eat, and soften the body, until the blood is multiplied in him; and give him baths, and give him joy and rest.
Then apply pitch to the limb, so that the pitch attracts great nourishment, and often bathe it in warm water, until the nourishment runs to the limb. and return to its natural shape.
the twisted limb after health When the limb is twisted after restoration, and the broken bones are open, and the shape of the limb is ugly, nevertheless it does not lose its natural function:
do not believe the fools who say that one must break the limb anew, and many a fool has done this in our land;
and this work is blamed, and it brings great evils, and perhaps death;
nevertheless, if the dislocations and torments are fresh, it is fitting that they be raised with hot water, or softening herbs be cooked, such as leaves of mallow, and roots, and melilot, and similar things;
and make a softening plaster, such as diachylon well made, and you take the mucilage of mallow, and mix it with gelatine grease or sesame oil, and make a plaster upon it;
Take fat figs and crush them with bran and similar medicines that reduce inflammation.
And never is dislocation removed by continuous and lengthy rubbing with wet hands. And let movement be administered to the limb every hour.
And if the tortuosity is old and hardened, like stone, and it is necessary to remove it with iron, then it must be cut up to the bone with a subtle and light incision. And put cinders and plaster on the wound.
Dislocation occurs when a joint moves out of its place, so that it cannot move, and the limb is misaligned, and the patient feels great pain and injury.
When dislocation comes to anyone, it is necessary now to bring it back without delay.
For if one delays, it swells up and by chance puts it back in place;
Therefore, it should not be moved while it is swollen. Many times this brings on spasms and other pains.
In all cases, when this occurs, make the patient healthy, then leave him alone until the abscess has been calmed.
Then raise the limb with hot water and oil, then loosen it gently and treat each limb as the treatment comes to its place.
And I have ordered the chapters on dislocations from the head to the feet.
Sometimes it happens that both jaws are dislocated, and the dislocation of both is according to two manners. Either they are sometimes loosened from their places, and softened a little. Or they are entirely dislocated and hang toward the ground, cutting off saliva from the mouth so that he cannot hold it, nor can he close his mouth, and envelops his tongue with speech.
When the dislocation is small, it returns by means of several arrangements.
And if it is whole and complete, then you must reset it quickly, and do not delay.
And in such a manner that the assistants hold the head of the patient, and put the tip of one of his fingers into the root of the dislocation of the jaw inside the mouth if the dislocation is of two parts. And the other hand should be free to place it evenly.
and instruct the patient to soften them, his jaws, and move them in all directions. And he looks at the eye equal, as long as it returns to its place.
And if bringing them back is difficult, even when the two jaws are together, then apply a mixture of hot water and oil, until they soften slightly;
do not try to force them back in place, as we have said.
And when they are brought back evenly, and the patient's mouth closes well without softening, then put soft cloths soaked in cerate made of rose oil and wax on them, and then bind them lightly with soft linen cloths.
and let the patient sleep on his back, with his head resting between two pillows so that he does not move it to the right or left, nor strain to chew, but take light food, until the pain is gone and the jaws are healed.
and then chew lightly what he wants, and do not bother to open his mouth to eat and drink until the mandible is well joined and healed.
And if the two jawbones cannot be put back in place within an hour and are not returned to their position, then fevers and accustomed sweats arise, and possibly a loosening of the bowels, and possibly vomiting of bile.
And when you see this, then know that it is lost; and many times he who had it died in nine days.
The forceps cannot dislocate within the sides of the continuation of the foot, and it is dislocated sometimes at a distance, and one can feel this well.
And the restoration is such that the patient lies often on his back and extends his arms; and then press the place with your palm, and it will return;
then put plaster on top and bandage it, and remove it;
and the head which is toward the elbow cannot dislocate; if it does, and if it dislocates any time, reset it in its place as we have said;
Then apply plaster and bandage it, remove it, and instruct the patient to rest until they are healed.
And in the same way, the head of the shoulder is reset when it is dislocated from its place.
Of shoulder dislocation
Know that the shoulder is dislocated only according to three ways:
One of which is that it dislocates towards the part of the armpit below; And the second is towards the part of the buttock; And rarely it dislocates upwards, and this happens seldom.
And it does not dislocate backwards for the shoulder, nor inwards for the nerves;
And often it dislocates below towards the armpit, especially in those who have little flesh, for in them it happens quickly.
To those who have enough flesh, it jumps out at the points, and goes back in at the points.
And it sometimes happens to some men that they have a bruise or fracture, and their shoulder swells with a hot abscess, and they think it is dislocated because of this.
Therefore you must try it until you are certain of it; and then begin the treatment.
And it is known that a dislocation occurs when it falls toward the armpit, and there is a difference between the sick shoulder and the healthy one, and you will find a clear distinction between them; and you will find a hollow at the head of the shoulder, and below the armpit at the humerus, the head of the shoulder as if it were a bone; and the patient cannot bring their hand back to its nest, nor move in any way;
and also, if it is dislocated upward, unless it is hidden, because you will find it distinctly at the humerus;
And this manner of dislocation is not very difficult to reset when it is new, or if the child is ill.
The manner is that the attendants lift the patient's arm above, then place their fingers under the armpit, and lift the joint with force upward to its place; and the attendants lift the hand, and extend it upward, then put it below; it will come quickly.
And if it does not come as we have said in the first days afterward, then it is necessary that the patient be bathed in hot water; and the attendant apply a softening and soothing liniment, such as a decoction of altaea and fenugreek and melilot in water, and apply it;
then let the patient be laid on their back, and put under the armpit a cloth of wool equally thick, not too soft nor too hard, then place the patient's heel on the cloth, and lift the head of the shoulder virtuously, and pull the hand of the patient;
and another minister hold the head of the patient so that it does not move downwards; this shoulder will now return to its place, and if you see the resetting according to this manner:
and that you have a man who is larger than the patient be present; and stand straight towards the side, and put his shoulder under the armpit of the patient, and lift the armpit upwards so that the patient hangs on the arm; and another minister pulls the hand of the patient downwards towards the belly. And if the patient is too light, he can hold something heavy with him, and the dislocation will return immediately.
And resetting can also be done in another way:
and that one sticks a long burning coal into the ground, whose head is as round as a pistol, and is neither too thick nor too thin; then it is placed under the patient, but let him have cloths soaked in vinegar above, and the patient is lying along the length of a log;
Then let his hand be extended on the other side, and the joint will return to its place quickly.
And if it does not want to return for all these things that we have said, then do this treatment: Take a firebrand two arms long and four thumbs wide, which has a pointed head to enter perfectly under the armpit, according to this form:
Then tie two cloths soaked in vinegar under the pointed end of the firebrand so that it does not burn the patient, then place it under the patient's armpit.
Extend his arm up the length of the firebrand and tie the shoulder to the firebrand, and the arm to the head of the hand, then place the arm on a large ladder's rung, and let his hand hang down on the other side. The joint must now be put back together.
And when it is in, no matter how, it is fitting that you put under the armpit a sphere of wool equal in size, then apply a plaster prepared with powder from the mill, with incense and egg yolk, on all the shoulder and around it, then bind it under the armpit firmly, and return the bandage over the plaster, and embrace the hand to its neck, and let the hands remain thus.
And it is necessary that he rest a bit, as long as the limb is comfortable, for it will heal more quickly;
and then rest more afterwards for five or seven days, and move it; and if it is firm and not softened, then it is healed.
And if the joint has been moved out of place due to moisture that has come upon it, or for another reason, it is fitting that you administer cauteries at three points, as it is laid down in the chapter on cauteries.
And if you do all this, and it loosens after seven days, and the joint does not hold, and he cannot raise his arm upward, then know that the nerve at the head of the shoulder is cut or stretched or softened; and know that the joint will never be fixed in its place.
Dislocation which is towards the hip and breasts or behind, is done by force and extension of the hands and administered elsewhere;
and heal until it is healthy.
And if after healing comes stiffness in the limb, and slowness in movement, then let the patient bathe many times until that stiffness is relieved and it returns to its original nature.
of the dislocation one cuts
Know that the joint of the knife is dislocated at points, and at points it returns;
and if it is dislocated from all sides, and even in front and behind, the dislocation is not put back in place, for one can see it well and feel it well; and it is dislocated according to each figure. And when you join the sick cautery with the healthy one, if you can see it openly. For the joint is raised, and cannot bend the arm, nor touch his shoulder at all.
And you must reset it in the same way as abscesses should come, for if an abscess were to come, it would be harmful to reset it;
and by chance it cannot be put back in place entirely, even when it is at the back; it is worse than the other dislocations and causes greater pain, and by chance death comes.
And the restoration is such that when it can be reset like this, you extend your hand with both hands. And let his arms be spread out, and his hands put in according to the angle of the knife, above and below, and push the joint towards his thumbs together, or at the root of his palm, until it returns to its place.
And if the dislocation is in front, it returns when he doubles his hand to his hand, and tightens from the root of the palm or the costal bone which is dislocated.
And if it does not want to return to its place, apply strong extension;
and when the minister extends the arm and holds it so that it does not move during extension;
then turn the arm from each side, after you have wrapped a long and wide double cloth around it;
and when the surgeon joins the joint to his hand, he should anoint it with oil to soften the joint, then push the joint together firmly until it returns;
and when it is in place, apply a dry plaster with egg yolk, bind it firmly and sling the arm to the patient's neck, and leave it for several days before releasing it.
And if the joint is firm in its place, untie the ligature, and leave it.
And if you see that the joint does not hold well, start over with the plaster and the ligature, and leave it like that for several days, until it is firmly in place. Then untie it.
And if he feels stiffness after the joint is reset and it moves, bathe it and rub it well, and press it until it is relieved. Or you put a greasy sheep's wool bandage on the joint, then leave it for one day and a night, then remove it, and let it enter the bath. And when he sweats, if he rubs the joint moderately, then put the bandage back on and then enter the bath. And thus do it two or three times, until he is healed.
and if you see it, put cow dung moistened with heated butter on it, and strain it.
It will return to its proper place.
the dislocation of the hand
The joint of the hand dislocates and returns easily, more so than other joints. Nevertheless, it is necessary to return it to its place quickly, in the same hour that it dislocates, so that the flesh does not swell, or an abscess comes hot.
And the putting back in place is done as follows: you put the sick hand on a table and extend the patient's hand; look at it, and make sure it is straight so that they place their palm facing the appearance of the joint, and push until it returns.
Nevertheless, you must look to see if it is well in place; Then put the patient's back on a table for stretching and pulling. And if the dislocation is on the back of the hand, have the patient put the back of his hand on the table, and the doctor put his hand on that appearance of the joint.
If it returns now, that is good. If not, apply poultices to soothe the abscess and leave it like that without restarting.
And if he cannot endure it, and you cannot put it back in place after several days, the joint will remain crooked;
and do not harm the patient further than that, as long as his hand is weakened and he cannot grasp anything at all. Then know that the nerves are cut, or the artery.
If there is no other remedy except to pull it out with a cautery, and by chance nothing else will do.
And when the hand is in place, put on the plaster that we have mentioned, then bind it and leave it for 5 days, then unbind it and leave it as is.
And if he cannot move it well, and there is some pain, then apply warm water and rub it until it is healed.
of the dislocation of the shoulders of the hand
Sometimes the joints of the hand are dislocated at any point, sometimes on the back of the palm or in the hollow.
Then apply force, and push the dislocation towards your thumbs until it returns, then hold the head of the joint, and bend it towards the side where it is separated;
and leave it for two days, and then set it equal that day;
And at night the bandage, as we have said, and untie it during the day, and make it move, and re-bandage it at night;
and do this often, until it is tight, and do the same if it is dislocated in the palm of the hand, and do as you have done before, until it is healed;
and do the same when it is dislocated elsewhere.
Concerning the loosening of the shoulder blade from the back
When the shoulder blade of the back or neck is dislocated, if there are several dislocations, there is no cure, for death hastens the patient.
And the signs are that the limbs jump with force involuntarily, and he cannot hold them, and often some limb is softened, either both thighs or both arms or one.
And many times the shinbone breaks into four parts;
That which breaks in back is called "gilbositez."
The cure is that you set it if the "gilbositez" came from childhood: if there is neither cure nor healing at all.
And that which comes from falling or blows or similar things, the ancient manners of cures are said in many words, where there is not much profit in all;
but I have shortened it according to my intention, and I have formed instruments in various ways.
I say that in the "gilbositez" which comes at the back of the foot, there is neither remedy nor healing;
and also that which comes straight to the two sides, and one cannot cure except for that which properly comes to the back, as I say;
and it is that the patient be extended on his face in an equal place, and have a support below him so he does not become bruised.
then put one ember at the head in the earth formed, and the other at the feet, and tie a band under the armpits of the patient, and another at the thighs, and at the knees, and at the ankles;
and two assistants hold the bands, one at the head and the others at the feet, between the two embers.
and be well closed, the ember as we have said, and the surgeon put his palms on the spine in a formed way, until it returns.
And if it does not return by this treatment, then take a table of three arm's length, and place it below the wall, and let the patient be on his side, and put the head of the table below the wall, then put the middle of the table on the spine; and put the patient's feet on the other end of the table, and press hard, until it returns to its place.
And if you see it, do it with a wrench that turns in the hand. And place two burning coals at the head of the patient's arm, and two others towards the feet, with a palm's length of space between each coal.
And make a hole in each coal, through which the wrench can pass, and set the coals firmly in the ground so they don't move.
And between each pair of coals place a turning coal, with which the wrench turns, and have two small coals of a palm's length in the two turnings to turn the wrench.
Then tie the string among the splints to the wrench at the head and the other string to the other wrench towards the feet, and each of the assistants turns his wrench along the entire string, and the master puts the spine straight as we have said.
And when they are equal, put a drying plaster on them with plenty of egg white, and then bandages, and then the strip of a tablet three fingers long, which covers the place of the gibbosity and the part of the spine that is sound, then tie it with a ligature as we have said, and use the patient with subtle nourishment, until he is healed;
and if anything comes at the end of health, it is necessary to administer softening and soothing medicines, with the strip that we have said before; and never administer a piece of plum, and never does the appearance come in the back spine of the back, and we think that it is dislocation; and it is the bone that appears, for which one should not have any presumption: By chance it might bring death.
Know that the joints of the hip and the joints of the shoulder only come loose by dislocations, not like the other joints.
And the joint of the hip is dislocated according to four parts: inwards and outwards, and in front and behind.
And more inwards than elsewhere, and rarely dislocated in front and behind.
And the knowledge of this dislocation inwards is that when you join the sick leg with the healthy one, it is longer, and the sick knee appears more open than the healthy one, and the sick person cannot bend their knee at the fire. And there is a swelling of a hot abscess, because the head of the thigh comes there.
And the sign of one to whom it comes is death, if this accident is contrary to those before.
And the signs of the one who has it in front is that their leg is stretched according to its completion. Everywhere, do not bend the knee without pain, and if one wants to make it go, it cannot before, and it retains its urine, and swells the groin, and when it goes, it passes over the heel.
And the signs of one who has it behind are that he cannot extend his knee or bend it, and the leg is more twisted than the other, and the ankle is softened, and the head of the thigh is at the place below the ribs.
The reduction of this kind of dislocation is such that you recognize if the dislocation is old, and it remains according to its arrangement, there is no cure; and one should not presume.
And in those whose dislocation is fresh, and there are four ways of dislocation, hasten that you return the joint, and extend it inside and out, and move it to the right and left. Perhaps it will return, and needs no other treatment.
And if it does not return in this way, it is necessary that you prepare a strong minister, and extend the leg strongly with two hands, or with a bandage that is tied above the knee. And another minister extends his hand over it in such a way that he puts his hands under his armpits, then he binds it with a strong cord on the thigh; And another holds the head of the cord;
and they stretch up and down all at once, so that the patient is lifted from the ground at once, and remains hanging.
This manner of extension is common to four resemblances, and if the dislocation returns as we have said, it is good.
If this does not work, it is necessary to apply a remedy according to its likeness.
When the dislocation is in the shoulder blade, it is necessary that you place the patient on his healthy side, then put the bandage at the root of the thigh and the place below the angle, then stretch the bandage upwards towards the angle and towards the armpit;
then another minister takes his arms and embraces the thick part of the sick thigh and stretches it out in a straight form; if it will return to its place now;
and this manner of dislocation is lighter than the others.
And if you cannot hold it in this manner as we have said, it is fitting that you bind the two feet of the patient together with a strong bandage above the two heels and above the two knees, and let the injured leg be extended two fists longer than the other;
then it should be hung on the top of a post, and be raised two arms' lengths above the ground;
then command a minister to embrace the top of the thigh, and let another minister hang with the patient who embraces the bottom of the thigh, for the joint will now return quickly.
And when the dislocation is at the hip, let the patient lie down as we have said for the one with sciatica, and tighten the bandage on the injured leg properly, and on the foot also;
Then put two embers, one at the head and the other at the feet, then insert one ember between the patient's thighs in the shape of a figure-eight. And place cloths moistened with water around them so that they do not burn the patient, then extend each ember towards him and have the patient hold their dislocated limb equal to his hand.
If it returns, it is good.
If not, put it on a table, and press it down as we have said in the treatment of dislocations, and lay the patient on their healthy side.
And when the dislocation is in front, you must quickly extend the patient's injured leg according to what I have said. And place the embers so that their heat is on the injured angle, then press with the other hand and extend it downwards towards the knee.
And if the dislocation is in back, it is not right to extend the patient downwards or lift them up, but rather they should be as if their hip were dislocated in back, as we have said about lying on both hips. And let it be upon its face, and the bandage extended as we have said before, and one must press upon the joint at the table. It will be done when the patient extends his legs, and they will be equal. Then adjust the thighs, and apply the plaster, and bind it with a bandage so that the hip does not move. And let him rest for three or four days, then untie it, and apply plaster on top.
And if you see that they are equal, bind it as before, and leave it for three days.
Then untie it, and let him walk gently, until the limb is strengthened.
of the dislocation of the knee
The knee is dislocated according to three methods: That is to say, inwards and outwards, and behind.
And do not dislocate it again.
And the signs are that you order the patient to bend his leg at his thigh, and if it does not straighten at his thigh, know that it is dislocated;
and the restoration of all is that you make the patient sit upright, and extend his leg if he can, and put your back on his face, and put his foot on your feet;
then take his knee in your palms, and draw it between your thighs, then bend the two sides that form the knee; and another minister extends his foot, as long as the knee returns to its place, and the sign is that he straightens his leg at his thigh easily;
and put the plaster on it, and let the leg air at the thigh, and tie them together tightly for three days or four, then untie it;
And let the patient not move until their limb is comfortable.
And if the limb is not in place, administer strong extension, as we have said in the treatment of the hip, until it is healed.
Of dislocation of the heel
The tendons are sometimes loosened, and sometimes completely dislocated, both within and without.
And the signs are that the ankle is swollen, and tense before the part where it is dislocated:
The resetting should be gentle, and one must extend the arm slightly with their hands when it is only bruised.
And when it is dislocated altogether, you must make the patient sit upright and hold them firmly by the leg, above the ankle;
then draw the foot toward you with your right hand, and then to the left twice, then extend it upward and push the foot up well;
and do this twice, as we have said, by pushing and pulling the foot;
if it returns, it is good;
if not, start the work again, for it will return;
and if it cannot return this way, have the patient lay on their back on the ground, and fix a strong stick firmly into the ground between their thighs, and bind cloths around it so that it does not hurt the patient.
Then have one assistant hold the thigh, and another assistant extend the foot to their hands or to a cord which they tie around the ankle. Then have each assistant extend evenly, and let the stick be now between the patient's thighs to hold them steady when they are being stretched.
Then place your hands evenly on the dislocation and have another assistant hold the healthy leg below, and the dislocation will return quickly.
And when it is back in place, put a poultice and bandages on top, and bind them firmly, and tie the foot to the leg, and be careful of the nerves which are on the ankle behind so that the bandages are not too tight.
Then leave it for two or three days, and if the ligaments loosen, strain it.
Then untie it on the third or fourth day, and forbid the patient from moving for four days. And if he goes before that time, it is not certain that it will not dislocate again.
And if an abscess comes, it is necessary that you appease it, as we have said elsewhere, until it is healed.
of two When the two are dislocated, if it pleases them to stretch beautifully without exertion, and that is a light thing.
And if the dislocation is in any joint of the back or foot, it is fitting that you make the patient sit on a flat place or on a table perfectly straight, and put your foot on what appears of those joints, then press with your foot strongly, until it returns.
And when it is equal and nothing appears, put under the sole of the foot a two-legged table, then strain it strongly and leave it for three days, then untie it. And let him rest until he is healed.
of wound and of dislocation together
When a wound comes with the dislocation, and one wants to restore it, many times it happens that the patient dies.
If you are not presumptuous in the cure, if you are wise in the art and have used it for a long time, and if you are pitiful and merciful and slow, do not be bold.
And use at the beginning soothing things to calm the abscess down, and leave the patient in the hand of God if you do not see hope for health. And when you see hope, now reset the limb in its place so that the abscess may drain.
And when the limb is in place, administer soothing things to calm the abscess down and treat the wound as it should be with drying ointments.
And if with the dislocation there is a break and small bones are detached, set the bones and do what we have said in simple ailments.
and guard yourself from entering the path of fear, according to what I have said, for this is worth more according to your Creator, and for the safety of your weapon and your body.
