Oh you, my very dear sons, I have completed this book which is the last part of the science of medicine together with its fulfillment, and I have made the end through its expositions and its declarations. And it came to me in a vision that I should complete it with this treatise, which is part of the work of hands, that is to say “surgery”.
And because the work of hands is treated in our region and is foreign throughout, so it is lost and broken down, and nothing remains of the strength except for small descriptions in books of the ancients that the hands have moved. And from this came error and vanity, and understandings are closed, and science is alienated.
It seems to me that I will revive it together with the order of this treatise according to the way of exposition and declaration and abbreviation. And I will come together with the forms of the cautery instruments and the other instruments of the work with the adjustment of the explanation and preparation of them, as it is necessary.
And because there are no good masters of hands in our time, the art of medicine is extended. And it is fitting for whoever undertakes this to be instructed in the science of anatomy, as Galen says, so that he knows the judgment of the limbs, and their forms and conjunctions and separations, and has knowledge of the bones and nerves and veins and the number of each, and their movement and of the veins moving and resting, and of the place from which they issue.
And because Hippocrates says that knowledge without practice is much, and with practice is little; and the same in the art of hand.
We say in the introduction of this book that whoever is not knowledgeable about the things said before, beware lest he fall into error and harm people;
just as I have wanted many times more than those who interfere with this science and abandon themselves without science and experiment.
For I saw a foolish barber who cut open an abscess of scrofula on the neck of a woman, and cut the arteries in her neck. For so much blood came out that the woman died between his hands.
And I saw another barber who treated a stone of a man of age, and the stone was large; he took out with it a piece of the bladder, and the man died within three days.
And I had already been called to treat him, and saw the patient's condition and the size of the stone, and knew that if it were cut out he would die.
And I saw another barber who took in charge the duke of our land who had a broken leg, and with the fracture he had a wound;
and the ignorant barber removed the fracture on top of the wound with strong ligatures, and did not leave the wound any dressing, and left it like that until the end;
and he commanded him not to unbind it;
and let it remain so until the leg was entirely swollen and the foot came to ruin.
I was called upon to come to him, and I hastened to come and undo the leg; and when I dislocated it, it was so easy and he felt no pain.
But the corruption of the whole limb had already been confirmed, and I could not heal it;
and the corruption did not cease to spread through the limb until the entire limb was lost.
And see another example where it drained an ulcerated abscess, and then inflamed because of its lord's malice.
For a chancre, when it is pure of melancholic humor, it is not right to touch it with iron unless it is in a part where one can entirely remove what is corrupted.
And for this reason, dear son, you must know that surgery is divided into two parts: that is to say, work where there is danger in several ways;
and I will show in each part of this book where there is fear and danger.
For which reason it is necessary for you to be careful, so that foolish people cannot speak ill of you.
If you take up your arms in good conscience, and undertake your patients lightly and firmly, and use the best method so that through the grace of God you come to salvation and be praised;
And leave the incurable diseases to God's will.
And remove your tools from those who make you doubt, and have faith so that you may come from this world to the other of glory.
Galen said in some of his admonishments: Do not take on a bad illness unless you are called foolish."
I have devised this treatise according to III chapters.
The first chapters are of fire cauteries and of medicinal cauteries, and the chapters are ordered from the head to the feet;
and of the shapes of instruments, and of the bindings for cautery, and of everything that is necessary in the work.
The second chapter is about cutting and piercing, and cupping and wounds, and extracting arrows, and similar things;
And the chapter is ordered and the forms of the instruments.
The third chapter is about restoring dislocations and sprains, and similar things;
And it is ordered from the head down to the feet, and the forms of the instruments.
Thus as we remember our work, it is fitting that I say the quality of help and harm for each complexion.
I say that the qualities of help and harm are the longest discourse and subtlest science and the most secret responses;
And many sages spoke about this and agreed on it;
and their words suffice me little, for I fear the length.
I say that cautery helps universally in all complexions where it has matter, except for two complexions: It is to know hot complexions without matter, and dry complexions without matter.
In hot and dry complexions together with matter, they divided none and said that the cautery is a great help; and the others said the opposite: that the cautery is only worth for illnesses that come from heat and dryness. For the nature of fire is hot, and it should not be cured with heat or dryness, a hot illness.
And those who said the opposite say that the cautery is a great help for hot and dry illnesses that come in the bodies of men. For when you compare the body of man and its moisture to the complexion of fire, you find the body cold.
And I agree to this word. For I have found it several times through experience.
And in any way, do not interfere unless those who have tried it and who know by long usage the chapter of cauteries, and the diversity of the complexions of men, and their dispositions and the causes of their illnesses, and the outcomes and the space of time;
We have no fear of other complexions, even cold and moist diseases. And all the unguents assembled and agreed to the cautery.
And know, son, that fire cautery together with fire is of the secrets of cures, and of greater benefit than a cautery of burning medicine.
For fire is simple, and does not come out except to the limb that is cooked, and does not harm another limb if it be named.
Hot medicines come from one member to another while pushing away, and bring to the member diseases of painful healing; And by chance they kill the sick person.
Fire because of its height and for the goodness of its substance does not do this if there is no excess.
And this have I found by experiment and by the length of service and study that I have put into the art, and it is upon the greenness of things.
And for this reason I excuse the length of speech, because it does not please me to take away from you the secret which is contained in fire and the quality of the work, how it drives out diseases from bodies as the philosopher says in demonstrating. Or receive it in your thoughts.
And know, son, that they agreed on what time cauteries should be made, and they emerged pricked.
And I say that the cautery is suitable at all times, because the resulting harms are lessened by the help of the cautery. And likewise, if the cauteries are for necessary pains, urgent and pressing, that cannot await the time when greater harm may come to the limb.
And never think, dear son, as foolish barbers do; for a disease that is healed by cautery has no return; and they say so.
and they say so. But it is not as they think, for cauteries are but a medicine that changes the complexion and dries the humors which are the cause of pain, and are worth more than medicine for its quick effectiveness, and for the virtue of its work and its mastery.
And it is possible that the illness may come at some times according to the complexion of the sick person and the place of the illness and its virtue;
And the superfluities are assembled in him by the acquisition of meats and similar things, if this is not done, apply cauteries in the place where he has much superfluity and moisture, such as cauteries of density for pain, and similar things, and some pain does not return at all; But this rarely happens.
And many people do not understand why cauteries are called the last of medicine, and it is this;
But they do not believe that cauteries are of value after medicine, but their intentions are false, and cauteries are the last of medicine because when we administer ways of healing in any illness and they are not effective, then we administer the cautery, and it is effective.
Then understand well that cautery is the last resort of medicine, not according to the intention of foolish minds.
The ancients said that cauteries of instruments of gold are milder than of iron, and they said this only because of the quality of gold and its height of substance.
And they said that the burning of a cautery does not cause rot, but this is not true for I have tested it and found it to be true in some men.
And cauteries of gold are worth more than those of iron, as they said. And yet when you heat an instrument of gold, you do not know when it is hot by the color of the gold, and it cools quickly.
And if one heats it too much; it will melt in the fire. and thus there are enough obstacles.
I have ordered this chapter from head to foot so that the way may be easier to find.
This cautery is good for moisture and cold on the brain, and there are two that are made because of an illness called "soda," and because of many humors that descend from the head to the eyes, and the ears, and because of a multitude of dreams and pain in the teeth and pain in the throat, and also for all illnesses that come from cold such as paralysis and soda and apoplexy and similar illnesses.
The form of this cautery is such that the patients are purged by a dissolving medicine modifying the head III humors or IV according to what the virtues and the ailment and the custom of the patient can suffer. And then make the patient's head fall back.
And then have him sit cross-legged between your hands, and place his hands on your thighs.
Then put the root of your palm on the root of his nose between his two eyes; and where your two thumbs will come, if it bleeds a little then heat the cautery which is called "olivary," of which this is the shape: And place it on the spot marked with ink, and move downward while squeezing your hand bit by bit in a twisting motion; then lift your hand slowly, and observe the place to see if you see a little bone. And if you don't see it, start the cautery again until you see the bone as I have told you;
After taking a piece of silk, put it in warm and soft cotton, and place it on the area, and leave it for three days.
Then place softened linen in butter; And leave it on until the burn is removed. Then treat the wound with an ointment called "tetrapharmacon," until it is healed.
And the ancients say that when a wound remains open longer, it purges more; and therefore it is helped to move.
And they say that one must leave the cautery long enough so that part of the bone is burned, and then remove what has been burned from the bone, and it should be healed.
And others say that one should leave the cautery on for so long and press so hard that it lowers from the bone as wide as the spindle that women put in their distaffs so that the humors are stirred out.
And one should leave the wound open for a long time; Afterward one must clean and cauterize.
And these two methods of cautery do not seem to me to be good at all, except in some men where there is a way of fear;
and it seems to me that I should leave it out;
for the shoulder is weakened by continuous solutions of nature, as we have seen in other members;
and when the shoulder of the patient is weak by nature, and the first appearance of cautery is safer and milder for me, and it is from this that I work in consequence to salvation altogether.
When the head comes chronic pain and lasts long, the patient should use herbs and pills that are called "cochie", and purging of the head, and oils, and plasters; And if they do it with the cautery as we have previously said, and it is not worth anything. Take care if the head of the patient is of strong constitution and that he is not too cold; Then cauterize below the cautery a bit as we have said above. Afterward, do the cautery on each horn of the head down to the bone, as we have previously said, and do the cautery where it is called “vessels”; And these are the places where one applies cupping glasses. And position your hand so that you do not see down to the bone: The patient feels much greater pain in this cautery than in others, and I will speak of it later.
And it is necessary that the cauteries on the horns be more delicate than those with which one cauterizes the middle of the head, and this is the form:
from the cautery of the head When sudden pain comes to one part of the head, and the illness extends as far as the eye, and the head is purged by purifying medicines, and the other cures that I have mentioned in the division of diseases are done, and all this does not help at all: then do cauteries according to two methods, that is to say with hot medicines and fire.
Cauteries with hot medicines are done as follows: you take a piece of aloe, remove the bark and cut it into a small piece the size of your fingernail, then place the temple where the pain is located in half so that you can put the aloe piece under the skin.
And when it is placed, hold it well and leave it like this for twelve hours; then untie it and apply a clove of garlic on top, and leave the wound like that for two or three days. Then put it on cotton soaked in butter as much as possible.
After the cure of anointing until it is healed;
And if you see that this cauterization with any burning medicines that I have written or doses to treat with burning medicines.
The iron cautery is done in this manner. Heat the cautery of which this is the form:
And it is called "close" because the head is made in the shape of a bell or it has a small curve, and in the middle a small appearance;
and place it on the painful area, and hold your hand and turn the fire a little, so that half of the thickness of the core is burned;
and remove your hand so that the artery does not burn, which is outside, and flows abundantly with blood.
Afterward place cotton in oil of flaxseed, and put it on the area for three days; Then he puts moistened cotton in butter, and then heals the place with ointment until it is healed.
And if you want to cauterize this migraine with the cautery called "culterella," at its very point, and be careful not to touch the artery in this migraine which is not old.
from migraine
When you cure a migraine as we have said before in divisions of diseases, and it does not profit, and you see that the cauteries previously mentioned of medicine and iron do not suffice, then it is necessary that you heat the cautery called "culterella" until it is white;
and draw thus a line half an inch long on the painful spot, and remove your hand once, and be careful not to touch the artery and do not go as far as the bone;
and beware of the jawbone that moves when one eats, and the nerves have no regard for the movement and that spasms do not come to the patient, and beware of the discharge of blood from the artery when it is cut, or cutting has great fear and even for him who does not know it, and who is not a student and experienced; and leave the work in half way;
but I will tell you how to stop blood when the artery is cut, and I will show you in this book where it applies.
And if you see that these cauteries do not suffice for the ailment, and the patient is suffering, cauterize him in the middle of the head as we have said, and treat the wound until it is healed;
and if you see [it], administer the cautery that we have said in the chapter of the extraction of the artery, with the cautery which has two knives; and this cautery is better than that one and more helpful.
of the pain of the ears from cold
When pain in the ear comes from cold, and one has worked with dissolving medicines and other cures that we have mentioned in the division, and the pains do not cease, then heat this cautery which is called "point," of which here is the form:
After pointing to all around the patient's ear, or around both where the pain is held in both, and you remove a bit from its root of the ear then after you have marked the place for the incision; and make ten points around each ear;
then treat the area until it is healthy.
Of the torment of the mouth
Torment which must be treated by cautery is none other than those that are moved by phlegm, as we have said in the division of diseases;
And do not perform cautery on things that seem to come from dryness and spasm of nerves.
When you treat this kind of torment that moves from phlegm with draughts and purges of the head and gargles, and this is not enough, then it is necessary that you cauterize the patient with three cauteries: one in the root of the ear, and another a burn behind the temple, and the third in the adjustment of the two lips;
and place the cautery in the part that appears healthy, and cauterize it on the head of the ear above a burn below the horn of the head, and another on the temple as long as a thumb; and leave the cautery on it until half of the heart is burned;
and this is the shape of the cautery:
And it resembles the knife that we have placed before, but it is a more subtle point, and the knife should be a thicker point;
afterward, treat the area as I have said before, until it is healed.
When the paralysis is old and you treat it as we have said, and it does not improve, and the patient has no fever, then make four cauteries: It is on the two horns of the head, and one with the head, and one at the place which is called “vessels” as we have said before, and the last cautery on the mouth of the stomach
and it should be treated as we have said before.
Of lethargy
For this illness, it is fitting to give the patient large herbs and pills that modify the brain.
Afterwards, raise the head of the patient all the way, and put mustard plaster on the back of the head as it is written or treated in the treatise of plasters.
And this is the manner of the cautery: If you do it as I have said.
If he is healed thus, well and good. And if he is not healed, make three cauteries from the temple of the head descending to the neck, and have a space of two large fingers between each cautery.
and the cure as the others, and if you see swelling there, and the patient is suffering, then apply the cautery in the middle; and if needed, two others on the two horns, and cauterize until it is healed;
and let the cautery be called "olive," as I have said before.
It is necessary that the head be cleaned of herbs and of what we have said before;
after you raise the head of the patient, then apply the cautery between the head and on each horn, and behind and three on the spine of the neck;
and if you need more, and the body is moist and the patient is suffering, and the disease is severe, then apply four cauteries on the spine of the back; and leave it until the strongest heat is felt, then lift your hand. After the cautery until it is healed, and let the cautery be called "olive" as we have said before.
Of epilepsy
Epileptics should not use cautery fire except those who are phlegmatic, and it is necessary to first modify the brain with herbs and other remedies that we have mentioned in the division when the patient is large and suffering from a lack of medicine.
And if it is a child who cannot endure it, then make him gargle and chew often modifying the brain with good meats;
after he raises his head in the middle, and makes the cautery as we have said before, and the cautery on the vessel, and on each horn; and if the patient is strong and suffering, then make cauteries as I have said to one who has paralysis and softening of the body, on the spine of the back and neck, and let the cautery be olive according to the manner that I have said.
If the patient is feverish, make a subtle cautery for him according to this method:
When by reason of melancholy are the superfluities or the moistures corrupted and phlegm thick, then the cautery of iron cauters as we have said to him who has paralysis.
And if because of melancholy the superfluities are declining towards melancholy and the body of the patient is moist then he should drink things so that his brain is purified according to what has been said previously in the division.
After asking about the head of the sick person; Then make a linen tourniquet well, also as the circle, and put it around the head.
And the patient must be crossed, and held well on all sides;
Then present the linen, and worth of old beeswax ointment. And heat it over a moderate fire so that he who applies it can endure it; Then empty the circle inside around the head and leave it to cool.
And do this to the patient once a week with good management until he is healed.
If you see the cautery burn too many times with one application of the hot iron.
This method of cauterization softens the brain properly;
And then put softened cotton in butter and gelatin fat.
from the eye of the arrows When awe first comes as the eyes by the signs that I have said in the division, then begin and make the patient drink things purifying the head, and keep him from all moisture, and make him sweat or bathe several times fasting.
Then he commands him to put his head back and cauterize around the head and make two cauteries on the two temples if the descent of the ailment is in both of them together or one if the descent is in one.
And apply the cautery to all the veins and arteries that are below the heart, and let the cautery be long according to the width of the temple;
And beware of the flow of blood, and if you see too much blood coming out, staunch it as best you can.
And I will teach you in the extraction of arteries and in incision how to staunch it;
And never make a cautery or cauterize below the two bones behind.
and we see that it is superfluous cold phlegmatic things, then make the cautery as I said at the beginning of this chapter descending to the eyes: I cauterize the head, and I cauterize on the two temples, and I cauterize where the hair grows under the two bones. And if there is more need, then I cauterize slightly above the eyebrow with all small cauteries.
When you give him medicine according to what we have said in the division, and he does not profit, then let the patient drink three nights of cochineal. After you shave his head, and make him cauterize with half an olive cautery; and make two cauteries with the cautery called "clavilis" on the two eyebrows, a little below the hairs;
And beware of the artery so that you do not cut it.
And this is the shape of the cautery which is called "clavilis":
When the membrane of the eye is softened by illness and moisture, then the cautery of this instrument which is called “olivary” should be used. of which this is the form:
And if you see fit, make two cauteries on the two eyebrows as long as the eyebrows are.
And do not let go of the hand except until the third part of the paper is burned, according to the manner that I have said.
When a hair points at the eye Sometimes it happens that the hairs of the eyes are converted to red, and prick the eye, and one does cauteries according to two manners: That is to say, of fire, or of burning medicine.
For the fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
When they are born and are even, then put the patient in your lap; then draw on the paper of the eyes a figure that is as the leaf of myrtle, and let the beginning of the sign be near the hairs;
then he puts softened cotton in egg white and parsley decoction on the eye, then he heats the cautery which has this shape:
After cauterizing on the shape that you have marked dot by dot many times, so that the flesh is burned at that spot;
and the signs of the success of the work are that you see the paper retract, and the hairs rise at the point of the eye;
then lift your hand, and leave it like that for three days, then he puts softened cotton in butter until the burn is removed; afterward the care of anointing until it is healed.
And if afterward the hairs come, and the paper is softened, then begin the cautery on that same spot again, as you did first;
and if the hairs are scorched, then cauterize until the paper is raised to its natural place and is even, and they do not prick the eye.
The burning medical cautery is that you instruct the patient to let the hairs grow until they are large and even, then make a shape from parchment the size of a myrtle leaf.
Then take French soap and quicklime, of each one drachm, and grind them together well. And do it quickly so that it does not cool down, then spread it hastily on the shape you have made like a myrtle leaf, and place it on the paper. And if the ailment is only in one eye, then you should work on that one, and if in both, as well. and place softened cotton under the eye with egg white.
And let the flesh of the patient be in good health and put your hand showing on the medicine, and press it a little and move it all the times that the patient feels the bite of the medicine, for he feels a bite as of fire.
When you have done this for a long time, then remove the medicine from your hand. And when the bite has passed, if you lift the place of awe, and look to see if you see the paper lifted as it was lifted by constraint of fire or by incision. And if it is so, it is well.
If not, put more medicine on the place where the medicine has not worked, until your works are equal, and your eyes are set right.
Then put softened cotton in butter on it until the heart burns are healed, afterward cure the place of the ointment which is called “diafensis” and others, until it is healed.
And if it is necessary for you to guard yourself well in your work with great care so that none of the medicine falls into his eyes.
And if the paper becomes soft afterwards, and the hairs prick in the eye, then begin the medicine again on that spot which is softened by the paper properly, just as you did before. after the cure until it is healed.
And this is the form of the poultice of myrtle:
Know that the eyes of men are diverse in size and smallness, and according to that are your constraints.
And let not the right way be answered to him whose is the study of this art.
Of the healing of a fistula by cautery
When you treat a fistula as we have said in the division of diseases, and your treatments do not profit at all, then it is necessary that you make a cautery according to this manner.
Instruct the patient to put his head in your bosom; and hold the patient's head between your hands in such a way that it does not move, nor shake his head;
then put softened cotton in albumin of egg or in juice of parsley on the eye;
After you heat the cautery which is like this:
and it is shaped at the head like the form of a dove's feather, together with which the cautery should be.
If you see that it is pointed from one head to the other, and if you see that it is also like a tent.
But nevertheless, this which is shaped is worth more for your work.
Afterward press the fistula if it is open and draw out the corruption and dry it. And if it is closed, open it and draw out the pus.
Afterward put the hot cautery on it and hold your hand on the cautery at the part where there is no fire above the oil, so that your hand does not shake. And put the cautery in the fat of oil, and corrupt it.
If you come to the beginning of the cautery right to the bone, it would be good. If not, begin the cautery again once more, and another if you need it, and leave it for three days;
Afterward he puts it on soft cotton with butter, and cures the ointment desiccant until it is healed, and if forty days pass and it is not healed, put on a corrosive water medicine until the bone is uncovered. And he heals according to what would come in his chapter.
And there is a way of cautery for fistulas which none of the ancients said. Understand a fistula, and make the place; Afterward put in the incision one subtle camamile of which this is the form: And make it to the quantity of one-third of an ounce; And hold your hand or the camamile firmly, and let neither the patient nor anything move, lest the melted lead runs to his oil;
And it is fitting that one put moistened cotton on the patient's eye in water or in wine.
The fistulous place will heal quickly and wonderfully by health.
And if the fistula is healed by the cautery as we have said, it is good. If not, it is necessary to administer an opening at the nose, and bring the fistula back to the body at the nose according to what is fitting in its proper place.
of cracks in lips Many times fissures occur in the lips which are called "hairs," and likewise in the lips of children.
When you treat these crevices of those that we have said in divisions, and the treatment does not help, then heat a small surgical cautery knife according to this form:
And put it immediately into those cavities until it reaches the bottom;
afterwards, treat the place with wax until it is healed.
When an abscess comes in the root of the jaw or in the eye socket, or in the palate, or at the roots of the teeth, after it has rotted and decayed and become old and turns into a fistula; and you treat it as we have said in divisions, and it does not help at all: then it is fitting that you have the cautery according to the quantity of the fistula; afterward, make a hole or opening in the fistulous tract, and hold your hand until the iron reaches the bottom of it and the other place;
and do so once or twice, after the treatment of what we have said in treatments, until it is healed;
and if it is treated this way, it is good; and if not, it is necessary to discover the place and remove the corrupted bone, according to what you will find in its chapter.
When the gums are softened by moisture and the teeth move, and you treat it with medicine but to no avail, then put the head of the patient in your lap; afterwards heat the cautery, which will be shown later in part, so that you put a cane on the tooth;
and quickly put the hot cautery inside, and hold your hand there until the patient feels the heat coming to the root of the tooth;
then lift your hand and repeat the cautery according to your will;
After the patient fills their mouth with salt water, let them hold it for an hour and then spit it out.
And in this manner, the tooth that was moving is stabilized, and the softened gum is restrained, and the corrupted moisture dried.
of the pain of the teeth
When toothache comes from cold, or there is coldness or wind, and remedies do not work, then one must use a cautery according to two methods: and cautery with butter and cautery with fire.
Butter cautery is such that you take cow butter and put a bit on the end of an iron or steel spoon; then take cotton and wrap it around the point of a needle, moisten it with boiled butter, and quickly place it on the aching tooth and hold it until it cools;
and do this often until its power reaches the root of the tooth, and if you see that moist wool and cotton soaked in cold butter are put on the aching tooth, and a hot iron is placed on it until the fire reaches the crown of the tooth.
The cauteries with fire are such that you take a cane of iron or wood, and it is thick so that the fire does not come to the mouth of the patient;
Then heat the cautery, from which the shape will come afterwards, and put it on the tooth and hold your hand until the cautery is cooled;
Do this often, for the pain will be removed that same day or the next.
And it is necessary that the patient fills his mouth with good butter at the time of this cautery, and then refresh it further;
and this is the shape of the cautery:
And make a cautery of whatever shape you wish, and according to what you have power;
and this is the shape of the cane:
of scrofula When scrofula is caused by phlegm and cold moisture, and is not amenable to digestion by medicines, then heat the cautery head so that the following shape comes, and make two openings for the smoke to escape from the other side of the cautery.
And place the hot cautery on the abscess once, where it is needed, until it reaches the bottom of the abscess;
And if the abscess is small, apply the cautery according to the size of the abscess, and leave it like that for three days; and place moistened cotton with butter on it until the burn is gone.
Then treat the site with ointments and dressings until it is healed.
When moisture overcomes the channels of the body, and especially when it comes from a cold complexion, then the patient must first be purged with laxative medicines;
After you apply the cautery to the root of the throat, and be careful that you do not come too close to the throat, and do not burn the heart but only a spot.
After you make the other cautery at the juncture of the neck and head of the spine, let the cauteries be called "clavile," as we have shown the shape before.
And treat the area as we have said before until it is healed.
When all the diseases of the lungs are from cold moisture, and the patient has neither fever nor dryness, and the illness is old, make two cauteries on the shoulder blades in their hollows. And another cautery between the two nipples.
And let the cauteries be called "clavile" according to the shape which has been said before.
And if you see [it], make a cautery by pricking with all the cautery which is called "points" whose form is shown before in the disease of the ears;
And let the points be up to XXX, or thereabouts.
After treating the place according to what is said before it, and let the cautery be at three points according to this form:
And for this reason are the cauteries lighter, because you make three at a time.
of the shoulder dislocation
When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first reset the dislocation. Afterwards, turn the patient onto his back and onto his side; then lift the heart that is inside the little bone with the two fingers of your left hand;
and if the joint is dislocated inside, then heat the cautery which has two nerves just like this is the form:
and cauterize the heart until it pierces through to the side, and the figure of the cautery together with four cauteries will come;
and for this is made a cautery with the cautery that has three nerves, so that the figures of the cauterization are six cauteries;
and are the nerves according to the subtlety of a tent and it is the shape of the cautery which has three nerves:
And never is it applied on top of this nerve for which there are eight cauteries.
After put on the cautery heated coals with string; after make the patient rest, and let not the limbs be moved for a long time until he is well recovered.
And if it is dislocated above, which rarely happens, then make a cautery on the thick part of the clavicle, or many cauteries by pricking.
For the joint is closed, and the moisture is removed, and the patient is healed.
When cold and much moisture come into the stomach, so that they draw it from its complexion, and phlegm is multiplied in it, and customary treatments do not help, then the patient must be turned onto their back and extend their legs and arms. Then afterwards make three cauteries one below the spoon of the foot for the quantity of a penny, to all the cautery nail-shaped, and two cauteries behind the two sides so that the shape of the cauteries is at three angles, and have half a space between one and the other so they are not joined together when they will rot;
and are the cauteries so perfect that they purge the two parts of the core, and is the shape of the cauteries according to this form without alteration:
And if you see a large cautery burn within the stomach according to this form;
And whoever has fear of this cautery, cauterize by pricking and marking on the stomach at a point according to the amount you see fit; then cauterize with the whole cautery which is called "points".
After the treatment of the wound that we have had before, as long as it is healed.
When the liver experiences pain from cold and moisture and excessive flatulence, as long as it is forced out of its natural constitution by excesses; and the patient is cured by what we have said in divisions, and it does not profit him, then it is necessary that the patient be purged on his own height; and sign three cauteries according to this form and figure and amount on the liver, defying the hypocondria, where the ribs of the man come;
and let there be a space between each cautery the thickness of a penny. And let the cauteries be as long as the body, and do not press your hand too hard on all the cauteries.
and only half of the heart should be burned, and let the patient stand upright on his feet.
And if he cannot, let him lie down, extend his legs, and raise his arms.
And if you wish, you may cauterize these cauteries with a knife, if you are skillful and wise in the art, and beware that you do not burn the whole heart, for you would dry up the whole body. and let it not reach the bowel, for the heart is very delicate in that place, and you will know by seeing.
When there is an abscess in the liver, and you want to know if it is in the flesh of the liver or in the membrane: if it is in the flesh, the patient feels pain but not too severe;
and if it is in the membrane, they feel very intense pain.
And when this treatment requires purging, it is necessary that the patient be placed on their head;
and then mark the spot where the abscess is, and then heat the cautery which resembles a ray, like this shape: And cauterize with the cautery until the flesh is burned, and the pus comes out, until the opening is all clear;
after the treatment according to the treatments of herbs until they are healed;
and it is not fitting that anyone uses this cautery except those who have studied for a long time in the art of medicine, and by whose hands these illnesses have cured many times.
Then one can work boldly, and nonetheless it seems to me that it is better to leave it alone.
For the cautery of pleural effusion
The ancients said that one should make cauteries of aristolochia roots, in this way. Take a long aristolochia root, the largest you can find, and let it be dry, and as thick and as long as your arm. And soften it in oil, and hold it in the fire, and cauterize with the cautery between the foreskin and the neck, and two small cauteries a little lower down on the part below the beard.
And two cauteries between the fifth rib and the sixth, declining a little behind. And one cautery near the breast, and another on the stomach, and one between the shoulders, and two more on each side of the breast behind the cautery that is between the shoulders.
And do not press your hand down, but make it open as if smelling.
And some ancients say that a man should use a fire cautery resembling a razor, heat it and place it between the ribs until it reaches the abscess. And thus the pain ceases, as we have said in the case of a liver abscess.
But in this work there is fear where the patients die now, or a fistula comes which cannot be healed.
Of the mouse
When you treat the disease of the mouse according to the divisions of treatments we have mentioned, and it does not profit, then you must apply three methods of cautery, all of which are good.
Of these, one method is to make three or four cauteries in a line according to the length of the abscess, according to the shape of the liver cautery that we have mentioned before.
And do not press your hand on the entire cautery, and let the patient often turn onto their back.
And another method of cautery is to heat the cautery that has two points, as we have shown in the case of shoulder dislocation.
And lift the heart which is located near the abscess, or where the pain of the patient comes from the left, and let the elevation from which you lift the heart be according to the heart, according to the length of the body, and let the cauteries be according to the width of the body.
After he pierces the two inflamed nerves so that the heart is pierced from the other side, then draw out the cautery, and thus he will have four.
And if you see, if you cauterize with the whole cautery at three nerves.
After the treatment when it has festered for a long time, this is worth more than the other cures mentioned before.
Cauterization is of no use to someone with dropsy, except in the manner called "asclytes".
When you treat it according to the methods we have said in divisions, and your treatment does not profit, then it is necessary that you make him four cauteries around the shoulder, and one on the stomach, and one on the liver, and one on the thigh, and two behind the back on the spine, and one at the breast. And let the cauteries be very close to the hope of the heart.
Afterward leave the cautery uncovered for a long time to avoid putrefaction, and do not leave the patient after the cautery. And healing would hasten, and the two intentions would be together with the help of God.
The shape of the cautery for the belly is the one we have shown before. And that for the back is oval-shaped, according to what has been put down before.
When the feet are swollen in someone who is dropsical and are full of clear yellow fluid, it is fitting that you cauterize on the back of the foot between the little finger and the ring finger; and apply your hand with the cautery without turning.
And do not enter too deeply, so that you do not compress the yellow wax, and let the cautery be of this form:
Afterwards, make two cauteries on each leg at the point of the knife; and let the cauteries be long, one below the knee in front and the other behind, in the middle of the leg;
and leave the cauteries exposed for a long time without cleaning so that it can dry out.
after the treatment of the other treatments that we have mentioned.
When a stomach ailment comes from cold and moisture, as long as the retaining and digestive powers in the stomach and intestines are weakened, and it cannot be cured by ordinary remedies; and you see the patient suffering greatly and with much greening (bile), then make a large cautery on the stomach as has been spoken of before or a circling cautery of the stomach. and four cauteries around the belly, subtle and all with a delicate point, and two cauteries on the thighs.
And if you see abundant moisture and the patient suffering, burn them on the shoulder, and burn each one, and two small burns on the stomach below the large one, for the cure is beneficial when there is good help.
Of the treatment of hemorrhoids
When hemorrhoids are at the fundament, one or several, and are old and composed of large, cold, and damp corrupted humors, and are treated as we have said by division, and it does no good, then make cauteries. III on the spine of the back, that which is all behind below the shoulder blade bit by bit in a triangular shape, and I cauterize below the elbow II twice.
And if you think that his stomach is cooled, and the meat does not cook, and one sees the face swell, then on the face we apply a large cautery to the stomach as it has been previously said, and another on the liver, and another on the spleen with the whole cautery. And leave the cautery uncovered for a long time. After healing the place until it is healthy.
When you apply an athlet, if it is heated so that it resembles a razor, and then put it all inflamed on the athlet applied; And leave it until your hand and the cautery reach the origin of the vein, so that the blood stops.
Do this once or twice, and if there is much swelling, cauterize each one as we have said. After the treatment of wounds while they are healing.
And if you cauterize with a large cautery on the wound, it will be of greater help.
When the patient cannot suffer cutting or opening, which we will recount in their place, then comes a certain illness that cannot be healed except by cautery.
When there comes a fistula, and it is old and has putrid and corrupting moisture, you must first test with a subtle probe and keep track of how deep the probe goes.
After heating the cautery which resembles a razor, insert it into the fistula according to the quantity that the pus has entered, and repeat the cauterization until the dead and corrupted flesh is burned, once, or twice, or three times according to the quantity needed.
And beware of burning the nerves that are nearby, and the large veins.
If the fistula goes to the body of the bladder and the intestine, beware of these places, and do not cauterize except in a fleshy place, and think that it is not a piercing.
After healing the place until it is healed, and if the pus is drained, and the materials are removed for a long time, then know that the place is entirely healed.
And if the materials are not removed, know that the place is infected and the bone rots at the base. And as one of these that we will say in its place.
When pain from cold comes as a result of great windiness and does not take any pleasure in women, then you must make a cautery on the reins on one side and the other with the small cautery that we have previously mentioned.
And if we cauterize it in the middle, there will be three cauteries in a line and they will make greater help.
of the bladder When the bladder is soft and weak from cold and moisture so that the patient retains urine, then make a cautery on the back part above the bladder where the pubic hair begins, on the right and left, and let each cautery be as long as the width of one thumb.
and make him do the cautery on his back, where you need it.
And let the cautery be sharp according to the shape previously mentioned.
When the matrix is cold and moist, and does not allow conception because of this, and the flowers are corrupted and their ends are delayed. and when they come, there is great pain: then it is necessary to make three cauteries around the vulva, as we have said in the bladder cautery, and two cauteries on his back.
And let the cauteries be sharp, as we have said.
When viscous moisture descends to the socket of the hip, and for this reason it moves from its place, and the signs are that the thigh is longer than the other when measured together.
And when the place of the separation is found, it is necessary that you cauterize the patient on the bone of the hip with a cautery resembling a circle and mark in front of the place around the bone as it turns, so that the bone is within the circle.
And let the cautery be such as that with which one cauterizes the stomach.
And if this cautery is not present to you, make three large cauteries from olive wood, and let the cautery be as perfect as all hearts.
and cure it until it is healed.
of the pain of the hip When pain comes to the bone of the hip, and it is from cold and moisture, and the patient is cured by what we have said in the division and the cure is not worth it, and the illness is old: Then it is necessary that you purge the patient of gross humors with fetid pills, or other good-seeming pills. After you do the cautery;
And the manner of the cautery is according to two manners: That is to say together burning medicines, and fire cautery.
Fire cautery is according to many manners, of which some are such:
That you cauterize upon the box of the hip three triangular cauteries according to this form, and make good depth and large ones, and there be between each cautery space the thickness of a finger, and let the cauteries be olive-shaped;
Once done we make a cautery in the middle upon the head of the hip, so that there are four according to this form:
And if you see, if the cautery is applied with a circle as we have previously said for the dislocation of the hip;
But do it in such a way that the circles contain the entire hip, and all the flesh around the core is burned.
And this is the way it is done for sciatica, when the pain stays in the hip and does not reach the thigh or the leg.
And if it extends to the thigh and leg, make two cauteries where the patient says the pain is located, and one cautery above the ankle, four must be made on the left side with a dot.
And the cauteries should be lancet-shaped, and the thickness of the flesh should be burned;
And if the patient feels that the pain extends to two fingers or near the end of his foot, then cauterize him where he feels the pain three points or four with a cautery called "points". And if necessary, do it again.
And if he knows that the pain is below the knee towards the thigh, do it with a knife cautery or a circular cautery, and be very careful in all your cauteries so that you do not leave the cautery long enough to burn the nerves and large arteries, and so that you do not cause the patient more pain and contraction.
And I myself have seen many who have performed cautery on the ankle of the foot, and they let it be until the leg was all swollen, and the foot also, and it was pierced and corrupted all the foot. After a purge of the stomach from which he died.
And if the pain is in two parts together, make a cautery in one and the other, according to this manner.
And the surgeons say about the cautery of the hip, which is the manner, make a tool and let its head be as thick as a doctor's nail or a little less, and let it have between the crosspieces and from one crosspiece to another the space of the size of a fingernail.
And let the crosspieces be opposite in two parts and also like knots, and it has a well-made iron handle.
And this is the form:
Let it be warmed until it is all red and gives off sparks, and then put it on the affected hip bone, and turn it on the healthy side.
And let the cautery burn once, when the cautery is hot, and leave it for three days. Then make a plaster of butter, and leave the wound open for a long time. After the treatment with anointing until it is healed.
Albucasim says that we use this cautery very little because of the fear of its appearance, and we rarely see anyone using it.
And nevertheless, this is a good cautery for those who can endure it, and where it is applied.
The burning medicine cautery is such that you make an instrument with crossbars where the edge of the door descends, and it is made of iron or steel with a long side, and at the height it has two notches, and between each one there is the thickness of a finger. and let them be opened by fire above, and join together according to this form:
Then place the box on the hip of the patient lying on his sound side, and press your hand firmly on the box of the hip; Then put between the two circles of the hot awl that has been heated in the fire for a moment, and leave it there for an hour or so, allowing the patient to suffer the heat and burning.
For there will be as much biting pain as from fire;
and when the biting pain has passed, lift your hand with the instrument and remove the hip awl gently, and leave it like this for three days, applying butter until that part which is blackened by the burning is removed; and let it stand for three days so that putrefaction sets in;
And this would be the last aid after the treatment of wounds so long as they are healed.
And if the pain has extended to the thigh or to the leg, make the instrument that you have made for the hip in the same way.
And this is the manner of the hot awl, and I have written it in the treatise on the rectification of medicine. Take alkali and hot coals, as much of one as the other, and grind them together, and put them in a new pot. Where there is a small hole so that the point of a razor can enter.
Where there is a small hole so that the point of a razor can enter. And put one pot over the other well-sealed, and put alkali and lime and gentle heat on top, so that there are two above the powders until you have heated it well in your hand.
And leave it like that until hot water and steam descend into the sealed pot, then take all that water and pour it over lime and alkali as before.
And then it will be very sharp and is administered for many medical works and for other members' cauteries.
For it makes a work like fire, and with other medicines that we cauterize well the hip like turpentine and honey of Anacardium and chalk with soap, all these things mixed together.
And Galien tells us of a remedy by which a man was cured of the pain in his hip and sciatic vein, and praised it greatly, and said that no other remedy was done, and that he was healed at once when this remedy was done, and he bathed himself as he teaches here after.
And say in a part manner that you take some green and fresh litharge, and grind it very much with a bit of fat, and put on the hip and on the thigh and on the leg where the pain holds, and bind it.
And leave it for three hours and by the quantity that the patient no longer feels the burning.
And then let it enter a bath so that its body is a little warmed up, and let it enter a bed, and the pain will go away entirely and it will be healed.
And know that no one should use a fire cautery for such medicines unless it is after the evacuation of humors.
And Dioscorides says that when the sciatic vein is cauterized with goat hairs, it helps a lot.
and it must be done in a part manner. Take wool and soak it in old oil, and place it on the hollow between the thumb and the other finger which is called the knuckle.
After you take goat's horn, and put it to fire until it is charcoal, and place it on wool, and leave it until it is extinguished.
And do it again in the same way, and do not stop doing so until you think by sense that it reaches up to the hip, and that the pain has ceased.
And this manner of cautery is called "cautery of goat".
Of the pain of the back
When pain comes to the back, whether by falling or from percussion or by too great an evacuation, or by similar cold matter spread out, none of these cases are worth cautery except for that which comes from infusion of cold matter.
It is fitting after this that the patient is purged with fetid pills or other such things, which are made on his back, where the pain resides, three lines marked by an inch, and in each line five cauteries or more according to the strength and quantity that the patient can suffer;
and it should be made as a cautery which is called "points".
and if you see, make III or IV cauteries with a medium-sized cautery iron according to this form:
This illness often comes upon small children, and the signs of its beginning are that they have a tight throat when they rise, and fear; and you will find in the last spine of the back, and in us the appearance that comes upon the other spines.
When you see this and you are about to treat it, cauterize with a hot iron according to this form. So that the cautery brands each part of the spine equally.
And if you see, if you cauterize around the spine with a hot iron two or three lines, and the points are close to each other.
After healing the place until it is healed according to what we have said, and beware that you do not apply the cautery in a gibbosity which is in the spasm of a nerve.
Of the pain of the joints
When joint pains are from moist humors that are spread throughout each limb of the body, and when pain comes to the foot, which physicians properly call "gout," and when it is from a cold cause and medicines cannot cure it, then it is cured by cauteries in this way:
make many cauteries around the joint of the foot, and let the cauteries be olive-sized according to this form:
And if there is need for you to grip on the face of the foot, make the burn with all the heat that one calls "point". And if the pains come to the knees and other joints, which happens many times, then make three or four cauteries on each knee from each part, with all olive oil cauteries.
And if you need more, make more, but do not hold your hand too strong except until the thickness of a grain of wheat is burned.
And if the pains descend as far as the knee and the back, administer to him the cautery that we have mentioned in our chapter.
And if the pains are in the hands, make dots around the wrist two lines long;
and if there is still pain in the arms, make dots on each joint and on the hair of the hand.
And if the pains come to the elbows or shoulders, cauterize each part, and give good treatment to the patient and take medicine.
For if you give it good treatment and purge phlegm, it will be healed with God's help.
When a rupture comes in the groin, and the bowels descend to the buttocks and it is new, then you must, when you see him healed, that he does not eat that day. and let him use things that loosen the belly so that the fevers descend from his belly.
after you make him sit on his back between your hands, and command him to hold his breath while the bowels are repaired, and reset them at your will, and place a sign below the break on the bone where the dagger went in, and at any mark that resembles half of a circle above the body;
then heat the cautery which has this shape:
As long as it is white and drips clear fluid. Then reset the bowels in their place; and have the assistant hold his hand so they do not return backwards;
and work well on the patient's thighs, and put a cushion and a sergeant under his thighs, and another under his armpit which holds his hands;
Then place the cautery on the sign with your whole hand, and hold it straight and hold it until you reach the bone; and if you do not reach it the first time, start again another time until you get to the bone. And be careful that the boil does not burst when you apply the cautery. That you do not burn it. And so that the patient does not die or suffer other ills.
And know that when you do not reach the bone with the cautery, your work is worth nothing.
And it is necessary that the cautery for children be subtle according to their size, and for adults also large according to their size;
After three days, treat the area around the cautery with butter until the burn is gone.
After that treatment with other ointments until it is healed, and have the patient lie on their back for forty days until the wound is well closed.
And it is necessary that his nourishments be left long, so that the eyeball does not protrude when he will go to the chambers.
And after forty days, when he will want to rise, let him be given a well-made bandage and wear it for forty other days.
And he should have good rest, work little, and beware of too much drinking and eating, and of shouting too loudly.
And when he follows this instruction, he will be completely healed.
And I will say here after the treatment of the tailbone in its chapter.
When tumors come in other bellies and are recognized, and you see that they do not grow any more, make a cautery with a cautery according to its quantity, and burn a third of the core. After the cure according to what we have said;
And none of the ancients have said that one should cauterize it with a three-angled cautery according to this form:
But first sign the place of the incision and make a line across its width above the fracture, and another behind it, and hold your hand steady over the whole cautery iron.
But the first cauteries are lighter and milder.
of old pain in any limb When pain comes to any limb, whether from falling or being struck, and this pain lasts a long time, and medicine does not help it, then it should be cauterized with a cautery called "points", and the cautery should be done according to the length of the limb, its smallness, weakness, and its virtue, and its location of twists and turns and its pain.
If he is healed by the first cautery, it is good;
If not, begin another cautery on top of it, for this custom is that it must change to the member which is closest, for which it is necessary that you make the cauteries until the patient is healed.
The mesail are helped sometimes by cautery with great help, and the same disease that comes from the putrefaction of phlegm and melancholy.
When you see it cauterized, be careful if the disease is at the beginning, and if it is cured according to what we have said in the division, and does not spread nor remain, and you doubt that the corruption will not spread throughout the patient, then make five cauteries on the head: One in the middle of the head, and the other towards the forehead at the end of the hair; and two on the two horns, and one behind on the nape.
and let your hand remain there so that the cautery reaches the bone and so that the scabs come out, so that the vapors of the thick humors can be released;
and cauterize on the spot according to what is in front.
And if the inflammation is spread everywhere; and it is clearly wasting away, then you should cauterize with the cauteries that we have mentioned above, and one cautery on the top of the neck, and two on the spine of the back, and six on the spine of the back and one large one on the rump and another below, and two on the two shoulders; and two on the elbows, and two on the tendons of the feet, and one on each joint of the hands and feet, and in the hollows of the hands;
and guard against the nerves that are on the back of the calf, so that you do not burn them;
and never apply the cautery on the bone where the dagger struck, and another on the bone of the stomach, and another on the liver.
And know that when you do more cauterizing, you do more good, and increase the benefit;
and know that the sick do not feel pain from the cautery as the healthy feel it, because the body is already all corrupted.
And it is fitting that the cauteries be large and small according to the limbs and joints, according to what you find in a manner of irons.
After healing, wash the wound with flour of beans mixed with honey and other remedies until it is healed.
When swelling comes in a limb and is cured by medicines and oils and plasters, and it is not healed, then apply cautery on the limb according to the size of the limb;
and let the cauteries be a small puncture entering the thickness of the flesh; Then cure the wound until it is healed.
And sometimes one does cautery to the hand and foot and back, at the point where the nerve that moves the limb emerges, and thus the swelling is removed.
And in all ways let no one interfere unless they are knowledgeable of the limbs and the origins of the nerves that move the body.
When the illness called “albaras” is chronic, and medicine has no effect, then cauterize a spot with a cautery iron, according to the quantity of the species of the heart, until the whiteness is removed, and its color is changed.
Then cure with flour of vetch and lentils with rose oil and plantain leaves, and blood of a dove and blood of an almond, of each one part. And let it be mixed all together, and let it be bound with a cloth, and let it air in place until it is healed.
The treatment of chancre by cautery
When a chancre first appears, and you see it stop growing, cauterize it with a cautery that resembles a circle, all around the chancre.
And nevertheless the wise say that one should also apply cautery to the middle of the ulcer;
and nevertheless it does not seem good to me, for I fear that it may become ulcerated and corrupted, and I have seen it happen several times;
and more rightly the thing is that it should be cauterized around, with a cautery called "circular", as we have said in speaking of types of cauteries.
When someone has an illness that is called "adubelati," and it lingers due to the excess that it causes or due to the weakness of the patient when he is decrepit (that is to say, too old), and he has little blood, or due to time; and you see it hastening to die then let the cautery burn around with many small burns, pricking. afterwards leave it thus. For it will hasten to die.
And if you see it pierce all the way through with the cautery, heat the cautery as follows.
And place your hand in the middle of this illness which is called "adubelati" as long as the cautery has pierced the heart, and let the cautery be such that the patient feels it behind in such a way that the course of the decay is relieved.
After the cure until it is perfectly healed.
Another manner of illness there is which is called "corrodent", and it is nothing else but a devouring of a limb, for it gnaws the limbs as fire gnaws dry twigs.
If you see this illness in a place that can endure cautery with fire, then heat the cauteries very small and large, according to what suits the place where the illness is;
afterwards cauterize from all sides until you eradicate all the corruption, and nothing of it remains, so that everything that is corrupted is removed.
And then leave it for three days, and apply a cauterized poultice softened with oil to the burns so that the burning sores are removed, and all the corruption.
After the cure of wounds generating flesh.
And if you see after three days that healthy flesh does not grow, that's good;
and if not, start the cautery again on what remains of the corrupted flesh.
And this condition has sometimes been cured with medicinal water in place of fire cautery;
But nevertheless, fire cautery is of greater help, and I have already said the cure for the malady of fever in the division. Take it when you need it.
of the purples that come to the feet Many times it happens that by fire comes a disease which is called "clos" according to our understanding, and it is a large foul thing which bleeds the foot.
And the cauteries for this disease are according to two manners. This is to know the fire cautery, and the hot iron cautery.
Fire cautery is when you heat the cautery point as thin as a goose feather, and it should be made of good iron to the size that it can pierce nails from all sides, and that it has subtle edges.
Afterwards, you put it all hot on the nail, and turn your hand around the nail until it comes to the bottom of the nail. And leave it like this for three days until it begins to rot. Then make a plaster of wild mallows ground with salt and leave the plaster on all night, and the nail will fall out and be uprooted from its roots.
Then heal the place of the wound by anointing with fat until it is healed.
And if they are converted by fire the body, and it often happens in hands and feet, then you must administer a hot cautery to them. And it is in this manner: Take a cane of iron or a feather of vulture, and put it on the nail and the surrounding skin, that is to say for warts. And put the cane on it so that it encompasses everything around, then put a piece of hot coal on it, and hold your hand firmly, and press your hand while turning so that the edge of the cane comes to the root of the nail, and can find the way of the hot coal deep down to the root;
and let the patient endure the bite of the hot coal for an hour. Then leave it like that, and it will come out by the roots.
Then do one after another, until you have removed all those that are on the body, then treat the wounds which generate flesh.
When someone trembles from coldness of nerves, or from quartan fever or another, it is fitting that you make them four cauteries or four on the spine of the back, one cautery between each spine. And one cautery on the foot, and one on the stomach with olive oil cautery;
This will stop the trembling, and hasten the health from the cold illness.
Sometimes appear through fire baths or stinking pustules, which come from large corrupt substances.
It is fitting in the first place, when they appear, that one makes a cautery on each head of the pustule: a subtle cautery of myrtle wood, the point of which is held in the fire, or of a long aristoloche root, or with a lentil-shaped cautery.
And always cauterize them at the beginning when they appear in this manner, and they will not be able to grow further forward, but the superfluities from which they come are broken down, and they are healed.
but it is necessary that this be done after the evacuation of blood.
Often there are great flows of blood from the artery that is cut at the wound that comes to the fire, or in the incision of an abscess, or in the cauterization of a limb, and similar things; and it is a very grievous thing to staunch.
And nevertheless when this happens to anyone, if you hasten to put your index finger on the wound of the vein, and press very hard until the blood is quieted under your finger, and that no drop issues anymore;
then put to the fire several small and large olive cauteries until they are all red;
then take one, large or small according to the wound and the place where the artery is cut, and put the cautery on that vein where you hold your finger, and keep the cautery there until the blood is stopped up.
And if it leaps when you lift your hand from the vein, and the cautery is extinguished, immediately take another cautery which are in the fire.
And do not cease to do one after another until the blood is drained.
And be careful that you do not burn the nerve which is nearby, and that no other harm comes upon the patient.
And know that when blood flows freely from the artery, one cannot properly rejoin it, especially if the artery is large, unless it is by one of the four methods which we have described. either by cautery, or by extraction when it is not yet treated, or by strong ligature of thread, or by medicines placed upon it which have the power to rejoin blood. And let it be tied and strained carefully.
Whoever administers a tightening of bandages or applies hot objects, or other similar things, it will not profit him nor the patient.
And if this happens to anyone and they do not have a mirror or medicine present, they should put their index finger on the wound of the vein as we have said, and press firmly until it is rejoined above the wound and above the vein. And do not move the wound, but moisten it with cold water often as cold as possible until the blood is frozen and thickened and rests.
And make inquiries beforehand about those who need to be cauterized and medicated.
We have told you in the first chapter all diseases where it is fitting to use fire cautery or burning medicines, and the incisions and the causes and instruments and forms of cauteries.
And I have placed this chapter from the top down to the feet, and I will go in this chapter by the same way so that those who want it can find it more easily.
And so as I begin this, it is necessary, dear son, that you learn that in this chapter there is more danger and fear than in the first of cauteries, and for this reason it requires greater caution.
For in the work of this chapter there often occurs evacuation of blood when opening a vein and incising an abscess, and in the treatment of wounds, and in extracting arrows, and in cutting into stones, and similar things. where there is doubt and fear, and many die.
And I warn you that you do not undertake folly. For many kinds of people come for treatment. if some come who are so frightened by their illness that they die easily because of the fear they find in their illness and its severity. and one must be afraid of these.
And there are some who give you their senses and say: Wait, I am cured." and the illness is insidious.
It does not suit you to consent to those who come to you who have this manner, but put greater caution in your honor than in your covetousness, and do not offer foolishly but wisely from those of whom you are certain, and whom you can take and lose.
And use prognosis and indication in the treatment of your patients to which health is converted.
And this will help you to acquire great renown, glory, and lasting remembrance.
Very dear son, Our Lord gives you good understanding and rectitude, and if you wish to aspire to the holy inspiration of his hand, amen.
Or I have ordained this chapter in divisions by chapters, according to that which is before, or the chapter of cauteries, that I have devised from the head even to the feet so that you may more easily find that of which you will have need.
Know that this ailment often comes to children at birth, and when the midwife pulls the child's head too forcefully.
And sometimes it comes from an unknown cause.
And I have never seen this ailment except in children, and all those I have seen hastened death; and for this reason it seems to me better to leave these cures to others.
And I saw a child whose shoulders were full of pain, and whose head grew larger each day until it could no longer support it;
and the moisture grew so much that he died, and this moisture gathered under the bone above the diaphragm, between the heart and the bone;
and the works are such if the moisture is between the heart and the bone, and the abscesses are small, that you split near the head a wide crack;
and it should also be as long as two of us, as long as the moisture runs;
and see this shape of the spatula:
If the moisture is thicker, and the abscess is larger, make two cuts in the shape of a cross, like this:
And if the moisture is below the bone, and the signs that you see are the corners of the head open on each side, and the sharp pain jumps forward when you press it with your hand inside, and this is not answered to you: then it is fitting that you split near the head three fissures according to this manner:
And after the incision, extract all the moisture. After removing the splits with cloths and powders, and he puts wine and oil, and leaves it like that until the fifth day;
then he unties it, and heals the wound with bandages and ointments, and leaves the head even, and gives the patient dry meat free of moisture to eat as long as the limb is strengthened and healed.
And another way of incision is that you look where the size of the abscess appears, and its gathering of sharpness;
for it is never in front; never behind; never to the right; and never to the left.
Therefore cut where the abscess appears, and the gathering of sharpness, and make the incision according to what power you have in it;
and be careful not to sever an artery; and let the vein flow blood so that the patient dies from the depletion of blood and evacuation of moisture.
When someone has a sickness called "catarrh" in the eyes or in the breast, and the sickness is old, and medicine does not help, then the last resort is to cauterize with copper the two arteries.
Therefore, when you have cut them, it is fitting for the patient to put his head back; afterwards rub the place with a rough cloth until the arteries appear, then remove the cloth from the patient's neck. Then look where the vein beats, and the lobes of one and the other are behind the ears, and they are filled.
Then mark the lobes with an incision, then cut one and the other with a sharp spatula of two parts, until the vein reaches the bone, and this is done by the breadth of the head.
And if you see it, put the spatula under the artery and the cup above, cutting as much as it should through.
And when the vein is cut, if blood flows continuously from above.
And if the artery does not open to the touch, it is necessary that you measure the quantity of space in three fingers, then mark and cut to the bone;
and the quantity of blood to be let out is six ounces, and perhaps a little more or less according to what the patient can bear, and the fullness of the artery.
Then look at the wound: If it remains on the bone with a slight pain, cut it so that pus does not come, then dress the wound and bandage it, and treat it with ointment until it is healed.
from a migraine When an old headache comes, and acute catarrh, due to the moisture of tears and the heats in the temples and a head cold and similar things, and it is treated by methods of medicine cures and all that does not profit him at all, then we extract the arteries of the temples and cauterize them as we have said.
And the manner of extracting them is such that the patient should shave the hairs from his temples, and listen to the artery which opens in the temple, for it opens well by its pulsation, and is more full outside than in some men who are too cold;
And if it is full, the patient should tighten his neck with some cloths, then rub the place with a rough cloth, and raise the place with hot water until the artery appears clearly; Then take the spatulum of which this is the shape: Then scrape the skin lightly until you reach the artery, then draw it upwards with pincers, and detach it well from the membranes that are beneath it on each side;
And if the artery is delicate, turn it to the point of the hook, then cut from that part according to the quantity of the two sides. For if she is not copied, then it will never jump all at once.
And treat the blood from the sixth hour until the third.
And if the artery is large, it is necessary that you tie it in two places with a strong double silk thread so that decay does not come before the wound heals and blood flows.
Then cut away the excess that is between the two ties in the same hour, and then, if you see fit, cauterize with a cutting cautery to the bone until the flesh is cut.
And this is the best work if the patient does not have a fever and they are of a hot complexion. For cauteries help to finish the humors: for this reason it is of greater help against the humors.
When it is necessary for the extraction of arteries, one must fill the place with old cotton and put well-made tents on top.
and when they are loosened, let it be treated with dry medicines that produce flesh, and with bandages, until it is healed;
and if without cutting the artery as much as you work, so hurry to cauterize it, or apply vitriol and hold it in your hand so that the blood is stopped; and if you do not have this, place your finger on the area until the blood is congealed, and apply a sharp cold to the area so that the blood stops, and it is removed as it should be;
And there should be a space of one finger width between the two knives, and then when you have marked the two areas, and place the hot iron on it until it reaches the bone, and cut the vein in two places. and they shall be kept apart between the two heads for it is not soldered by this cautery at all.
And this is the form of the cautery:
and that which is milder and lighter in the extraction of the artery is that you cauterize the vein with this sharp cautery of two parts, but the sharp points should be well spaced to keep their heat longer. For when the instrument is too thin, it holds less heat.
of tears When the tears of the eyes are running down the veins that are on the top of the head, and no remedy of medicine profits, and you see the face of the patient reddening, and his forehead shaking as if in a shiver; and if they are swollen and moist so that the hairs of the papers are falling out, and the papers are being scorched and burned by the heat of the tears, then this remedy is needed. And the ancients called it "the bruised remedy," and it is that you make at the back of the patient who has this illness three incisions on his forehead equally according to the length of the forehead.
And the ancients called it "the bruised remedy," and it is that you make at the back of the patient who has this illness three incisions on his forehead equally according to the length of the forehead. and let one of the incisions be as it should go all along the forehead downwards to the nose, and the others let them be along the ribs above the papers, and beware of incising the arteries which are along the ribs above the papers
and remove your hand from the continuation of the two jaws, and let each wound be the quantity of three fingers across joined
and have ready a piece of sponge and much linen for wiping the blood, then put the spatula sharp on two parts as follows is its shape
from the incision which is above the temple to the second incision; and scrape away all the flesh which is between the two incisions at all the tissue which is on the bone, then make another cut from the middle incision to the other second one, and then extract with force this spatula. If you put the instrument called "cultellaire" into the first fissure, it is very sharp on one side and dull on the other; this is its shape:
And place the sharp edge towards the flesh burned at the heart, and the rounded edge towards the bone, and push until it comes to the middle fissure.
And cut all the vessels that descend from the head to those so that the incision is continuous until it reaches those which open onto the heart, and then likewise make in the middle a split until the other side.
And then extract the blood equally, and press the place so that the blood is taken up.
Then put in each split a tent of old cotton, and put on cloths softened in wine and oil and ash, and keep that no abscesses come there.
And on the third day untie the bandage, and he will administer a large poultice of hot water, then cure it with ointment basilicon with rose oil, and other cures as one cures wounds, until it is healed.
When someone has an acute catarrh accustomed to it, and you see the eyes are swollen and small, and weaken the vision, and the papers are burned. And the hair falls out, or the head aches with sharp pain, and the patient sneezes; Then know by these signs that these humors and phlegm do not come from only one vein, and the best cure for it is this.
And you must instruct the patient to place his hand behind his forehead, then make a large incision between the forehead and a broad space on the cheek. And begin at the incision of the left temple to the right temple, and let the cut be down to the bone; and keep your hand away from the nerves of the temples which move when one chews;
and when the bone is uncovered, wipe away all the blood with a sponge, and then put cotton wool between the two edges of the incision, and bind it with linen cloth; then bind cloths soaked in wine and oil over it, and beware of a hot abscess;
when it is removed, you must rub the bone until fresh flesh begins to grow, then treat it with drying agents which promote the growth of flesh.
In such a manner: Take two parts of wheat flower, and four parts of colophony, and make a plaster. And administer it to these wounds in order to draw out flesh throughout.
Of the stuffing of ears
Everything that falls into the ears is one of four things: Either grain, or beast, or stone from a mine, or similar thing such as iron. Or seed, such as acorns, beans, peas; Or flowing things such as water and saliva and similar things.
When there is a stone or another manner of thing in the ear that does not fit in the ear nor grow in it, then put the ear in the sun.
If you see the stone, if it distills any drop of oil of violets or oil of sesame seed, then administer extraction. And make it sneeze by compressing, and plug the nostrils when the sneezing comes, and put around the ear pieces of cloth or wool. and hold the ear above.
Many times comes fever from this treatment;
and if it does not come fever, administer extraction with fine tweezers, of which here is the form:
If it jumps fever with tweezers, it is good;
if not, administer extraction with a fine lancet of small sharpness;
and if it does not jump by this, make a cane of iron and insert the head of the cane or the hole of the ear strongly, and stuff what is around the cane with soft wax so that the veins cannot enter with the cane; then the fever will form, for many times fever comes as we have said;
and if it does not come fever in any way, take glutin with which birds are caught, and put into some instrument suitable for this, and put a piece of cotton around; Then press the buttocks onto the stone or whatever it may be, and draw hard.
And if it does not come out with all the things we have said, then hasten to slit the ear just as you would an abscess that is hot or a spasm.
And the manner of the slitting is that you first make the patient dizzy from the cephalic vein, and draw out some blood according to his constitution. Then have the patient sit between your hands and turn his ear upwards, and make a small slit at the root of the ear where the fat or flesh depends; and let the slit be crescent-shaped, so that you reach the bone, then suck out the pus according to your ability, and quickly suck it into your mouth;
And continue the treatment until it is healed.
And if it is grain that is within and it swells, then administer extraction;
and if it cannot come out, then administer a thin, delicate spatula according to this form: and make an incision of that grain.
But do not do this when you think that the grain is moist due to the moisture of the ear, until you have made many pieces of it;
then extract it with delicate pincers and a syringe, as we have said, so that the extraction is aligned.
When a patient has sharp pain in the ear, it is necessary for them to first use sneezing as a remedy and generously fill the ear with old cotton. And let him lie on the same ear where the pain is. If it jumps forcefully through this, it is good.
If not, then take many stones according to the length of your finger, thin and light, and heat them a little over the fire; and place the patient's ear in a hole or opening, and press on it with his feet from the other side, and strike another stone on the stone that is in the ear; and do not stop doing this stone by stone until all the pain is gone, and so it will all be gone;
and if you see it, take the joint, and put one of the heads into the ear, and take the other head and heat it with fire until the softer joint is burned;
then redo another part of other joints until all the pain is gone, as we have said in the stone.
For the extraction of a small animal, such as a flea and similar things, treat it as we have said in the division;
but if it is large enough to be felt, use pincers for its extraction; and this is the lightest thing to remove that is in the ear.
For the extraction of worms embedded in the ears, when you treat it as we have said in the division and where we discuss distillations, and the treatment does not help at all, then it is necessary that you look at the ear in the sunlight: If there are any worms, take them out with delicate pincers; and if there are none, take the cane whose form is this:
And it is narrow below and wide above. Insert the most delicate tip into the ear according to the amount of the patient's suffering, then suck up the whole cane; Do this often until all the worms come out.
And if they do not obey and come out, stuff cotton around the cane as I have said for the stone;
and if they do not come out as we have said, administer distillations that the ancients have proven in the killing of worms, and you will find them or a treatise on distillations;
and if you distil your oils and medicines into the ear with all these instruments, whose form is this as you see: And whether of silver or iron three holes are below at the small openings, and above covers for distilling.
And to press the distillation inside, there is an iron instrument well made for this, and if you see take the razor and wrap cotton around the point. Then put your oil or juice in it, and whatever medicine you see fit in the cane, and hold the cane to the ear.
Then put the razor with all the cotton inside, and press your hand moderately until the oil is distilled or reaches the ear. And let the patient smell it inside, and whether the distillation is a bit heated by the fire or not, you distill it into the ear. And be careful that it is not too cold, because the medicine would not be as good.
Of the stuffing of ears
No child is born who does not have some perforation in their ears;
And the same thing happens to adults by rupture of a wound, or from a splinter lodged in the ear, and this rupture sometimes comes perfectly within the ear, if one cannot see it;
And sometimes a small piece of fire obstructs the perforation, and one sees it well.
That which comes perfectly within and cannot be seen is a grievous ailment in many conditions, and in this case it is fitting that you place the patient's ear in the sun; and look inside: If you see the apparent obstruction, if the work has all this sputum, this is its form:
It should be sharp and cutting in front and behind, so that it does not injure the ear;
If the hair is from the flesh or earlobe, hold it with delicate pincers and clip lightly until all of the hair is removed.
And if the operation is performed perfectly in the ear, then take a delicate razor and heat it slightly over the fire, then apply it to the flesh of the ear.
If you feel the hair which causes pain to the patient's ear, pierce lightly and be careful not to injure the nerves of the ear.
Then place a tent in the ear according to the width of the hole, and moisten it with Egyptian ointment. Do this every day until the wound is healed, or take a tent and moisten it with rose water, and powder it with ground vitriol.
And if you see the ear is swollen, it is necessary that you remove the tent and insert another moistened with cerate made of rose oil and wax until the swelling is removed. Then treat it until it is healed.
And if bleeding occurs, plunge a sponge and cloths in cold water, and place it on the ear, and use other remedies that stop the bleeding, which are or treatments of distillations.
This instrument which comes on papers of the eyes when they are moist and dry, it is fitting that you extend them with pincers and forceps, and the cup of a spatula from its roots; Then put on the place powdered vitriol.
And if without cutting off, then cauterize with a lentil-shaped cautery subtly, and after the incision cauterize it worthily.
And often repair them, so that nothing remains of their roots; and when they are cauterized by fire, then those roots are burned and do not return.
From gravel Many times come on papers of the eyes things that seem like hail in their form and hardness, and for this reason this illness is called “hail,” and it is an assembly of thick moisture on the paper above and below; The works are such:
The works are such: Take care if the hail moves from one side to the other, and this is a light thing to know;
Make then the two sides wide, then lightly scrape each part, then take it with pincers and cut.
If you cannot cut it without piercing a bit of paper, do not grieve anything to the patient;
And if the fissure is large, sew it with a suture and treat it until it is healed.
And if it is small, do not exert any force, for ointments will soon restore it and bring flesh.
And if the hail is descending into the inside of the ear toward the upper part, invert the paper and extend the hail with pincers, cut it and press from one side and the other;
and if the paper is removed by incision, it does not matter.
and when the hailstone is cut out, apply oil of salt water and heal the place with that which draws heat until the patient is healed.
of the fat of the eyes Exinach is a grease which is drawn into cloths of paper and it happens more to children than to adults, and it grieves much their eyes, and they get catarrh in the mornings, and cannot look at the light of the sun because the tears hasten to their eyes.
and for this they lie on their faces then, and sleep on them, and have their papers beneath their eyebrows wet so that the swelling and appearance are covered with exinach which appears in the eye. And when you press the place with your thumbs and feel the exirnach between them.
And the manner of the work is that the patient puts his head in a healthy place;
And then take a linen cloth and prepare a tent in the manner of a circle according to the quantity that it contains to be drawn from each part, then put it on top. And press with your hands on one side and the other so that the discharge is gathered within the circle.
Then make in the middle of the moisture with a sharp spatula a slit about as wide and no larger than the wound made when opening a vein.
And make the skin whole until you reach the discharge. And in several arrangements, the discharge comes from the slit according to the shape of a piece of white fat.
Therefore extract it all at once with a piece of cloth pinched between your hands, and turn your hand to the right and left until it is scattered.
And be careful that you do not add anything into the fissure, unless you reach the whole septum as far as the eye, lest you bruise it.
And if the pus does not appear at the beginning of the fissure, then slightly widen the fissure until it appears.
Then extract it as we have said, then moisten cloths in vinegar and water, and place them on the spot, and bind with bandages.
And if there are such men who grind flaxseed and put it on to corrupt that moisture which remains.
Then treat it until it is healed.
And if it comes to the place of a hot abscess, then let the cure of softening poultices be applied until it is healed.
of the hairs of paper When hairs grow from grafted skin that are not natural and are old, they harm the eyes, and bring about various illnesses such as accustomed tears and softening of the skin and albuginea, as long as it is a cause of the destruction of the eyes.
And the treatment is according to four methods: either by cautery with fire, or by sharp medicine according to what is before it, or a chapter of cautery, and is done either by incision and suture, or by canes, according to what I will say.
It is necessary that you put the head of the patient on your breast, then turn the paper from the eye to your left hand;
if it is converted, it is good; if not, if you put a needle through all of it above; and let this be at the edge of the paper where the hairs grow at these hairs, and draw the thread above all the paper, and turn it to the razor;
then make in the part below the paper, below the added hairs, across the whole span, from the large tear duct to the small;
then extract the thread, and put below the paper a small tent of cotton and linen, then draw on the paper a shape like an myrtle leaf, and in any case it is necessary that the shape be according to the quantity that you see raise the paper which is divided into all.
And if one needs to apply a large quantity of paper, according to how soft the paper is;
Then make across all the spatula on the two lines that you have marked, and begin with large tears to small; And let one of the cuts be near the natural hairs, as thick as a radish root, then push the scalpel into one of the two angles of the heart, then flay it all;
Then bring together the two lips with a stitch from a needle using very fine thread, wipe away the blood, and let the excess of threads dry on the two eyebrows with nothing sticky, if you see fit to do so;
And if not, don't worry about it, then leave the stitch and threads until three or four days;
Then heal the wound without stitching with drying and constricting things, for paper will revive at the closure of the wound and its joining, but stitching is harmful (as the ancients say), and this work is without fear. And if there is another way:
And if there is another way: And it is that you sign the paper in a shape like the leaf of myrtle as we have told, at III ounces dried according to the form that is here:
Then he who has small strength should apply it equally according to the form which is here.
And if you cannot hold the tweezers and the thing is not equal, then take a needle with one thread and put it in the shape; and put one other thread under the large tear, and the second thread under the small one, and bring together between your fingers the threads equally;
then lift your hand equally and lift all the skin on which you have signed as we have told, then bring together the two edges of the wound by stitching and heal it until it is healed;
And if an abscess comes to your incision, soothe it with cerate and similar soothing ointments.
And it sometimes happens that the hairs of the paper are converted:
If you must use what we have said about incision;
But the suture in one and the other is more artificial.
The treatment of boils is according to this form: And convert the paper and place it within according to what I have said, then make two boils by art, and two thin threads as long as the paper and as wide as a spatula is; And take two ends of two parts where you hold the threads;
Then join one and the other subtly above what rises from the oil of the paper, and draw the two boils from the two parts formed; And leave it like this for several days
If he delays, so that the wound has some strength, then heal it until it is healthy;
And when the wound heals and if the paper is lifted and they no longer prick the hairs;
And this is the form of the two canes that you will make according to this figure and according to this quantity of length and width:
The work is such that you take a fine needle and put in a very fine silk thread; Then join the ends and knot them subtly, and let the length of the threads be a palm long;
Then order in the chase another fine silk thread tightly and knot the two ends of the thread;
Then put the patient's head on a healthy surface;
And let it be under the sun so that the work is illuminated, because it is a subtle and delicate work, then put the needle all the way into the root of the hair hastily, and make it pierce through the paper quickly as you draw it over the natural hair;
Then pull out the hair up to the flesh, and put that hair into the flesh, if there is one or two or three or more.
Then pull out your hand so that the hairs come out at all the flesh in the paper with the natural hair.
And if the flesh is treated and the hairs do not come out with it, you will treat the flesh below all the thread that you have ordered there, until the flesh comes out through the holes above it, and you see it by the sight of the eye.
Then you will treat the flesh and the thread, and close the eye and leave it closed for two days or three, until the hair grows in its place and the flesh grows up.
And if the hairs are small, then accompany one long horsehair with the natural ones, and let it grow together with the one you leave it with until it is lengthened and then remove it.
Of the putrefaction of the eye When this illness which is called "aleacratio" or gangrene comes to the eye, it can happen in two ways:
one natural, and the other unnatural.
And it happens by cutting of a wound, or a cut or a cautery, and by similar things.
And the way to treat it is that you split that suture and separate the lips of it and put linen tents inside and bind it until it is healed;
and it is not right that you use things in its treatment that dry and constrict. For if you do this, the illness will return worse than the first;
but work with softening things, such as fenugreek; and rose water or elderflower and flax seed are cooked, and ointments of diascordium melted in any oil, and he envelops a tent and cures it this way.
And the treasure of your cure is that you take care that it does not heal according to the shape it was before.
And this work that we have said is nothing other than directions for this illness, so that it does not return to the shape it was before.
This sickness which is below, which is truly called "axacrati," and it is natural and accidental.
Accidents come from wounds and fissures and cautery and similar things;
and the way of the work is this: you take a needle with a doubled thread and insert it into the flesh, making it pierce from the left tear duct to the right so that the thread comes out in two sides of the flesh;
then you spread the flesh above the needle and sew it with a spatula half a span wide. And if the shape of the paper returns according to what is fitting, it is good;
If not, take a razor and put it in the slit, and turn the paper, and make two slits on either side of the inside of the paper.
Let the heads of the two slits be at the two angles of the incision that you have made, and make one angle so that when they are joined together, the shape is like the shape of a letter that has no "Greek I";
Then remove that flesh, according to the amount its sides are thick underneath, from what follows the paper, then join the two separated parts and sew them with a thread of wool;
Then apply the care that we have said of softening remedies, and bandages, until it is healed.
And if the illness comes from a slit or seam or cautery, it is fitting that you make a full slit below the hairs of the papers, and according to what is said before; then sever between the two leaves of a tent, as I have said;
then sever between the two leaves of a tent, as I have said; and one must perform the work according to the form of the illness, for it is very diverse in form, and wise masters prepare themselves with all their power to make the figure return to its natural form;
and the patients themselves, according to what work and instruments are needed, must be in several positions.
When this suture occurs in the hands of men in such a way that the paper above is glued with the white of an egg, and it cannot move or perform its natural functions, then you must put the point of a razor under the paper and lift it up;
and hold it with forceps, as long as you cut what is exposed with a very fine spatula, which is not too sharp or too dull, so that the patient does not suffer because the spatula is too sharp and does not burn the oil;
And let your incision, which you scrape away from the assembly, be light so that the paper comes back according to its natural form.
And it heals all the assembly, and make no more in the sharp eye salty, and lift it from sharp sweetness, and of colic.
Then put between the paper and the oil a tent of linen, and put wool soaked in plenty of egg on the oil. And after the third day, use warm colic and things southward until it is healed.
Know that the nail is according to two manners: It is nervous and seeming like hard fat, and another which is not nervous, but is seeming like white frozen moisture, that when you touch it with iron and think to pinch it, it cannot.
and one and the other such beginning towards the large tear duct, and grows bit by bit until it covers the whole eye and all the light and the movement of the eye.
And the manner of the incision is such that the patient puts his head on a sound surface, then opens his eyes; and lift the paper with your hand, then place the needle at the tips of the small forceps, and extend it above; then take a needle, and put in horsehair or cowhair or oxhair, and strong thread; and double the point of the needle a bit and put it in the needle, and pierce it all the way through with the needle, and tie the needle to a thread and extend it above, and flay all the hair on the side of the needle which touches the eyelid and the silk to the hair up to the head, then cut off the rest at the root of the tear duct all along the delicate spatula and with small forces, and leave the flesh natural or tear duct, so that by the incision the body's accustomed tears do not come;
and at no time have the nails been put to the oncicle alone, as we said. then we flay the whole spatula bone so that it is shaped like this:
And be careful that the spatula does not touch the fleshy cloth and tear it, and that the little plum is not pierced;
and after the incision, put a piece of silk thread into the eye, and a collar made of silver, and leave it until the next day; then treat it as needed until it is healed.
And if the nail is not nervous, and you cannot put in the needle, and the oncicle cannot enter, this type of nail is often cured with medicine;
and it grows as I have told in the division, and if you see it covered, open the eye of the patient, and take the spatula with a small sharp point according to this shape: And place the ungent on top subtly, and if you see that it diminishes nothing and the reason hastens it, then distill from your mouth into the eye a collyrium made of litharge and red lead, and only grind it, and stop the eye until the next day;
If nothing stands in your way, such as a boil in the eye, then milk it and first treat the hot boil until it is healed, then resume the work as before, until it is healed.
Then begin the other work according to this same work, until it is all removed.
And if the appearance of the flesh from the tear ducts harms the eye greatly, then suspend it to a thread, and in a cup cover part and not all, so that a stream of tears does not come;
Then distill into the eye red collyrium which is made of litharge.
In some men, flesh-colored warts never arise, and cover the plum kernel and bind it on papers and turn it over the fire, and it resembles a rose of baluster;
And the work is such that the patient puts his head in your lap, then you perform the operation on him, and keep all those parts clean with suitable bandages, and support it with strength.
Then shave the first part, and go shaving all the way to the end with a razor, and be careful not to injure the eye during the operation.
And make the incision with a spatula as we have said in the incision of the nail, and use small force so that you remove the splinter, as the form after this chapter demonstrates.
And when the incision is complete and all the flesh is removed, apply oil of cypress that has been boiled or distilled with red copper and similar corrosive medicines, and put hot cotton soaked in oil on top, so it is secure from a hot abscess.
and if it remains there and the foot swells up, and you doubt a hot abscess, leave the eye and treat the abscess with soothing things for a hot abscess;
Then return to your work while it is healing, and do the same as many times as the object is inserted into the eye in this manner.
But nevertheless, it is fitting that you relieve the treatment of each weak eye from its natural path; and from the accidental path in ironwork;
And do not put your hand into any of these works until you see that this member suffers from the work.
Beneath are red veins which are covered upon the eye, and they tolerate at sight their work and weaken the eye all days.
Therefore, it is necessary first to look at whether the eye is strong or weak and there is no other illness except pain; then proceed in this way:
instruct the patient to put his head in good health, then suspend those veins at all ounce according to his wisdom, and let the ounces be subtle double according to this form:
And let them be placed in two rows upon the body according to this form:
then one coils as strongly those veins subtly, and wipes the blood hour after hour, until you see remove those veins outside of the eye;
and guard that you do not prick the eye at the points of the spatulas, and make this work at noon hour in front of the sun, and be very ardent in your work so that you only cut those veins;
and when you have done this, if you distill in the eye colire green and red to corrupt that which has remained within the eye.
And if you do not have power to pluck all that in that hour, if you make a plaster on the eye of things soothing the pain of it, and leave some days until the pain is soothed and you are sure of hot abscess, then begin again according to this manner which is before until it is healed;
and this is the shape of the strengths:
The one named "fistula" is made.
When you treat it by cautery and burning medicine as I have said before, and it is not healed, then cut into the abscess where it should remain and drain all the moisture until the bone is exposed.
And when the bone is exposed and you see decay and blackness, then cut it with all the instruments in this shape.
And it is called "sharp chief" and is made of strong iron at the head front, and is pointed like a file as it is in this present shape.
And place it on the site of the corrupted bone, then turn it between your fingers and press with your hand a bit until you know that corruption is gone.
And do this several times, then restore the place with drying medicines.
If the wound is soldered and flesh grows, and the body of the bowel is soldered and remains so for forty days, and it does not reopen nor become abscessed, and no ill accidents occur, know that it is healed.
If this is not the case, if there is nothing else to do but bring the fistula back to the opening of the nose according to this form: And that you uncover the bone the second time with an iron instrument and sharp medicines, and when it is uncovered take a borer according to this form, and let the head of the borer have three angles, and the drill bit be sharpened down to the point as you see here:
Then put it on the bone near the tear duct, and keep your hand away from the eye by one finger's breadth, then turn the borer completely until it pierces the bone and the patient feels it because the vein in this place will swell if they hold their hand over their nose.
and then restore the place with dry medicines as I have taught you, and when the flesh is born and hardens the place, it goes to the snow; it is a lighter thing for the patient.
When the eye opens completely and there is no disturbance in the nose, or diminishment, then you must bind the patient;
then the sound, then apply cupping glasses or a hot iron to draw out pus, then put on the eye a bandage made of acacia and aloe and incense and sarcocolle, and then strain the eye, and plaster it with bandages and cloths;
and the manner of the cloths is that you take cloths soft enough and fold each one into four, and then put one on top of the other according to the quantity that the eye needs;
Then strain it with a hard bandage, and start the cupping glasses to suck without cutting.
Then remove the cupping glasses and leave the oil strained day and night, and if the ligaments soften, then you must strain it more.
Then remove the bandage after a day and a night, and if you see the oil come back together, it is good.
If not; Start the plaster and bandages and bandage and cupping glasses again until it is healed.
For the tearing of a woven cloth When ruptures come in the canvas weave, then open it and take out thin sheets like grains of resin, and they are wonderful to see.
Then if you see it covered, the work is such that you thrust a needle into the root of the part below up to that above, then thrust another needle where it has a doubled thread from the tear. and have it pierced, and leave the first needle according to its position;
then grasp the place of the double thread and tie one part of the eye around it, and pull it tight, then remove the needle and put a softened linen cloth soaked in plenty of egg white;
and leave it until the threads adhere with the eye, then treat the eye with comforting things until the wound is healed;
and once the wound is held by the eye on each side with a circle of cloth, until it is healed.
And if the eye shows great swelling, pierce it with a delicate scalpel that comes out perfectly from the eye, and drain the albuminous moisture and reduce the swelling, and it will subside soon;
then remove it until it is healed.
This disease which is called "alcunnati" is nothing other than bowel which is gathered in the eye, resembling descending aqueduct, and it is not aqueduct;
and the manner of its appearance is such that you make the patient sit on a prepared and straight seat, then take the head between your hands in two parts, and move it until you see the bowel coming up to your eyes. then let it be fixed, and not descend, and let the light be unhindered, and have the patient look at things as he used to;
and if it does not descend below, know that it is aqueduct, and if the descent of the bowel is not as we have said.
If you make the patient sit between your hands, then take a subtle spatula and place it on the cornea with a prick by the continuation of the conjunctiva with the cornea and the crown, as long as the bowel rises;
and when it is removed, if you distill in sharp hot oil mixed with honey, or sharp or fenugreek boiled and honey, then let it be cured by another cure until it is healed.
sharp points of the eye We have seen similar things in the division, and what it takes to pierce; if in work according to health.
It is fitting that you make the patient sit between your crossed hands, far from the light of the sun, and bind the good eye tightly;
then put the paper from the eye in your left hand if the eye is left, or in your right hand if the eye is right;
then take in your right hand, if the eye is left, the instrument which is called "almagda", or in your left hand if the eye is right;
Then place the point of the instrument behind the cornea at the thickness of a reed in the white part of the eye towards the part with the lesser tear duct. Then push the instrument which is called "almagda" virtuously, and twist your hand until it pierces the white part of the eye, and feel that the almagda reaches the empty space;
And it is necessary that the measure of the almagda path be equal to the measure of the space from the pupil to the end of the black part; and this is the cornea of the eye;
If you see the bone through this paper because of the clarity of the corneal membrane, then place the instrument up to where the point is, and then press it down one path after another.
If the sharp point descends now, let the patient see it in front of him and the instrument in his eye.
Afterwards rest a little, and if the point goes back up the second path, put force with the instrument, and when it is well embedded and it does not rise, then gently extract the almagda by turning your hand little by little;
And then put again a sharp point of a gem stone, and lift from it the oil inside. Then apply a compress of oiled wool or linen soaked in rose oil and egg yolk, and bandage with clean oil.
We, and those who are of our time, put on common broth with plenty of egg.
And if the almond cannot enter the eye because of its hardness, for there are some men who have their eyes too hard, then you must take the instrument that is called "alberit", of which this is the form:
And pierce then only the conjunctiva, and do not go too deeply, but make a subtle place, then put in almond paste, as we have said;
and for the completion of the work prepare the patient a doctor approaching, in which he sleeps on his back in a dark place;
and let it be free from all movements, and take light foods, and do not move his head neither to the right nor to the left, and let it be bound according to its position until the third day;
then unbind him in the same dark house, and test his sight, and let him see some things, and then bind him again until the seventh day;
and it is not fitting that you do this during the time of healing or after the incision now, but it is fitting that you delay it because the sharpness rises quickly.
When an abscess comes, untie the oil before the seventh day, and direct it by he who soothes abscesses.
And when it is appeased, untie the view and put on its face a little gold to cover for any day, and let it be in that dark house.
And then leave from the house bit by bit, and turn into your cases.
And know that no disciples should interfere in this case. And one came to us who was from the Yrach, who told us that in his country people made almond milk, which one sucks for sharpness, but nevertheless I never saw any in our land, nor did I ever read about it in books of the ancients. And perhaps it is a new thing.
And these are the resemblances of almond forms, for those who do not know them to see.
and let them be of proper iron And let the heads of these be of the same subtlety, and the last one in three sharp angles.
Sometimes there are born or made various jointed charms, of which some appear to be scorpions with many feet.
And if there are such that it has a charm enchanted of fox color, and if a charm of good bone color. In that case of these charms which is of good bone and not enchanted, it befits that you make the patient sit between your hands facing the sun.
In that case of these charms which is of good bone and not enchanted, it befits that you make the patient sit between your hands facing the sun. And open his nostrils, and give the charm to those nostrils, and draw forth for as long as you know that the charm is entirely drawn out.
And if there remains anything that you cannot draw out, then work at it with all the subtle instruments lightly so that nothing remains. and if without you surpassing it, or abscess grows, then cut it as it suits;
and if they are malignant abscesses, then hurry and cauterize them until the pus is dried up and all the humors are removed, then pour or mix easily and sharply with wine. If the mixture works, and moisture comes up to the palate, know that it is healed;
and if the moisture does not penetrate as it should, know that there is a humor embedded in the bone above, to which the instruments cannot come to cut;
then it is necessary that you put in a thread of linen a bit thick, and knotted by hand with us, and have between each knot a space of one inch or less; and put the patient's shoulder with the thread in his nose so that it can pull it through the nose into the mouth;
And many times do children thus make fools of themselves, and it is a light thing for him who wishes to do it.
Then hold the head that comes through the nose with one hand, and the other head that comes through the mouth with the other hand, and know one after the other as those who are at the loom.
Do this until you know that the new ones have corrupted this flesh, then pull out the thread, wipe away the blood, and moisten the thread with Egyptian ointment, and put it back at the beginning as before.
Do this for three days or more, until the ointments have corrupted all that remains of the flesh.
And then place at the beginning a cane of lead for some days until it is healed, and if it needs drying medicines, then use them.
and this is the form of the instrument for purging the head, into which one distills oils and medicines or such.
And it is made of silver or iron, resembling an open lamp, like a cane, and the same applies to its conduit.
and if you see, make it a closed cane, and let the instrument be full for purging the head;
and it has a handle at the head to hold it when one heats the oil or any liquid.
from the flesh out of the nose
Often a disease called "telul" arises on the head and grows large, so much so that it is a frightening thing to behold.
And for this reason, you must cut it off at the beginning and remove all of it, then apply a cautery or burning medicine to the spot.
and if it is delayed in being cut until it is large, then be careful if it is hard, of dark color, and lacking sensation.
do not touch it with iron, for it is an infected abscess, for when it is cut even once, great harm comes to the patient;
and if the abscess is soft to the touch, not of dark color, and you see that it can be completely cut, then empty the patient and cut it without fear, and treat the area with drying and binding agents.
Know that when a solution of continuity comes to one of these cartilage works, it profits little, except in some men.
It is therefore necessary when this happens to anyone, to see if the wound is fresh and bleeding freely; and then bring the two edges together in stitches, and then treat it until it is healed;
and if the edges are already separated on one side and the other, it is necessary that you scrape all the parts of their core until they bleed, then bring the two edges together in stitches, and hold them firm, and sprinkle powdered dragon's blood and ground incense over them; And put on the powders a piece of plaster of Paris or another soldering plaster, and leave it until it dries out by itself, then cure it with anointing until it is healed.
The way to suture is that you bring together the solution: either with needles, as we have said in suturing the belly; or with thread, as I have shown you.
of abscesses of the lips
Sometimes hands appear within the lips of a hard abscess, resembling grains of millet, both smaller and larger;
then you must turn back the lips and split open each knot, and take them with forceps and cut them in every part;
then apply the place after incision with powdered vitriol until the blood is cleansed;
and then wash it with oil, and cure the place with dry things until it is healed.
Many times there grows on the gums hot flesh, which the ancients called "albulus";
it is necessary that you hold it with forceps, and cut it at its root, and let the pus or blood run;
then put ground vitriol on the spot, or other binding and drying powders;
and if that flesh returns after the incision, which often happens, cut it a second time, and cauterize it; if it does not return after the cautery;
Sometimes there are gathered at the head of the teeth, inside the mouth between the gums, scabs which are ugly and rough; and sometimes the teeth are black and citron-colored and wormy, as long as the corruption comes to the gum, and the teeth are foul-smelling;
If it is necessary that you make the patient sit between your hands, and his shoulders be in your lap, and cut the flesh or the bones that appear, until nothing remains. And then make black and green, and yellow and other stains, until they are clean.
And if one removes what is at the first reason, it is good. If not, then start again on the second day and the third, until you have cut everything.
And know that teeth need various forms of instruments for cutting, according to what the work demonstrates, for the rasp which cuts out teeth has other shapes than those which cut between the teeth. And these shapes and others should be prepared with you.
It is necessary when you treat the tooth for its pain that you delay the extraction as much as you can, for it should not be done hastily. for it is a very high substance until one has no excuse for the razor
Then when the patient is constrained to be treated, it is fitting that you are certain of the teeth which are doing the treating. Many times the pain deceives the patient, and he thinks that it is from a toothache, and makes the good tooth bleed; and nevertheless the pain does not go away because of this, as long as the bad tooth remains, for we have often wanted to do this to those healers;
and when you are well certain of the aching tooth, it is fitting that you scrape around the tooth at all its sides, strongly in order to keep the gum from all sides;
then move it with your two hands or use delicate pliers at the first touch and touch, until it is well loosened, then firmly hold the pliers; and let the jaw of the patient be in your holy hand between your knees, and hold it well so that it does not move.
After extracting the tooth straight without breaking it, and if it does not come out easily, take one of these instruments and insert the end into each side lightly, and move it as you did first.
And if the bone is pierced and gnawed, it is fitting that you fill it with cloths where the holes are. And if you extract it subtly with forceps, so that it does not break when extracted.
And it is very wise to work around the gum to loosen the tooth.
And take good care that you do not break it, and a part remains, and returns to the patient by the evil of the root, greater pains than the first.
And beware that you do not do as the ignorant barber-surgeons do, who by their haste and boldness break the jawbone sometimes, and do not bring about what we have related.
But they sometimes bring about great illness by the extraction because of the roots that remain or the jawbone that they break, as we have often seen.
And when the tooth is extracted, wash the place with wine or ale and salt.
and if a flow of blood comes, which often happens, apply powdered vitriol to the place.
And if that does not work, then cauterize it.
The shapes of the instruments with which one must first pull out teeth should have long points and thick handles so that they do not bend when you are pulling the tooth.
And these are the shapes: And they shall be of large members so that they do not bend at all against, and shall be made of well-forged iron, and shall have teeth to hold the pieces.
from the root of the teeth When the root remains after pulling, it is necessary that you put moistened cotton soaked in butter on the place for one or two days until the gums are softened, then insert the tongs called "algefri," whose head resembles a bird's beak.
And they should be made inside like a file and this is the shape:
And if the roots do not want to come out with all these forceps, it is necessary that you uncover the flesh all around the root, and put in the instrument which is called "althali", that is to say a spatula, of which this is the form:
And it must be strong and thick so that it does not break, and if the root comes out with this, it is good.
If not, help yourself with all the instruments, from which the following forms come:
And if one uses this instrument which has two handles, of which this is the form: and other iron instruments which are placed in front of the teeth, and of this instrument which resembles large pincers, of which here is the form:
And let these instruments be such that they cannot break, and know that many instruments are dense; and also other instruments, which are not counted;
and clever master surgeons find their own instrument according to what their work and the illness show them, for there are such illnesses where the ancients did not teach any instrument because of the diversity of others, so that it does not break the chariot or other bones, or rot if he seeks the instruments that suit it, as I have told you, and help yourself with gestures, from which is its form:
And let them be large and well-gripping to hold the bone so that it does not escape, but can hold and remove it;
and then restore the place with suitable medicines, and if it has decay in the bone, and it is small, so do all this with instruments.
When a tooth does not appear according to nature and the form is ugly, even in young women, you should know if the density is born after the tooth and is not in its proper place, and it cannot be filed or smoothed.
Then the ray. And if it is joined with the tooth, take this instrument which has this shape and resembles a small beak, and is made of sharp iron.
And the chisel little by little in your hand for several days for the hardness of the tooth, and so that you do not move the others, and if it appears that it can be filed, then the file with a part files as follows is its form.
And it is like the file with which one makes needles.
And file the tooth little by little in your hands lightly, so that it does not move until it breaks off.
Then the plane at the end should have no razor sharpness, and if it is too sharp and cuts the tongue, then file down the sharpness until it is even so that it does not cut the tongue nor corrupt speech.
When a tooth in front falls out, either by percussion or by falling, and the patient cannot bite on what he eats without pain, and you have treated them with astringent medicines, and that does not work;
then it is necessary to restrain it with a gold thread, for silver thread turns green and rots, but gold never changes.
And let the thread be neither too thin nor too thick, according to the amount of space between the teeth;
and if you see that you need to straighten the teeth, take the thread and wrap it twice between the two healthy teeth, then place the ends between the crooked teeth, if there is one or several, until you reach a healthy tooth on the other side; Then begin again the covering up to the part where you began, and hold your hand delicately and wisely, so that it does not move.
And let your bandage be at the root of the tooth so that it cannot escape.
Then grasp the head with forceps and bring them together, and place it between the sound tooth, and set it so that it does not bruise the tongue.
And then leave it thus tightly as long as it can remain, and if it loosens or the threads break, bind it with another thread.
If it remains and serves thus for its entire duration, this is the form of the teeth and the arrangement of the two sound teeth and the two missing ones, as you see.
And when the head of the tooth falls out, put it back in its place, again and again, as we have said.
and let no one interfere who is not wise and experienced, and at no time is the shape of a cow's bone tooth made, and it is put in the place where the defect is, and it is extracted as we have said, and remains and serves thus for a long time.
At no time does this ligament which comes below the tongue or by nature, come to be so. Or by accident of a stitched wound;
And the work is such that you open the patient's mouth, and hold his head in your lap, and lift the tongue;
Then grasp the nervous ligament broadly, as long as the tongue is dislocated from its attachment, and if there is hardness or knotting, and it is due to stitching of a wound, then he puts in the hook and grasps broadly that ligament;
and guard that the incision is not too deep, for the artery which is beneath;
and when you have done so, lift the place with sharp rose and water, or with sharp cold water, then put under the tongue a tent of linen;
and let the patient chew each night so that the gums cannot adhere.
And if blood flow comes, put powdered vitriol on the place; and if it continues to bleed, cauterize it with a lentil cautery, which is good for this. then cure it with other cures until it is healed,
and if you see it of a dark color or black or hard, such that the patient does not feel it, do not touch it at all, for it is a chancre;
and if it is leaning toward the blind spot, and there is moisture, if it drips, one cuts the corner of a delicate spatula and frees it on one side and the other. And if your effort does not succeed in your work, put crushed vitriol on it until it is extinguished, then return to your work until you draw out all the pus.
Then lift the place with ease and silk, and treat it with other treatments until it is healed.
of abscesses of the throat Sometimes boils come inside the throat which are called "godaths," and they are properly called the two almonds; and when you treat them as we have said in the division, and they are not healed, take care:
If it is a hard abscess of small sense and dark color, do not touch it with iron at all.
And if it is red and the root is thick, do not touch it with iron at all, so as not to cause bloodletting. But leave it alone until it is dead, and then you will cut it off, or it will break on its own.
And if it is white and the root is thin, have your instrument ready to cut, but first see if the abscess is warm, relaxed and soothed.
Then make the patient sit facing the sun, and let their head be in your hand, and open their mouth and take the instrument between your hands, and press down on the tongue with it.
And let it be of silver or thin steel like a knife:
As you press the tongue down with this instrument and see the abscess, take a lancet and put it into the almond (tonsil) and pull hard on it as much as you can.
and do not handle anything from the cloths with it, then apply the cautery instrument, of which this is the form, that it seems one force; and all its edges are curved, and one edge against the other, and they are very sharp, and it is made of Indian iron or steel.
And if you do not have this instrument present, take pliers as they are of this form: And it should be sharp on one side, and blunt on the other.
And when you have applied one of the almonds, then apply the other according to the same manner, and after the incision, gargle the patient with hot, sharp water and easy, and if bleeding occurs, then gargle the patient with hot water, or decoctions of cooked pomegranate seeds, or myrtle leaves, and similar things, until the blood is stemmed. Then let it heal until it is sound.
And sometimes other abscesses are born in the throat than the two almonds, so treat them like the two almonds.
And I treated a woman for an abscess that was born inside her throat, namely an abscess of small size.
And it had almost completely closed off the whole throat so that the woman could not breathe through the passage which was blocked, and she could neither eat nor drink, and would have died if she remained in that state for one or two days.
And the abscess was so high up that he had to put two reins through the two holes of the nose.
I hastened immediately, and put a poultice in it, then I drew out the pus freely and drew out a large portion of pus.
Then I did another poultice in the other opening where it was born, and opened her mouth and pressed her tongue.
Afterwards I put poultices on these abscesses, and squeezed out some of it, and only a little blood came out. and thus was the conduit of her throat unstopped, and she began now to drink water and then wine, and did not cease to cut from that abscess for a long time;
and the abscess would grow again, and fill the place which I had emptied, until it became very large;
then I lanced it and cauterized it inside the throat: thus it ceased to grow;
and I departed from these parts, and only God knows what happened to her after me.
of the eye
When the cold descends to the eye, and it is swollen and elongated, it is called "perpendicular";
and if it is below large and round, it is called "eye".
When it is cured as we have said in the division, and the cure does not help, and you see that the sore abscess is quieted, and it is subtle, then you must cut it;
and the one which is round assembled and is not long; and it is of blood color or brown color or black, then you must avoid its incision. For there is great danger for the sick person.
Therefore, when you see it according to the manner that I have said, by its whiteness and length, you should make the patient sit in front of the sun, and press their tongue against the instrument which we have mentioned before; then insert the lancet into the eye, and draw it downwards, and hold it with one of the two instruments that I mentioned for the incision of the two almonds.
And you must not cut away more than the superfluity which is beyond the natural boundary;
for if you cut away more, it will greatly grieve the voice and speech;
and after the incision, use what we have said in the incision of the two almonds, and dress it until it is healed.
And if the patient is afraid of the cautery, it is fitting that you apply something to numb the fear during cauterization.
And the manner of the cautery is sharp and pointed. And let the patient put his head in clean water, and then press his tongue to the instrument that we have said or chapter of cautery, and seize it with sharp, lively tongs, so that it is not too thick nor too clear; And apply the point of this instrument, which has this form:
And it has on its head a hair or where one puts the medicine, like the hairs of a spoon, and place the instrument on all the medicine above the eye;
And let the patient lie on his side so that his saliva and mucus run from his mouth into the medicine, so that it does not descend into the throat, and cause harm.
Then hold your hand on all the medicine and press it on the eye, for a quantity of half an hour, until you see it soften and the stinging of the medicine is appeased;
And if you see it, take cotton and wrap it around any instrument, and moisten the cotton in medicine, and push the instrument all the way into the cotton along its length until the cotton ignites on the edge.
And do this often until the cautery is perfect, then let it dry and apply it after four or five days.
And if you need to renew the cautery with medicine, do so again and after the cautery wipe it around the edge with cotton dipped in butter, and clean what is around the medicine.
And let it be treated with cold water, and be healed with gargles until it is cured.
This treatment is safer than incision or cautery.
If it is cured with fumigation according to this method, take calament and hyssop and origanum and rue and chamomile and wormwood and similar herbs, and gather them all or some of them in a pot, and add water, and boil.
and let the pot be well glued with strong earth, and let the pot have the instrument stuck in it according to this manner: And it should be of silver or steel, and let one of the heads be put in the mouth of the sick person so that the vapor rises to the eye through the cane, as long as the eye is mortified;
then repeat often, until the eye dries, and be careful not to do this at the beginning of the arrival of a hot abscess, for many things happen; and do not do this except when the hot abscess is declining.
And if this instrument is not present, take a cane and put in the head a bit of egg white, so that the mouth of the sick person is not too hot; for the egg white does not make the vapor burden the mouth, and it is a good cure together with safety.
Many times a bone or fishbone, or something else, gets stuck in the throat.
So it is necessary that you draw out what you can see, and press the tongue to the sun with the whole instrument, so that you see the thing move.
And what you do not see and is lodged in the throat, it is necessary that you make the patient vomit so that the meat is cooked in the stomach. Perhaps the thing will come out by vomiting.
Or if the patient has swallowed a piece of sponge, or a piece of navel, or a lettuce root, or a piece of stale bread. And tie a thread to the sponge, and then swallow it. And when it arrives at its place, it will come loose, and then you will draw it out forcefully.
and if it does not come easily from what we have said, then take an instrument of lead according to this form:
And let the instrument be curved at the head so that it can more easily enter the throat, and have the head raised upward; and be careful not to touch the epiglottis, lest it cause his death, nor push any bone inside;
and it is better that the patient pushes the instrument in, so that he knows where the thing is located; if it goes down, or if he pulls it out forcefully and evenly with all the instrument until it comes loose.
from the vein of the throat
Sometimes medicine alone is enough for a remedy, as I have said in the division on the treatment of remedies; and when this does not help, then look into the patient's throat in the sunlight, and press their tongue with the instrument that I have described for you.
And if you see the sinew, if it is grasped by all its small hooks, or with delicate tongs that are suited for this.
And if that does not work, take a dog's cane and put it in the patient's throat, then push or shove the end of the cane with a hot iron, and do this often. And keep the patient warm every day.
Then take a full vial of cold water, and work the mouth open, and put it in your mouth all at once, and move it around in your hand often; And as soon as the bone feels the cold, it will fall back into place.
And if it does not fall back into place as we have said, then fumigate the patient with asafoetida, with the instrument that I have mentioned in the fumigation of the eye;
Do this many times, for it will fall back into place without delay.
And the manner of fumigation is that you take a pot in which there are live coals, and it be covered with a cloth pierced in the middle, and the head of the instrument be put through that hole;
Then you put in your fumigation, and the patient puts the head of the cane in his mouth, and closes his mouth so that the smoke does not escape, but comes up to the bone.
And the wound will now heal, and if it does not close, begin fumigation many times.
And the patient suffers thirst, and eats salty things and such, and does not drink water.
And then it will be necessary that she be healed by this treatment.
And the shape of the instrument with which one treats the wound, if it can be seen, resembles curved tongs to enter the throat. And it has the appearance of a beak of a sewing needle, and it has the roughness of a file, so that what it takes, it cannot let go.
Many types of abscesses are, according to what memory comes here after one and another in this book, and they are diverse in perforation and size.
and it is in two ways one of which is in its own likeness, and of that which it holds moisture.
And the second manner is for the boils when they are on the body.
For abscesses of the head are different from those of the buttocks, and abscesses in fleshy areas are different from those that come in joints, and each has its own judgment in the work.
And if to abscesses one should not pierce, as long as the belly is healed according to its fulfillment;
and if to such as it befits to pierce when they are ripe, and do not die according to their fulfillment, like abscesses which are near joints.
For when abscesses come near joints, and they are left until they are ripe around it, by chance the ligament and nerve of the joint may be corrupted, which is the cause of contraction in that limb.
Where the abscess is near the principal limb, and if you delay the perforation until it is healed, it will harm the principal limb;
or where it is near the foundation, if one pierces it even when it is healed;
and it does not behoove that you pierce an abscess ripe without complete digestion, except that which is near the foundation, lest it rot through and through, and be lengthened within, and a fistula arises; and cannot heal greatly.
And you must know the time for the perforation of the abscess which is dangerous according to its completion, and that is when the pain is relieved, and the departure of fever, and the decrease of pain and redness, and from the softening and sharpening of the head of the abscess, and the other signs;
and you must make the perforation where the most dependent part of the abscess is, and where it appears to move;
and the perforation should be along the length of the body, and if the abscess is in the hands or feet, or at joints and nerves and arteries, it should be made in all their equals where there is no danger of a tear. In those that bend, according to the position of that limb.
And when an abscess is in fleshy tissue, it is best that you leave the opening until it is confirmed in complete digestion, as we have said.
For if you pierce it before this time, the poison will spread along the body, and it will be filled with a lot of filth; and perhaps the lips and the depth of it harden.
And if there is an abscess that needs to be pierced according to the breadth of the body, according to what the limbs require.
And it is fitting that you administer small abscesses, small perforations; and in large abscesses, large perforations, and many fissures according to the appearance of the size of the abscess;
and if there are such abscesses where it is fitting to cut out the core, and cover; when it has become as yellow as drapery, and is mortified, then it is fitting to do as one does with boils:
and if there are such that are split into three angles, and if there are such of which one cuts as the leaf of myrtle, like abscesses of angers;
and if there are such where one makes a round incision, and other incisions and similar cuttings.
Those who have no head, such as a superficial abscess, it is fitting that you pierce it completely;
and when the abscess is large and it has gathered much pus, and you pierce it, do not draw out all the pus at that hour, but draw out a part; then repack the abscess until the next day, then draw nothing further. Do this many times one after the other, until all the pus has come out;
Likewise if the patient is weak in constitution, or a woman bearing child, or small children, or old men decrepit. For the entrails often leap with the expulsion of the bowels, so that by chance the patient dies, and you are not to blame.
Therefore avoid this chapter with great caution, and when you have pierced your abscess, if you wipe the wound, and look to see if the wound of the abscess is small; and if it is a clean cut, apply bandages of linen or fine cotton. and if it is a large abscess with many openings, it is necessary that you place a bandage in each one so that they come together.
and if you have covered a part of the skin in the abscess and have sewn it around, it is necessary that you fill it with old cotton or linen cloth without moisture, and bind it until the third day.
Then the bone should be set and treated with ointment until it is healed.
And if bleeding occurs during your work, apply cold water that is sharp and clear, moisten the cloth, and place it on the bleeding site many times.
And if the discharge of blood persists, apply dressing and treatment, and the powders that I have mentioned in this book, and if it is the time of winter, and the wound or abscess is very sensitive, then you must place bandages and cloths softened in wine and hot oil.
and if it is in summer, and the flesh is strong, then you should put damp cloths soaked in vinegar and oil, or in wine and cold oil, until the third day, as we have said;
and then open the abscess, wipe it clean, and treat it as is necessary until it is healed.
And this is something that must be universally known in the treatment of abscesses:
I have told you how one should proceed before treating abscesses, and see this chapter.
When boils come on the head, they are like little knots that are in rags, just as the seam of a chemise, and many look alike.
There are some that are fatty and others that have moisture as well as pus;
and if there are those that are hard and stony at the edges, there is no doubt that the artery does not oppose it.
And the work of the waist is such that you must test all instruments which are called “entromissoire”, from which the form comes after this, what it contains.
For if it contains moisture, let him pass a long cloth over it.
And when the moisture is drained, do not leave any skin containing that moisture exposed, for it will return if you leave anything.
Then dip cotton in Egyptian ointment, if it is present; If not, in water and salt, and apply it to the wound, and leave it until the next day; and do this for what remains overnight.
And then begin again with the cotton, as before, on the second day, and the third, until you know well that it does not remain overnight;
then treat the wound with ointment as appropriate, until it is healed.
And if the abscess holds a thick pus, then cut it according to this form for a long time; and drain your lancets, and flay it from all sides, and apply all your treatment to draw out the pus where it lies;
and if the artery opposes you, do as I told you afterward.
And also do this for an abscess if it is pierced, and from the waist and from the healer as I told you.
And the incision on the abscess pierces and moistens, it is lighter, because they are drops of blood. And if some of these abscesses or boils have no moisture, and of those was one I lanced on the head of an old woman;
and I found the abscess just like a hard stone, rough and white, and it could not be broken; and if one had struck it, they would have done as much harm as striking a stone.
For other boils that come on the head, such as those which come on the heads of children and at the roots of the ears, the opening should always be made in the lowest place, so that the pus can flow out;
and the treatment should be done accordingly.
Many times this abscess occurs in the neck and below the armpits, and in the groin, and sometimes it comes in other parts of the body, and they are many and interconnected with one another.
And every scrofula is properly within its own rib, just as the wart and the boil on the head, as we have said; and the resemblances of these scrofula are many
and the resemblances of these scrofula are many There are some which contain moisture, and if there are malignant ones which do not want to obey health.
in that one then which you see of good disposition to touch, and resembles the color of the body, and moves from every part and is not near the nerves of the neck or the artery or the vein, and is not deep;
it is fitting that you cut it above, and flay it from every part, and extend the two edges of the sore to one-quarter inch, if you need, as we have said in abscesses of the head;
and treat it little by little, and be sure that you do not cut the nerve or vein, and let the scalpel neither be blunt nor too sharp, so that the hands do not slip, and do not see too far ahead, lest you cut what you should not.
And if you cut the vein or artery, and it does not let you work, then put vitriol powder into the wound, or some powders that stop blood, and remove the wound; And leave it until the abscess is calmed and the wound softened, and begins to rot.
And when the blood has been drained off, return to your work until you have completed it.
Then let your thumb indicate if there are any small scrofulas, and cut and clean them.
And if there is a large vein at the root of the scrofula, it is not right to cut that scrofula at its root. Rather tie it with a strong double thread and let it fall away by itself without harm.
Then apply the wound with old cotton dipped in Egyptian ointment, then bandage it.
And if you cut out all the scrofula, it is necessary that you bring together the two edges of the wound and sew them up now, since there is no longer any excess due to the size of the scrofula. It is necessary for you to understand how to cut the root of it, and draw force, and sew as we have said.
It is necessary for you to understand how to cut the root of it, and draw force, and sew as we have said. Those scrofulas that hold superfluity, pierce them where they appear dead;
and pierce it as the one mentioned before, depending on it, then administer tents with ointment and similar things so that it corrupts what remains of the corruption. and when the wound is well cleansed, apply an ointment promoting flesh, until it heals.
The ancients said and spoke of the cutting of the throat; but I never saw anyone in our land who did it, and this is the writing of their words.
For those who have a squint, it is fitting that the fissure in the throat called the "epiglottis" be scraped; and this should not be done for them, because all the veins and the pores of the patient are closed to those who have a hot abscess in the mouth, or in the throat or in the almonds.
When the illness is in the throat, it is necessary to lift the epiglottis to prevent death from strangulation.
It is therefore fitting, when we wish to cut the epiglottis, that we cut it below three circles or four, a small incision across, between the two circles or according to the amount of the incision in the soft palate, not in the cartilage;
And those are suitable for the cutting of the epiglottis because there is no cartilage and the vessels are long to inquire.
And if the master is fearful, it is fitting that he extends the skin of the throat to all its extent, then splits the flesh as far as it reaches the channel. And avoid the blood vessels, if you see any, and then cut the syfac as we have said;
and it is demonstrated by the section of the phlegm of the channel that flows out through the place that is broken, and by the absence of the voice.
And leave the wound open a while.
And when the hour has passed in which we doubt strangulation, bring together the two lips of the wound of the flesh and sew it all alone without the cartilage.
Then administer medicines which cause flesh to grow, until it is healed.
Albucasim says that one should not do this until the throat is completely torn open, and the patient is judged to be dead, and the fault lies with the windpipe. Then cut the epiglottis so that the patient can breathe, and he breathes through the wound, and thus is kept from death.
And because the ancients commanded to leave the wound open until the evil of the disease has passed, and it passes in three days or four. Then they commanded to sew the wound and clean it, until it was clean.
And I will tell you what I have seen. I saw that a young woman took a knife and stabbed it into her throat, and cut part of the channels of the lung.
And I was called to heal her, and I found her as dead.
I discovered the wound, and found the blood which had issued from it, and although it had not yet pierced a vein nor gone further than the throat, the veins were weak through the wound.
I hurried and sewed the wound, and I cleaned it until it was healed.
And it happened to the maiden that she became hoarse of voice, and afterwards returned to her usual state.
Therefore I say that in the cutting of the epiglottis there should be no fear.
This abscess is called “hernia of the throat,” and is a large abscess in the color of jaundice, and occurs mostly in women.
And it occurs in two ways: natural, and accidental.
Where the natural has no cause.
And the accidental is according to two ways, of which one is similar to fat boils, and the other way is similar to an abscess that comes from us of the artery. And there should be fear, and it is not fitting to work with fire except on that which is small, and test and examine at every opening: if you find it as soft as our butter and cannot flow through any vein, cut off the top as we cut noses and treat all its hairs if there are any. and bandage it well from the start, and heal it as is appropriate until it is perfectly healed.
Many ways are known to us of which I will say all the resemblances;
and it is fitting that I state all the differences that exist between a vein and an artery.
I say that an artery is hot and feverish as long as the boiling is not past and the decay is completed. Then the fever and heat subside.
A vein has neither heat nor fever nor pain and contains its own juice which is its proper sac and is according to the color of the body, and it begins as a small stream and grows larger.
and they are according to two appearances, either greasy or moist, and many of their colors are as I have said in the division.
It is necessary, when you come to the treatment of a wound, that you probe and inquire first of all with any instrument called an "introducer," according to its shape or chapter which follows afterward.
And the manner of inquiry into abscesses of us is that you take the most moist place that you find in the abscess, and turn your two fingers little by little, until you know that the instrument has pierced the core, then according to the size of the abscess.
Then extract the trocar, and take care in this that it does not go further.
If moist matter runs out, whatever color it may have, let the patient do as I have said for other abscesses;
and if after the trocar no moisture comes out, know that it is greasy, so let the patient do in a cross shape, and take it with forceps, and slightly scratch it on each side, and guard the skin where it lies so that you draw it healthy with the new one.
and if you cannot pull it out whole, pull it out piece by piece so that nothing remains.
For if anything remains, the nose will return many times;
and if a piece remains and it does not bother him, apply the wound with some sharp corrosive powders, and extract the wound, and put soothing things on the hot abscess, and treat it with other remedies until it is healed;
and if the nose is large, sew the two edges of the wound and treat it with what promotes flesh.
and if the pulsating vein opposes you or another hastens you and applies the place of crushed vitriol, and leaves it there for two or three days, until the wound festers, and relieves the boiling of blood; then return to cut what remains in the nose.
See here the forms of instruments for insertion, and they are of three manners: large and medium and small;
and there are three square ones which are called “albaret”, and one which is called “breb”, and there are three manners of them: large, medium, and small, to encircle the abscesses of fistula;
and they are also like the needles with which we sew charms, and are made of citrine brass, or iron, or silver, and those that are yellow are worth more, and are better tested by black lead for encircling the curves of fistula;
and they are of three manners: large, medium, and small, according to the quantity of the width of the perforations.
The forms of the cannulae are of much similarity, as you see here:
and if they are of three kinds with two curves;
and if they are of three curves, and are also of three kinds;
and if they are of two curves, and one curve only, and are of three kinds;
and all these are necessary in their place.
The head of these with which one cuts are sharp, and there are some which do not cut more forcefully than from one side, from which one scrapes the flesh, for this reason one does not cut the vein nor the nerve;
and of these are the small hollow-handled instruments held in hand, so that the patient does not notice them when opening abscesses;
and they are of three kinds: Great, small, and medium, as you see;
And do not use them except in fleshy places, such as legs, arms, breasts, and joints, and similar places;
And never make another instrument small, resembling a pestle's head, according to this shape, with which one cauterizes blood: and put it back in place which heals by joining of the veins, and arteries, and never again according to this great form:
Sometimes men's breasts swell when they begin to corrupt, so much so that they resemble women's breasts;
and remain unsightly and swollen, and those who wish to cure them, if it is necessary, must do so according to the form of this line .b. up to .g.: Then scrape off the fat, and fill the wound with medicine mixed with charcoal, then bring together the two edges of the wound with stitches, and treat it until it is healed;
and if the breast hangs low, and is loosened by its size as it happens with women, then make two cuts in two ribs above, through two similar incisions. so that one is held to the other at the end of one and the other, so that the largest line contains the smaller according to this form, from this line .b. up to the line .g.; then flay the skin that is between the two lips, and remove the fat, and apply what we have said about stitching and powders, and what is necessary in the treatment, until it is healed;
and if it is not healed, or the incision is not entirely made, because the patient does not want to rest, or due to the flow of blood, then you must fill the wound with softened cotton soaked in corrosive ointment; And leave it until it fattens with marrow and grease, then treat it until it is healed.
These abscesses that come under the armpits are kinds of hard scrofula where there are ribs, and some contain moisture.
Therefore those who contain moisture must be cut according to this form, from line .b. to line .g. And when all the pus that is in the abscess is emptied, then apply the wound with old cotton and leave it until the next day; then remove all the cotton and treat it with an ointment suitable for it until it is healed.
And if the abscess is similar to scrofula, then cut it as we have said for cutting scrofula, and if the wound goes inwards, then apply cautery as we have said before.
When the artery is severed and the skin above it is sewn together, there often come abscesses, and the same thing happens with a swollen vein and an abscess;
and if the one who knows cuts it when it is for the artery, the abscesses are long and straight; And when you feel it with your fingers, you feel separation;
and when it is for the vein, it appears round and fiery.
And it is folly to cut this abscess, especially when it is under the armpits and at the angles or on the neck and in many other places, and it is very large. Therefore it is fitting to avoid treatment with iron, and the one who is in charge must also avoid it, and for the one who has swelling from an artery that passes beneath the skin along its length;
Then work the incision as if making a notch, and neatly separate the artery from the surrounding tissues, until it is exposed.
Then insert a needle beneath it, and make it pierce through to the other side, and remove the artery with a doubled thread in two parts, according to what I have taught you in the extraction of the two arteries that are in the temples.
Then prick the area between the two ligatures with an introcuter until all the blood that is there comes out, and the abscess is released.
Then apply a dressing that promotes healing, as long as the ligatures hold. Then treat it with an appropriate ointment until it is healed.
And if the abscess is located near the vein, it is necessary that you hold in your hand what you can grasp from the abscess along with the skin, then insert a needle beneath the area you are holding, and make it pierce through, and thread a doubled thread so that you pull it from the other side. Then tie the abscess, as I have told you, with thread from one of its two sides to the two bones.
And if you doubt that the thread will not come loose, put another needle through all the thread below the entire abscess at the incision of the first needle, and pull out the threads in four places.
Then cut the abscess until the excess comes out, then cut the excess from the heart and leave what is tied.
Then put a cloth softened in wine and oil on it, then give him treatments of bandages and ointments until he is healed.
Just as abscesses come in arteries and veins, abscesses also come to nerves when they are strained, or from too much labor, and similar things.
And this happens most often in the shoulders and elbows and in all places where there are joints, and it is a festering sore, and its color resembles the color of the body, and it is in several conditions without pain.
and when it is extracted formed, if the patient feels pain, and is not entirely well in the body, but below the heart;
and moves well in all directions, and does not go forward or backward, nor below nor above, and the one that is in joints should not be covered by iron: for fear it might cause contraction; and those that are on the head or forehead, make the skin with a spatula.
and those that are on the head or forehead, make the skin with a spatula. If the abscess is small, take it with tweezers and cover it at its root;
and if it is large, suspend it with an awl and scarify it, then the surgeon assembles the wound with sutures, and heals it until it is healthy.
Sometimes it occurs in bellies and nowhere else, and is a disease called “fungus” because of its resemblance to ashes, and the root is subtle, and the head large;
and there are small ones and very large ones;
and I saw a man who had two in his belly which were more like mushrooms than anything else, and there was no difference, they were white, and had small roots, and were easily split open, and moisture ran from them immediately.
I weighed them and found one weighed eighteen ounces, and the other six ounces, and in operations when cutting if you see that the patient is moist, and the color of the artery is white and moist and has fine roots; if the cut is made with a scalpel, and there are cauteries ready.
if the cut is made with a scalpel, and there are cauteries ready. For at the waist there often comes excessive blood flow, and if it does not stop, hurry then and cauterize.
and if you see the patient faint and fearful of the iron incision, then take a well-made thread of silk, and tie the artery as we have said, and leave it for two days;
and then hold it tightly, and do not cease to pull the thread of flax until it catches the bone, and moves through it.
And if the roots are large, there is fear of catching them immediately for the abdomen, but you can well catch half, then cauterize it so it does not grow back;
Then treat the wound, and be careful not to catch the tendon which is of a reddish color and poor sense and milky appearance.
For this is an ulcerated abscess, and I will come to the treatment of ulcers later.
When the arm is strong If the swelling comes from cautery of a wound or a split in the flesh, and is on the belly and among some bowels, as it happens in other ruptures, or from blood that flows from veins or arteries according to what is before it, or from windiness.
And if it is from a rupture of the flesh and by the flow from the bowels, then the color of the abscess resembles the color of the body, and it is a light thing without pain, and opens from various outlets. And if it is due to the issue of the intestine, then it is more diverse, and when it is pressed at its hips if it rebounds, and then returns, and by chance if it is tightened, and greatly enlarges at the entrance of the bath and through strenuous effort.
And if it is due to moisture, it is an easy thing, and opens well when you press it with your hand, but do not force it.
And if it is due to blood, it opens by these signs: the abscess is large and hard, and it is fixed according to a certain quantity. And if it is due to windiness, it is soft to the touch, and the work is such that you look to see whether the appearance is due to the blood of an artery or vein, or windiness.
And if it is due to windiness, it is soft to the touch, and the work is such that you look to see whether the appearance is due to the blood of an artery or vein, or windiness. Then you must let the cure continue. For there is doubt and fear, as I told you in the chapter on abscesses, for the artery and for the vein.
And if the appearance is due to the intestines or the bowels, then it is fitting that you instruct the patient to hold his breath, and be extended straight, then press all around the arm. Then command him to grasp firmly between your hands, then go around the place that you have pressed with all of the spatulum, then extend half of the abscess above at all the great one. Then bind it with a strong thread or a cord of strong silk tightly, and let the knot be secure.
Then work on half of the abscess stretched out over the ligature, and insert your index finger, and press the intestines. If you find it caught by the ligature, loosen it, and push the intestine out behind the belly.
And if you find the pus, take it with forceps and cut off the excess.
And if the artery or vein opposes you, wind carefully around it, then return to your work and take two needles, insert them with strong thread, and push the two needles around what you have already done, in a cross shape so that you pierce.
Then draw the abscess in four directions along the needles, and if you see it, remove the needles and leave the wound open until it dries, and let the dead flesh come out on its own. When you cut it when it is thin and rotten, then cure what is needed, and empty the abscess as we have said;
When you cut it when it is thin and rotten, then cure what is needed, and empty the abscess as we have said; And extract the blood or moisture that you find, then treat the place as needed, and stitch the place.
Where a sore We have said in the division the resemblances of a sore, and how one should work by medicine, and how one should avoid the treatment with iron;
and say that a sore spreads in the marrow, and great caution is needed in its cure, and they said the ancients that when sores are in places where one can shave them off like a sore which is on the breasts, and on the thigh, and in similar places, one should remove it all when it is at the beginning;
No one ever heals before me.
And the operations, when it is in place or can be removed, as we have said, are that you purge the patient of black bile several times.
Then make him fast if he has manifest repletion, then put the patient in a good place to perform the operation;
then shave your instruments or lancets, and the hair from all sides, and the bone from all sides without leaving anything;
and let the blood flow freely, and cleanse the place well with your hand or something else, and if the bleeding makes you oppose the incision of the artery or vein, then cauterize it until the blood is stopped. Then cure it with another cure until it is healed.
Of dropsy We have said in the division the likenesses of dropsy, and in what manner the gathering of water is made, and the signs of each likeness, and the cure that is made by medicine, and that which is cured by iron:
and one should not touch it with iron in these two cases: that is to say, tympanites and iposarche, for they are deadly things.
Therefore, when you treat this type of dropsy which is called “broken” and the treatment does not work, see if the patient is weak, or if they have another illness besides dropsy, such as cough and loosening of the bowels and similar things. Do not touch it with iron, for there is doubt;
And if you see the patient is of strong constitution and they have only dropsy, and they are not too young nor too old, then you should proceed as follows: Lay the patient straight on your hands, and have the assistant press on the belly from below, at the lowest part of the bladder. Then take the sharp-pointed spatula in this way: And let it be cutting of two parts. to the point, and however it is not so deep that it can reach the intestine when put in, and cannot be bleached.
Then look if the dropsy is directed towards the intestines: if it is necessary that you split in its lower part three finger widths straight down above the hipbone; and if the dropsy is due to liver disease, your incision should be on the left side of the abdomen three finger widths.
and if it is for the spleen, it should be on the right, and it is not necessary that the patient lies on the incision so that the excess fluids do not flow to the weak area.
Then pierce all the skin with the instrument and push it in, and lift your hand to all the spatulas between the skin and the fascia as much as when scraping off the quantity of a fingernail or so.
Then pierce the syfac until the spatula reaches the eighth place, and that is the place of the sharp point, then hold it firm, and push this instrument, which has the following shape: And it resembles a slender silver cane, and is made of horn or light wood, and has a small hole at the bottom. And on one side are three holes. And two on the other side, and one on another.
And the point is cut like a quill, and that is the shape of the incision with which scribes cut the quill:
At the top is the handle so that when the instrument comes to the point, it now descends onto the instrument.
Empty it then halfway or a third, because if you empty more than is necessary at that time, the patient may die due to the release of his spirit from the body, or he will fall into a stupor, or approach death.
but according to the void quantity of its virtue, and according to what the patient's disposition signifies, and their pulse;
then treat the instrument and hold the point, and it is now held for the heart which pierces the pertussis that is on the syfac, of which I have spoken, that you pierce according to this manner;
then start the instrument the next day, if you see the patient suffering thus, and treat a small amount of the point;
do this every day, and be careful not to press while it remains but a prick of a point.
And if you doubt the patient, and leave much of a point, let the cure be hot sand or a warm bath and sweat, and sunbathing, and have them drink plenty; and the cure of drying medicines until he is healed, and cauterize on the stomach and on the liver and on the spleen after the extraction of the arrow, as I have said before.
Sometimes children are born without a hole in their penis, or the hole is small, or it is not in its place.
If it is necessary as soon as possible, so that it does not pierce all the marrow very subtly according to this form:
then put or make a small plug of lead, and tie it and leave it like this for three days or four and when he wants to urinate, remove the plug, and urinate, and then put it back;
and by chance none is needed, for the strong urine which comes will not leave it closed.
Those whose openings are small, if they are treated with a clove of garlic, as we have said, it will widen.
Those who do not have the passage in their place are wretched, for none are born who have a passage at the head of the penis, so they cannot urinate before lifting their penis up; and they cannot ejaculate because the matter cannot come up to the urethra, and this is a bad illness.
And the manner of the work is such that the patient lies often on his back, then they extend the head of the penis and the foreskin as the size of a quill, so that the hole pierces in the middle, as it should be;
And beware of the flow of blood which comes many times, and if it happens, use a styptic to stop the bleeding, and dress the wound until it is healed.
of the boils of the penis Many times these pustules come on the penis, and they are an unsightly appearance of flesh;
and there are malignant and benign ones;
it is necessary that you take them with a subtle lancet, and cut and clean them all, then put softened cotton with Egyptian ointment on top; then dress it with diachylon ointment until it is healed.
And if the ulcer is malignant, of a foul color and discharging, then you must apply cautery to it.
When you have caught it, and if the albathed is at the top of the penis, and has part inside the skin and part outside, then it is necessary that you remove the albathed which is inside first. And when it is soldered, so the cure is outside.
For when you cure it together, if the head of the penis is not well secured so that it is not pierced, and blackness and corruption comes in its penis and groin;
it is necessary to cut away everything that is black and corrupted, then bind it with a plaster of honey and flour which is made of pomegranate rind and vinegar, then cure it with other cures until it is healed.
And if a flow of blood comes, then apply the crescent cautery according to this form:
Cauteries help in two ways together: That is to say, in the stopping of blood, and in corruption;
and if the head of the penis is corrupted and retracted, it is fitting that you apply or insert into the penis a cane of lead, and have the patient urinate through it.
and when the hairs grow around the head of the penis which happens to those who have not been circumcised, or there is a wound or an abscess, then it is fitting that you burn it off with a heated instrument, so that the bonds are loosened and the head of the penis is freed on all sides.
and if this is a difficult thing to do, it is fitting that you burn it off with a spatula at some point on the head of the penis and on the skin.
then carefully separate them between, and apply a fine linen cloth moistened in cold water so that it does not burn again.
Circumcision is not a loosening of continuity like the other wounds; However, when we perform this work of our own will, and especially on children, it is necessary that we make the best work, and the lightest for salvation.
I say that the ancients did not speak of the circumcision of their children, for they did not practice it in their law, and we have only what we have acquired by experience.
For I want most masters and surgeons who performed circumcision to do it in one go, with force, and with a single incision;
if the heart failed because there are two layers, and perhaps one cuts above and leaves the one below. Here it is necessary to cut again, and there is double pain, and for healing which is in two layers, the tip of the member is not well secured.
And for the healing of one layer, perhaps the iron slips and spoils the work, and many times are born so they do not need healing and I want it this way.
From the cleansing which is done with all the force of the thread I have found the benefit of experience for the force cuts precisely as well above as below.
For when you press your hand, if you cut equally in a straight line. But let the threads be well twisted around the leather;
And the manner of the first work is such that you make the child think, if they understand, that you are only doing it to tie the thread around the penis, and then you can reassure them in all the ways you can.
Then let it come out between your hands straight, and hold the force between your hands or under your feet so that the child does not see them, nor any of the instruments.
Then put your hand on the penis and blow or breathe on it, and pull it up until the head of the penis is in. Then cleanse it well of the dirt that has gathered there, then tie the place with a doubled thread, then tie it below the penis at the other tie.
Then cleanse it well of the dirt that has gathered there, then tie the place with a doubled thread, then tie it below the penis at the other tie. and hold it with your second finger to the pouch and the index finger, and grasp between the two ligatures, then lift the heart quickly from above and treat the head of the penis. then let the blood run drop by drop, for that is the best. and put powder on top and on top of the powder I drape it with a half of a cooked egg tempered with rose water, confit with good and fresh rose oil, and leave it on until the next day, and cure it with another cure as long as it is healed.
The form of forces in the world is this:
the two cheeks should be held and sharp, and the cheeks should also be as large as the handle equally.
The error of the world is when the hearts inside flee at the incision.
Therefore it is necessary that you extend it to your finger, just as pus forms an abscess;
And the cap similarly, and if you cannot hold it at your finger, then take tongs and hold the cap.
And if they exceed three days, and that which is beneath the foreskin is swollen, then leave it until the abscess under the foreskin is calmed, and lightly scrape it.
If the cap can be moved as you are able, and take care of the part of the foreskin, for it will do no harm.
Then cure the place of things within the wound with powder as we have said in our treatise on powders, and if the cap is too tight and goes up, it will do no harm.
Therefore cure it, as we have said, until it is healed.
Concerning the retention of urine
The retention of urine can be due to stones, or congealed blood, or a bowel obstruction, or a dead fetus, or similar things, as we have said in the division.
And if the urine is not released, and you see that the retention is due to a stone at the neck of the bladder, then it is appropriate for the patient to be bent over on his knees. And his feet should be placed on his back and he should stretch out his belly above his back, and restrain the patient from moving as much as possible. Then the neck of the bladder is constricted to force out the stone above so that the urine can be released.
And if it does not come out, as we have said, and the patient is in great pain, then you must administer an extraction using an instrument called a “syringe,” which has this form:
And it should be of finely wrought silver, light as a bird's feather. And the handle should be a palm and a half long, and fine at the top.
And the manner of removing urine is this: you take a doubled thread and tie a piece of wool or cotton to the top, and insert the top of the thread into the syringe;
and cut off the excess wool and insert it up to the top of the syringe. Then grease the syringe with oil or butter and yolk of egg, and have the patient sit on a seat, and anoint his bladder and penis with moist oil and olive oil and warm water;
then gently insert the syringe into the penis, until it reaches the root of the penis, then bend the penis upwards towards the buttocks;
Then insert the syringe forward until it reaches the bladder and feel the patient's urine flow into the empty vessel and this is not done according to this order unless the guide where it goes is crooked.
Then extend the thread to all the wool bit by bit and the urine follows the wool then extract it and make the urine flow.
And start the syringe again until the bladder is emptied and the patient is relieved.
When scorches or blood comes to the bladder, or putrefaction is gathered there, and you see sharp waters and medicines distilled, then do it with all the instrument which is called "clepsedre", and this is its form:
It is closed and if it has three openings: Two on one side and one on the other as you see.
And the leaves should be cut so that the medicine shortens it well without addition, if one can draw out the moisture and insert it when needed.
And when you see your medicines going into the bladder put the head of the catheter in the moisture and draw it out with what is inside.
If you treat the moisture at the joint, and then firmly bind the limb; The moisture will enter the limb, and will come to the bladder immediately, so that the patient will feel it;
And this is the form of a subtle enema with which one enemas the bladder:
And it is made of silver or pewter, and the head is higher;
And below at its side where the linen string is attached;
Then take a sheep's bladder and put the moisture which you saw used to enema the bladder into it, then tie it between the two breasts with a good strong string doubled over, and heat the whole thing on the fire;
Then insert the head of the enema into the urethra, and hold your hand on the bladder to keep all the moisture flowing until the patient feels that the moisture has arrived in the bladder;
and if you do not have a bladder, take a piece of parchment, and make a circle out of it, and pierce it round about. Then thread a strong cord through these holes, then assemble the circle as one assembles a ball, and put inside what you see of oil and moisture and vinegar, and tie it to the instrument.
And do as you did with the bladder, pressing with your hand until the moisture comes to the bladder.
of the stone
We have already said in the division the manners of stone, and its extraction together with medicines.
And I have said the difference between a stone lodged in the reins and all its signs, and in what kind of stone one should operate with a cut. and in the bladder, and in the penis;
and I will tell you openly and briefly.
I say that the stone which is lodged in the bladder happens more often to children, and it is a sign that the sharp point of the stone resembles the point of a needle in its subtlety.
And it opens wide and grates on the patient's penis, and penetrates it many times, and then it twists. And many of these points are dissolved;
And healing is easy for children until they are four years old, and it is very painful in older people, and is in the middle for those who are between youth and old age.
And the treatment is easier for those who have large stones than for those who have small ones.
And when we come to the cure, it is necessary first to cleanse the patient by enema, to draw out all the slime that is in the intestines. For it often hinders seeking the stone.
Then take the patient by the feet and push them down so that the stone descends to the bottom of the bladder, and it comes out sometimes from the top.
Then make him sit between your hands evenly balanced, and let his hands be under his thighs so that his bladder is entirely inclined downwards.
Then grasp it and touch it inside.
If you feel the stone in the space, then hasten now to cut upon the stone.
And if it does not move at all when touched, then moisten your index finger with oil from the left hand, if the patient is a woman, or your middle finger if the patient is a young man; and insert it into his fundament and grasp the stone, and when you feel it with your finger, bind it at the neck of the bladder.
Then press upon your finger and insert it to where you see you must cut.
And command the assistant to press the bladder with his hand and tell him to extend the testicles upwards with his right hand, and to remove the skin that is below the testicles in the area where the incision will be made.
Then he thrusts the spatulate instrument cutting, of which this is the form: And he makes an incision between what is between the thighs and the fundament, not in the middle but on the side of the left buttock;
and it should be straight above the stone, and your two hands should be right there at the fundament, and let the waist be wide externally and narrow internally, according to the quantity of the stone, not too large;
by chance, if the hand that is at the fundament presses so that it jumps out without effort;
and know that there are stones which have angles and margins: if it is grated to come out;
and there are some which are underneath, resembling a bean and round, of which the exit is easy.
Therefore when there are angles and a margin, make the size greater.
And if it does not come out, it is fitting that you extract it with tongs which are also like a file at the head, in order to pull out the stone so that it does not escape. Or you insert below it a subtle instrument bent at the head;
And if you cannot introduce it thus, enlarge the hole a little, and if the stone is not softened, extract it with vitriol.
And if there are more than one stones, insert the largest first into the neck of the bladder, then those on top, then force it through and the small ones afterwards if there are several.
And if it is very large, you must sew it, and make a larger wound. For two things happen to the patient: Either he dies, or his urine comes out immediately because the veins cannot join together.
But nevertheless, strive to draw it out or break it apart with forceps, so that you draw it out piece by piece.
And when you have completed your work, apply to the wound frankincense and aloe and dragon's blood, draw it out, and put on top a cloth softened in oil and wine, or in oil and rose water and cold water, to soothe the hot abscess. Then put the patient back on his neck, and do not untie the bandage until the third day.
And when you loosen it, if it rises very well in a place of oil and water, then cure it with diachylon ointment and basil ointment until it is healed.
And if abscesses come into the wound and corrosions, and blood clots in the bladder, and urine is retained by this, which is known in part to flow without a jump along with the urine. Then put your finger in the wound and draw out that blood, for if it remains, it will corrupt the bladder and rot it.
Then lift the wound with a sharp point and a needle and thread, and help it in all the ways you know, until it is healed;
And it is necessary that every hour that you treat it, you bind the two thighs together, and apply the medicines on the spot.
And if the stone is small, and it is lodged in the urethra, and stuck there, and the urine cannot pass; If the cure that I have just mentioned is done, then you are excused from cutting many times because of this treatment. I have already tried this myself.
Take an iron forceps according to this shape and let it have three angles fixed in the fire:
Then take a thread and tie it around the penis below the stone, so that it cannot move back into the bladder;
Then insert the borer into the penis lightly, until it reaches the stone; And turn the borer in your hand on the stone bit by bit, until you can pierce the stone through to the other side;
If urine comes soon, then press your hand on what remains of the stone that is inside the penis. If it is soon broken and jumps out with the urine, the patient is cured.
And if you cannot do this for any reason that prevents it, tie a thread under the stone and another above it, then cut the penis where the stone is between the two threads, then extract it forcefully, and untie the thread, and cleanse the congealed blood that is in the wound. And treat it until it is healed.
of the stone of women
It can happen that a stone is lodged in women, and if it happens sometimes, the treatment is difficult, and it is forbidden for three reasons:
One is that perhaps the woman is a virgin;
and the second is that one cannot find a woman who knows well how to reveal herself naked, especially when she is chaste.
And the third manner is such that by chance one cannot find a woman well-knowing in this art of hands;
and the fourth manner is such that the stone of the woman is more deeply set than the stone of the man, for which it is necessary to make a deeper incision, and there is great fear. And if necessity demands it, it is fitting that you take a midwife well-knowing, and one rarely finds her, and if you do not find her, do not cast in a subtle mirror;
and present a midwife well-versed in the lives of women, or a woman who knows part of the art, and command her to do what you command her from the inquiry into the stone; and look very well whether the woman is a virgin:
and look very well whether the woman is a virgin: then it is fitting for her to put her finger or foundation and seek the stone;
and if she finds it, she should constrain it below her finger, and recommend that she put her finger or the patient's hand, and wants and presses her left hand on the bladder.
If she finds it, it is necessary that she moves it quickly from the entrance of the bladder to below, as long as it comes to the root of the thigh;
then she presses on the stone in the root of the thigh against the middle of the buttock, where it is most easily moved, and feels the stone in that part; and does not move her finger above or below the stone, and let the size be at first small;
and does not move her finger above or below the stone, and let the size be at first small; then put the knife in the size, if you feel the stone, enlarge the wound as much as the stone can come out forcefully, and know that there are many kinds of stones:
This is to know, small and large and rough and smooth, long and round, and those that have veins.
if you know the resemblances to recognize the outcome
And if the vein goes away, put powdered vitriol on it, and hold it for an hour until the vein is extinguished.
Then return to your work while the stone is strong, and have the instruments that I told you about for extracting the stone from men to help you in your work.
And if the vein goes away and it is an artery that is cut, put powder on the area and bind it with bandages and cloths, and do not start again that day, and leave the stone and do not pull it out, for fear the patient might die. Then treat the wound.
And when the heat of the blood is calmed, and the pain subsides, you may return to your work, as long as the stone remains hard.
Ramices aqueous is nothing other than an accumulation of moisture or white phlegm, which is below the heart of the testicles and contains sperm.
and it is called "syfac," and never properly in the cloth of an egg, if one thinks that it is another egg; and it is the skin under the white syfac that we have said;
and this did not occur to us. And the formation of this branch is so weak that it comes to the joints, and is spread throughout the matter.
And never if it comes from percussion on the testicles, and this moisture has many colors: it is colored declining to jaundice, or it is without red, or black, or watery white, and this happens more;
and these are the signs to know this gathering, for if it is white syfac as we have said, it is a boil on the testicles; the sore is long as the shape of an egg, and does not open the testicles, because it has moisture all around.
And if there is moisture in the actual cloth, the abscess will return with a portion of the egg, and for this reason it is thought that it is another egg.
And if the moisture is between the skin of the testicles and the white sinew, then one feels it well.
Therefore, when you see that you know the color of the moisture, then try all the instruments, of which the form is described above. According to this which comes after the introducer, judge of what is within.
And when we cauterize it with iron, it is fitting that the patient be purged according to our power and the fullness of his body.
Then place him on his back, on something a bit high, and put many cloths under him;
Then sit on his left, and instruct the assistant to sit on his right, and extend the instrument to one of the two ribs near the testicles.
Then take the scalpel sharp and cut the skin of the testicles among them along the length down to the knife's point and let your incision be perfectly straight in dividing the skin of the testicles until white flesh, and flay it subtly according to the poor man.
Then pierce the white flesh clear with a sharp large hole and extract all the pus, and then put your ointments and raise the white flesh up.
And do not touch the heart of the testicles, but only the white flesh. Cut all or in parts immediately its side subtly, so that if you do not cut it wisely, the pus will return.
And if the testicle jumps out during your work, reset it in its place when you have completed the work on the white flesh.
Then join the two lips of the heart of the testicles with a suture, then treat it like other wounds until it is healed.
And if you find that the egg is corrupted by another disease, it is necessary that you tie the vessels that are suspensory, doubting the flow of blood.
Then cut the colon at all the suspensory points, and extract the egg, and treat it as we have said.
And if the sharp is assembled in two parts together, know that these are two branches. If you cut the other part as you did the first equally, then wipe away the blood, and put in the wound linen moistened in rose oil.
If you cut the other part as you did the first equally, then wipe away the blood, and put in the wound linen moistened in rose oil. And put another linen moistened in wine and oil, and put it on the two cuts, and put doubled cloths on top, and tie them up according to this form.
Then take two cloths, and fill them with shredded linen according to this appearance, and they are assembled by stitching in the throat of the breeches, and one of the ends takes hold on the foundation up to the back, and the other at the part by the handle.
and the other two chiefs on the two angles, and let all the restraint be assembled in the loop of the arm;
And never is this branch of the cautery medicated in place of an iron blade, but rather you take a delicate surgical cautery, and cut the skin of the testicles, and heat it as we have said, so that the white fascia containing the nerve is exposed.
If you take the cautery according to this form, and pierce that fascia with it, and flay it with this delicate hot cautery:
And cut in all the ways you can, until you have completely eradicated it.
and take care that the fire does not touch the testicle;
And know that this work is safer; and easier to manage bleeding, and milder than the operations of incision.
and if anything opposes you, whether an abscess or discharge of blood or something else, then treat what opposes you, according to what has been said before.
And if the patient is fearful and does not want to wait for this work because of its horribleness, then make a small perforation as I tell you, and it is that when you are well certain by the signs we have said that the aqueous humor is there, then have the patient sit on a raised seat; then pierce the abscess at the bottom part across the whole width, and make the perforation as long as the body;
and let the opening be wide so that all the humor can flow out;
then put cotton on the spot and bind it, and let the remaining humor flow out, then treat it until the wound is healed;
and if the white cloth does not let the pus out of the mouth of the wound, then it is necessary that you put a feather in it or an instrument with which one treats the dropsy, of which the shape is mentioned before;
and enlarge the sore, and know that the pus will return, and gather after six months or so; and when it is gathered as before, then the patient will spend his days.
Know that in the section of this branch there are many positions out of fear, for which it seems to me better to leave it.
and I will tell you the work and the likenesses of the abscess.
I say then that many abscesses come on the body, and likewise on the buttocks; and this is by many instances.
This is to know by excess of sharp and bitter humor, which is spread to the joints, or from impact.
And the color of the abscess according to the color of the body; And there is no pain found, and it is a grievous abscess;
And by chance there are some abscesses that are gray, porous and pierced, and of a dark color, and sometimes it comes from a new artery or swelling of a vein.
When it is from a new artery, it is known by the hot disposition of the abscess when you press it with your fingers. And it is not advisable that you touch it.
That which is made from swelling of a vein is known by its disposition upon the touch of the fingers and one can well make an incision upon this type and upon others. and it is that you cut the heart of the onions, then lift up the egg white, and draw it forth from the white sinew, and deliver the suspender from all parts of the egg.
If the egg white is already cooked with these new things, then it is fitting that you draw out the egg white, and cut it.
And if it is attached to the sinew, or in those that are inside the vessels, then it is fitting that you deliver all of that membrane, and cut it roundly.
And if the birth of the flesh is behind or elsewhere, it is necessary that you cut all of it and extract the egg as we have said.
And when your work is completed, apply the wound with wool moistened in rose oil and wine, then cure it with other remedies until it is healed.
This is an abscess wrapped in an envelope resembling a poppy seed pod, with the softening of onions, and the patient groans when he goes.
And the treatment of this illness is just as fearful as the one before, and nonetheless we will tell you its work, according to what the ancients did.
It is fitting that you make the patient sit on a raised seat, then put the suspensory from his testicles down to your thighs, to all the vessels that are near the penis, and tie them tightly.
Then take a sharp scalpel and cut through the vessels in a wide area until they are exposed, then flay from each side as we have said in the extraction of the arteries that are in the temples;
Then he puts in a needle with a doubled thread and ties it to the first place where the vein came out, and ties it straight across to the other end; Then he cuts them in the middle straight according to the length of the body, and draws out the corrupted humors;
then heals the wound as the others where we inject a bowel so that no vessel bursts that nourishes one of the testicles;
for by this no harm comes and if all the vessels come into view then it is necessary to draw the veins at all the vessels so that the bone does not lose its nourishment because of the incision of the vessels and they dry up and cannot be helped
The occurrence of this branch is by the section which comes or arises on the belly in the part of the groin so that the intestines descend from this rupture to one of the veins
and this rupture is either at the groin or from the extension of it and these two manners come from many causes
either from a blow, or a jump, or a struggle, or the lifting of something heavy and by similar things
and the signs when it is from the extension of the groin are that it happens little by little over a long time and does not come suddenly And the abscess is equalized up to the fundament, so that the pus follows the intestines.
And the signs are when it is a section of the fistula, that it brings at the beginning sudden pain, and there are various abscesses appearing underneath the skin nearby, and it is due to the exit of the intestine and the body's defenses against the fistula.
And never remove the intestines with the entrails, and it is retained there, and causes great pain to be suffered by the patient, especially when it is pressed.
And in these iron treatments due to fear, for which it is advisable to avoid them.
And the way of working is such that you instruct the patient to massage the intestines with his hand inside the wound, if he can enter; then it should be rubbed on its neck between your hands and loosen the thighs;
then extend the heart above, and scrape all the skin of the buttocks along the length; then put inside the lips of the waist one-inch incisions according to what you need to open the wound, and be such that the pus can come out;
then flay the pus that is under the skin of the buttocks, so that the white pus hard is uncovered on all sides;
then put your index finger in what follows the buttock, in what is between the white pus that is under the skin of the thigh, and between the second pus, and detach what is behind the thigh, and between the second pus;
and then place the left hand inside the testicles and extend the white cord upwards towards your left hand, and lift the egg towards all the white cord toward the waist; and instruct the minister to extend the egg upwards, and loosen what is behind the bandage;
and ask at your feet if there is any intestine wrapped around or hard white cord, and if you find none, push it into the belly below;
then take a needle with a large thread made of ten threads, and insert it into the back part of the cord, which is after the skin of the testicles; after the waist, then cut the heads that appear from the threads, as long as there are four threads; then assemble them one on top of the other in a cross shape, and tie the cord, which we said is below the skin of the testicles, with a strong tie of two parts; Then wrap the head of the shoulder with threads, and tie it in two parts, so that none of the vessels that nourish it can enter, lest an abscess arise. And place a second tie above the first one, twice as long as that, and after these two ties leave two fingers' breadth below the pit of the chest. And afterward all the rest according to the roundness which an egg carries.
Then cut into the part below the skin of the chest, as much as the sinews allow, and the gut, as we have said before.
Then apply wool moistened with oil to the wounds, and place it upon them, and then apply the tie that we have mentioned. And never cauterize white flesh as we have said, after the incision, for fear of stopping the flow of blood. For this happens often, and leave the tie until it oozes through.
and if it delays in the chair, so be it raised with hot water, and put on what we have said, as long as it discharges;
then treat the wound with another treatment, until it is perfectly healed.
of a fleshy hernia
In this branch I never saw anyone who dared to make the cure with iron.
And the ancients said that it is made as the branch which is together with the vine, in such a way that you tie the vessels, after the incision on top lightly underneath;
then cut it in half, and treat the abscess with what works, until the vessels discharge;
and treat it as we have said, until it is healed.
Sometimes a rupture comes in the angles, as we have said, and opens the limbs;
and none of the intestines are drawn out as coils, and if any are drawn out, it is bad, and repair every hour;
And if it remains too long in this position, the wound or fistula grows, until the intestines protrude.
And this happens by the extension of the fistula which is at an angle, as we have said, for it is stretched, then softened and swollen, and opened.
And the treatment is by cautery, as we have said before.
And sometimes it is cured with iron in this manner: And that the patient lies often on his back between your hands, then mark the place of the rupture swollen for three fingers wide.
And then extract the fistula which is below the skin that has become accustomed to it, then take a thread and place it on the spot apparent of the fistula.
And press at the depth of the belly, then sew the two apparent places of the fistula onto the head of the thread, and sew one and the other.
Then extract the head of the right [bone], and do not cover the bone nor extend the bone or anything else, as I have shown you in the treatment of the fracture of the intestines; Then treat it by the treatment of wounds.
Then treat it by the treatment of wounds. And when you cut the threads, if the patient cleanses and heals the wound until it is healed.
The syfac is constrained, and has no appearance in the fracture, and the cauteries are muted in this place, and closer to salvation.
from the softening of the skin of the testicles
Many times the skin of the testicles is softened in some men, because the vessels within are softened, and it is made to be seen;
And it is necessary, when one wishes to treat it, that one make the patient lie on his back, and cut the softened skin onto the natural skin;
Then bring together the two lips at one suture, and if you see it, first sew the excess of the softened skin to three or four sutures firmly;
Then cut between the sutures, and treat it like the other wounds, until it is healed, and remove the thread.
Through chastisement
Know that castrations are begun in our law, and for this reason it would please me not to speak of them in this book;
and they are only necessary for two ways:
one is that the mire responds in kind when one asks it and in kind the cure;
and the other, because we often need to castrate certain beasts to help us, such as goats and sheep and cats and other beasts.
I say therefore that castrations are done in two ways: either by attraction or by incision.
In that which we do by attraction, we make the beast sit in hot water until the testicles are softened and hang down; then take them with your hand until they are drawn back and you no longer feel them.
Of the castration of the loins: It is necessary that you hold the beast, and press the skin of the testicles with your left hand, then tie the suspensory ligament, and cut on each testicle one cut, when you have well skinned them;
And leave no spot so that the facial skin and the subtle facial skin which is upon the vessels;
And this manner of castration is better than that which is done by traction, for because in traction some part of the testicles may remain by chance, by which the beast desires lust;
Then heal the wound until it is healed.
Of hermaphrodites
Hermaphroditism is according to two manners like men: One is when between the two testicles appears also like the shape of a woman's nature, or it has hair, and sometimes passes urine through it.
And the other manner is in women, and has upon the breast as a rod and two horns.
And the treatment for man and woman is such that you cut away all the attached flesh, and treat it like other wounds.
In the second manner, for men whose urine passes through the skin of their testicles, there is no cure.
A tentigine is an attached flesh on the natural part, as long as it is too ugly to see; and some women have them as large as a hand, and this is the treatment.
It is fitting that you hold the excess of the tentigine in your hand or at a knife point and cut it lightly;
and do not go too deep, so that blood does not flow, then treat it with other treatments until it is healed.
And there is another flesh that grows at the mouth of the bladder, and it bleeds, and sometimes bursts, and it is according to the appearance of a cow, and because of this the ancients called it "cow disease." It is necessary that you treat it as we have said about the tentigine, and cure it until it is healed.
It is erratic when the nature of a woman is not perceived, or when the openings are small; and it is natural by birth, or accidental by illness that it has come;
and it is natural by birth, or accidental by illness that it has come; or it is by char added, or through subtle artifice or species, and it is made perfect in the marrow, or in the ribs, or below, or wherever it may be;
and they defer conception, and childbirth, and perhaps having flowers;
and the knowledge of these is by the regard of the belly.
If the splinters are close together, appearing so at your right or left hand.
If it is through subtle artifice, and it is close to two pounds, if you hurry, then do this:
Put your two index fingers together, and the woman should be on her back, spread her legs;
then stretch the two pounds until the subtle artifice is gone, and the inflammations are over;
Then take wool and moisten it with oil and put it on the place and let the woman rest at home every day so that she cannot lift.
And if the bone is hard and thick, you must cut it with a spatulum resembling a myrtle leaf.
If the swelling is from fresh meat, suspend it to the loin and the hip;
and have the medicines well-seasoned with blood, such as agaric, dragon's blood, frankincense, together with plenty of egg yolk.
Then apply a cane of plumb large enough so that the wound cannot close;
and thus for a long time, and apply a tent of dry linen;
then it should be cured with other remedies until it is healed.
And when a sore appears on the sea, if it should be covered according to this manner, unless it is an abscess or ulcer. For an infected abscess which is in the flesh one must not touch it with fire.
of hemorrhoids Hemorrhoids are openings of veins which do not usually accustom themselves to, and when hemorrhoids are old they become swollen.
And we have said in the division the resemblances of wounds, and the signs, and I will say here those which receive cure.
I say that hemorrhoids and fistulas, when they are deeply embedded in the anus, and do not appear to the touch, unless they are cured by iron.
Those who are at the mouth of the marsh, one can feel, are those one can cure.
It is necessary then that you put the woman in a cold house, then extract the tumor with forceps, and cut off the cap on its roots, then sprinkle powders of medicines that restrain blood, such as alum and dragon's blood and incense, and similar things.
Then plunge her feet into water for an hour, then put her in cold water.
And if blood flow occurs, let her sit in a decoction of sumac and pomegranate rind and gall and similar things, then take barley flour and mix it with honey and oil, and make a plaster on her back.
And if it extinguishes, it is good. If not, apply cupping glasses to the back and breasts without injuring.
Then take wool, and moisten it with plantain juice or with elderberry juice mixed with old wine, and apply it to the place.
And when the abscess subsides, care for the place with ointment until it is healed;
and that which is called “albathir” is red, and resembles the sharp edge of a knife, if it needs to be covered as I have said for the lultel. And then care for it until it is healed.
Many kinds of abscesses come in the flesh, such as ulcers and gangrenous abscesses and herpes and inflammations and fistulas and hemorrhoids and hot abscesses, and many other diseases which I have mentioned in the division.
It is therefore necessary that I say in this treatise about the hot abscess which comes on the marrow, which is not like the abscesses that swell.
And if you want to know the work of iron, look and see if the abscess is hot at the beginning of its appearance, full of heat and fever, and if it becomes red when you can see it. Then do not hurry to pierce, but let it rest until the pain is eased;
And then make the patient sit on a stool, and have two small stools where he can lean, and let him rest on his back and bring together his feet at the sides of the leg;
And let his thighs be spread apart, and put his arms below his knees, and tie them well with a good bandage;
Then suck the side towards the right side, and he will bring the instrument with which one works the mouth of the wound, from which afterwards comes the shape;
And it is necessary that when you see this instrument being administered, you first insert the point to know the depth of the wound, so that what enters within the instrument does not go deeper than it should, and that it does not injure the patient; and if the instrument is larger, it is necessary to cover the depth of the wound with cloths so that the instrument does not injure it.
and he must put the horn of the instrument on top and hold the instrument.
And when the abscess opens and it is made soft with the hand, if necessary, cover it at the head, apply the spatula.
and when the bowels are emptied, you must put softened tents in the wound, in rose oil or in dry verdigris oil.
and put the tent firmly from the wound to the depth of the wound, and put above the wound and on the handle clean linen soaked in water or vinegar that has been cooked.
then cure it after two days with ointment suitable for this purpose until it is healed.
and at no time lift it up but moisten the wound with an enema of vinegar and honey, then of vinegar or lily roots and long-cooked aristolochia. then return to ointment.
And if the wound is filled in the margin, it is necessary that you refrain from cauterizing with iron, but cure it as we have said in the division.
Of childbirth It is necessary first for the midwife to know the figure of natural childbirth, and the signs if she sees the woman hasten downwards, and desire to smell the air.
then the child will hasten strongly to be born. Then you know that this childbirth is according to the natural figure, and the issue is under its head, and the afterbirth with it.
And when you see these signs, it is fitting to press her belly lightly so that the child is born quickly.
For when it descends head first, the afterbirth comes with it and the womb is cleansed of its superfluities by good cleansing.
And this which comes otherwise does not come naturally.
For it comes sometimes upon its feet, and comes strong against the body or the shoulder, and the hands, where it comes upon its belly, or often, and is converted by chance out of its neck, and by other evil figures;
It is necessary for the midwife that she be wise and subtle in these things, and beware of error and deceit, and I will show you all the figures how one must help her.
If the child comes upon its head by natural passage, and the woman gives birth with difficulty, and her strength is weak, then have her sit upon a stool, where women hold her;
and boil oil or fenugreek seed, and then put the midwife between her thighs a small spatula of which here is its form. And split the second fingernail, and cut it to its nail until the moisture which is inside comes out.
And press the woman's belly so that the child descends, and if it does not descend, then it is necessary to give the woman an enema of fenugreek mucilage with sesame oil.
Then make her grip and sneeze continuously, and hold her mouth and nose for an hour. If it is now extracted.
And if the two hands come out strong, then it is necessary that you reset them lightly, little by little; and if they cannot enter, then place the woman on a stool, and raise her feet up high. Then overturn the stool onto the ground, and hold the woman so that she does not fall when it is overturned.
And if their hands cannot enter, and the infant dies, then cut the infant's hands with the knife which is previously placed, and remove the child, and reset it equally.
of the delivery of the child upon its feet When the infant comes onto its feet, if it bends forward, you must push it upwards; and then turn it little by little, until it is straight;
then take hold of its feet and extend them little by little.
If it jumps up to its thighs, if ordered, then make it sneeze forcefully. If it jumps further, God willing.
And if it is not as we have said, so turn it little by little until it is according to the natural shape. For then it is light.
And if it does not come further as we have said, take gum arabic, and oil of sesame, and melted resin, and grind all together in a mortar; and put it on the nature of the woman within and heat this ointment, then make her sit in hot water up to under the ribs;
and when it is softened underneath, make him a collar of myrrh, and put it underneath, and leave it for an hour; then make her sit on a stool, then make her sneeze and pull out her mouth and nose, and press her belly lightly, for the infant jumps now.
of the issue of the child upon its knees When the infant comes in this form, if he puts his hands on his chest little by little; then be swaddled up to his neck, and hang his feet down, and be lying on the bed; and fold his hands little by little, and then put his hands on the belly, and remove the cushions from underneath, until she is fully revealed below; and if the infant does not jump, take his feet and move them back and forth, then move the belly upwards, then he pushes with his hands; and suckle the child little by little; And instruct the woman to take care of herself until the infant is weaned.
Of the delivery of a child who comes forth with one hand outstretched It is necessary to engineer a way to return the hand: If one cannot return it, then have the woman stand up and walk;
if she cannot walk, then have her sit on the bed and straighten her legs out.
Then apply the ointment that I have mentioned;
and if she does not give birth, then have her sit on a chair and then study how to return the hand; and suckle the child according to its natural form, and make her sneeze, and instruct her to take care of herself until the infant is fully weaned.
From the issue of the child upon its neck, and it has spread its hands, and its face turned toward the back of its mother It is necessary that the midwife holds her hand, then turns it little by little, and suckles it gently;
and when they are equal, put on a plaster of honey and oil as we have said, then tell them to move it little by little
and when you have done this, make her sit on a seat, and tell her to hold herself steady and make her sneeze in this same manner to all the second
in this same manner to all the second When it comes out hard in this manner at the second time, cut the second time to your fingernail until the moisture is emptied
and if the child can suck on its face and on its neck, cut it from there so it is not held back, and let the child die
then put the child inside as far as you have put it as it should be, and tell the woman to hold herself steady at all times
From the issue of twins Know that twins are born many times, and sometimes none are born III or IV; and this is not a strange thing, and it happens often. Two are a strange thing, and do not live, if they are named;
Two are a strange thing, and do not live, if they are named; I know that they are multiplied and are weaned by the wolf who devours them, which is linked to the buttocks;
and sometimes they also come forth naturally as one under all, as we have said.
And if they come forth grievously, so the cure as we have said, and be the balm subtle, and make quickly and lightly what it does; and do thus as it is worth moving to safety. of several children
Sometimes they are formed in the womb I or II or III or IV or V or VI or VII, or more up to XV, and they are all formed in the shape of a child by the measurement of the glorious sage, and it befits that the balm know all this, for by chance similar things happen; Do according to what is right.
of the dead child
When you treat a woman for a dead child in the womb, as I have said in the section, and it does not come out, and you are forced to work with your hands. It is necessary that you know if the woman is of sound constitution and does not have any other condition or fear of death.
It is necessary that the woman be placed on her back, with her head inclined downwards and her legs raised.
And the practitioner must hold her firmly in two places, or tie her to the bed so that she is not moved during the removal of the child.
Then rub the mouth of the womb with moist oil mixed with marshmallow and fenugreek mucilage and flaxseed. Then anoint her belly with these oils and mixtures.
Then put the end in lukewarm water, then wherever it bites apply ointments that are suitable for this, and be careful if it is inflamed so that it descends on its head;
If it puts the ointments in its eyes or neck or mouth or palate or below the beard or on the temple or near the ribs, and if its descent is on foot, put them on the ankle and lower ribs.
And it is necessary that he hold the ointment in his right hand, and put the curvature between his fingers of his left hand, and apply it to all his hand lightly, and put the ointment in none of these places that we have said, until it comes to the empty thing;
Then put it against the other ointment, or the third if you need it, so that the extractions are equal.
And then they are stretched equally by moving from one side to the other, to make it come out, and let the canines be toothed to hold it, as it is in this form:
And if a part remains, anoint the base with some of its two oils, and put them in that part, and draw out the other part;
And if none remains, put this canine or a higher place, and do this until it all comes out.
And if one hand comes in front of the other, and he cannot bring it back due to tightness, it is fitting that you wrap it up on a cloth, until it all comes out; then cut into the joint of the sole or with a knife, and thus you must do it to the other hand, and to both feet.
And if the child's head is large and it is stuck in the birth canal, or if it has a sharp point assembled, then you must put the pointed spatula between your fingers, press the head and remove the point. Or you turn it to the instrument which is called "almidach", from which its shape comes with the instruments or chapter that are after this one.
And do the same if the child has a large head naturally.
And then pull the bones with forceps, and if the head jumps out and is extracted by force, it should be split, as long as the moisture which is in the birth canal goes out.
And if it cannot come out, cut it into pieces as much as you can.
And if it is swollen in the belly or below the ribs, then you must pierce it until the moisture runs out.
And if the infant is on its feet, the attraction is light, and straightening at the mouth of the uterus is easy.
And if it is embedded in the belly or breast, it behooves you to extract it wrapped in a cloth on the hand; and make the belly or breast, so long as the moisture that is there runs out;
and if the other members are removed and the head remains, put a ball of your hand upon the wound, and pull it to the mouth of the wound; then put one or two pincers on it, and pull hard;
and if the mouth of the wound is constricted by a hot boil that has come, it is not right to work on it, but rather administer moist and greasy things; and apply poultices, and plasters of mild softening and moistening properties.
And if the child is on its side, and you can put it even, administer what we have said for a live infant;
and if there is not enough strength, so the treatment goes in parts, and leave nothing of the second intention.
And when you have done this, if you administer what we have said in abscesses which come to the marrow.
and if bleeding comes, it should be put on tightly restricting, and administer other treatments.
And I saw a woman in whose womb one child had been dead, then she conceived another upon that one, and the other also died. After a long time, a boil came to him on his arm, and it swelled so much that it opened, and he began to have great pain.
I was called to heal, and I thought for a long time, and could not stitch the wound.
I put on a plaster of strong attraction, and one bone came out, and after some days another. I marvelled greatly, for this belly has no bones.
If I thought these were bones of a dead child.
I treated the wound, and handled bones with my hands, until the woman was in a better state; and I kept the woman for a long time like this, and it would be a little bit of bone at that place;
and I have only recorded this chapter so that when the masters find a foreign thing, they know how to help.
Here follows the form of the pressor, with which we weigh the books;
and at two turns as the head of the two liens. However, let the horn be more subtle than the restrictor, and made of ebony or boxwood.
And let the mouth be of a fist two fingers wide, and the edge of the trees one must, and in length a palm and a half. And between the two limbs there are two adjustments of this same fist, which are firm on one side and the other, half a palm long or a little more.
And these two adjustments are pushed into the mouth of the marrow to open when one turns the two horns.
Another form, more subtle and lighter in appearance, is made of ebony or boxwood, according to the appearance of tongs. And it has two horns and two adjustments, as you see, a palm long and two fingers wide.
and when you see the vulva open to the instrument, make the woman sit up on her bed with her feet hanging down and her legs open, then insert the two instruments joined together into the vulva, and hold the head of the instrument below between her thighs. Then work your hand on the whole instrument, just as you did with the pliers equally, according to the amount that you see the mouth of the vulva open, so that the woman does what she wants.
These instruments are all assembled and multiplied in their likenesses. And when the midwife has them ready, the work is faster and higher for their quantity.
If you do not despair of the instrument until you have prepared it, for its necessity is not excusable.
When the afterbirth is retained during childbirth, it is fitting that you instruct the patient to hold back her breath, and then make her sneeze on purpose, and remove your hands from her mouth and nose. and if she jumps through it, it is good
If not, he takes a pot and makes a hole or cover, and puts in herbs that can open the mouth of the sore, such as calamint, rue, anise, chamomile, cassia lignea, and centaury; all these herbs, or some of them, are cooked in water over the fire
then he puts a cane or tube into the pot, and the other end into the mouth of the sore, and lets it stay until the vapors go inside the sore
then he makes her sneeze, as we have said. If the second sinew leaps quickly.
And if it remains after this treatment and is not soft, he orders the woman to moisten her left hand in sesame oil or marshmallow mucilage, and then puts it into the sore, and squeezes the second finger. and when she has found it, if she takes it and extends it little by little straight so that the marrow does not break at the extraction;
but it is necessary to move it slightly to the right and left, and then pull; it will come out and become disentangled.
And if the mouth of the marrow is narrow, we have said the cure is to sneeze and to smoke herbs;
and if it is not from all that we have said, be careful not to pull in the opposite direction;
but it is necessary that what is at the mouth of the marrow, you tie it to the thigh of the woman, then give her an enema of tetrapharmacon ointment. if she will purge and put it back, and it will come out strong;
But nevertheless, when it ferments, a foul odor arises in the stomach and head, and harms the patient. Therefore suitable fumigations are necessary for this:
None of the ancients have tried fumigation of cress and dried figs.
The shape of the instrument with which one smokes the woman for the retention of flowers and the afterbirth is this:
And it appears similar to a cane, and one puts the subtle head in the fire, and the wide heads on the fire;
And let the fumigation be over the coals, until the rash is gone, and begin another.
Many children are born who do not have a pierced fundament, but rather it is closed by a subtle membrane: Therefore the midwife must pierce that membrane with her finger, and not pierce it with a sharp spatula, and guard against touching the wound.
Then put it on linen softened in wine and oil, then treat it with ointment until it is healed.
And if you doubt that it will remain set, insert or put a cane of lead in and leave it for three days, and let it be removed when the child wants to go into its chamber.
And sometimes this swelling comes from the suppuration of a wound or an abscess; If it is necessary to cover that suppuration: if it is cured, as we have said of the chain of lead.
Fistulas that come below the buttocks are nodules, and thickenings that come from the buttocks upward, or in the space of two parts, whether there is one fistula or several.
And when that thickening is old, it works, and still brings forth white or subtle pus, and sometimes these fistulas persist.
And they are known by the fact that there is either excretion or flatulence when the patient has a bowel movement, and perhaps even one jumps out.
And if there are fistulas that extend to the bladder, and to the middle of the penis; and reach the junction of the thigh, and to the base of the buttocks.
And thus one recognizes a fistula extending to the fundament, and not extending: and it is that you place your index finger or thumb on the fundament, and insert a fine needle of silver or iron into the fistula when there is no crookedness.
And if there is crookedness, then insert a tent of fine linen, or a horsehair, until you feel the tent or hair with your finger;
and if you do not feel it, and nothing comes out through the opening, neither feces nor gas nor worms as we have said: know that it does not perforate; if you hurry with the cure
And when the fistula extends as far as the bladder or as far as the urinary tract, then the urine escapes and cannot be sealed by medication.
If it is pierced up to the joint of the thigh, so is the tendon coming up to the place; if there is no crookedness and the invention of pain around it, so it becomes well again, and neither medicine nor ointment is worthwhile;
and in these fistulas there is no stronger cure than work, and vanity of foolish wonders that get involved.
In the one that is not pierced and is not old, there is hope of healing by iron, as I have experienced, and it is that the patient lies between your hands on his back;
and lift their legs up to their thighs, and put their thighs inclined towards their belly; then thrust a tent of iron, or of lead if there is crookedness, as far as you know where the tendon comes.
If the patient feels it around the buttocks, you must stick your index finger in, and then feel if the thread has gone through.
And whether it is uncovered or you feel between your finger the sinew or flesh, then know that it has passed through. If it does not work a little, it cannot be healed.
They say that one can heal some well, but this happens rarely.
And the help that is done is that one heats a subtle cautery according to the width of the fistula as it has been said before. And they put all of it hot into the fistula until it comes out near the buttocks. And do this two or three times as long as you know that those faulty sinews are burned, which resemble a bird's feather.
And then treat it with tents softened in butter until the flesh dries, then treat it with ointment that hardens and binds.
If it is healed like this, it is good.
If this cannot be healed otherwise;
And if the tent enters and does not pierce through to the bone which is at its foundation, and there is between your finger and the tent a thick covering of flesh or of sinew, and you see the fistula under this covering from the heart; If the point of the beginning of the fistula appears and protrudes before the tent, and then apply the cautery afterwards until it reaches the head of the tent; and the tent will be delivered and will fall out;
then cleanse those damaged flesh parts that resemble a bird's feather, and let nothing remain.
And if the blood comes, and cuts between you and the work, then cauterize it with fire or medicine.
For the fire cautery accomplishes two good things: This is to know, the cautery of these added carts, and the extraction of blood and the drying of moisture.
Then the treatment of softened tents in butter or crushed cheese, as long as the fire burns hot, and it has burned the carts in the wound.
Then treat the wound with ointments smeared on hard charcoal, and these are dry medicines.
For when it is restored, it is healed and does not return.
And if a fistula reaches as far as the base of the body and is distant from the body, it should be plugged at its root or base, and inquire about this.
If you feel the tent, and between II is the cloth or the silk or carts, where it is about to pierce, if there are only signs of faith and hope, by the administration of one of the three methods:
You either cauterize it as we have said, or you cut it out to the bottom, or if you can, put tents and treat it as first.
And do not go too far in depth, lest you cut the ligament that holds the foundation, and cause involuntary excretion. Then the cure, as we have said;
Then the cure, as we have said; If it should be healed, then remove the covering and cleanse it after it has been cut near the base, either with a tent or some other pointed instrument. Then cleanse this rotten flesh that is in the wound as much as you can; Then strive to restore the wound and keep the fistula behind the base.
Then strive to restore the wound and keep the fistula behind the base. If it is a lighter matter for the patient.
And fistulas are never made in this manner: And when you insert a tent into the fistula and it is near or touching the base of the skin above, then take a tent pierced at its head in this manner: And I put the twisted thread in two, and put the tent over the whole thread in the fistula until it is at the head.
If it pierces the margin of the base inward, then remove the thread from that piercing so that you insert your finger or thumb.
And treat the head of the thread, and bring the two ends together, and separate one from the other, and leave it for one or two days.
And restrain it several times, as long as the threads hold those carriages which are between them, and they intertwine.
Then treat the wound until it is healed and clean.
If the fistula does not open, make it pierce in all the ways you can, if it is not too obstructed. For it is not right to make a bandage so tight for the placement of the cure, as we have said, until it is healed.
The shape of a sharp spatula with which one makes a fistula must be very thin on one side and sharp. And on the other side, not so, so that it does not cut what it should not cut, as you see here.
Hemorrhoids are according to two manners: Where they are inside the fundament, like grains of resin, and there are small and large ones, and sometimes bleed, and there is one or several, and they protrude outside the fundament and at the head of the fundament.
but those that are lacking have a bit of moisture, and still now or a bit of sharp citric acid or a bit of blood, and they have the color of the body;
And the treatment of those who have them in the foundation, if it is so that you instruct the patient to stretch for relief in chambers, until the foundations dry out, and the threads appear; if you hurry, and pinch it with tweezers, or hold it with your fingernail, then cut it at its roots;
and if the lancet cannot hold them because of their moisture, take them with a cloth, or cotton, or a piece of chamois; and pull them out at your leisure, then cut them off and sprinkle some hot powders on top that are in place of a cautery; where you cauterize them as it is said in the chapter of cautery, then you treat them with other treatments until they are healed.
and if the foundations cannot come out, give the patient a strong and harsh enema to cleanse what is in the foundation so that it can come out clearly. If the patient complains, and if the threads are strong from the foundation, then the treatment is easy.
If the patient complains, and if the threads are strong from the foundation, then the treatment is easy. and you take them with your fingernail or with pliers and cut them off, then treat them as we have said until they are healed, and he fears the incision with an iron. If it is necessary for you to administer a suture in this manner:
If it is necessary for you to administer a suture in this manner: Take a twisted thread and put it through a needle, then draw the thread over the top and make the needle pierce through the other side, and turn both ends of the thread under the needle, and let it be wide.
and remove the forming thread, then tie the thread, and remove the needle, and do this for all the others, and leave it to correct the excess of blood;
then put on the foundation a softened cloth soaked in rose oil or wax, and put it on the foundation, and instruct the patient to rest;
and then leave it until they fall out, and when they have fallen, treat them with ointment and other cures until they are healed.
dryness of the veins or foundation Many times dryness of humors occurs in the intestine, and by constriction of nature, and when the illness is old and medicine does not help. It is necessary that you scrape off with the point of a spatula or your fingernail the rind above it so that it does not become moist. then treat it until it heals as it should;
and if it cannot heal, shave it again more strongly than before until it heals a lot and is scraped. Then heal it until it is healthy.
Do tremble A boil is a small foul appearance on the body, and it goes very deep inside.
And sometimes one finds coldness there, and one also feels it like a tremor of death, and it comes throughout the body, more in the hands than elsewhere.
And the treatment is that you take a cane from a goose feather, or a strong vulture feather, and place that cane on the tremor, until the circles completely encircle the tremor. Then turn your hand on all sides of the cane until you grasp it all around the tremor, and press it deep inside, and pull out the tremor from its roots.
And if you see it, make one like this from a chain of iron or steel, and let it be thin underneath and wide on top. Do not pierce, but hold tightly to the pain, and press.
And if you see it, cauterize the boil as it is shown in the chapter on cautery.
Sometimes one makes an enema of silver or artichoke, or melted bran or millet;
And sometimes one uses small and large instruments, according to those to whom they are administered. Therefore those who are treated in the care of children and who are weak and painful, are small.
Therefore those who are treated in the care of children and who are weak and painful, are small. The form of the enema, both small and large, is wide above, where the belly is tied according to this manner.
and if there is a blockage where the stomach is bound, as you see, and the excrement remains inside pierced;
and there are two openings on one side and one on the other.
and the belly where medicines are placed is made from a bladder of an animal or parchment and pierced all around with small holes, and there is one finger space between each hole, then thread a thick strong twisted raw silk thread through these holes in an X shape or around it, and gather up the belly as if it were a goat. and when the medicine is inside, tie it to the instrument in front of a strong thread, then administer the enema.
and this is its circular shape:
And let the medicine be neither too hot nor too cold, and anoint the head of the clyster with oil or egg yolk, or something similar, then insert it gently; then the minister squeezes it with both hands together until all is expelled, then he withdraws the clyster, and lifts the patient's legs to the wall, and if the medicine wants to come out, let him strain as much as he can; and if he sleeps all night, it is of greater help.
And if you apply a clysma for a disease of loosening of the belly, and the medicine hastens to go, then begin again until it is healed.
And if the hemorrhoids are in the fundament or abscess, then let the clyster be as subtle as for a child;
and this is the shape of a subtle clyster on which the skin is extracted:
We have said in the division about the treatment of wounds;
Or we will tell you the cures of hands and medicine according to its accomplishment.
I say that wounds are diverse according to what they are made with, and according to the places or the wounds where they are made, and by what they are made.
The things by which wounds are made are by the striking of stone and the cutting of sword and knife or of lance or of musket or of arrow or of similar things.
Or they are made according to the parts of the body, such as a wound that strikes on the neck or on the head or the foot or the belly or the liver and similar members.
And I will tell you the treatment of each wound and begin with simple wounds of the head, for remembrance will come in its chapter.
I say that when a simple wound comes to the head and the bone is not broken, take care if it is from a striking of stone or similar things, and the skin is completely torn and the wound is large, and you slightly doubt a hot abscess: If it bleeds quickly from the cephalic vein itself, if there is little blood coming from the wound, and let the bleeding be on the opposite side of the injured part.
And forbid the patient from eating rich food and large meats.
And if it does not bleed, let his food be reduced, and do not drink wine, nor eat meat.
And place on the wound, if an abscess seems to be coming, cotton moistened in rose oil alone, or in astringent wine.
And if there is no hot abscess, put on the wound, if it is fresh and bleeding freely, and not moved by air, powder, which I will mention a little later.
And if the fire has already moved it, put on some ointments until it is healed.
And if the wound is large, like that of a sword cut or similar, and the edges cannot be brought together by bandages, then stitch them together, as I will say for abdominal wounds, using sutures.
If the wound is exposed to bone, and it can, and it does not hold except by a point, then sew it. Then treat the wound with medicine, and restore hard flesh in place of leather, and instruct the patient to eat large meats, such as testicles and cooked wheat, as well as poultry, and similar things.
And if you find rotten flesh that does not reach the bone, then sew up all the rotted part and cut it out, then treat it.
And if it has an artery or vein in the wound that is bleeding and cannot be stopped by medicine, then tie off the artery, and if you find it dislocated, then tie it with thread. And if this does not help, then cauterize it.
And if these wounds are small and simple, the treatment is light: And put this powder on it so that it heals as if the fire had moved it.
And the way of the powder is: Take frankincense one part; dragon's blood two parts; quicklime three parts, and powder it subtly, and apply it to the wound, and remove it when it burns well and joins with all its blood;
and then bind it well, and leave it without being unbound, unless it swells; for one does not remove the medicine until it is healed.
And never do this with chalk alone, when one does not have incense nor dragon's blood, but that the fire has heated the wound.
And if the fire has already moved the wound, do not put this powder on it at all;
but apply some digested ointments, or poultices of barley flour made with water and honey, until it flows well; Then cure other cures until he is healed.
And if the fracture of bone comes with the wound, and it is small, extract it with subtle pincers;
and I will tell you here after about the fractures of the head.
of the wound of the neck
If a wound comes to the neck and it is simple, it has no difference between it and that of the head, but if the nerves in the neck or the artery are cut.
If it is the nerves, there is no other remedy than to leave the treatment, and do not put anything restraining, for it harms the nerves and makes them retract; and do not put anything cold on the wound, for the substance of nerves is cold, and their continuity is with the brain, which is the highest member;
but let the medicine be below, such as chamomile washed in clear water, and mixed with rose oil, and chamomile washed also in clear water, and other stones of the mine according to this manner, and moist ointments.
And if the wound is large, sew it up and bind it with bandages, then treat it until it is healed.
And if the wounds are deep and it is swollen and full of pus, then pierce it lower.
And if the artery is cut and blood flows, then bind it, and tie it, and cautery is necessary.
And if the spine of the throat is cut, or the heart, and the conduit is kept by which the meat goes, then sew the heart onto the cane of the throat, and do not touch the throat but put it back according to its natural shape. And then remove carefully and leave it for a few days, then treat it with dry dressings until it is healed.
And if the wound has made an impression on the bone, then cauterize it. And if there are pieces of bone, remove them all if you can, and those that you cannot obtain, leave them until the wound rots, is cleansed, and its exit is aligned.
and if the wound is fresh, sprinkle powder on top of the powder that I have mentioned. And if there is bone in the wound and there is a fistula, then treat it as I have said in this chapter.
If it is a cut from a spear or knife, and the wound is deep, look to see if air escapes when the patient breathes. Then you know the wound is mortal;
and if it is not deep and is fresh with all its blood, do not put any powder on it for the first hour, nor bind it so that the blood does not cease flowing freely, return to the heart, and kill the patient. But apply an attractive ointment and bind it twice a day.
And if you do not have ointment, put old cotton in the wound to suck up moisture and let the patient sleep on the wound for three, four, or more days. if there comes no spasm, nor evil trembling of the heart, nor dislocations of the bone; and when you see good signs, know that the wound is saved. Then cure it with bandages and other treatments, until it is healed;
and if it cannot heal, then know that there is a fistula;
if the cure is as it should be. And if the wound is from a sword or knife incision, and it is simple, whether on the leg or the back, treat it as you would any other wound in that location; if it is large, suture it;
and if it is small, treat it with powder, and if it has penetrated the bone and shattered pieces, clean the wound and remove any foreign objects if they are loose; and if they are not mature, let the wound fester, so that extraction is easier.
And for other wounds on other limbs, judgment is as we have said.
For a rupture of the belly
The rupture of the belly is great, medium and small;
from a large wound sometimes the intestines, or the nerves of the intestines, protrude, by which entry of others (is possible);
and the stitching is more difficult, and sometimes the small wound is worse than the large one, because one puts the intestines back in more easily if one does not put them back hot by hot;
because the intestines swell quickly when they feel cold and enter more easily, and therefore it is better to mend the middle-sized wound because one can move the intestine to its place better than the others.
And know that a rupture of the belly is according to four manners:
The two common sutures occur in the suture of the belly, and the suture of other wounds of the body and two other proper sutures are common to other wounds.
And all the same they are more fitting with the suture of the belly, and I will say each one and declare it.
I say that when the wound is small, and nothing of the intestine is outside, and it is an easy matter to put it back in, this can be done in one of two ways. Either because of the smallness of the wound, as we have said, or because the intestine is swollen because of the cold.
And when it is cold, warm it in two ways: Soak a sponge or a soft cloth in hot water only, or you can cook in hot water squinant and cypress and spikenard, and apply to the intestine until the swelling is gone;
and never make this wine restraining, and it is better to give alone for disentanglement.
And when you see the swelling depart, if you moisten the intestines with sharp or high and bad things that are cooked, for by this is alleviated the entrance to little.
And if it cannot enter, then make a small wound with an instrument with which we cut hemorrhoids;
and the first treatment is better than cutting, that no one should cut without great necessity.
And these are the instruments for splitting it:
if you cut inside in the curve and do not remove it, and see here the shape: And when the wound is enlarged and the intestine has come out, if you put it back in according to its natural form in its proper place, if you have the power, because this is worth a lot.
When the wound is wide, and it is in the lower part below the belly, then it is necessary that you make the patient lie on his back, and put his legs higher than his head; and if it is in the part below the belly, then put the head and the breast higher than the parts below, and also if the rupture from the belly is in one of the two sides then put your understanding in this way that the injured side be higher than the other.
and thus it is fitting to administer what I say in large and small wounds.
In small wounds put what appears to you, then have between your hands a minister gentle who holds all the rupture in his hand, and brings together the lips.
And this is the common way of stitching, and it is that you take a needle or several, according to the quantity of the width of the wound, then leave from the head of the wound a half a space, and there you put in a needle where it has a good strong thread. and pierce the two edges of the skin with the two edges of the sinew, which is beneath the skin inside, as long as you make it pierce from that part, and bring together the two edges of the sinew four together.
Then strain a double thread onto the needle in two parts, then bring together the two sides of the wound evenly, and then leave one finger's space, and insert another needle.
Then tie the two threads as you did with the first needle, and do not cease doing this according to what you need needles for, until the whole wound is restrained.
And let the needles be medium-sized, between subtle and thick, for subtle needles pierce all the flesh, and those too thick cannot enter well. Therefore it is fitting that they should be medium-sized.
And it is not fitting to drive the needles too far beyond the flesh and skin so that they pierce and open the wound before the suturing.
And then tie the sides of the needles so that they do not prick the patient while sleeping, and apply bandages or cloths to the sides of the needles to hold them in place, and leave them until the wound is sutured.
And this way of stitching with needles is more suitable for small wounds, because it uses one needle or two.
The second stitch is common, and it consists of assembling the two sides of the skin and the two sides of the sinew together with one needle having a strong medium-sized thread.
And when you have pierced all these sides together, pull the needle back to where you started, in the manner one sews cloths.
And leave a space between each stitch the width of two grains of pepper.
This stitch heals a man, and I sewed a wound on a man's belly, who had been cut by a knife, the wound was more than a handspan large and the intestines protruded two handspans, and the wound was in the middle of his belly.
I put the intestine back in place after it had been out for 24 hours, and the wound healed until the 15th day, and I cared for it, and it was healed.
And they thought he would die, and it was a miracle.
and I did not treat him with ointment, for I was in a place where none could be found, nor any medicine. and I put nothing more on the wound than old cotton twice a day, and washed it with honey water until it was healed.
Now I will tell you the two proper ways of stitching.
Take the needle and push it through from the far side to the near side.
When it has pierced the flesh straight through, take the thread or twine or whatever you have put the needle through and make it pierce from the other side from the inside out.
And the understanding of this stitch is that you sew just as furriers sew furs, and that you leave the thread once on one side and pick it up again on the other, until the entire stitch is complete.
The second way of suturing, which Galen properly calls, is as follows: they bring the two parts together naturally and apply one end of the silk to the other end in this manner.
Insert a needle or silk thread close by and make it pass through that place only, leaving the two ends of the silk. Then turn the needle and make it pass through from the outer part to the inner part, along with the two ends of the silk.
Then make both pass from the outer part to the inner part, in two other silk threads that are on the other side.
And this is the simplest way of suturing and the most common.
Galen said these words, and some confirm it, that one must sew the abdomen with two needles, each with thread.
And one must put a needle from one side, and the other from the other side, in the manner of those who sew straps.
And know that when the rupture is in the middle of the belly, the suture is more grievous than those of other places in the belly.
The judgment of the wound is such as the judgments of the other wounds:
and it is that when you find the wound fresh with all its blood, in such a way that the artery has moved it, then put back the intestine, and the seam.
Then put on charred charcoal powder, and if the artery has moved it, then put on any ointment that is present, as long as the wound swells. And stitch the thread, and weld the sinew, and the muscle. Then treat the wound as the others, until it is healed.
And if you do not have medicines, as soon as it begins to boil put old cotton on it, and move it twice a day until it is healed.
For you do not need other medicine in several situations unless the wounds are complex.
And if you doubt that the wound might cause a communal infection with principal members, it is fitting that you moisten linen lightly in tempered oil, or rose oil, and place it around the wounds, and under the armpits.
And if he feels pain or putrefaction in the bowels, which often happens, then enemas of warm black wine, and similarly if the putrefaction reaches the intestines.
And pierce within, and know that when it is the large intestine, it is easier to heal than the small intestine.
The intestine which is called "jejunum" cannot heal when it is injured, and this is because of the arrangement of its veins, and because of the subtlety of the whole body, and the closeness of its nature to the nerves.
And if the splinter jumps from the wound, put it back as you would the intestines, while it is fresh.
And if it is old and has become green or black, you must bind the black area so that blood does not flow there, for there are veins and arteries.
Then cut what is between the ligature and place the two ends hanging down from the part below the wound until it falls out to ease extraction when the splinter comes out, and the wound heals.
from a fracture of the eye socket
When the intestines are round and the wound is small, some men can restore them, for I have seen a man who was wounded in the belly by a spear;
and the wound was to the right of the stomach, and it became inflamed and turned into a fistula, and there was excretion and flatulence;
I have put a cure according to what I could, and did not stop trying to refine it until he was healed, and his wounds were sutured.
And when I saw him sutured, I doubted that the patient would not have pain in his belly; and he did not have any pain, but remained in better condition, and ate and drank;
and some experimenters said that when he has a small wound in the intestine, it should be bound in a certain way: take threads of large size, then bring together the lips of the wound, and when the thread has opened its mouth, place it upon the two lips so that it tightens its mouth above;
and then cut the thread's end, and this stays so that it cannot loosen, then place another thread afterward in the same manner as before, until the wound is completely closed; and sew the wound.
If the hair burns in the intestine and no harm comes to the patient, then one can tie the intestine with a fine thread which is cut from the intestine of an animal.
Take the end of this intestine thread that is well frayed, and then tie to the end of this thread a fine linen thread twisted, then put the thread in the needle and sew the intestine and rejoin it at the tear.
And this way of sewing is nothing but according to the way of trust and hope;
And if the wound is large and wide, especially when it is in one of the intestinal folds, there is no remedy or safety except subtlety.
of fistula or whatever it may be Know that every wound or abscess, when it gets old, is called universally "fistula," and the same when it is healed and drawn inward.
And a fistula is according to the greenness of a hard and white knot where there is no pain felt, and it rises as high as the feather of a bird.
And sometimes it jumps clear thin, and other times thick. Sometimes it bursts forth, and other times enough.
And as I have spoken of it in the division of wounds, any wound that is not healed and there is no flesh, it only flows by one of nine causes: That is to say, by the smallness of blood or flesh; Or by its malice; Or because there is hard flesh inside and on the lips that does not allow flesh to grow; Or because there is too much pus; Or the wound is infected and the matter is of bad quality; Or the medicine is not good in the treatment; Or because the corruption is a manner of pestilence; where by its property in the region digestion is slow, and sensation is late, and it swells naturally; where there are veins or bones:
and I have already shown all these causes, and the signs, and the cures of medicines in the division.
It is fitting that I make you know the cure of fistula which is made by work of hands.
Know that a fistula occurs in all the limbs of the body; for there are fistulas that come from large veins, and arteries, and nerves, or the diaphragm, or the intestines, or the bladder, or any of the ribs, or the spine of the back, or any joint of the hands or feet; and if it happens that it comes to the property of the principal member, and similar things.
And all fistulas that are of this manner are of grievous healing, and there is nothing but toil, and ignorance;
and if there is any fistula that does not come to the place I have mentioned, and you are confident of the cure, and you see it known, then take a tent of iron or of bronze, if the fistula is straight, if the other.
and if the fistula is crooked, then make a tent of lead, for lead bends and conforms to the crook.
and if the fistula has many openings and you cannot well enclose it with tents, then irrigate it through one of the openings, for moisture passes from one opening to another and cleanses it.
then carefully bleed it to your power, so that you know if there is bone or nerve, and it is well drawn out, and inquire well from the patient about the pain he feels when you press with your hand, and the place where he feels it.
And when you truly know the place where it is, and if it is far from a joint, or nerve, or artery or vein, or in any of the places that I have told you, then cut according to what I have told you, and remove the putrefaction and the corrupted flesh that are inside;
And then treat it until it is healed, and if the fistula is deep in the right place, it is necessary that you cut deeply, as much as you can, then put soft tents soaked in hot medicine, and push them to the bottom of the fistula, so that the medicine corrodes the excess that remains at the bottom;
And then apply ointments that regenerate healthy flesh, until it is healed.
And if it is not healed by this, then cauterize as we have said, and if the bone is corrupted by the fistula, then cut it.
If veins or nerves do not hinder you or the main limbs, as we have said;
And if the bone is exposed and there is corruption and blackness, remove all the corruption until it is gone, then treat the surrounding flesh as needed until it is healed.
And if it is not healed and returns as before, know that you have not gone far enough.
If uncovered and sought until you reach the bottom, remove all corruption, then restore the area.
And if it is healed thus, it is well. If not, know that the corruption is too deep for you to reach; there is no other remedy but to leave it to nature.
And if there is a small corrupted bone and you can remove it with forceps, extract it with an appropriate instrument for this purpose. If there are many bones, remove them all, leaving none behind.
and if moisture opposes you, and there is no error or fear, then grasp both moisture and flesh, and free the bones.
And if you cannot remove them in an hour, then put something promoting decay on the wound, and leave it until the flesh is rotted around the bones, and then you will remove the bones more easily;
and if it is a large bone, such as of the leg or thigh, then allow only the corruption until the blackness is all removed, then restore the wound;
and if there is a large part corrupted and it reaches the marrow of the bone; then you must saw and cut all the way to the corruption, and then treat it until it is healed together;
and I will tell you of a fistula that happened to a man in his leg, so that you take example and help in your work.
There was a young man of about thirty years who had pain in his leg from a cause that came from within the body, so that the humors came to the leg and it swelled with a large abscess, and he had no reason to open.
But his doctors, in their folly, worked so much on the abscess that they opened it and corroded a lot of matter, and it became a fistula, and there came many holes that all flowed with pus and moisture from the body.
And many doctors treated him for two years, and there was no one who knew anything about surgery, until I was called to see him, and I saw his leg and the medicines with which he was being treated, and what flowed from the holes in large quantities. And his young body was becoming red and had a yellow color.
I stuck a tent into one of these holes, and then I encircled all the holes, and I found that some came against each other from all parts of the leg.
I hastened therefore, and cut into one of the pores until I discovered a part of the bone, and found it corrupted and pierced, and the corruption was coming to the bone inside.
I scraped away what appeared to me to be the corrupted bone, and thought that there was no other corruption, except that which I removed;
and I began to restore the wound with hot medicines for a long time, and could not solder it;
and then I began again, and discovered the bone as before, and found the corruption continuing into the bone, and I scraped it, and then removed it, and struggled to solder the place. but I could not do so until I cut around a palm's breadth of the bone, and treated it thoroughly to its entire marrow, then I restored it with medicines. And it was healed and joined quickly, and there was no need to start the work again except for the weakness of the patient, who could not endure, and for fear of death that I had of him. For the evacuation often bled, but it was healed completely, and in place of the bone a hard flesh grew, and it was of good disposition and had no harm nor contrary of any kind, neither at coming nor going.
And if a bone is broken in any part of the body, then it must be treated in this manner: Take a bandage and bind it to the head of the bone that appears, and order someone to extend it upwards; and put another bandage of wool larger than the first bandage and tie it on the flesh that is below the bone, and extend the head so that you draw the corrupted flesh downwards, and uncover the flesh on the place where you wish to sew, so that the thread does not injure the flesh;
and put a hot coal or a wooden board below the bone to help cook the corrupted flesh;
And it is necessary to treat as much as one can see and feel the corruption, and to treat again another time.
And if the bone is corrupted, and it does not appear, and the corruption is in the middle or in a part, then lay bare all the flesh.
Then put the ember underneath, and then treat from one part to the other the corruption, and let the treatment be as long as the corruption, one finger's breadth, as we have said.
And if the corruption is in the joint, then cut the corrupted joint, and treat the bone where it holds on the other side.
And if the corruption is in the continuation of two joints, there is no other remedy than to cut them.
And if the corruption is in a finger of the hand or a toe, that is very serious, but nevertheless you must inquire into this corrosion, how it appears to you. And cleanse it in all the ways that you can, but make sure that the vein or nerve does not oppose you.
And know that the incisors and saws for cutting these bones are many, according to the position of the bones and their appearance, and their thickness and subtlety, and their size and smallness, and their hardness. And therefore it is fitting to prepare an instrument for each type of work;
And know that the work will show you the instrument you will need, according to the knowledge of this art and the testimony of the ways of illnesses. Therefore prepare the instrument you need according to what is fitting.
The shoulder can dislocate either from internal causes or external causes;
And when you have treated the corruption with medicine, and it does not improve, then it is necessary to cut that limb up to the place where the corruption comes from, so that the patient escapes death, or from the greater malice of losing the limb.
and the signs are that the limb becomes black, as if it were burned by fire, and after the blackness comes the corruption of member to member, and takes hold throughout the body.
If you are bitten by a viper, and if it is by the sting of some venomous beasts, such as a sea scorpion or an adder and similar creatures, if the corruption is at the head of the wound, cut it, and do not give it space to come up to the hand.
And if it comes up to the hand, cut it at the joint, so that the corruption does not come up to the arm;
and if it comes to the arm, cut it at the elbow;
and if it passes the elbow, it is death, and there are no remedies except for the quantity of its venom.
and do the same when the corruption comes or the foot: if it comes to the first joint, then the cup after the other joint;
and if it comes to the foot, then cup the whole foot; and if it rises in the leg, then cup at the knee joint;
and if it comes above the knee, there is no other remedy than to leave the patient to die;
and the way to cup or sew the limb is that you tie it above and below, and extend one minister's bandage downwards, and another minister's bandage upwards, and you cut the flesh that is between the two bandages at a span wide, as long as the bone is uncovered;
then cup or sew, and put on each side a linen cloth so that the sewing does not touch the healthy area, and causes the patient other injury and abscesses.
And if bleeding comes while you work, quickly cauterize the area or apply some restraining powders.
Then return to your treatment until it is complete, then bind the injured limb with a suitable bandage and care for it until it is healed.
And I will tell you what happened to a man in his own foot:
He developed a blackness that looked like a burn from fire, and this corruption first came in the back of his foot until it spread throughout his entire foot.
And when the man saw the corruption, he immediately hastened to cover his foot and it was healed.
And a long time after, the corruption returned to the back of his hand. He came to me and I applied reparative things to him after cleansing his body, but I could not stop the corruption.
and he asked me to hold his hand, and I did not want to, because I had hope of recovering the substance. and I also doubted that if I cut his hand, he would not die, because the strength of the man was weak.
and he completely despaired, and returned to his land, and hastened to grasp his hand, and was healed.
and I only relate this story because one may do something else if needed.
Sometimes an abscess comes in the flesh, and lasts so long that it causes a large gathering of pus. And then it breaks open and bursts, and the pus escapes, and the wound remains hollow, like some vessels. And the skin on top is as delicate as a linen cloth, and does not reach to the bone or to the nerve, and this kind of illness is called "healthy" and is not called "fistula".
but if it is so lengthened that it comes to the bone quite clearly, it is called a "fistula"
and if the skin is so that you can peel back all around it, and even when it is thin, like a cloth; and does not become foul because of its corruption.
And if you believe that the skin will burn, and the corruption is not quite clear, and the skin is thick like leather, then treat it with an enema as follows:
look if the bowels are large and the belly that comes from it has a foul odor, then give an enema of Egyptian medicine which is made as follows: Take alum, oil and litharge, equally, and put them in a vessel over the fire until the medicine is red and becomes as thick as honey.
And then take some according to your need, and make it with vinegar and honey, and apply it as an enema on the breast, and extract the pus. And let the medicine remain for two hours, then remove it while squeezing.
Do this many times until the breast is softened and the pus is removed.
And at no time apply an enema of vinegar ash when this medicine is not present, and take ashes from grapevine wood, pour vinegar on top, then strain it and apply as an enema until you know that the breast is well cleaned.
And if the patient cannot bear it, neither the Egyptian medicine nor the vinegar ash, then apply an enema of vinegar and honey or a little bit of powdered litharge. Where you cleanse it with honey and mead wine, so that the honey has the property of purifying and cleansing, and the wine makes the body healthy;
And when you have done this, and you are confident that the breast is well purified, then cleanse it with something that produces flesh in it, and take a plaster that draws out moisture, and make it with rose oil and wine;
Or you cleanse it with certain medicines and ointments, of which I have spoken the properties or treat the ointments;
And if the opening of the breast is small and the nozzle of the clyster cannot enter, widen it a little with an iron tool, and put in a tent made of Egyptian ointment or basil ointment until it is enlarged.
And if the wound is too large, sew it up and leave only the place where the clyster can enter; and if the opening that leads to the bowels is above, make the cut lower than where it is.
And if you cannot cover the breast below as you see, arrange it in such a way that the belly descends to the lowest place it is; for when the belly is perfect, do not allow flesh to grow and if you cannot cover the breast below as you see, arrange it in this manner: Let the belly descend slightly, and do not leave any of the belly.
Let the belly descend slightly, and do not leave any of the belly. And take consolidating medicines to put on the healthy flesh, and spread them on a linen cloth that covers all the flesh; Then cover as firmly as possible the opening of the breast so that it is wider than the first, and spread ointment softly on the other cloth according to the size of the opening, and put it on the opening of the flesh to straighten the belly, and do not remove the large cloth except after many days once;
and he who is outside the breastbone opening removes often to remove the bowels and know what runs from the bowels whether it is venom or pus or enough, whether digested or undigested.
And take notice whether the patient feels pain or not, and if there is an abscess or not, and when your medicine has extended in some way and you see the nature that jumps up on the breastbone opening, know that the breasts are already healing and health approaches.
And then untie it in the morning or on the third day, and when you untie the wound, if you change another cloth and renew the ointment.
And if subtle poisons come after a long time, do not despair of health at all, for health approaches.
For there are men whose wounds heal slowly, and those who do the opposite.
And if undigested bowels jump from the breast after many days, know that the breasts are not healing.
and if the breasts are slow to heal and are elongated, then apply drying medicines that are moist in substance and dry in virtue, such as ointment diafinit, for it has a large part of vitriol, and this is the last medicine;
Take ointment diafinit, and make it with rose oil, and the rose of old wine equal in substance;
Then boil it and use it;
and the same honey thickened by cooking will be better when diafinit ointments are not present, or you take myrrh and aloe and incense, grind them, and sprinkle the powder on the honey when it is off the fire;
then make it into a paste and apply it to the breast, and sometimes administer aristolochia longa and roots of orris, which are also like flour of vetch and centaury; and in use of simples or compounds: crush them, and make a powder, and put on the honey that I have said, and use it;
and if the cure is prolonged, and is not cured by this cure, then know that the corruption is thoroughly embedded, and makes an impression in the bone, or hard limbs, or limbs; if the cure of the fistula cure, as we have said before.
A felon is an abscess that arises under the nail of the finger or toe, or by chance arises in other places;
and when it is inflamed, and no heed is paid to it, then it comes to an abscess, runs and drains pus so much that it runs to the root of the nail, and by chance runs all.
And corrosion comes to the bone, until a foul odor appears, and the flesh around it becomes wide, and the color is dark red.
When you treat it as we have said in the division, and the treatment does not help, then it is necessary that you cut away all the superfluous flesh that remains from the wound, and then cauterize the wound afterwards. Cauterization is of great help if the bone is sound, and the nail is healthy;
and if the nail presses on the flesh and begins to grow in, and there is a wound, then you should place a wedge under the nail that points at the flesh, lift it up high, and cut away this flesh subtly and lightly, and put on the remaining flesh medicines that are burning and corrosive to remove all of it; then cure the injury with ointments until it is healed.
And if the corrosion is in the bone, cut and treat harshly, for as long as the corrupted bone remains, it cannot heal;
and if you see the flesh corrupting, cut it in a line as previously described, then treat it until it is healed;
And if it is fierce, and swollen, and it feels great pain, then you must first heal it.
Then cut the nail with a sharp instrument, cutting across it, and be careful that the cut does not reach the flesh beneath the nail, for the patient would feel too great pain.
And if it happens, apply something soothing on top.
The two nails that are born in the hands of some men by chance are all fleshy, and by chance there is a part where there are bones, and sometimes there is a nail, and none of them are born at the root of the joint, or the birth is in some us of the two.
Those who are born in any part of the bone do not move, and those who are born at the joint of the bone may move.
The incision for one who is fleshy should be light, in a half manner. Cut it at its root with a wide instrument.
Those who are born at the root of the joint are painful to treat. You must hold them in order to cut them.
For one who is born or must be delivered soon, it is fitting that you cut the flesh roundly down to the bone, then cut the bone in a manner suitable for this, and then treat it until it is healed.
The soldering which comes to the two bones together comes by birth or by soldering of a wound, or by burning of fire, or by similar things.
It is fitting that you copy this suture so that it may repair according to its natural forms. Then place between two soft cloths or bandages soaked in rose oil so that they do not fuse together. Or you may put it between two thin pieces of lead until the edges are fused together as it should be.
If a suture comes to any of its fingers with the palm, treat that suture as it should be.
Veins are large vessels wrapped full of melancholy superfluities which come from various parts of the body;
and it happens more in the legs of those who walk and work and carry loads than in others.
It is therefore necessary that you administer to him several times purging of bile, and then the juice of basil.
The treatment with iron is according to two methods: One is where they are cauterized and strong black blood is drawn out. And the other method is that you tie off the vein and treat it thoroughly.
The waist is set according to this manner: First raise the leg with hot water very strongly, until the thigh is softened, then strain the leg of the patient from above the thigh down to the part below the knee;
then cut the vein in one place, or two, or three, with a wide incision, then let and draw strong black blood from it with your hand, from one side to the other, until as much blood has issued as the strength of the patient can bear;
and then bind it up and instruct him to abstain from meats containing black coal;
and repeat the evacuation and cleansing when the veins are full and hurt the patient.
The raising of it is according to this manner: Raise the leg of the patient, if there is much hair, then put it in a bath and raise the leg with hot water until it becomes red and the veins swell;
and if you do not have a bath, heat it by the fire, and then apply it to the vein for as long as from the top of the knee or in the part below the ankle;
then apply the leather to the incision and flay the vein on each side until it appears when touched;
and you will see it red and black, and when it enters the leather it also appears white like a rope;
then put the vein under it as long as it is raised from the leather, and then lightly bind it to the incision, then apply it to another place above for three days;
then flay the leather on the vein until it appears, then lift it with a razor as you did, and bind it to another incision as you did first;
then apply another cut, or several if you need them, then lift it and apply it to the toe, then train and lift it up to the second cut;
Then extract it by degrees, until it is all out, then the cup.
And if you cannot draw it out and lift it, put a strong doubled needle through the whole thing, tie it, and pull it, and put it below the thread, and turn your hand from one side to the other until it comes out. And be careful that it does not break off, for if it breaks off, one cannot draw it out or lift it, and harm comes to the patient.
And when you have drawn it all out, put moistened wool soaked in wine and rose oil on the site of the wound. And treat it until it is healed.
And if the bone is contracted and twisted and wrapped together, and it is not straight, as we have said, then you must split it crookedly, but do not break it. And treat it as we have said before.
The shape of the iron with which one cuts the vein if it is curved and does not cut, then it will cut the vein.
And it is of a large curve, for if it were subtle, it would cut the vein, but let it be large as we have said, and this is the form:
This vein is found in the legs, in hot parts where neither herbs nor trees grow, and in earth where there is no moisture.
And by chance it grows elsewhere than in the legs, and this happens from the putrefaction that comes below the skin, as snakes and worms come within the body, you will find it between the skin and flesh.
And if the signs of the beginning of this vein are such that a very great inflammation comes in the leg, then the color changes, and the vein begins to protrude, just as a root of a plant.
When the shoulder joint opens, it is necessary that you wrap around it a piece of linen from three and a half to four inches, tie it, and leave the linen hanging on the leg, and every time it becomes wet, you wrap it again in the linen and tie it.
and if it is too long, cut off a part of it, and wrap the remainder, and do not cut it at its root, until it is all out. For if you cut it, it will return into the flesh, and cause an abscess and putrefaction or elsewhere, and bad sickness.
for this reason it is necessary that it be treated bit by bit until the end, and nothing remain on or in the flesh.
And it sometimes happens that this vein, when treated, is V palms long or X, and one man once came to me to whom it issued from X palms in length, and when you cut it, it bursts I rays or perforations, and pierce it through to the bottom so that all comes out.
And let the matter which is inside be emptied, and apply to the place healing medicines that prevent putrefaction any day, then treat it as abscesses.
And never put your hand on this vein unless it is open at the joint of the foot or leg, and it comes out with many pores, from which blood jumps.
Therefore cure it as we have said before.
of worms which are born between skin and flesh This ailment is called in our land “ox disease” because it often occurs in oxen and it is a small worm that is born between the skin and flesh and travels throughout the body going up and down, and he feels it well from limb to limb as long as it runs under the skin where it goes, and jumps hard.
And it is engendered by the corruption of certain humors, just as worms and snakes and lampreys and roundworms in the belly come.
And there is doubt about its harmfulness because when it travels through the body and rises to the head and enters the eye by chance, it destroys the eye. and this happens many times.
When you see it being cleansed and milked, one cannot know that except when it goes:
Therefore, it is necessary that you bind the place above and below with a strong tight ligature, then cut it above and milk it out, and if the worm is deeply embedded in the flesh and you do not find it, cauterize it with fire until it dies;
and the greatest harm it does is that it runs the eye, as we have said;
and if you see it coming or close to the eye, remove the eyebrow below it, then cut it above and milk it out;
and one must make the patient use cleansing of the body with dissolving medicines for corrupting bad humors, and beware of meats that cause putrefaction.
of the pain which comes from windiness This disease is called "vakirir" in our land, and it is a pain that comes to some members, and can move from member to member;
and I have seen what I tell you. I was called to a sick woman, and she uncovered her arms, and I saw a small swelling in the vein of her arm;
and a little while after, I saw it rise as quickly as a worm to her shoulder, faster than anything else, like living silver when it cuts from one place to another;
the pain departed from that place and settled in her shoulder, and then a little while after it ran throughout her whole body, until it reached the other arm;
then she told me that it was turning again around her body, just as I saw it.
I marveled greatly at how it moved from limb to limb, for I had never seen this illness in this way. Nevertheless, I had seen many who had pain move from one place to another, but I had never seen it like this, as I saw it in the woman;
and I thought that it was because the woman had a dry body and uncovered veins, and because of that appeared this constrained windiness.
And they do not appear according to this reason in those who are delicate and have moist bodies and filled veins.
And when you see this illness being cured and the patient feels that pain, if it appears to you as we have said, immediately apply a bandage above and below, and then bind it tightly until that constrained windiness in the place has gone out. And cauterize the place;
and if you do not see it in your own eyes, so the cure of those who drive out windinesses, such as fetid pills, and serpentaria pills, and similar others.
Arrows are diverse according to their appearance and according to the places of the body where they lodge.
The diversity of them is that there are some that have large points, small ones, shaved ones, and sewn ones. and of those which have two angles, and of those which have tongues, and of those where there are pieces;
and that which falls in any member falls according to two manners: where it falls in a principal member such as the brain, heart, liver, lung, spleen, intestines, bladder and similar members. When it falls then in any place of these members, and the signs of death which I will tell you hereafter appear to you: it is fitting that you beware of the extraction of this arrow, for death comes afterwards in several ways; and when these evil signs do not appear to you, and the arrow is not deeply embedded, then treat it and care for the wound.
And the sign of the brain when the arrow falls and pierces the bone and cuts through the dura mater which is on top of the brain is when there is dimness and drowsiness and dizziness and redness in the eyes, and inflammation and redness of the tongue, and spasms and confusion of understanding, and vomiting of bile; and perhaps it lacks strength from the nostrils, or the ears; and perhaps it loses speech and voice; and pus leaps from the wound, white in appearance, resembling a poultice, and also leaps like burning charcoal;
and if these signs appear to you, then hold back from treatment, and treat the arrow only if it is not embedded.
The signs of an arrow when it strikes or pierces are that it is near the left breast, and also feels as if it were stuck in something hard, not empty; and perhaps the arrow moves like a pulse, and brings forth black blood, and coldness and cold sweat come, and fainting: then know without doubt that death approaches.
And the sign of an arrow that has not been properly removed is that without any discharge of pus it jumps from the wound and the throat swells, and the patient changes color and sighs deeply and desires cold air.
And if the arrow strikes in the covering of the buttock, it is below the small ribs; and gives great pain and great sorrow and sighs; and it moves all the members of the shoulders.
And if the arrow pierces the stomach or intestines, by chance some undigested flesh may leap from the wound.
And if the arrow pierces or lodges in the belly, and does not pass through the intestines, there is no hope of a cure, nor of extracting the arrow.
And if the arrow lodges in the bladder, and the urine jumps out and goes away, and the patient feels great pain: know that the wound is mortal.
The other members, such as the face and neck and throat and shoulder and armpit and spine of the back and thigh and legs, and similar members, are safe according to various positions. When an arrow is in the nerve or artery and it is not venomous as I will tell you what happened to me so that you may do likewise.
It happened to a man that an arrow fell or pierced at the root of the nose: I tried it, and drew it out on the other side below the fat of the ear, and he was healed without any trouble.
And I drew out an arrow from a young man that had pierced the fat of his eye below the skin, and the arrow was embedded, and one could only reach the point toward the fletching, and the arrow was large, the size of a Turkish bow, all iron light without ears;
The game was healed, and no evil accident came to it.
And I drew an arrow from the throat of a Christian, and the arrow was Arabic with ears:
I shaved the beard, and I worked delicately until I drew it out, and the Christian was healed.
And I drew an arrow from a man, which had fallen in his belly, and I thought he would die;
and then after he had passed thirty days, he did not change his condition; I cut above the arrow, and I dug around it, and drew it out forcefully, and he did not have any bad accident.
And I saw a man to whom an arrow had fallen in the back, and the wound was sealed over it;
and the arrow remained inside him, and did not change his natural state, nor did he find harm in any of his natural works.
And see another man to whom an arrow fell in his face, and the wound was sewn. and he remained thus without suffering great pain;
and many other similar cases.
And treat an arrow for a prince's man, the king, which had fallen between his nose and cheek, and was leaning slightly to the right side. and the arrow was completely embedded.
I was called to treat it after it had fallen for three days. If I find the wound very narrow.
I carefully removed it all at once, and he did not feel it at all. And he felt numbness and pain under his right ear.
I thought it was from the point of the arrow. I put a plaster on the spot that was atractive and digestible so that the tissues would not swell. And the points of the arrow appeared to me.
And the points of the arrow appeared to me. I applied a plaster for several days and sewed up the wound deeply, and kept the patient still for a long time until he felt the arrow one day within his flesh.
And he told me so. I put a strongly caustic medicine on the wound for several days until it was open and I probed it and felt the head of the arrow moving in its place.
Then I widened the opening of the wound with that caustic medicine until the head of the arrow appeared visibly to me.
And I carefully passed the time for four months, and then widened the wound so that I could insert the forceps and pull it from one side and the other, but it would not come out.
Then do not cease to refine and engineer ways of instruments, until I took it one day as well-made forceps, according to the form which will come at the end of this chapter, until I tried them, and restored the wound.
And many judge that the cartilage of the nose cannot be restored: I restored it then, and the wound was sewn up, and the patient was healed entirely.
I have told you the quality of extracting some arrows, so that you put your practice on what I do not say, for books cannot grasp everything;
but wise masters compare on very few things, and on what is present and lacking, find nine works, and nine instruments, at the dismantling of strange things which happen in this art.
I say that arrows do not come out of the limbs where they are stuck except according to two manners: either by the place where they enter, or by another part;
and the one that comes out by the place where it enters is an arrow that enters the flesh, and rarely comes out now.
And if it does not come out now, leave it until the flesh is rotted around it, and the passage is opened.
And if it is stuck in the bone and cannot come out, leave it like that for several days, and move it every day.
And then it will come out; and if it does not, pierce around it with a fine awl until the flesh around it is widened, and then treat it.
And if the arrow is lodged in the body so that one cannot see it, then one must search for all of it. And if you feel it, draw it out with any suitable instrument.
And if you cannot due to the narrowness of the wound and the depth of the arrow, and there is no bone, nerve, or vein, then make the wound larger.
And draw out the arrow if you can, and if it has ears by which it is held, remove the flesh that is stuck to it in two parts as much as you can, and then break or bend the ears of the arrow so that you can draw it.
And subtly, even though you do not break the arrow, draw it more easily.
And if you cannot do it at once, leave it until the sinews around it are rotten, then treat it, for the extraction will be easier. And if the flow of blood opposes you, then apply what we have said about the treatment in its chapter;
and beware of cutting a nerve or vein, and put it in any way you can draw the arrow without danger, whether quickly or slowly, or firmly or gently;
and position the patient according to the shape they were in when the arrow fell upon them, for this is the greatest help there is, and if you cannot, then place them according to what the signs show you.
An arrow that has come from another direction, or where there appears to be something of it, or the skin is swollen in a place if one sees or feels it apparently:
then cut above, so that the tongs can grasp it, and then extract it: If a leap must be made now.
And if it is held in the bone, turn your hand round and round until it enters the bone and widens the bone, then draw it out.
And if it cannot come out, leave it for now and then start the extraction again until it comes out.
And if there is an arrow in it, push it all the way through.
And if it is a bone, and you see that pushing is necessary, administer the instrument with its point, so that the point of the arrow enters the groove of the instrument.
Then push it in; and if the arrow is barbed, put the instrument with its point entering inwards, to ease extraction.
And if the arrow is touched, it is necessary that you cut all the flesh around where the poison is, if you can, then treat the wound as is appropriate.
And if the arrow is in a bone or muscle or belly or bladder or side, and it is close by, and you can cover it up, then cover it.
And be careful not to cover the vein and nerve, then extract it, and then stitch the wound if necessary. And the cure as long as it is healthy.
The form of the tongs with which we treat arrows is similar to a bird's beak, and see here the shape:
And there are many ways of doing so: Large, medium, and small, according to the quantity of the arrow.
The shape of the butt end is like the feather of a bird, to push at the point of the arrow, as it is in this form:
There are XXXI veins from which one heals oneself, of which it has or head XVI, that is to know: Two pulsating ones which are after the ears, which are called the two "herbages"; And the two arteries which are in the two apparent temples; And two veins that are in the two tear ducts of the two eyes, which are called "aspirers"; and the vein which is on the forehead; and the vein that is at the head above the nose; and the two cords which are at the neck; And the two veins that are on the lips above the mouth, and these are the veins which are called "augeherich"; and you see those that are under the tongue
The veins which are commonly healed are five in each arm:
one is the cephalic, and is on the left side, and common people call it "vein of the head"; and the middle one is called "fast", and is composed of the cephalic and the basilic, and common people call it "vein of the heart"; and the basilic is on the right side, and common people call it "vein of the belly", and it is above the fossa, and it is the one which is healed, which appears manifestly above the pouch.
And the salvation is the vein which is between the auricular and the annular, and it has two branches;
and in the leg and foot there are three veins: The first one is below the curvature of the pocket of the left side, and the second sophene which is at the ankle of the right side. And the vein that is called "nesse," which is in the ankle of the other side;
And in the other leg are three veins below those ones.
The vein of the head which is behind the ears helps with old catarrhs and migraines.
And the qualities of the vein, as I tell you, are that you raise up the head of the patient and rub the place where the veins are with a coarse cloth. Then twist the patient's neck with a vise until the two veins appear behind the ears in two places depending on the head. Where your thumbs are, and where you feel the pulse beneath your thumb, there is a sign of an artery.
Then take the lancet and put it under the vein until the bone, then lift your hand along the whole vein upwards, and cut and loosen the skin and the vein well. Two should go through, and make blood come out as much as you see.
Then bind and tie it until it is healed.
And I have already said the incision and the cautery in the first book.
The lancing of the two arteries which are in the two temples is good for ancient migraines and habitual ophthalmia and for the flow of sharp tears as well.
And the quality of the lancing is as I say: and it is that the patient tightens their neck until the two veins appear openly. And put your thumb under your index finger and then cut a small amount.
Then lift the skin above the vein at its highest point with your index finger and insert the lancet below, lift the vein upwards, and tie it off just as you have done for the other two veins; let run enough blood according to your need.
Then untie the patient and place your hand on the vein for an hour, then apply cotton. And then bandage it firmly and leave it until it is healed.
And we have already spoken of their tying off and extraction, which is the beginning of this book.
Bleeding from the vein in the forehead is worth as much as bleeding from the cephalic vein for old facial ailments, migraine, and redness.
And its quality is such that the patient twists their neck until the vein appears. Then take the instrument which is called "fosseur", whose form is this:
And place the point on the vein, and hold it steady with your hand or something else, and let the blood flow out according to the quantity you see. Then untie the patient's collar, and tie the vein tightly until it is healthy and no longer bleeds or oozes.
However, it must not be too severe. And the cutting should not be across the bone because the bone is close and may break the vein if it is thin.
Cutting the two veins that are in the two temples helps with headaches, and swelling, and redness, and pain in the eye, and diseases of the face.
And the quality of their cutting is such that the patient tightens his collar by twisting a bandage as before.
Then the healthy one, and let it be a sinue, a long poke with a flame a wide poke, for there is no flesh. And if the flames are subtle, by chance they break;
Then make the blood run, as much as you need, and then tie it on cotton, and tie it well.
The sinue of the vein of the nose is good for fever and for strong headache, and for diseases of the face such as migraine and redness that comes on the face, even when it is old;
And the quality of the sinue is that the patient pinches his neck, then strains his nose with your left hand, and takes a long subtle flame, and puts it in between the two nostrils, because the vein does not open well there, and the blood will now begin to flow;
And do not apply too much pressure, and let the blood flow according to your need, then bandage it for a night, because it is quickly restored.
The juice of two guindeges helps with the constriction of the veins, and at the beginning of measles, and many diseases, and impetigo, and corrosion, and herpes, and esthiomenas;
And the quality of the juice is that the patient constricts his neck under one and the other, as we have said;
And let the masters stand above the head of the patient, and the patient sit on a stool, then they lance the vein for a long time widely, then draw blood temperately, or as much as needed.
Then redo it in the other vein, then untie the ligature, and loosen all the veins moderately so that the patient does not strangle. And leave it until morning so that the wound may heal.
From the vein of the liver The sinews of the veins above the lips help to glue in the mouth, and cause corruption of gums, and fissures of the lips, and pain and inflammation.
And the quality of the healing is to have the patient sit in front of you and pull out his collar as I have said. Then turn back the lip and look at the two veins, one is at the right lip and the other at the left, and you recognize them because they are black, and because around them are small black veins.
Cut both, and if you don't recognize them and are in doubt, cut the largest one on each side, and do the same with the two veins above and below, because it is the same manner.
from the vein below the tongue The healing of the veins below the tongue is done after the healing of the cephalic vein and this is for the tightening of the throat, and for diseases of the eye, and diseases of the mouth.
And the quality of the healer is such that the patient sits between his hands in front of the sun, and he lifts the tongue, and looks underneath on each side a black vein.
Heal then one and the other, and do not go too deep, for beneath are the arteries.
The veins of the knife with which one commonly heals are healed according to two manners:
either by puncturing all with a sharp pointed blade, or with an olive-wood subtle tool like cutting knives, and it is called “anesil”; and they are broad and subtle according to the width and narrowness of the veins. The form of the burning iron is very famous, and it is wide as you see.
And one must open the raised veins full of apparent thick blood, and that contain thick and troubled blood; and this is the shape of the olive-wood blade:
and it is more subtle pointed, and it is for cutting the subtle veins where there is subtle citric blood
The vein of the basilica, which is one of these veins, helps ailments that are below the throat, and at the neck, and at the chest, and at the belly;
And it behooves the healer that he bleed it abundantly, and that he guard against the artery which is below. And if he cuts the artery, and a flow of blood comes, then it behooves him to staunch it, as I have said; And it should not be piercing the flame, but cutting like a knife.
And if the basilica does not open manifestly, then it behooves you to extract it, and change another; or you want any vein of it, or you bleed in place of it the vein below the arm: it opens manifestly; And apply the cautery to the flame, as we have said.
And if you wish to know the location of the vein, it is necessary that you extract the arm, and touch the area until you feel the pulse. Then mark the location for the incision, then bind the arm, and apply the cautery to the vein with a flame. And be careful not to wound the artery when you see the swollen area, for it is an artery: Avoid it then.
And if you see it protrude upwards like the urine of a child, and its color is red and delicate, know that it is the sinew of an artery: Hurry then, and place your finger along its length, then remove your finger if the sinew shrinks back, which often happens. Bind the arm, and leave it so, and do not move it the patient;
And be afraid, and do not move it until it is healed.
And if the blood is not stopped, and it comes to you, and the medicine is not present to you, then bind the artery if it is open, for the head of the retractor. And stop the blood.
And take a bark of fig, and split it, and take one of the halves and bind it on well until the next day.
If the blood is stopped, it is good. If not, if the healer, as we have said, uses powders that stop blood;
and the stopping is not greasy in several positions because of the small size of the wound, and the strength of the bandage on the arm.
The vein of the arm in the middle helps it draw blood from above the head and below the body because it is composed of the basilica and cephalic, as we have said.
And it is necessary for the phlebotomist to be careful of the nerve that is below, and if he cuts too deeply and finds the nerve, it will swell and the wound will become sore and perhaps cannot heal.
And this nerve appears many times, and if it does not appear in some people because of its subtlety, then you must lance the instrument numb. And avoid the nerve as best you can.
And if it has a vein between the two nerves, make the incision long.
The vein of the cephalic helps it draw blood from the head and helps with those things.
And it is necessary to cut in the middle with olive oil or myrtle oil flame because it is the safest of all veins, for it has no nerve nor artery below. Nevertheless, it is necessary to seek the lightest place, and do not be bothered if one must start over the first time. And by chance some men's veins swell at the first attempt, but it does not matter.
The quality of the cautery is according to your thought.
The first thing that you must know about healing is that healing is administered only to preserve health and to avoid future illnesses;
and let the healing be done in one of the three ways which are here stated: that is to say, cephalic, facial, and basilic; and one should bleed at the beginning of spring in youth, and in autumn and winter after eating, when the signs of fullness appear;
and one should bleed on the first or third day, after two or three hours from the start of the day.
The saint which is administered to sick people has no determined hour, but only when need is by day or night, in all hours and at all times.
And it does not suit to administer the sacrament to children until 14 years, nor to a woman carrying [a child] before the fourth month until the seventh. They ought not to be bled those who have passed 60 years.
And when anyone wants to be administered the sacrament, in whatever manner it may be, it is fitting that he purify his bowels with a light clyster, if he has much retained phlegm, so that the veins do not draw from the bowels harmful superfluities dangerous to the principal members;
Nor should one who is too full of meat, nor who is drunk so that he is filled with wine, nor those with dropsy be administered the sacrament.
And one should refrain from administering the sacrament after a colic attack, vomiting, discharge of the bowels, and multiplication of birth pains in women, and labor, staying awake, and fasting, and to those whose virtue has entirely departed, or through something of the arms or body.
Then subtly reduce the humors, if it is large without, through food and drink and through medicine, if you have the power.
Then enter a bath, if nothing forbids it, to thin the blood, and bleed from a vein between the wrist and elbow, as we have said.
And guard yourself that day from work, and from pain, and from lust, and from similar things.
And be bound and joyful, and let the bandages be higher than those on whom you bleed, and rub the arm two or three times, then tighten the bandage moderately, for when it is too tight or loose, it cannot stop the blood.
And then rub the place with your hands until the veins swell and you can feel them.
Then moisten the bandages with a drop of old oil, then put your index finger of your left hand on that vein below the place where you want to bleed so that the vein does not move and fail when cut.
For there are veins that flee as cords in a snare, and if some are full of windiness, so that when one puts on the flame, it withdraws from the flame, and cannot open the vein, and thus is one of these. And if he opens the vein, the wound is too narrow, for which reason it is necessary that the bleeders be advised in these things.
And if the vein opens the first time, it is good. If not, one begins again a bit lower than that place or higher hastily, if the veins are not swollen.
And if the veins are swollen and the patient is frightened, one leaves him for a day or two, and does not tie the arm. Perhaps abscesses will come.
Do not enter a bath, then begin the bleeding again if it pleases him.
And if the puncture is small, or the blood runs subtly and you doubt that it will not issue as much blood as you see, then put the flame directly into that puncture itself.
And perform the work quickly so that the veins become swollen. For this often happens when the wound is small.
If you see the place swollen, do not begin the bleeding again, and put a poultice of oil on it. For it alleviates the body of blood, and the oil softens in that place where the oil is placed.
And thus administer the poultice of oil in every bleeding that you bleed the veins, to stanch the flow of blood.
and the same thing makes a triangle and a bulge of it, when it is put back in place. if subtle the sinew tears apart when it is too thick.
And if a large abscess comes, which happens often, even when it is not drained except at this time when the opening of the vein is small, if you hurry, and put on the place a sponge moistened in hot water and salt for one hour.
And it must be done after the blood has flowed from the vein, and if it stays in place after a few days without any blackness or greenish color, then do not harm it. And if you see it, put on some aloe or myrrh mixed with juice of calamint, mustard, or something similar.
And often there appears an abscess and swelling at the site of the vein-opening:
Put your hand on it then, and if you find the place soft when pressing with your hand, that appearance is bad. Therefore, do not put on anything of what we have said, for fear of cutting an artery.
But make a dry plaster to harden the area, then treat it with another dressing until it is healed.
And treat each blood according to the quantity of its virtue, and the color of the blood.
For if the blood is black, let it flow out until it is red. And if you see it thick, let it flow out until it is thin. And if it is too hot, let it cool down.
And for one who is full and strong, and needs bloodletting, make a larger wound, and let the incision be wide.
And for one who is weak, do the opposite, and it should be bled a little and often, and one must bleed him by cutting across, not by pricking.
And this manner of incision is safe from bleeding and severing of nerves, and it is worth more than the incision that is long or wide.
And to him whose body lacks strength for the incision, it is fitting to give softened bread in pomegranate juice; If he is heated, draw blood three or four times. And if he is of cold complexion, give him softened bread in thick syrup or in aromatic honey syrup with spices such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and chick peas, and a well-smelling syrup.
And if he faints after the flow of much blood, it is fitting that he inhale broth of flesh and fragrant subtle syrup and use the other things that we have said in the division or chapter of syncope for the evacuation of veins.
And if he wants to avoid weakening his arm and bleeding another time, it is fitting that when he is weakened by a great bloodletting, he should bleed a little at a time, according to the amount of his strength continuing.
And whoever wants to sever his arm after the first bleeding, and he has strong flesh, should bleed for seven hours after the first bleeding, or after the ninth hour.
And whoever wants to heal from another place, it must be healed on the second day or the third.
For he has much blood within his body which is already heated, and it brings fever; so it is fitting to draw a large quantity, and widen the opening so that he sweats abundantly. After you have observed all the conditions of incision, and place your hand on his pulse as he is incised, so that death does not come in place of sweating, and this happens many times when the surgeon is negligent.
And it is not right when you see to detach the arm, and make blood come out the second time, and the wound is closed, that you press strongly upon it. And if it is crooked, that he extend the arm quickly, for that would be bad;
But let it stay until it heals the second time; Or you place the tip of the flame there, as long as the blood which is frozen at the opening of the vein comes out strong, and put a piece of silk sharpened to a point on it, and press lightly upon it.
And if the vein is swollen, leave it alone and do not constrict it, until the abscess is appeased.
And if it is necessary to draw blood a second time, if the blood in that place itself, or in another vein, or in the other arm.
The vein above the arm is cut in place of the head vein because it is composed.
And the manner of the healing is that the patient plunges their hand into hot water, as long as the wrist turns red;
then it is tied moderately, so that the vein appears well, then heal it now crosswise, not lengthwise nor wide;
And let the opening be wide, and cut very close to the joint of the hand, and if it cannot come out, then put the hand in hot water, and let the blood run into the hot water until you have enough.
And if it is summer, do not put the hand in hot water at all, for one puts it more in winter than in summer.
And the cutting of this vein is safer than all other veins, for there is neither artery nor nerve.
Cutting the vein on the right hand is good for all liver diseases, and this is the way:
Hold the hand tight, and put it in hot water until the vein swells up so that you can see it. And if you cut across it, and even if you sever it completely, it doesn't matter.
And do not press too hard, for the nerves are underneath all exposed flesh, and then put the hand in hot water, if it is frozen in the wound and cannot come out.
And when you have treated the blood as much as needed, put oil and salt on the vein to heal quickly, and do so for every vein.
The sinew of the hand on the left is equal to the disease of the mouse, and do all as I have told you on the right.
The herb of the sophene is worth against all illnesses that are below the body, such as illness of the marrow, and retention of flowers, and illness of the reins, and of the thighs and legs that are old, and similar illnesses.
And the quality of its sinew is such that the patient plunges his foot in hot water and rubs on the vein until it bursts, and ties above the joint of the foot. And the vein is at the ankle, and many rains go from above the foot.
So choose then a larger vein or one at the ankle that moves well.
And if you sinew it on the foot, be careful of the nerves underneath, and sinew across as if cutting.
And let the flame be gentle.
And if the blood cannot come out, put the foot back into hot water, and let the vein be well emptied.
And if the sinewing fails the first time, start again a little further up, for the flesh is salty.
Do not doubt the nerve, as we have said, and so do the same to the sinew of the other foot equally.
The vein of the sciatic nerve is at the ankle of strong men, and its blood is worth the pain of the hip when it's for hot blood.
And the quality of his sinew is such that the patient enters or bathes, and strains upon the ankle four times in twisting, for otherwise it does not open the vein.
And if it opens, strain the sinew in all the ways that you can, and by crossing; and it is better that you cut it off, for the flesh is underneath, and it is very strong in men's hands.
and it is better that you cut it off, for the flesh is underneath, and it is very strong in men's hands. And if you do not find it, strain any sinew of his that opens or runs down both feet and towards the little toe, and beware of the nerves.
And draw as much blood as you see, then untie the ligature, and put cotton on top and remove it; It is now healed.
Cupping vessels are made of horn, or of ivy, or glass.
And cupping is done in two ways: either by cutting and drawing blood, or without cutting.
And this cupping which is done without cutting is also done in two ways: either it is with heat, or without heat.
And cupping which is done by cutting and extraction of blood is done in fourteen places on the body, of which one is entirely on the head. and the others are along the neck. and two others on the sides of the neck. and the cupping vessel below the chin. and the cupping vessels on the two shoulders. and the cupping glass upon the boils; and the cupping glasses applied to both arms; and the cupping glasses on both legs; and the cupping glasses on both ankles;
and cupping does not draw blood, except for a few small veins that are scattered in the flesh, and therefore it does not weaken anyone, as one does when bleeding from a vein; and it is not fitting that it be administered, neither with full heat nor without heat, in any illness which comes from repletion, until all the body is emptied.
And if by necessity of illnesses it is fitting to cup, or for customs, then we administer them every hour at the beginning of the month, or at the end, and both in between.
for there are some who, when they need to be cupped, have a heavy head;
and if some find fullness and redness in their face, and head, and neck, and darkness as well.
and some who find a drop of blood in their mouth, and have a swollen tongue, and spit blood; and if there are some who faint, and see by night blood and sadness and death and similar things.
And when we see these signs, and especially when it is the least humid month, we order them to be cupped after three hours of the day.
The sinew of the thigh helps with the heaviness of the head ... which comes to it, and it is not fitting that this be done after the evacuation of all the body;
and this cupping is in place of the sinew of the cephalic vein, and it is not fitting that those of cold complexion use it, or who have diarrhea, for this does them great harm.
and therefore it is not suitable for old people to use it, nor those who have cold diseases.
And those who recover often become stiff, and therefore it is necessary to put the cupping glass a little lower because of the fear of stiffness.
Bloodletting on the neck is in place of the vein and the basilisk, and therefore it is good for constriction of the breast, and for a fissure of the channel of the buttock, and for all, and for fullness.
And it is not advisable to press too hard, because if it holds too firmly, it can cause obstruction or stomach and heart issues.
Bloodletting on the two ribs of the neck is good for headaches, and ophthalmia and migraine, and strangulation, and pain in the roots of the teeth, and it is in place of the vein of the basilisk.
And it is necessary that you instruct the patient to press their hand on the spot, so they do not cut an artery, and there is no flowing of blood.
The applications of cupping below the chin are good for diseases of the mouth, and for the rotting of gums, and similar illnesses which are in the mouth. and it is in place of the health of the two lips.
Cupping of the shoulders is good for illness that comes from heat and fullness.
Cupping on the arms is as effective as three veins in the arm, for it draws blood from these large veins.
And instruct the patient not to make too strong a suction, for the flesh is naked of fat, and under it are nerves and arteries.
A cup placed on the buttock is good for hemorrhoids in the fundament, and for illnesses below it, and it should be large, and made of iron so that it draws well. And by chance, if it were delicate, it would break. and it would make large wounds.
If the cupping glasses on the legs bleed freely, for they draw blood from the whole body, and are good for old pains of the kidneys, and bladder, and loosen tumors;
And they are placed on the two thighs, and the two ankles, and nevertheless they weaken the body after long use, and cause emaciation in many constitutions.
The way to apply a cupping glass is that you first put it empty, and suck temporarily, and place it quickly, and move it evenly, and do not cease doing so, until you see the place red and swollen, and appear the redness of the blood;
Then remove, and replace the cupping glasses, and take care in the constitution of bodies, for there are some who have tough flesh, and clear pores: it is fitting to strike only once, and it is fitting to make wide wounds, and a deep prick; and suck lightly.
And if the blood is thick, it is fitting to strike it twice: the first time to thin the way for the thick blood.
And if the blood is very thick, it is fitting to strike it a third time;
and when we want to draw blood little by little, we only strike once. And if we want a lot of blood, we often restart;
and if the blood is thick, strike deeply and strongly, so that the heart is pierced only slightly, and it is fitting for those who have thick and hard skin, and who have obstructed pores, that you moisten the edges of the cups with oil that is stimulating and dissolving: if it is in summer, with violet oil, or sweet almond oil, or pumpkin seed oil;
and if it is in the evening, of cress oil, or lily, or chamomile, or other similar thing.
And if the superfluity is large and cold, then take oil of marjoram, or of balsam, or oil of anise, and suchlike.
And if he who is treated has tender flesh and large pores, it is not right to put any oil on it, but it should be washed after cupping with rose water, or cold water, or nightshade water, or gourd water, or porcelain water, or other similar [water].
And those who have a lot of moisture, should get up with watercress, or myrtle water, and sumac, and similar things.
And those who have large superfluities, they rise from old wine, or vinegar of honey, or decoction of anise or chamomile, or other similar things.
and it is not suitable to apply a cupping glass before the bath nor in the bath, but after the bath an hour or two.
and do not sleep after cupping, and it is necessary that he wash himself when he is about to be cupped and when he has been cupped.
And beware of those who are being treated if they are choleric, and if their wound is too painful and inflamed; it is necessary that they take cold things, such as pomegranates and endives and lettuce in season, and similar things. and eat little, and roasted meat, and moist meats.
and eat little, and roasted meat, and moist meats. And he who has a cold complexion should take syrup of honey, and moderately spiced wine, which is between old and new, and eat little, and eat little birds and pigeons.
and on the day that he will bleed himself, he should drink more than eat.
And it is fitting to give some men three times a nutmeg before the bleeding or after, to comfort the main limbs. and let the wine be subtle, but it is not right that those who are hot drink it.
Cupping glasses that are placed without pricking are those that are placed on the liver, and on the thigh, and gout, and on the belly and buttocks and the reins and the hip, because these limbs do not suffer from being pierced, and we only do it to draw blood from limb to limb, just as we put them on the breasts when a baby bleeds;
To remove the viscosity which is at the member, as we put cupping glasses on the belly and on the arm to reduce the member;
And remove the pain, when there is swelling or stone, if it removes by its attractive virtue perhaps the swelling, or dislodges the stone from its place;
And thus it is done when it is put on the liver and on the thigh when there is retained windiness, and these cupping glasses are administered empty to suck only; And sometimes they are administered together with fire, and sometimes filled with hot water, as in illnesses of the pleura, and in this manner one fills the cupping glass with hot water alone, or with hot water in which herbs suitable for this have been cooked.
The form of the cupping glass administered with fire is as follows:
And it has two hands and a half palm in circumference, and it has around the middle one small hole, as for putting in a needle, and it is made of horn, smooth in front so that it does not injure the patient when putting it on the member.
and he should put in the middle a stick of wood or iron, to place a bandage which holds, and they are big and small according to the illnesses and the age of those who take them;
for the cupping glasses for children are different from those for old people, and for thin people than for fat people.
And one must put this cupping glass thus on the limb:
Take the bandage of wax or linen, and put it through the cupping glass across the stick which is in the cupping glass, so that the clarity is at the bottom of the cupping glass so that it does not burn the patient;
and then put it on the limb, and your hands should be on the hole that we have said, so that when you want, if the vapor goes, you take off the cupping glass;
and you take the linen as before, and often start again, if you need to.
In the cupping glass which is administered for sickness of pleurisy, at all times acute, there is neither stalk nor hole, and it is not administered except when it is full of water, and it is placed upon the limb only.
And this is the form:
Cupping glasses are not administered except on limbs where one cannot put cupping glasses because of their small size, such as lips and gums, and similar places. And in those devoid of flesh, such as bone or sinew, and others similar.
And the quality of the user is that when you find cupping glasses which are in sweet water clear without stain, then take them.
And put them for one night in sweet water, until they are familiar and have nothing in their bellies. and then it should be bled by vein and cupping, then rub the limb until it is red, and put poultices on top.
and when they are full and have shrunk, if it is a place where one can put a cupping glass, then put one on, for this is very helpful afterwards.
If not, lift the place up gently, and then sharply, very well, and then breathe on it.
And if the poultices heal too quickly after the body of the poultice, wet a linen cloth in cold water and put it on top until the poultice is softened.
And if the poultices are multiplied, put crushed vitriol or alum and similar things on top until they are softened.
Or you can put half a handful of peeled beans on the spot and leave them until they burn at the spot, which will now stop it.
and if you need more, take other bandages.
And if the bandages do not want to stick, rub the area with fresh blood, or prick it with a needle until the bandage sticks in it, and then put them on, and as soon as they feel the blood, they will stick.
And when you see that they are falling off, sprinkle a pinch of powdered aloe and salt, or ash on top, so they will hold now.
Here begins the book of fractures This chapter is often necessary in the art of medicine, and it is the restoration of fractures and dislocations.
Know, thread of wool, that the fools who speak against this chapter have never seen any of the old books, nor read a letter from them.
And for this reason is the knowledge estranged in our land, for I never found any good one.
and I do not know anything else, except through the knowledge of the old books, which I have studied so much that I have treated this knowledge through experience and through the custom of my life.
And I have described in this chapter what is contained therein and have summarized it at the end, and have clearly shown the forms of the instruments that are used, as I have done in these two previous chapters.
It is fitting then that we say in the prologue of this book the summaries of the words and the chapters where wise men put their understanding, and linger on truth, so that those who are experienced may know and learn this noble art, and teach it to others.
I say that when a fracture or dislocation or torsion or sprain comes to anyone, it is fitting that you hasten to heal the patient on one side and the other, unless something prevents you, such as weakness of body, or infancy, or old age. or if the weather is very hot, or too cold;
and eat cold meats, that is to say, cold stews, and broth of birds and goat, and do not drink wine, nor eat any fatty meats, and do not fill yourself too much with meats that fill the veins with blood, until you have no fear of a hot abscess, or spreading of matter in the limb;
If the patient returns to his first treatment which he has used.
And when the broken bones begin to heal, it is fitting that one nourishes the patient with meats that produce great nourishment, or have viscosity, such as cooked wheat in water, rice, and turnips, and veal pie, and eggs, and fresh fish, and strong wine, and similar things. For at half ignorance it takes more time, and sooner the fracture.
And know that broken bones of the old and infirm cannot be well set or rejoined according to their nature due to the dryness of the limbs, nor those which are too tender, such as the bones of young children.
But have no care, set the broken bone with large splints that hold it firm and join the limb together, until it is strengthened as it was before. And do not hasten his work, and for this reason he must be nourished with large meats, as we have said.
And know that fractures are diverse in many ways.
For a head fracture is different from a fracture of the foot or leg, and I will tell you in this chapter all kinds of fractures. For there is a fracture that goes to the bone marrow, and another in sharpening, like the point of a pen for writing.
For there is a fracture that goes to the bone marrow, and another in sharpening, like the point of a pen for writing. And if there is a break with a wound, and a break with a small crack throughout.
And in every manner he should have his engine, and his proper instrument for restoration, according to what memory brings to its place.
And it is known that the bone is broken by the fact that the limb is twisted, and clearly shows by a gap, and sounds when pressed.
and when there is no crookedness nor sound upon touching, and the patient does not feel great pain, there is no fracture;
but there may well be crookedness, or a crack, or a small fracture. It is not right to move it with your hand, but apply the medicines that will come after, and then extract it now subtly.
And know that the fracture which goes in depth, and the two parts are separated, it is necessary to now put them back together equally, just as abscesses come to life;
and if a hot abscess comes, let it rest for some days until the abscess is soothed;
then set it straight as you can lightly and carefully, and know that the restoration of this is lighter than the restorations of those where there are pieces;
then remove it, as it should be done afterwards.
And if the bone is broken into two pieces, whether it is the hand or foot, or at your hand it is a small limb, or at two tendons, or at one tendon and at your hand;
And set the limb according to its natural shape, so that when the parts of the broken limb are loosened, you should reset all the additions to their places as much as you can, and make sure that your work does not cause injury or pain to the patient.
And adjust the two ends of the bones according to the best forms.
And feel it well with your hand if it seems to you that it is not quite right:
If it sets well and do not force it too much or squeeze it as those who cause boils and contractions in the limb by their work, as we have often seen.
And when the limb is in place, instruct the patient well not to move it, neither while watching nor while sleeping, nor while turning, nor in any other way; and make sure that the limb is so secure that he does not feel any pain. For when he feels no pain, except perhaps a little, it is necessary to put him in a position where he feels no pain.
and make sure that the limb is so secure that he does not feel any pain. For when he feels no pain, except perhaps a little, it is necessary to put him in a position where he feels no pain. And be careful that he is kept straight so that crookedness does not come when it is restored.
And the quality of the broken limb is according to what I tell you.
Know that broken limbs are diverse in smallness and greatness and form.
For there are small limbs, such as arms and legs and similar ones: it is necessary to wrap them in soft and fine linen cloths; and those that are large, such as thighs and legs:
it is necessary to wrap them in a wide and strong bandage, because the wide bandages embrace the whole large limb and hold it equally on all sides so that there is no blemish.
then tie it with light tow bandages, three or four turns according to the limb, and hold your hand firmly on the whole bandage, then go above the break and tighten it less so that the break is then a bit further from the break.
and soften the ligament little by little, until you take a large part of the healthy place, then take the other ligament, and return it around directly onto the broken place.
Then bind the part below the fracture, and remove it moderately, not too hard nor too softly, as we have said in the first chapter above.
Then place between the bandages strips of linen or cloths, so that they are all equal, then bind everything above with bandages, and then put your well-made splints on top, if there is no abscess or swelling.
And if there is swelling or an abscess, put something soothing on the hot abscess and that removes the swelling, and leave it like that for several days.
Then remove your splints, and let them be half the width of a walking stick or wood from which they make stakes, or palm reeds, and let them be according to this shape.
but it is necessary that the plaster which one puts on the break be a bit bigger and wider than the others;
and it should also be as long as is necessary for the limb, whether small or large; then remove the plasters as you did in the first hour, then tie a thread over it neatly, just as in the first hour on the break; tighter on one side, looser on the other;
and it is necessary that the thread be medium sized, not too thick nor too thin, and be made of soft linen;
for if the thread is thick, as I have seen in some works of fools who make their bandages from twisted linen threads, that is a great error, because the bandage cannot be even if it is too thin, and it is not right for there to be less than two fingers' space between each plaster.
And if the patient is bruised by the heads of the needles after the tightening in their flesh, then put under them wads of linen, or wool fleece, so that they do not bleed.
When the wound is with the fracture, and the heart is broken, I will say the cure hereafter.
And know that it is not fitting to set all broken limbs on the first day. For when the limbs are large, it is not fitting to put strong splints on before five or seven days, or more according to your certainty of a hot abscess arising;
And see here the manner of ancient plasters for restoring fractures, dislocations, and torsions:
And it is that you take flour which sticks to the walls of the mill, and mix it with plenty of egg, and apply this mixture, not too thin nor too thick, and use it; this is the common way to make a plaster that restores fractures in many positions, for both women and young children, because it is neither too hot nor too cold.
Another way to make a plaster that restores fractures, dislocations, and torsions: Take three bay leaves and frankincense and elecampane and asafetida and gum arabic and mastic, each ten drams. Myrrh and aloe, each three drams. Alcohol nine drams. And make them into powder and mix them with the white of an egg. If the man's complexion is hot, use this plaster, for it is of good composition and quickly restores broken bones and is worth much to many men.
Another kind of plaster that is worth using for twisting: Take mugwort and woundwort, each ten drams. Myrrh and aloe, each nine drams. Acacia six drams. Armenian bole ten drams, and grind well, and cook with rose water or the white of an egg and administer it.
Another kind of plaster for joints and bones separated from their places, and eases the pain arising from it, and heals the use of the bone, and breaks it: Take a new linen cloth, and moisten it in oil and honey, and place it on the area.
This plaster does not restore, but it is good for calming a hot abscess and properly removes pains.
Another way to make a plaster that restores broken bones: Take dried fig leaves and ground ivy leaves, and grind them together, and make a plaster.
Another way of plaster for restoring a broken bone and for drawing out the matter from an abscess. Take mallow root, chamomile, violet flowers, wheat flour, of each one part;
and grind them, and mix with wine, and if the limb is heated, mix it with moist coriander water or water, and use it.
Another way of plastering stronger than the first, when a hard abscess comes to the restoration of the limb. Take mallow roots, flaxseed, betony, melilot, and sanicle, and violet flowers and chamomile flowers, of all one part; and grind them, and mix with salt water, or fresh water, or with wine, according to the heat of the limb, and its rest.
Hippocrates says in his book that one should not put anything on a broken limb to restore it except cerate made of wax and oil, and nothing else more, and he says that it should be neither too soft nor too hard.
And it seems Galen says that one should put on the broken limb, to restore it, dry things a little hot, such as myrrh and aloes and frankincense and similar things, as we have said.
Another manner of plaster that is good for injury and pain: Take marjoram and goat hairs cut off, or bird feathers, and vipers bugloss, and cut them equally, and grind them, and make a plaster and bind it.
And then unbind it a little while after, and take care that the patient does not feel any pain, nor that the bone has moved from its place; if not, unbind it in a few days. And if pain comes to the place, or itching, feeling of rest or swelling, then hurry, unbind it and remove the plaster now;
and take light linen cloth, and a damp sea sponge, and plunge it in water, and lift the place, until the itching ceases, and the pain is relieved; then let the limb rest for an hour, then put dry linen cloth on it moistened with water or rose oil, and bind a bandage over it, until you are sure of a warm abscess;
and lay the inflammation of the limb to rest, and let the pain be removed, then resume the binding subtly, and a piece of plaster, and do not bind it as tightly as before; and subtly until it is healed.
And if you see that an abscess has pus and is red, painful, and swollen, when all of it has been removed, and you need plaster and bandages, do so again as you did first equally.
And if nothing comes to the limb of what we have said, do not unbind it except after III days or IV or V or VII; and never leave it for XX days, according to what is seen, until the fracture heals and brings the adjustment of the flesh close;
then the restraint more than the first, and it thickens its flesh, as I have said before;
and if you see the place dry more than is necessary, know that nourishment cannot come there; so then apply a sharp hot wet compress, every time you unbind it, and do this every third day, and loosen a piece of the bandage;
By this work then cut the nourishing to the limb, and quickly amend what the foolish mind does, that restores the limb crookedly.
It is bad, and if it are works feared, and I do not see other thing than to leave it alone and work straight.
Many manners of breaks are there, and various figures, and the causes are destined.
For there are breaks that are made by the percussion of a sword, and the neck bone breaks all the bone up to the sinew which is beneath the bone, as it makes hay or wood. And for this reason this manner of break is called "haichure".
Or the sword cuts the bone above without piercing it, and this manner of break is called "absolute".
And the wound from these two breaks is large or small.
And if there is an embedded percussion, or fissure, or blows of stone, or falls on stone, or other similar things.
And if there is a fracture extending near the membrane that is beneath the bone or above it, and this wound is large or small.
And if a wound that is healed in the bone as fine as a hair, and the fissure is small, and for this reason it is called this fracture “capillary”;
And if the wound is made by striking with a stone, or by falling, or by a similar thing, and it makes the piece of bone go down inside, and the edges are shaved as smiths do when they strike on anvils; If the stone enters within.
And this happens more to those who have soft or moist bones, such as the skull of a child;
and it happens in all these kinds of fractures that small pieces are detached from them like chips; and I will speak about it in its place.
And we know all kinds of fractures by the traction on them, and the probing with instruments, and by the corrupted flesh which is upon them.
The similar hair is known by this, that when one has uncovered the bone, and rubs a little upon it, if it appears black.
In the treatment of a fracture, pay attention to the patient's condition, and if you see any bad symptom, such as vomiting of bile, loss of understanding, stretching, trembling, fever, and the eyes coming out and becoming red, and other similar things in various states, then it cannot heal without doubt.
And if you do not see a hopeless accident, and you hope for salvation, then begin the treatment.
And when the newborn comes to you first, and it is winter, it is necessary to remove the bone before the fourteenth day so that you can.
And if it is in summer, hasten to remove the bone before the seventh day, so that the cloth under the bone becomes corrupted and accidents occur as we have said.
And if the fracture of the bone reaches the membrane that covers the brain, it is necessary that you split the fractured part thus:
and take the head of the sick person and uncover it on the bone in all ways that you can, and over the figure of the wound as much as you can, and if discharge of blood comes when uncovering the bone, or abscess comes out, help him with what is necessary and fill the place with cloths softened in rose oil; and let the wound rest until the abscess that comes out is appeased and be sure of the discharge of blood; then begin to remove around the bone, and this is done according to two ways of working:
one way is if you cut a narrow incision in front, and this is the form:
And then he puts another incision larger than the first.
And the second way is if you have a number of incisions of various sizes, some narrow and others wide, and they are pointed, and they are of unbreakable iron;
and work lightly so you do not bruise the head
And if the bone is strong and hard, it is necessary that you pierce it around, so that you administer cuts with rasps, but make sure they do not pierce beyond the bone where you are testing, and it must have above the point a margin or a circle, so that it does not let the point go beyond the bone.
And you must have several of them, so that each one comes in its place according to the type of bone, so that you have rasps for all of them.
And this is the form of the three kinds of rasps:
The quality for piercing around the broken bone is that you put the rasp on the bone and turn it at your wrists as much as you know the bone is pierced.
Then put the rasp another place a little after, and so do all around, then cut with nippers the space of the bone that is between the perforations, and do this more subtly than you can, and lightly, as we have said, as long as you draw the bone to your hand, or to any of the instruments that you have such as tongs, pincers.
and guard that you do not touch the brain nor the sciatic nerve.
And when you have pierced the bone and cut it, it is fitting that you leave the instrument which remains from the bone to all other instruments resembling an incisor, but it must be thinner and more subtle than the other incisor.
And if any of the small bones or scales remain, lightly remove them with instruments. Then treat the wound with bandages and ointments as we have said.
And the other method of working is that which Galien says, which is safer. and praise him very highly, for this is his word. It is necessary first that you uncover a portion of the bone, where the fracture appears to move, so that when you have uncovered that part, you will place below the head of this lenticular incisor, of which this is the form:
And do not cut from one side, and the part is sharp on two sides so that the cutting edge is towards the bone.
Then strike with a small mallet above so that you gently tap the bone all around and be careful of the cloth beneath.
If it is near the bone, strike lightly for you can strike it well without harm and without fear.
And if the fracture of the bone does not pierce as far as the fabric, and the bone is cut only from above, and there are small pieces, then you must scrape away that roughness and remove the scales with a delicate razor, which you should have in various quantities to administer in each place the most suitable, according to the work and the shape of the fracture.
If you shave before using large razors, and then after with more subtle ones, and do not cease to do so until it is well done.
In each of the other delicate clippings and fractures, it is fitting that you administer care according to its direction.
And this is something that is not answered by one who has put his study into this art.
And if the fracture is exposed, it is fitting that you take a linen cloth, according to the quantity of the wound, and moisten it with rose oil, and place it upon the wound; then take another cloth doubled in two or three, and moisten it with wine and rose oil, and place it upon the first cloth. and do this as lightly as you can so that you don't burden the wound, then apply another bandage over it, and don't tighten it any more than is necessary to hold the wound together;
and leave it like that for one or two days, until the abscess has quieted down, then untie it, and apply medicines such as lily roots, vetch flour, frankincense powder, birthwort, and similar things;
and make a powder out of these things, and put it on the wound, and then apply cleansing medicines without biting.
and make sure that the wound is clean, so that you do not leave any ointment on it, and do not allow pus to gather, for when pus gathers on the cloth covering the brain, it will run and spread, and cause the patient great harm;
for when one puts upon the cheek a biting thing it stings above Take heed therefore, if any bad accident comes to the patient, as we have said, it is doubtful without doubt.
And if blackness does not come except from the medicine that one has put upon it, because of its virtue, it is fitting that you take one part of honey and three parts of rose oil and make a paste with them. Then cure it in ways that are fitting until it is healed.
Know that sometimes the two parts of the nose above are broken, or one by itself, for there are two bones.
and that below is cartilaginous and does not break; it only makes a bend or twist, and then heals.
And if one of the two parts is broken, it is fitting that you bite your little finger or thumb above the nose, and put the broken part inside against your index finger, and with a pouch by pressing, until the nose returns according to its natural shape. And do this lightly, and be careful that the patient does not feel pain from your work.
And if the fracture is in the upper part above the knee, and the bone cannot return to its place, it must be set even with the top of a large nail.
And if the fracture is in two parts, do it again in the same way and hasten to restore it on the first day, if you can.
If not, after the seventh or tenth day, when the swelling of the abscess has subsided, then bind the fractured part with two strips of linen cloths, if the fracture is in one part.
You bind one on the other side, if the fracture is there; And let the strips be so wide that they fill the spaces of the bone.
And they say no restorer should moisten the bandages with butter, and change them each day. It does not seem good to me, but it is necessary that they be softened in a preparation of egg yolk and mill powder; then leave the bandage on until the bone is solid and the cartilage is hardened.
And sometimes put goose quills instead of bandages, and if the wound is covered with linen, hold it still, and let the patient blow on it. Or do what you see.
And if boils come to a head while you are working on them, put cerate or moistened cotton in rose oil, or in a poppy seed decoction.
And if the abscess does not come out, apply a plaster on top made of sesame flour and frankincense powder mixed with egg yolk, then put it on light bandages and do not tie them.
And if the broken bone is small and it is broken into many pieces, remove it with suitable instruments, then sew up the wound and treat it with things that promote healing of flesh and bone, such as plasters and ointments suitable for this.
And if there is no wound inside the bone, treat it with bandages and put splints of plank until it heals.
When the jaw is dislocated downward and there is no external wound, and the fracture is only superficial and not broken in two, but rather pushed inward, so the expert can easily recognize it.
It is necessary, if the fracture is on the right side, that you put your index finger in the patient's mouth; And if the fracture is in the left mandible, put your index finger of your right hand in it and gently push the fracture inward and hold it with the other hand by force and make it equal.
And if the fracture of the jawbone is broken in two, it is necessary that you administer extension of two parts, so that it may be equal.
And if the teeth move or are broken, tie them with a thread of gold or silver or silk, then apply cerate to the fractured jaw and put a double cloth on top; and put a large well-made splint on top of the cloth, or an equal piece of leather, long and wide according to the jaw, and tie it up at the points you can reach, and instruct the patient to rest and eat light foods.
And if you see that the shape changes, loosen it on the third day and then reset what has changed; and put plaster on it, made from powdered mill flour with plenty of egg or sesame flour, after you have removed the cerote.
and put a light linen cloth over the plaster; and if the plaster dries out, and the patient's condition does not change, leave it until it is healed. Many times it is healed in three weeks.
And if an abscess arises, do as we have said many times.
And if there is a fracture and wound together, consider whether any piece of bone has been removed; if it is subtle, use suitable instruments for this.
And if the wound is narrow, enlarge it with fire according to your need.
And when you have removed all these pieces, and none remain, if the wound is large, sew it up, and put suitable plasters on it, to encourage flesh to grow, until it is healed.
The clavicle breaks several times in front of the shoulder, and the fracture occurs in three ways:
either it is broken and separated into two, and there are pieces, and this is the easiest to restore;
Where there is a fracture with a wound.
And the works are such that when the fracture is without a wound, you have two assistants, so that one holds the shoulder where the broken bone is; and the other extends the neck towards the side;
then put the fracture at your feet so that the form is as it should be and there is neither appearance nor protrusion.
And if you need to extend further, put under the patient's shoulder a round sphere of cloth or wool, and let it be large according to your necessity; and extend and lift the broken bone, and pull out the sphere with your hand so that you set the fracture as it should be.
And if you cannot draw the head of the humerus back out because it comes in perfectly, then it is fitting that the patient lie often on his shoulder blade, and put under the shoulder a medium pillow, and have assistants push the shoulder down, until the bone of the humerus is raised.
Then straighten the fracture at your feet, and if you find it broken, it is necessary to cut it open;
and treat the fragments lightly, and if the bone cannot be joined by any pressure, then apply it to one of the incisors that you have. but put this instrument under the forceps, to hold the joint:
and it resembles a spoon, and is not sharpened, and should be as wide as the bone requires, according to the size of the bone and the strength of the work;
and it has two heads, as you see, and one is wide, and the other narrow, according to the rupture of the wound that you made when you treated the bones;
and when you are sure of the hot cautery, if the wound burns and the rupture is small or you doubt the hot cautery, then apply the wound with cloths and bandages according to its quantity.
And if boils come, moisten a cloth in rose oil and vinegar and wine, and put it on.
The constriction of the bone, when it is without wounds and without cutting, is that you put on the bone a plaster of powder from the mill and yolk of egg, and put light bandages on top, and put a splint underneath the armpit if you need it. Then take a very large bandage of a palm's width, and put a double layer of linen on top of the bandages and plaster. Then take a subtle splint of three fingers wide and long, and wrap it around the bandage so that the head of the bandage hangs down. And put the splint on top of the fracture, and turn the bandage up over the neck, and under the healthy armpit, and under the sick armpit. And loosen from each part, and when you see that the ligature holds the fracture properly, and you see clearly that the splint does not move on top of the broken bone, then leave it alone each day, and when the ligaments become slack, then tighten it.
and make the patient lie on his back, and when he sleeps put a small pillow under his armpit to lift the shoulder up; if it lightens the fracture of the collarbone by lifting the shoulder, then tie his arm to his neck and do not untie it until twenty days have passed lest a bad accident occurs;
then begin the plaster again, if you see he needs it, and remove it and leave him like that until he is restored.
and it is restored in at most twenty-eight days, and less for some men.
of the breaking of the shoulder
It sometimes happens that the broken shoulder or the wide place does not heal in the middle, and it should not be forced except by touch;
if you arrange it according to the shape of the break, and reset it according to its natural form in all the ways that you can;
Then put on the place powder from the mill with plenty of egg white, and light bandages, and put on a double cloth; Then put on a wide and subtle splint, a bit larger than the shoulder, and under the splint are shavings in no place of the shoulder, so use those shavings of linen bandages so that the splint lies evenly;
And then bind it all with a large bandage firmly so that the splint does not move from its place, and look at the binding each day;
And every time it loosens, if you bind it and put the splint equal if it is out of place, and let the patient lie on their side;
and the shoulder is restored in XX days or in XXV.
And when this number is fulfilled, untie it, and be sure, for it is not bone that is put out lightly.
And if a piece of bone sticks out in front and not below the heart, then make a poultice, and have the surgeon do what we have said for the fracture of the collarbone to soothe the abscess with heat.
Of the breaking of the foot
The bone is sometimes broken in half, but this rarely happens; but it often breaks at the end.
And when it is broken in the middle, it falls below, and the patient feels great pain, and shortness of breath, and all at once, and by chance vomits blood, and the hair appears in the broken bone, and one can feel it well.
And the restoration is such that the patient lies often on their back and puts a cushion between their shoulders, then presses the shoulders together, and assembles the ribs of the two sides with your hands, and subtly make them equal in all ways as you can, so that the shape of the bone is as it should be;
then put plasters and bandages on the broken bone with a fine powder of salt or another light substance, and wrap it in a cloth, tying it above the broken bone so that it does not move; and turn the bandage around the back, and loosen it gradually, and check every hour if the bandage is loosening, and if it loosens, tighten it.
and if it is necessary to untie it because of corrosion or itching that comes to the place, or pain or abscess, then hasten and untie it, and remove the plaster, and treat what has come in a manner of cures.
then loosen the plaster, and remove it until it is healed.
of the breaking of the ribs
Know that the breaking of ribs only comes from their great size after the back, and chiefly within, and they only break because they are slippery; and one can well tell by inquiry what it is.
And the restoration is such that you put the break evenly, as it should be. And then apply a plaster, and remove it with a spatula, if you need to.
And if the breaking of ribs leans inward, then the patient feels great pain and sharp points, as with pleurisy, because the bone pierces the tissue. and has pains and coughs up a great deal of blood, and it is a very serious ailment and the ancients have considered it a great danger.
And if some say that it is fitting to administer meats that inflate the belly, to expel the fracture.
We do not make this, so that hot abscesses will not come, if they have not already come. And if it has come, so be healthy.
And say none of you where we put cupping glasses on the spot, to suck out pus, and it seems reasonable. However, there is doubt that the cupping glass does not draw the superfluities to the spot due to weakness.
And they say that one should cover the place with linen soaked in hot oil, and put tents between the ribs to make the binding even around, then it is cured by the cure of pleurisy, of meat and of medicine.
And if the patient feels great pain that he cannot endure due to the bone pointing through the skin, and there is doubt in the patient, then it is necessary to cut above the spot of the broken rib, and it is necessary to put something under the instrument to protect the flesh.
And then one should cut the bone and pull it gently, and then sew the two edges of the wound if it is large, and dress it with plasters until it is healed.
And if abscesses come, put soft cloths soaked in rose oil on the spot.
and treat it while the place of this which it is necessary for an abscess, and let it lie often on the side where it should be, as long as it is healed.
and also at the spine of the back.
And when this happens to someone, and you want to know whether they will be healed or not, if you notice their hands are softened and swollen and dead, and they cannot move them nor extend them, and when you prick them with a needle, they do not feel it.
Know that it is mortal in several positions, and if he moves them and feels well when they are removed and pressed, know that the juncture of the bone is saved, and that the patient will be cured, if care is given.
And if similar things come to the spine of the back, and you want to know whether it will heal or not, see if its limbs are softened, and if the accidents which are in its hands are soft, and on the back there is flatulence and discharge without will;
and when one has turned it on its belly, there is discharge without will. And when he is lying on his back and he wants to rise up, he cannot. Know that it is mortal: if one does not labor in its treatment.
And if this accident does not happen to him, the matter is lighter.
And the cure is that you warm it if there is a hot abscess, and put on the spine rose oil or egg yolk oil until it is soothed;
Then put on one of the comforting and drying plasters, and bind it with a bandage, and instruct the patient to rest; and do not sleep on that part where he feels the pain, until he is healed.
And if any bones are broken, it is necessary to cover them on a hearth; and remove the bone, then bring together the two edges of the wound, if it is large, with stitches, then cure it with ointment containing charcoal, until it is healed;
and if the head of the bone is broken, which is called the "head of the cow," put your left hand in your pocket and place it equal to the other hand at your power, then put the plaster and splint on top, if you need them;
Then remove it, and if there are broken bones, set them up and the bone setter heals the wound until it is healed.
of the fracture of the bone of the hip
It sometimes happens that the bone of the hip is broken, and if it does happen, there would only be a slight decrease in height. And bend down long, and incline toward the side, and comes to the patient pain in the place, and throbbing, and swelling as it breaks.
And the restoration is such that you extend your hand above, as far as you are above the fracture; and know what the fracture is and its shape.
And if the fracture is only at the head, you set that fracture equal as long as it is in its natural shape.
And if the fracture is long, or it slopes inward, make the patient lie on their stomach until the restoration of that fracture appears to you. And when you have set it equal, put a plaster on it, then put a splint of wood or horn on top, and hold the fracture so that it does not move.
And apply the place beneath the ribs, as long as the ligature is equal. And instruct the patient to sleep on his healthy side or on his back.
And if a hot abscess comes, do not touch it until the hot abscess is calmed down, and put on what we have said before. And then return to restoration, and extract it as it should be done, if there is no bad accident;
Of the breaking of the shoulder
The shoulder joint is that which is between the elbow and the head of the shoulder, and if it is broken, then one must restore it according to one of two manners:
One of which is that you take a smooth stick of medium thickness, according to this form:
And tie the two ends with two ties, and lift them up high, and have the patient sit on the seat.
Then take the broken arm and bind it on a stick, so that it reaches the armpit, and put a curve in the stick. Then hang it on something heavy or have someone hold it down.
Then place your hands together at the point of the break, so that the break returns as it should.
And the other manner is that one lays the patient on his back and ties his hand to his neck; then he commands two assistants, that one hold what is on the fracture with his hands, and the other hold below all of the ligament, and each stretches in their part.
And if you see that the extraction is stronger, extract the ligature below the fracture, and above the fracture, and extend each of the ministers to their part.
And if the break is close to the head of the shoulder, you should put one bandage below the armpit and the other toward the elbow, below the break.
And if the break is toward the elbow, it is best to put a bandage lightly and without strain, so that the break is aligned on the arm and at the elbow.
Then align the break as it should be and bind it, unless abscesses appear.
And if an abscess arises, do not extract it until seven days have passed, and place moist linen soaked in rose oil on it until the abscess has subsided;
Then extract it, and the way to extract it is that you put a plaster on the break, then assemble the arm on the shoulder joint, and put your hand on the shoulder or chest.
And put the cloth on it, and extract it on the shoulder joint, and on the arm, so that the arm is in its proper place, if nothing prevents it, or if the bone has not been moved.
And if you doubt that the bone has moved, then use splints and put on the break a splint larger and stronger than the others, and have two finger-widths of space between each splint, and let each splint be so large that it extends three finger-widths beyond the break on each side;
Then pull upward on the splinters, just as I said at the beginning of this chapter about fractures, harder and less in distance.
And if you see the setting of the splinters and the tightening, as we have said, in the hour that you are restoring the broken limb, and you doubt the abscess heat, let it be bound until the seventh day, as we have said.
Then look at the bandage every three days, so that it does not itch or swell, or come to the place where the nourishments cannot come to the limb because it is too tight. If the shoulder, as we have said.
And if none of these accidents come, then do not unbind it except after three days or more, and let the patient sleep on his back, and have his hands on his stomach.
And put under the shoulder one cushion plain of wool equally, and look every hour of the day or night that the shape of the broken limb does not move, or that the bandages are loosened.
if it is treated by the power of medicine, and you give it the meat that we have previously mentioned, in such a way that the meat is at first subtle; and when it begins to recover, let it be thick.
And it is customary that the shoulder and the leg should be recovered in forty days altogether; and then you must loosen it and administer baths and ointments for healing to straighten the place.
And if the constriction is ugly and tight, it will remain for one day or two months.
Of the breaking of the arm
The arm is composed of two bones, which are called the "humerus," one of which is small, and it is the one that enters the pouch;
and the other is large, and it is the one that is below, toward the little finger;
sometimes only the large humerus breaks, or sometimes the small one, and sometimes both together.
When small bones are broken, the restoration is easy, and the healing;
And when large ones are broken, so is the healing difficult, and more grievous than when they are broken together.
If it is a small bone that is broken alone, then you must gently stretch it, and set it equal.
And if it is a large bone, it is necessary to bind it more tightly;
and extend it on a cushion, and hold the pouch of the hand higher than the others, and the small toes lower than the other toes, and let the patient be crossed upon himself, and the cushion in front of him higher, so that the patient does not suffer any hardship;
then extend the minister's left arm to the part below his hand, or at the ligament, and another minister above.
And then put the sights equal, according to its best form.
And if in the fracture there are pieces, put each one back in its place, and if there is any detached that the heart grasps, and you cannot restore it to its place, then make a splint and set the bone as we have said before.
And if with the fracture there is a wound, I have spoken of it in a particular chapter; if you take the care
And if at the beginning of restoration boils arise, then apply a poultice made of rose oil and white wax, so that it is neither too hard nor too soft; and tie the poultice on subtly, until the boils are appeased.
Then remove the wax, and apply a plaster of mill powder with plenty of egg yolk, then apply splints, and let the splint from the fracture be stronger now, and a little wider than the others;
and know that it must have six splints or arms in several positions: whether the fracture is in one of the bones, or in two;
and place it higher above the fracture than elsewhere, and always less as you move away, as I said at the beginning of the chapter; And let the bandages that are on the fracture be soft and moist, and not hard nor rough;
And let the bandages that are on the fracture be soft and moist, and not hard nor rough; And let the thread with which it is bound be linen, neither too thick nor too thin, as we have said.
And examine the limb and the ligament after a few days. And if any bad accident comes to the limb, such as itching that comes to the limb, it is fitting that you bathe the limb in hot water, until the itching is appeased;
and let the limb not be tightly bound when at rest.
And then begin again the tightening, and if the ligaments are softened and the bone loosened, and similar things, so address it.
And if you fear that the nourishment cannot come to the limb because it is too tight, then you must soften it a little and leave it like that for several days until the nourishment arrives, and then remove it.
And if none of these things that we have said happen to the patient, then do not loosen it for 20 days.
If he is in pain, then let him hold his hands at his neck and let his collars be even, and beware of movement and exertion, and sleep on his back;
And know that this fracture is restored in thirty days or thirty-five, and perhaps in twenty days, according to the humors and constitutions of the patient.
Of the breaking of the hand
Know that on the back of the hand and at our fingers there are many small breaks, and they only come with weeping often.
And when the palm of the hand is broken or bent, it is fitting that the patient sits upright and straight in front of him equally;
Then place his hand on the extended table and extend the broken bones and set them equal to the others, so that they are well joined.
And apply a plaster and bandages, if abscesses do not appear, then he applies a splint according to the quantity of the place. And it should be wrapped in a linen cloth.
And if the fracture is at the base near the belly of the palm, make a sphere of cloths and instruct the patient to squeeze it to his broken palm. And then bind it with a long cloth, and let the splint be as wide as the palm of the hand, and bind it as is fitting.
And if the fracture is at the wrist, it is necessary that you put a splint above and another below on the palm, so that the hand is open and straight, then tie it tightly around the hand, and bind the two splints together.
And if a fracture occurs to any of our two arms, it is the elbow, then set it straight, as it should be. And pull it out with the palm of your hand, and if you see that it will raise a small straight stick to lift the fracture, and it does not move.
And if the fracture is in one of the other arms, like the index finger or one of the others, then set it straight and bind it with the healthy arm that is next to it. Or you tie them all together, as strong as possible, or put them on a stick, like a pouch.
And take care in the restoration and arrangement of a heated abscess, and heal those who come to you, as I have said.
The bone of the thigh is often broken, and one can see it well when it turns forward and backward.
and its restoration is done by tying one linen above the fracture, and the other below. And the patient lies on his face, then each minister extends his linen to his own side equally;
and this is when the fracture is near the bone.
And if the fracture is near the root of the thigh, one of the splints should be towards the hip, and the other splints below the fracture.
And also if it is near the knee, then let the linen be below the knee, and the extension downwards;
then put the splints on the bone equal with his two hands, as long as it is according to its natural shape, and then apply the plaster and the bandage, so that abscesses do not form.
And if there is a hot abscess, let it cool down then return to your work and your treatment; the binding is done in this manner.
It is necessary that you wrap it up on the break with a bandage doubled twice in two or three layers, and leave the excess, then turn the leg so that the heels come to the root of the thigh, and put one thread long between the thigh and the leg, below the knee, and bring the head of the thread above.
Then turn on the leg and on the thigh the bandage, then put on the break splints, and put a splint on the bone of the leg.
Then fill the place eight between the leg and the thigh with soft cloths to make equal the tightening, then begin to tie three or four turns on the break. And when you go higher above the break, tighten it less.
Then take the two ends of the thread that you have put between the leg and the thigh, and tie three splints which are above them, then go back down to the head of the thread, as far as you come below the foot.
and hold it so that it does not move from its place, then leave it like that, until neither an abscess nor swelling nor any similar thing comes. And if it should happen, and it loosens, and corrects what comes as we have said many times;
and if there are pieces of bone that stick out, it must be drawn out, if one can. and if one cannot, it is necessary to split the place and draw forcefully. and treat it as we have said, until it is healed.
And when the thigh is broken like this and splints are put on it as in the shoulder or arm;
in all ways, with restoration done like this, the patient does not weaken.
And know that the thigh is restored in 10 days, or a little less or a little more, according to the diversity of complexions.
Know that in the knee joint there is often no fracture, but it bends many times.
And if it breaks, except for a crack or hole, and occurs at any wound, and even without a wound, it is good for everyone.
And the restoration is such that one puts together what is broken to its proper place as much as it can be assembled.
Then apply the plaster, and put a round star on it, if you need one, and remove it as is appropriate, then consider all the arrangements that we have mentioned in other fractures, such as a hot abscess and other similar things. Apply to each ailment what is appropriate for it, until it is healed.
From the breaking of the leg
Know that the leg has two bones, one of which is called "mustelz," and the other is called "foscile."
And every other fracture occurs as it does in the arm, and for this reason, the restoration is the same as that of the arm equally, and the work is all one. And if the two bones are broken together, the leg turns in all directions.
And if the small bones are broken, turn them back.
And if the large bone is broken, there is great pain felt, and it is clearly seen. and turn below.
Then apply extension, and put it equal, and bind the splints equally;
but nevertheless, if the fracture is ugly, and there are several pieces, the extension should be less and lighter; and adjust according to your skill.
And when you have completed your work, take two bandages of beech wood that can bind the leg on one side and the other, and they should be as long as the leg from the knee down;
then wrap them twice above and below, and tie them in the middle as well, and with this bandage, the leg cannot lean to the right or left, and thus it is good.
and no one should apply splints as long as the leg, and if they are made of wood, they should be placed on the leg to prevent movement, and properly done, this is done in the fracture or where there is a wound;
And stir each day the leg to see if there is a hot abscess or another incident. If the cure lasts as long as it is healthy.
Of the breaking of bones of the foot
At the ankle there is no fracture, but the bones of the foot sometimes break and are crushed, and there is strength only in several positions.
And if it happens that a bone of the foot is broken, and you see these bones rise against each other, put the patient's foot on the ground as if he wanted to walk, and then put your foot on his, where the bones are raised, and press it so hard that they return to their place.
Then put the plaster and bandages on top, and put under the belly of the foot a small table with two sides plain, then straighten the foot carefully, and after you have wrapped cloths around it, and other things which you need.
And when three or four days have passed, untie the bandage, for you will find the bones aligned, whether they are broken or dislocated.
And if any of the two are broken, restore them as we have said for the bones of the hand; Then place on the broken bone a splint according to the length of the bone, and let it be one span wider, then place below the foot that table which I have mentioned, and bind it carefully.
And if there are two or three, or more, broken bones, then place on each bone a splint according to its size, wrapped in a linen cloth, and bind the table below the foot. And let it be placed on the head of the table beneath the belly of the foot so that it holds it well.
And it is fitting that you do not forget the other things that I have said about other fractures, as we have said. and treat each incident as it is fitting.
of the breaking of the bone where the dagger
When the bone of a woman's nature is broken, make her sit wide-legged, then incline her to the back, and have her held from behind.
Then fill the bowl with cotton soaked in the nature of the ailment; and put as much in as I stand.
Then lift the woman up, and gently tap her back, bit by bit, and then let the cotton jump until it reaches the entrance of the ailment, and return the bone with the hand.
And when she wants to urinate, remove the cotton, and when she has urinated, put it back in, and do this for seven days or so. The fracture will be restored, and if you see it, take a bladder of a lark, tie a cane to the opening, and insert the whole bladder into the ailment. Then blow into the cane until the bladder is inflated inside. The ailment will return the fracture to its place.
Then fill it with cotton and leave it like that for several days until it is healed.
And when the bone of a man's shoulder, or a woman's, is broken, if you restore it as we have said for the bone of the hip;
and these fractures are not hidden from those who apply their study and practice to it, and understand my book.
For the fracture indicates in several ways the right path of restoration: understand then.
When a penis is broken, take a goose's throat and insert the penis into it; then wrap bandages around it, and leave it for three days or more, and it will heal quickly.
From fracture with wound
It is necessary for one who has a fracture with a wound, even if it is large, such as the bone of the thigh or shoulder or similar, that he be cleansed now, so that the cleansings that we have said bear witness to this.
And if the wound is healthy, and there remains vitriol, if you have nothing else, then begin again to restore the fracture in that same hour, or that day, if no abscess comes.
And if an abscess comes, leave the restoration until the next day, until the abscess is soothed, and do not touch it on the third or fourth day, for you will cause evil accidents.
And if the broken bone is apparent upon the heart uncovered, it befits that you put it in place lightly with your hands, with small extension.
And if the extension does not appear to you to be equal to your hands, then take this instrument of iron which has seven or eight inches in length, and its width is according to the quantity of the wound; and for this reason it is necessary for the healer to employ three or four, according to what they need in each treatment of a fracture.
and let there be a round one and a large knob, that it does not bend under pressure on the limb during your work, and let it be wide in front, and thick from the middle forward, like this:
And it is called a "palanche," for which reason it is necessary that the curved head be placed on the visible head of the bone; and the end at once, so that it returns, and is equal one against the other. And if the fracture is subtle and the instruments cannot grasp the bone well, it is necessary that you cut off the head of the bone so that the instruments have power.
And if you cannot return the bone as we have said, if there is a point of an instrument suitable for this, either an incision tool or saw, at your disposal;
then cut away what remains in the bone from sharpness and small splinters.
And when the bone is set back, and the patient feels great pain afterwards, know that it is not in its natural place.
If you do so that it is in its place, then moisten the cloth in black stiptic wine, and properly if it is in summer; and do not put any cerate or other thing on the wound where there is oil, lest it cause decay and corruption;
then administer splints when you have restored the bone, and leave the wound uncovered, and apply a covering all around, according to the quantity of the wound, and take good care that the wound is not strained with the fracture;
and many times foolish errors have been made, and they have brought death to the patient or corrupted him sometimes; and let the binding be looser and softer than for other fractures.
And if the wound is bad or large, and you doubt that evil accidents may come, as we have said, and you find pain in the place, then it is not fitting to put on splints; but wrap around it, instead of bandages, hard cloths, and tie them.
And when you see after one or two days that pus has formed in the wound, remove what you have put on it and apply a healing ointment, such as tetrafarmacon and similar ones.
And it is fitting that you loosen the limb twice a day, in the morning and in the evening, until it is fused and healed.
And it is fitting that the limb be aligned in such a way that the bone runs down slightly.
And if every day it gets worse, and it cannot be soldered but comes back again loose, know that there are small pieces of bone, for which you must want the wound with a tent, and remove all these detached pieces that cause this pain.
And if a fistula comes to the place, or another manner of corruption, it is fitting that you cure it according to what he says in his chapter before.
And when the bone is broken and open on the limb, as the bone of the thigh or shoulder, and other similar large bones, do not draw it out at all, for many times death comes, but leave it until it rots.
Perhaps it will fall off by itself after XX days or XXX, then treat the wound if you can.
And if you cannot, leave it alone.
We often come after the healing of the break, especially when it is near the joint, and it is a sorry sight to see the shape of the limb. And perhaps the limb cannot perform its natural functions.
Take care, then, if it is fresh to us: if he administers astringent medicines, such as aloe, incense, and myrrh, and sarcocolle, acai, and similar others, so that you take any of these things, or all together, and mix them with astringent wine or with plenty of egg yolk or with oil; and puts them on the wound in bandages, and binds it well, and does not loosen it for any days.
and puts them on the wound in bandages, and binds it well, and does not loosen it for any days. and then loosens it, and begins another one, until the nodules are removed.
or you bind it on a well-made piece of linen; for the property of linen is that it removes all swellings from the limbs.
and if the nodule has already become hardened like stone, and it is necessary to remove it, then place a cup on top of it, and make the superfluity appear. Where you shave it with any razor until it is removed, and treat it until it is healed.
the limb which is weak after healing
When the fracture of the bone is restored, and remains after the members weak and subtle, it happens for many reasons: One is because it was bound too tight, and not bound as it should have been; Or because there were too many bandages, and the nourishments could not come to the limb; Or because of a multitude of movements; Or for too great movements, not at its proper time; Or because it has little blood in its body, so it is weak.
And the cure is that you make the patient eat, and make the body tender, so that the blood is multiplied in him; and he administers a bath, and gives him joy and relief;
then he puts pitch on the limb, so that the pitch draws out a great inflammation, and he often raises it with hot water, until the inflammation subsides in the limb; and it returns to its natural shape.
a crooked limb after healing When the limb is twisted after restoration, and the broken bone is open, and the shape of the limb is ugly, nevertheless it does not lose its natural function:
do not believe the fools who say that one must break the limb all over again, and many fools have done this in our land;
and this work is blamed, and it brings great evils, and by chance death;
however, if the inflammations and torments are fresh, it is fitting that they be raised with hot water, or softening herbs be cooked, such as leaves of mallow, roots, melilot, and similar things;
And make a softening plaster, such as well-made diachylon, and take the juice of mallow and mix it with the fat of a ewe or oil of sesame, and make a plaster on top.
Or you take ripe figs and crush them with flaxseed meal, and similar medicines that reduce swelling.
And never is the dislocation removed by constant and long rubbing with wet hands. And let movement be administered to the limb every hour.
And if the crookedness is old and hardened, like stone, and it is necessary to remove it with an iron instrument, then it should be cut up to the bone, with a fine, light incision. And put a cushion and care into the treatment.
Dislocation occurs when a joint moves out of its place, which prevents it from moving, and the limb is misaligned, and the patient feels great pain and injury.
When dislocation comes to anyone, if it is necessary now bring it back without delay.
For if you delay, the wound will swell, and by chance it will be replaced in its place with difficulty.
Therefore, it is not good to move it at the hour when it is swollen: many times bring forth spasm and other pains;
in all ways, when this happens, if you make the patient healthy, then leave him, until his abscess sores are soothed;
then raise the limb with hot water and oil, then reset it lightly, and care for each limb as it comes into its place.
And I have ordered the chapters of the dislocations from the head down to the feet.
It sometimes happens that the jawbones are dislocated both, and the dislocation of both is according to two manners: where they are sometimes loosened from their places, and softened a little; or they are dislocated entirely, and hang towards the ground, and cut off the saliva from his mouth that he cannot hold, nor can close his mouth, and wraps his tongue with speech.
When the dislocation is small, it returns by itself through several arrangements.
And if it is whole and complete, you must reset it quickly, and do not delay;
and in such a way that the attendants hold the head of the patient, and put their eyes behind the pocket of one of his hands into the root of the dislocation of the jaw inside the mouth, if the dislocation is in two parts; and the other hand should be unbound, to put it even.
and instruct the patient to soften his jaws and move them in all directions. And he must hold the eye equal, until it returns to its place.
And if returning it is difficult, even if both jaws are together, apply a mixture of hot water and oil until they soften slightly.
Do not hesitate to return it, as we have said.
And when they are returned evenly, and the patient's mouth closes well without softening it, apply soft cloths with a bandage made of rose oil and wax, then bind it lightly with soft linens.
and let the patient sleep on his back, and his shoulders should be lying between two cushions so that he doesn't move them neither to the right nor to the left, nor does he make any effort to raise himself, but takes light food as long as the pains are removed, and the jaws are tied;
and then let him eat what he wants lightly, and do not work at opening his mouth to eat or drink as long as the jaw is well tied and healed.
And if the two jawbones cannot be put back in place within an hour and are not returned to their proper positions, then fevers and usual pains arise, and perhaps dissolution of the belly, and perhaps vomiting of pure bile.
And when you see this, then know that it is lost; and many times they died in nine days.
The forcele cannot dislocate from within the continuation of it and the foot, and it is dislocated sometimes outwards, and one feels it well.
And the restoration is that the patient lies often on his back and extends his arms; and then press the place with your palm, and it will return;
Then put on the plaster and bandage it, and remove it.
And the head which is towards the elbow cannot dislocate. If it does, and if it dislocates even once, then reset it in its place, as we have said;
Then put on the plaster and bandage it, and remove it, and instruct the patient to rest until they are healed.
And in the same way reset the head of the shoulder blade when it is dislocated from its place.
of the dislocation of the shoulder
Know that the shoulder is only dislocated according to three ways:
one of which is that it dislocates to the part of the armpit below; and the second is to the part of the buttock; and by chance it dislocates to the part above, and this rarely happens.
and do not dislocate behind for the shoulder, and do not dislocate within for the nerves;
and many times dislocate below towards the armpit, similarly for those who have a bone protrusion, because it must be hastened.
For those who have enough flesh, it enters with difficulty and returns with difficulty.
And it sometimes happens to some men that they suffer a blow or fracture, and their shoulder swells with a hot abscess, and they believe it is dislocated because of it.
Therefore, you must test it until you are certain; and then begin the treatment.
And it is known that a dislocation occurs when it falls towards the armpit and puts a difference between the sick shoulder and the healthy one, and you will find manifest diversity between them. And you will find a hollow at the head of the shoulder, and below the armpit towards the chest, the head of the shoulder as if it were a bone. and the patient cannot bring their hand back to its place, nor move it in any way.
And also, if it is dislocated at the top, unless it is hidden, for you will find it clearly when touching.
And this type of dislocation is not difficult to reset, when it is new, or if the child is sick.
The method is that the practitioner lifts the patient's hand upward, then puts their fingers under the armpit, and lifts the joint forcefully upward to its place. And the practitioner lifts the hand and extends it upward, then puts it below. It will come quickly.
And if it does not come as we have said within three days, it is necessary that the patient be bathed in hot water; and let the patient use a soothing and softening poultice, such as a decoction of marshmallow and fenugreek and melilot in water, and it should be applied.
Then let the patient be laid on their back, and put a cloth of wool under the armpit, neither too soft nor too hard, then place the patient's heel upon the cloth, and gently lift the head of the shoulder, and pull the hand of the patient;
and another assistant hold the patient's head so that it does not move down; that shoulder will now return to its place, and if you see the resetting according to this method:
and it is for you to have a man who is larger than the patient present; and let him stand straight beside the patient and put his shoulder under the patient's armpit, and lift the armpit upwards so that the patient hangs on the arm; And another minister pulls the patient's hand towards their belly. And if the patient is too light, then you can put something heavy on him, and the dislocation will return immediately.
And we reset it in another way:
And one sticks a long coal in the ground, whose head is as round as a pistol, and is neither too thick nor too thin; Then it is placed under the patient, but with several cloths on top of it, and the patient lies along the length of the wood;
Then their hand is extended in the opposite direction, and the joint will return to its place quickly;
And if it does not want to return for all these things that we have said, then do this cure: Take a coal two arms long and four fingers wide, which has a round head to enter perfectly under the armpit, according to this form:
Then lay upon the head of the wound cloths underneath so that it does not stain the patient and then put it under the armpit of the patient
And extend his arms upon the length of the wound and bind the shoulder upon the wound and the arm at the head of the hand then put the arm upon the rung of a ladder that is wide and let the hands be extended downwards and let the body hang down on the other side The joint will come back together now.
And when it is in place, no matter how, you must put under the shoulder a sphere of wool equal in size; then apply a plaster prepared with powder from the mill, frankincense and egg yolk, over the whole shoulder and bind it; then bind it under the shoulder firmly, and tie the bandage over the plaster, and embrace the hand to its neck, and let the hands remain thus.
And it is fitting that he rest a little while, as long as the limb is comfortable, for it will heal more quickly
and then rest more afterwards for five or seven days and move it. And if it is firm and not softened, it is healed.
And if the joint is forced out of place by moisture or for another reason, it is necessary that you administer cauteries to three holes, as it is shown in front of this chapter on cauteries.
And if you do all of this and it loosens after seven days, and the joint does not hold and cannot raise his arm upwards, then know that the nerve at the head of the shoulder is cut or stretched or softened. And know that the joint is never fixed in its place.
Dislocation which is towards the shoulder blades, or breasts, or behind, is done by impulse and extension of the hands, and it is administered elsewhere;
And cure as long as he is healthy.
And if after healing comes stiffness in the limb, and slowness in movement, then have the patient bathe many times, until the stiffness is relieved, and it returns to its first nature.
Of dislocation one must
Know that the joint of the elbow is dislocated at points and at points it returns;
and if it is dislocated in all parts, and even in front and behind, the dislocation is not rejoined, for one sees it well and feels it well; And it is dislocated according to each shape. And when you join the sick knife with the healthy one, if you can see it openly. For the joint is raised, and cannot bend the arm, nor touch his shoulder at all.
And it behooves you to reset it as abscesses come for if abscesses should come, it would be a hardship to reset it;
and by chance it cannot be completely reset, even when it is at the back; If it is worse than other dislocations, and there is greater pain, and perhaps death comes.
And the restoration is such that when it can be brought back, you extend your hand with both hands; and your arms are spread, and the hands from above according to the way it was twisted, then and below, push the joint at its edges together, or at the root of the palm, until it returns to its place.
And if the dislocation is at the front, it returns when he doubles his hand onto his hand, and pulls from the root of the palm or the costal bone which is dislocated.
And if it does not want to return to its place, administer strong extension;
and have two assistants extend the arm, and hold it so that it does not move during the extension;
then turn the arm from each side, once you have wrapped a long and wide doubled cloth around it;
and when the assistants join the joint to your hand, anoint it with some oil to soften the joint, then push the joint firmly, until it returns;
And when it is in place, put a dry plaster on it with egg yolk, and bandage it firmly, and bind the arm to the neck of the patient, and leave it for several days, then unbind it.
And if the joint is firm in its place, untie the bandage and leave it;
and if you see that the joint is not holding well, start the plaster and bandage again, and leave it like that for several days, until it is firmly in place; then untie it.
And if he feels pain after the joint is reset and it moves, bathe it and rub it well, and press until it is relieved; or put a greasy sheep's wool on the joint, then leave it for a day and a night, then remove it, and put it in a bath; And when he sweats, if he rubs the joint moderately, then puts the bandage back on, and then goes into a bath; And thus does it twice or three times, until it is healed;
And if you see, put cow dung moistened and heated with butter on top of it;
It will return to its proper position.
The dislocation of the hand
The joint of the hand dislocates, and its return is lighter than the other joints. Nevertheless, it must be returned to its place quickly, in the same hour that it is dislocated, so that the flesh does not swell or an abscess becomes hot.
And the return is such that you place the afflicted hand on a table and extend the fingers of the hand, and look at it and put it equally so that he puts his palm on the appearance of the joint, and pushes until it returns.
Nevertheless, it is necessary that you look to see if it is well in place. Then put the patient's back of his hand on a table at extension and flexion. And if the dislocation is on the back of the hand, place the patient's back of their hand on the table and the surgeon puts their hand upon that appearance of the joint.
If it returns now, it is good. But if not, if you bind soothing poultices for abscesses on it, and leave it thus without moving.
And if he cannot bear it, and you cannot put it in place after several days, the joint remains crooked.
And do not harm the patient further than that while the hand is weakened and cannot grasp anything at all. Then know that the nerves are cut, or the artery.
If there is no other remedy than to burn it with a cautery, and perhaps nothing else will do.
And when the hand is in place, put on the plaster that we have said, then bind it and leave it for five days, then untie it and leave it like that.
And if he cannot move it well, and there is some stiffness, then apply warm water and rub it until it is healed.
of the dislocation of the wrists of the hand
Sometimes the fingers of the hand are dislocated on each side, sometimes at the back of the palm or in the belly.
Then stretch the fingers and push the dislocation back into place as far as it will go. Then support the head of the finger and bend it towards the side where it is dislocated
and leave it for two days, and then set it equal that day;
And from that time on, as we have said, untie it during the day and make it move, and rebind it at night;
And do this often until it is tight, and do the same if it is dislocated in the belly of the hand, and do as you have done before, until it is healed.
And do the same when it is dislocated on another side.
For the dislocation of the shoulder blade from the back
When the shoulder blade of the back or neck is dislocated, or there are several dislocations, there is no cure, for death hastens the patient.
The signs are that the movements jump without volition and it cannot be held, and many times some limb is softened, whether the two thighs or the two arms or one.
And often it moves the shinbone in four parts;
The one that moves at the back is called "gilbositez":
The cure is that you consider if the gilbositez came from childhood: If there is no cure or healing at all.
And the one that comes from falling or impact or similar things, the old ways of cure said in many words, where there is not much profit in all;
But I have shortened it according to my intention, and have formed instruments in various ways.
I say that in the gilbositez that comes at the front of the foot, there is neither remedy nor healing;
and also that which comes straight on both sides, and one cannot cure except that which properly comes to the back, as I say.
and let the patient lie on his back in an even place, and have a stretcher beneath him so that he does not get bruised.
Then put one tongs in the ground at the head and the other at the feet, and tie a cord under the patient's buttocks, and another at the thighs, and at the knees, and at the ankles.
And let two ministers hold the cords, one at the head and the other at the feet, between the two tongs.
And let them be well fastened, the tongs as we have said, and the surgeon put his palms on the spine straight, until it returns.
And if it does not return by this treatment, then take a board three arm-lengths long and wedge it under the wall, and let the patient lie on his side, and put the head of the board under the wall, then place the middle of the board on the spine. and put the patient's feet on the other end of the table and press firmly until it returns to its place.
And if you see that it turns in the hand, do it at the elbow. And put two hot coals on the head of the patient's arm one large and two others towards the feet, and have between each coal, above and below, a palm's length of space.
And have in each coal one hole where the elbow goes and let the coals be firmly in the ground so that they do not move.
And between each two coals have one turning coal so that the limbs turn and have in the two turnings two small coals a palm's length long to turn the elbow.
And then tie the strap which is among the splints to the elbow towards the head and the other strap towards the feet to the other elbow and each of the assistants turns his elbow at all the straps and the master puts the spine straight as we have said.
And when they are equal, put a drying plaster on them with plenty of egg, and then bandages, and then the splint of a tablet three finger-lengths long, which should cover the place of the gibbosity and the part of the spine that is healthy, then tie it with a bandage, as we have said, and use subtle nourishment for the patient until they are healed.
And if anything comes at the end of health, it is fitting to administer softening and soothing remedies with the splint that we have mentioned before. And sometimes one administers a piece of plumb, and sometimes the appearance comes at the back of the spine of the back, and one thinks that it is a dislocation. And it is the bone that appears, for which one should not have presumption. Perhaps death would follow.
Know that the joints of the hip and the joints of the shoulder only come out of place as dislocations, and not as other joints do.
And the joint of the hip is dislocated according to four parts: inward and outward, and front and back;
and more often inward than outward, and seldom dislocated front and back.
And the recognition of this inward dislocation is that when you join the sick leg with the healthy one, it is longer, and the patient's knee appears more open than the healthy one, and the patient cannot bend their knee towards the fire. And there is a warmth that comes from a hot abscess, because the head of the thigh bone has come loose there.
And the sign of one who is about to die, it is so that this event is contrary to those before.
And the signs of one who has it beforehand, if it is well aligned according to its completion; Nevertheless, do not bend the knee twice without pain, and if one wants to make it walk, it cannot beforehand, and it retains its urine, and swells the ankle, and when it walks, it passes on the heel.
And the signs of him who has it behind are that he cannot spread his knee nor bend it, and that leg is more twisted than the other, and the groin is softened, and the head of the thigh is at the place below the ribs.
The resetting of this type of dislocation is such that you consider whether the dislocation is old, and it remains according to its arrangement, if there is no cure; and it should not be presumed.
And in those whose dislocation is fresh, and there are four types of dislocations, hurry to return the joint, extend it inside and outside, and move it to the right and left; perhaps it will return, and does not need another cure.
And if it does not return in this manner, it is necessary that you prepare a strong assistant, and hold the leg strongly with two hands, or with a tie that is tied above the knee; And another assistant extends his hand over it in such a way that he puts his hands under his armpits, then you bind him tightly with a soft tie above the thigh; and another holds the head of the tie;
and you extend upward and downward all at once, so that the patient is lifted from the ground at once, and remains hanging.
This manner of extension is common to four similarities, and if the dislocation returns as we have said, it is well.
If this does not work, it is necessary to put a cure in its place.
When the dislocation is in the thighbone, it is necessary that you place the patient on their sound side, then put the tie at the root of the thigh, and the place which is below the groin, then extend the tie upwards towards the groin, and towards the kneecap;
Then take another minister to grasp his arms, and embrace the thick part of the thigh of the sick man, and extend it in a straight form. It will now return to its place.
And this manner of dislocation is lighter than the others.
And if you cannot hold it in this manner that we have said, it is fitting that you bind the two feet of the sick man together with a strong tie above the two heels and above the two knees, and let the sick leg be extended two parts more than the others.
Then it should be hung on the top of a beam, and be raised two arm's lengths above the ground;
Then command another minister to embrace the top of the thigh, and let another minister hang with the sick man who embraces straight the thigh, for the joint now returns quickly.
And when the dislocation is to the exterior, lay the patient down as we said for those with gout, and tighten the bandage properly on the diseased leg and on the foot too.
Then put two embers, one at the head and the other at the feet, then insert one ember between the patient's thighs in the shape of a letter M. And place cloths dampened with water around it so that it does not burn the patient, then extend each limb towards them and the practitioner places their hand equal to the dislocation.
If it returns, it is good.
If not, place it on a table, and press it down as we have said in the setting of the fracture, and lay the patient on his healthy side.
And when the dislocation is in front, it is necessary to extend the diseased leg quickly and according to what I have said. and place the practitioner's hand on the diseased angle, then press with the other hand and extend it downwards towards the knee.
And if the dislocation is in the shoulder, it is not right to stretch the patient out or lift him up from the ground, but he should be as though his hip were dislocated in the shoulder, as we have said about childbirth on the two hips. And he should be face down, and the bandage extended as we have said before, and one must press on the joint at the table. And it will be done when the patient extends his legs, and they will be equal. Then adjust the thighs, and apply a plaster, and bind it with a bandage so that the hip does not move. And he should rest for three or four days, then untie it, and apply the plaster again.
And if you see that they are equal, bind it as before, and leave it for three days.
Then untie it, and make it move gently, until the limb is comforted.
of the dislocation of the knee
The knee is dislocated according to three manners: that is to say, inwards and outwards, and backwards;
and it does not dislocate forwards.
And the signs are such that you order the patient to bend his leg at his thigh, and if it does not bend at his thigh, know that it is dislocated;
and the restoration of all these is that you make the patient sit upright, and extend his leg if he can, and place your back on his face, and place his foot on your feet;
then take his knee in your palms, and draw it back between your thighs, then bend the two sides of the knee so that they form and another attendant extends his foot, until the knee returns to its place, and the signs are that he bends his leg at his thigh easily;
and put the plaster on it, and let the leg air out at the thigh, and bind them together tightly for three days or four, then unbind it.
And let the patient not work at all, until the limb is strengthened.
And if the limb is not at all aligned, then apply strong extension as we have said in the treatment of the hip, until it is healed.
of the dislocation of the heel
The heels are sometimes loosened, and sometimes completely dislocated, both within and without.
And the signs are that the ankle is swollen, and tense before the part where it is dislocated:
The setting back should be light, and one should gently extend the hand to its fingers when it is only slightly displaced.
And when it is dislocated altogether, it befits you to make the patient sit upright, and hold them firmly by the leg, above the ankle;
then draw the foot to you with your right hand, and then to the left twice, then extend it upwards, and thrust the foot upwards beautifully;
and do this twice, as we have said, by pushing and pulling the foot;
if it returns, it is good;
if not, start the work again, for it will return;
and if it cannot return this way, have the patient lie on his back on the ground, and fix a stick firmly in the ground between his thighs, and tie cloths around, so that he does not bruise the patient;
then have one assistant hold the thigh, and another assistant extend the foot with his hands or a ligature, which he ties around the ankle; then have each assistant extend equally, and let the stick be now between the patient's thighs to hold him down when he is stretched;
then place the mirrors equally at the dislocation with his hands, and have another assistant hold the healthy leg underneath, and the dislocation will quickly return.
And when it is set in place, apply a plaster and bandages on top, and bind them tight, and tie the foot to the leg, and guard the nerves that are above the ankle behind, so that the bandages are not too tight.
Then leave it for two or three days, and if the bandages loosen, rebind them;
then untie it on the third or fourth day, and forbid the patient from walking for four days; and if he walks before that time, it is not certain that it will not dislocate again.
And if an abscess comes, it is fitting that you soothe it, as we have said elsewhere, until it heals.
of two When the two are dislocated, if they can be nicely extended without effort, it is an easy thing.
And if the dislocation is in any bone of the back or foot, it is necessary that you make the patient sit on a flat surface or on a table straight, and place your foot on what appears of these joints, then press down firmly with your foot until it returns;
and when it is equal, and there is nothing visible, one places under the sole of the foot a board with two legs, then they bind it tight, and leave it for three days, then unbind it. and let it rest until it is healed.
of wound and of dislocation together
When a wound accompanies the dislocation and one wishes to restore it, many times it happens that the patient dies:
do not be presumptuous in the cure if you are not wise in the art and have not used it for a long time, and if you are not compassionate and merciful and slow, do not dare;
and at the beginning use soothing things to draw out the abscess, and leave the patient in the hand of God if you do not see hope of recovery; and when you see hope, now reset the limb in its place so that the abscess may drain.
and when the limb is in place, administer soothing things to the abscess that is hot, and treat the wound as it should be, with drying ointments;
and if the dislocation is with a fracture, and small bones are broken off, the surgeon must do as we have said in simple diseases;
and guard yourself from entering the way of fear, as I have said, for this is worth more according to your Creator, and for the safety of your soul and body.
