O vos, tres chiers filz, je vos ai acomplit cest livre qui est li derriens de la science de medicine ensamble l’emplissement de lui, et ai fait la fin per ses expositions et par ses declarations.	O you three dear sons, I have completed this book which is the last of the science of medicine along with its fulfillment, and have made the end through its expositions and through its declarations.
Et m’est venu en vision que je le vos acomplisse avec cest traitier, qui est partie de l’uevre de mains, c’est a savoir «cyrurgie».	And it came to me in vision that I complete it with this treatise, which is part of the work of hands, namely “surgery”.
Et por ceu que l’uevre de mains est fortraite en nostre region et est etraingie dou tout en tout, si est perie li science et decopee, et n’est riens demorez de li fuers que les petites descriptions en livres des anciens que les mains ont muees.	And because the work of hands is fortified in our region and is strange throughout everything, so has the science perished and been cut off, and nothing remains of its strength except for small descriptions in books of the ancients that have been moved by hands.
Et de ceu est venue li error et li vanitez, et sont closes les ententions et est aloignie li science.	And from this came the error and the vanity, and are closed the intentions and is alienated the science.
Or me semble que je la vuel vivifier ensamble l’ordination de cest traitier selonc la voie d’exposition et de declaration et de l’abreviation; et venrai ensamble les formes des ferremens de cautere, et des autres estrumens de l’uevre avec l’ajostement de la declaration et de preparation de li, sicom il est mestier.	Or it seems to me that I will revive it together with the ordering of this treatise according to the way of exposition and declaration and abbreviation; and I will come together with the forms of the tools of cautery, and of the other instruments of the work with the adjustment of the declaration and preparation of them, as it is necessary.
Et por la raison de ceu que nuls boins maistres de mains n’est trovez en nostre tens, est li ars de medicine eslongié.	And for the reason of those that no good masters of hands are found in our time, is the art of medicine prolonged.
Et covient celui qui s’en entremet sormonter en la science d’anathomie, si com Galiens dit, tant qu’il saiche la juement des menbres, et les formes et les conjunctions et les separations d’aus, et aient connissance des osses et des nerf et des brais et le nombre d’ous, et le demenement et des voines movans et des reposans, et dou leu de lor issue.	And it is necessary that he who engages in it should ascend in the science of anatomy, as Galen says, until he knows the judgment of the members, and the forms and the conjunctions and separations of tissues, and have knowledge of the bones and nerves and veins and the number of vessels, and the movement and of moving and resting veins, and the place of their issue.
Et por ceu dist Ypocras que li nons avec le non est mout, et avec l’uevre est poc; et meismement en l’art de main.	And for this reason Hippocrates says that the hand with the name is not much, and with the work is little; and similarly in the art of hand.
Nos vos disons en l’introite de cest livre que qui n’est conissans des choses devant dites, si se gart qu’il ne chiece en error et qu’il n’ocie les homes; ensi que j’ai veut maintes fois plusors de ces qui s’entremettent de ceste science et si s’abandonent sen science et sens experiment.	We say to you at the beginning of this book that whoever is not familiar with the things said before, let him be careful so as not to fall into error and harm people; as I have often seen many who engage in this science and abandon their knowledge and experience.
Car je vis un fol mire qui copa .i. apostume de scrophules ou col d’une femme, et copa les arteres dou col; por coi tant de sanc issit hors que li femme cheit morte entre ses mains.	For I saw a fool who cut i.e., an abscess of scrofulous or the neck of a woman, and he cut the arteries of the neck; for which so much blood came out that the woman died in his hands.
Et vis .i. autre mire qui traït une piere d’un home d’eaige, et li piere estoit grans; si emporta avec li une piece de la vessie, et fut mors li hons dedens .iij. jors.	And I saw another surgeon who treated a stone of a man's bladder, and the stone was large; so he removed it with a piece of the bladder, and the man died within three days.
Et je i avoie ja esteit apelez por lou traire, et vis la disposition dou malaide et la grandor de la piere, et soi bien s’on lou tailloit il en morroit.	And I had already been called for the treatment, and saw the disposition of the patient and the size of the stone, and it is well if one cut it he would die.
Et vis .i. autre mire qui prist en cure .i. duc de nostre terre qui avoit la jambe brisie, et avec la briseure ot plaie; et li mires plains d’ignorance estraint la brisure sus la plaie as esteles par fort lieure, et ne lassa a la plaie point de xalain, et le lassa ensi .i. termine; et li comanda qu’il ne la desliast mie; et demora ensi que li jambe fut toute enflee et li piez et vint a perdition.	And I saw another surgeon who treated a duke of our land who had a broken leg, and with the fracture there was a wound; and the ignorant surgeon forced the fracture over the wound to the stars with strong ligatures, and did not leave any washing on the wound, and left it thus; and he commanded that he should not untie it; and remained so long that the leg was completely swollen and the foot came to perdition.
Je fuis apelez por venir a lui, et me hastai por venir deslier la jambe; et quant je l’oi desloie si fut em pais et ne sentit point de dolor.	I was called to come to him, and hastened to come to untie the leg; and when I untied it so it was at peace and felt no pain.
Mais toute voie li corruptions estoit ja confermee ou membre, et ne la poi saner; et ne cessa li corrution d’aler par le membre tant que li membres fut dou tout perdus.	But every way the corruption was already confirmed in limb, and it could not heal it; and did not cease the corruption to go through the limb as long as the limbs were altogether lost.
Et vis .i. autre mire qui effondra .i. apostume enchancreit, et puis enflama per le malice de sa signorie.	And see i. another sore which breaks open i. abscesses, and then inflames by the malice of its lord.
Car chancre, quant il est purs d’umor melancolique, ne covient mie qu’on i(l) touche de fer s’il n’est en teil leu c’on puisse toute oster ce que est corrumpus.	Because a sore, when it is pure of melancholic humor, it does not behoove that one touches it with iron unless in such place one can entirely remove that which is corrupted.
Et por ceu, treschier filz, vos est besoig que vos sachiez que oevre de mains est devisee en .ij. divisions: c’est asavoir, huevre ou il a peril en plusors dispositions; et je mostrerai en chescun leu de cest livre ou il a paour et peril.	And therefore, dear son, it is necessary that you know the work of hands is divided into .ii. divisions: that is to say, works where there is peril in many dispositions; and I will show in each place of this book where there is fear and peril.
Por coi il est besoig que vos vos en gardez, si que li fol mire ne puissent mal parler de vos Si prenez vos armes en cusenson, et entreprenez vos malaides legierement et fermement, et usez de la millor voie si que per la graice de Deu vos venez a salut et soiez loez; et lassiez les maladies espoantables de grief saniteit; et ostez vos armes de ceu que vos fait douter, et aiez foit en vos si que vos puissiez venir de cestui monde a l’autre de gloire.	For this reason it is necessary that you keep yourselves guarded so that foolish people may not speak ill of you. 
Galiens dist en aucuns de ses amonestemens: «Ne prenez mie en cure male maladie, que vos ne soiez apelez fol mire.	Galians says in some of his admonitions: “Do not take care of a disease poorly, lest you be called a foolish fool.” 
» J’ai deviseit cest traitier selonc III chapitres.	I have devised this treatise according to three chapters. 
Li premiers chapitres est des cauteres de feu et dé cauteres de medicine ague, et est li chapitres ordenez de lou chief jusques as piez; et des formes des estrumens, et des ferremens de cautere, et de tout ceu qui est necessaire en l’ueuvre.	The first chapter is of fire cauteries and of medicine cauteries, and is the chapter ordered from the head to the foot; and of the forms of the instruments, and of the methods of cautery, and of all that is necessary in the work.
Li secons chapitres si est de taillier et de percier, et des ventouses et des plaies, et des estractions des saiettes, et des semblans choses; et est li chapitres ordenez et les formes des estrumens.	The second chapter is of cutting and probing, and of cupping and wounds, and of the extraction of arrows, and similar things; and is the chapter ordered and the forms of the instruments.
Li tiers chapitres est de restorer les dislocations et des torcions, et des semblans choses; et est ordeneiz des lou chief jusc’as piez, et des formes des estrumens.	The third chapter is of restoring dislocations and twists, and similar things; and is ordered from the head to the foot, and of the forms of the instruments.
Ainsois que nos nos remembriens de l’uevre, il covient que je die la qualiteit de l’aide et dou nuisement de chescune complexion.	Therefore, as we remember from the work, it behooves me to speak of the quality of the help and of the ailment of each constitution.
Je dis que li qualiteis de l’aide, et dou nuisement, est li plus longe parole et subtilz science et li secrez reponus; et de ceu parlerent li plusors des saiges, et s’acorderent a ceu; et me soffisent poc lor paroles, car je redous la longesce.	I say that the qualities of help and of ailment are the longest speech and most subtle science and secret responses; and about this speak the most sages, and agree with it; and I suffice myself little their words, because I fear the length.
Je dis que cautere aide universement a toute complexion ou il a matiere, fuer que .ij. complexions: c’est a savoir complexion chaude sens matere, et complexion seche sens matere.	I say that cautery helps universally to every constitution where it has matter, except for two complexions: namely, hot constitution without matter, and dry constitution without matter.
En complexion chaude et seche ensamble matiere, deviserent aucun et dirent que cautere i est grans aide; et li autre dirent le contraire: que cautere ne vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de sechour.	In hot and dry constitution assembled matter, some say that cautery is great help; and the others say the contrary: that cautery is of no value for illness that comes from heat and dryness.
Car li nature dou feu si est chaude, et ne doit mie estre cureiz de chaude maladie par chalor, ne per sechour; et dist cil qui dist lou contraire que cautere fait grant aide a maladie chaude et seche que vient en cors des homes.	For the nature of fire is so hot, and it should not be cured with heat from a hot sickness by heat, nor by dryness; and he who says the opposite that cautery does great help to a hot and dry sickness that comes in the body of men.
Car quant tu comperes le cors de l’ome et sa moistor a la complexion dou feu, tu trueves le cors froit.	For when you compare the body of man and its moisture to the complexion of fire, you find the body cold.
Et je m’acorde a ceste parole.	And I agree with this statement.
Car je l’ai troveit aucune fois per experiment.	For I have found it no time through experience.
Et toute voie, ne s’en entremette mie fuers que cil qui l’a esproveit, et qui conoit par lonc usaige le chapistre des cauteres, et la diversiteit des complexions des homes, et les dispositions et les causes de lor maladies, et les sorvenues et l’espaice dou tens; des autres complexions n’avons nos mie paour, meismement em maladies froides et moistes.	And all ways, let not anyone intervene except he who has proven it, and who knows by long usage the chapter of cauteries, and the diversity of complexions of men, and the dispositions and causes of their illnesses, and the occurrences and space of time; of other complexions we have no more fear, even in cold and moist diseases.
Et tuit li mire s’asemblerent et s’acorderent au cautere.	And all the mirrors assembled and agreed to the cautery.
Et sachiez, filz, que cautere ensamble feu si est des secrez des cures, et de plus grant bonteit que cautere de medicine ardant.	And know, sons, that cautery assembled fire is of the secrets of cures, and of greater goodness than cautery of burning medicine.
Car li feus est simples, et ne vient mie fuers que au membre qui est cuis, et ne nuit a autre membre se poc nom.	For the fire is simple, and does not come outside except to the member that is burned, and does not harm another member if it is named.
Les medicines ardans vienent de membre a autre en aloignant, et font venir au membre maladies de grief sanation; et par aventure ocit lou malaide Li feus por sa hautece et por la bonteit de sa substance ne fait mie ceu, s’il n’i a superfluiteit.	The burning medicines come from member to another removing, and bring to the member diseases of difficult healing; and by chance kills the patient the fire for its height and for the goodness of its substance does not do this, if there is not superfluity. 
Et ceu vos ai je troveit par experiment et par la longesce dou servise et de l’estude que j’ai mis en l’art, et esteit sus la verteit des choses; et por ceu je m’escuse de la longesce de la parole, car il ne me plait mie que je vos oste le secreit qui est reponus ou feu, et la qualiteit de l’uevre, coment il deboute les maladies des cors, si com li philosophe le dit en demostrant; or le recevez en vos pensees.	And this I have found through experiment and the length of service and study that I have put into the art, and it is based on the truth of things; and for this reason I excuse myself for the length of the speech, because it does not please me that I lose the secret that is placed in fire, and the quality of the work, how it expels diseases from the body, as the philosopher says when demonstrating; but receive it in your thoughts.
Et sachiez, fil, que il s’acorderent en quel tens doient estre faites les cauteres, et eslirent prientens.	And know, son, that it is agreed upon in what time the cauteries should be done, and how they are applied.
Et je dis que cautere est covenable en tous tens, por ceu que li nuisemens sorvenans est desoz mis par l’aide dou cautere; et meismement se li cauteres est por dolors necessaires fors et hastans que ne puent atendre le tens que plus grans malice ne veigne au membre.	And I say that cautery is advisable at all times, because the harms arising are diminished by the aid of cautery; and even if the cauteries are for necessary pains outside and hastening so that they cannot wait for the time when greater malice comes to the limb.
Et n’i pensez onques, chier fil, si com font li fol mire; car a la maladie qui est sanee par cautere n’a point de revenue; et il le dient ensi; mais il n’est mie si com il cuident, por ce que cauteres nen est que medicine qui mue la complexion, et seche les humors que sont cause de la dolor, et vaut mues que medicine por le hastement de sa valor, et por la vertut de son oevre et de sa signorie.	And do not ever think, dear son, as the foolish ones do; because the disease which is healed by cautery has no return; and they say thus; but it is not so as they believe, for cauteries are not only a medicine that changes complexion, and dries the humors that are the cause of pain, and is more effective than medicine for the hastening of its recovery, and for the virtue of its work and its sovereignty.
Et possans chose est que li maladie viegne aucune fois selonc la complexion dou malaide et lou leu de la maladie et sa vertut; et sont assemblees en lui les superfluitez par l’aquisition des viandes et des semblans choses, se ce n’est cauteres administrez em leu ou il ait poc de superfluitez et de moistor, si com cauteres de dens por la dolor, et les semblans choses, et teil dolor ne revient mie; mais ce avient poc.	And it is a remarkable thing that illness comes at times according to the complexion of the patient and the location of the disease and its virtue; and are gathered in him superfluities by the acquisition of meats and similar things, unless cauteries are administered where there is little superfluity and moisture, such as cauteries of fire for pain, and similar things, and such pain does not return; but this happens rarely.
Et mout de gens n’entendent mie por coi cauteres est apelez li derriens de medecine, et c’est voir; mais il ne croient mie que cauteres vaille aprés medicine, mais lor ententions est fause, et est cauteres li derriens de medicine por ceu que quant nos aministrons manieres de cures en aucune maladie et elles ne valent, adonc administrons nos le cautere, et il vaut.	And many people do not understand for what reason cautery is called the last of medicine, and this is true; but they do not believe that cautery is worth after medicine, but their understanding is false, and it is cautery the last of medicine for because when we administer ways of cures in any disease and they are not worth, then we administer our cautery, and it is worth.
Adonques apert bien que cauteres est li derriens de medicine, ne mie selonc l’entention des folz mires.	Therefore, it is well understood that cautery is the last of medicine, not according to the understanding of foolish people.
Li ancien dirent que cauteres d’estrument d’or est muedres que de fer, et ne dirent ceu fuers que por la qualiteit de l’or et por la hautece de sa substance; et dirent que li leus de cautere ne fait mie porriture, mais ceu n’est mie voir car je l’ai esprovei, et ai troveit que c’est voir en aucuns homes; et cauteres d’or vaut mues que de fer, si com il lou dirent.	The ancients said that cautery of gold instrument is more effective than iron, and they said this because of the quality of gold and the height of its substance; and they said that the burn from cautery does not cause rotting, but this is not true because I have experienced it, and found that it is true in some people; and cautery of gold is worth more than iron, as they said.
Et toutevoie quant tu chaufes estrument d’or, tu ne seis mie quant il est chaus par la color de l’or, et s’est tantost refroidiez; et s’on le chaufe trop; si font au feu; et ensi i a assez d’empechement.	And although when you heat an instrument of gold, you do not know when it is heated by the color of the gold, and it cools quickly; and if it is heated too much; so they do in the fire; and thus there is enough impediment.
Et por ce usons nos de cautere de feir que nos l’avons mues apparilliet a nostre oevre.	And for this we use our fire cautery that we have made appear in our work.
Or vos ai ordeneit cest chapitre des lou chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que li voie soit plus legiere a trover.	I have ordered this chapter from the head to the feet for you so that the way is lighter to find.
dou cautere olivaire	of the olive cautery
Cist cauteres vaut a moistor et a froidor sus lou cerveil, et en i a dous c’on fait par la cause d’une maladie qui est apelee «soda», et par la cause de maintes humors qui dessendent dou chief as eulz, et as oreilles, et por multitude de songes et dolor de dens et dolor de gorge, et meismement a toutes maladies qui vienent de froidor si com paralisie et sode et apoplexie et semblans maladies.	This cautery is good for moisture and cold on the brain, and there are two types made because of a disease called "soda," and because of many humors that descend from the head to the eyes, and ears, and for a multitude of dreams and tooth pain and sore throat, and also for all diseases that come from cold like paralysis and soda and apoplexy and similar diseases.
Li forme de cest cautere si est que li malaides soit espurgiez par medicine solutive mondifiant le chief .iij. nuis ou .iiij., selonc ceu que li vertus et li eaige et li acostumance dou malaide le puet soffrir; et puis fai rere lou chief dou malaide.	The form of this cautery is that the patient be purged by medicine solutive modifying the head 3 or 4, according to what the virtues and the age and the custom of the patient can suffer; and then make round the head of the patient.
Et puis le fai seoir croisiet entre tes mains, et mettre ses mains sor som peis; aprés met la racine de ta palme sus la racine de son neis entre ses .ij. eulz; et lai ou venra tes dois moiens, si saigne d’enche puis eschaufe le cautere qui est apelé «olivare», de coi ci est li forme:	And then make him sit crossed between your hands, and put his hands on your waist; after put the root of your palm on the root of his nose between his two eyes; and where your two fingers will come, if it bleeds then heat the cautery which is called "olivare", because this is its form:
Et le met sor le leu signiet d’encre, et fai en dessendant et en estraignant ta main poc et poc en trestornant; puis lieve ta main isnelement, et rewarde le leu se tu vois l’os .i. sol petit; et se tu ne lou vois, si rencomence le cautere tant que tu voies l’os si com je lou t’ai dit; aprés pren .i. poc de seil, et met en awe et molle coton dedens, et met sor le leu, et li laisse .iij. jors; aprés met sus cotun moilliet en burre; et laisse sus tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés cure la plaie de l’oignement qui est apelez «tetrafarmaçon», tant qu’il soit sanez.	And place it on the place marked with ink, and make by descending and straining your hand poc and poc turning; then raise your hand gently, and look at the place if you see the bone i.e. small; and if you do not see it, so begin again the cautery until you see the bone as I have told you; after take .i. poc of wool, and put in soft cotton inside, and put on the place, and let it for .iij. days; after put on cotton moistened in butter; and let it on until the burn is gone; after cure the wound with the ointment which is called "tetrafarmaçon", until it is healed.
Et se dirent li ancien, que quant plus demoure overte li plaie, plus s’espurge; et por ce si aide mues.	And the ancients said, that when more the wound stays open, more it purges; and for this reason they aided it to move.
Et dirent aucun de ces que on doit tant lassier le cautere que partie de l’os soit arse, et puis rese on ceu qui est ars de l’os, et soit curez.	And they said none of these that one must let the cautery so much that part of the bone is burned, and then set those who are burned of the bone, and be cured.
Et dient li autre c’on doit le cautere tant lassier sus, et bouter si fort c’on abaite de l’os ausi large comme .i. vertoil que les femmes mettent en lor fusez por ceu que les humors issent mues hors; et doit on lassier la plaie longement overte; aprés le doit on curer et sodeir.	And they say the other that one must leave the cautery thus, and thrust it so strongly one lowers the bone as wide as a whorl that women put in their spindles for that the humors may come out moved; and one must leave the wound long exposed; after that one must cure and soothe.
Et ces .ij. manieres de cauteres ne me semblent mie estre bones dou tout en tout, fuers qu’en aucuns homes ou il ait voie de paor; et mues me semble que je lou doie laissier; car li chiés li est afoiblis par les solutions continuees de nature, si com nos le tesmoignons ens autres membres; et meisme quant li chiés dou malaide est foibles par nature, et li premiere semblance de cautere est plus salve et muedre por moi, et de celi use je oevre en donques emsamble salut.	And these two ways of cauteries do not seem to me to be good in any way whatsoever, except for certain men who have a way of fear; and it seems to me that I ought to leave them; because the shoulder is weakened by continuous solutions of nature, as we testify in other members; and even when the shoulder of the patient is weak by nature, and the first appearance of cautery is more safe and moderate for me, and from this use I act thus altogether well.
de l’anciainne dolor dou chief	of the ancient pain of the head
Quant en tout le chief vient dolor croniques, et dure longement, si doit user li malaides yeris et pilules qui sont apelees «cochie», et d’espurgement de chief et d’oiles et d’emplastres; et s’on li fait le cautere que nos avons devant dit, et il ne vaut.	When throughout the head comes chronic pain, and lasting long, the patient must use herbs and pills which are called "cochie," and of purgation of head and oils and plasters; and if one does to him the cautery that we have said before, and it is not worth.
Pren warde se li chiés dou malade est de fort nature, et qu’il ne soit trop froit; adonques le cauterize desoz celui cautere un poc que nos avons dit desus.	Take ward if the shoulder of the sick man is of strong nature, and that it be not too cold; therefore cauterize below that cautery a bit that we have said above.
Aprés fai cautere sus chescune corne dou chief jusc’a l’os, si com devant avons dit, et fai .i. cautere ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz»; et est .i. leus en coi on met ventouses; et alige ta main si que tu ne voises mie jusc’a l’os: li malaides sent trop plus grant dolor en cest cautere que as autres, et je em parlerai aillors; et covient que li cauteres des cornes soient plus subtis que cil dont on cautere la moieneteit dou chief, et c’est li forme:	After make cautery on each horn of the head until the bone, as we have said before, and make one cautery where it is called "vasselz"; and there are one's in which one puts ventouses; and align your hand so that you do not see until the bone: the sick man feels much more great pain in this cautery than the others, and I will speak of it later; and it is necessary that the cauteries of the horns be more subtle than those with which one cauterizes the middle of the head, and this is the form:
dou cautere dou chief	about the cautery of the head
Quant en une partie dou chief vient dolor sodaine, et est estendue li maladie jusc’a l’oil, et li chiés est espurgiez par medicines mondifians, et on a fait les autres cures que j’ai dit en la division des maladies, et tout ceu ne profite mie: adonques li fai cauteres selonc .ij. manieres, c’est a savoir de medicine ague et de feir.	When in one part of the head comes sudden pain, and it extends to the eye, and the joint is purged by medicines softening, and we have done the other cures that I said in the division of diseases, and all this does not benefit: therefore I make cauteries according to .ij. manners, that is to say of medicine hot and of fire.
Li cauteres de medicine ague si est que tu preignes une doce d’alz, et oste l’escorce et le recope .i. poc as .ij. chiés, et puis fent la temple ou li dolor tient en teil maniere que tu puisses reponre la doce d’alz desoz le cuir; et quant elle sera reponuee si le lie et l’estraint bien et le laisse ensi .xij. houres; et puis le deslie et trait fuers la doce d’ail, et laisse la plaie ensi .ij. jors ou .iij.; puis met sus cotun plongiet en burre tant que porreture en isse.	The cautery of hot medicine is that you take a slice of garlic, and remove the husk and cut it 1 pock as 2 joints, and then make the temple where the pain holds in such a manner that you can place the slice of garlic under the skin; and when it will be placed so tie it and restrain it well and leave it so for 12 hours; and then untie it and remove the slice of garlic, and leave the wound so for 2 days or 3; then put on top cotton dipped in butter as long as possible.
Aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vues si fai ceu d’aucunes medicines comburans que j’ai escrites ou dozime traitier des medicines comburans.	After the ointment cure until it is healed; and if you see so do those of certain burning medicines that I have written or doze treatment of burning medicines.
Li cautere de fer si est selonc ceste meniere.	The iron cautery is thus according to this manner. 
Chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	Heat the cautery of this form: 
Et est apelez «clos» por ceu que li chief est fait a la forme d’un clo ou il ait .i. poc de corbeure, et em mileu a une petite apparance; et le met sor le leu dolorous, et tien ta main et trestorne le feir un poc legierement, tant que li moitiez de l’espés dou keur soit arse; et lieve ta main que li artere n’arde, que est defuers, et decorre habundance de sanc.	And is called "clos" because the head is made in the shape of a clo or it has .i. inch of curvature, and in the middle a small appearance; and put it on the painful place, and hold your hand and stir the fire a little lightly, until the half of the thickness of the spear of the heart is burned; and lift your hand so that the artery does not burn, which is outside, and flows abundance of blood.
Aprés met coton en awe de seil, et met sor le leu par .iij. jors; puis i met coton moilliet em burre, et puis cure le leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vuelz cauterize ceste emigraine avec le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare», a tout la pointe, et te garde de coper l’artere en ceste emigraine qui n’est mie anciaine.	After put cotton in awe of wool, and put on the place for .iij. days; then I put cotton moistened in butter, and then cure the place with ointment until it is healed; and if you want to cauterize this migraine with the cautery which is called "cultellare", at all the point, and keep from covering the artery in this migraine which is not ancient.
de emigraine	of migraine
Quant tu cures emigraine si com nos avons devant dit en divisions des maladies, et ne profite mie, et vois que li cauteres devant dis de la medicine et dou fer ne li soffit mie, adonques covient il que tu eschaufes le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare» tant qu’il soit blans; et seigne ainsois sor le leu doillant une ligne de demi doi de lonc, et oste ta main une fois, et l’estrain que tu ne coper l’artere et que ne viegnes jusc’a l’os; et te warde de la mandibule que muet quant on menjut, et li ners n’ait regart que la muet et que spasmus ne veigne a malaide, et te warde de decorrement de sanc de l’artere quant elle sera copee, ou copement ait grant paour et meismement a celui que ne s’i conoit, et qui n’est estudians et esprovez; et laisse l’uevre em mi voie; mais je vos dirai coment on restainche sanc quant li artere est copee, et je vos mostrerai a leu ou il afiert en cest livre.	When you cure migraine as we have said before in divisions of diseases, and it does not profit, and see that the cauteries before said of medicine and of iron do not fit him, then it is necessary that you heat the cautery which is called “cultellare” until it is white; and reign thus on the place ailing a line of half a two of long, and remove your hand once, and strain that you do not cut the artery and that you do not come until the bone; and ward yourself from the jaw that moves when one puts, and the nerve does not look but the silent and that spasm does not come to the patient, and ward yourself from a decrease of blood from the artery when it will be cut, or cutting has great fear and also to him who does not know it, and who is not studying and experienced; and leave the work in half way; but I will tell you how one restrains blood when the artery is cut, and I will show you at the place where it appears in this book.
Et se tu vois que cist cauteres ne soffise mie a la maladie, et li malaides est soffrans, cauterize le enmi le chief ausi com nos avons dit, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee; et se tu vues, aministre le cautere que nos avons dit ou chapistre de l’estraction de l’artere, avec le cautere qui ait .ij. coutelz; et est cist cauteres millors de celui et plus aidans.	And if you see that this cautery does not fit the disease, and the patient is suffering, cauterize him in the middle of the head as we have said, and cure the wound until it is healed; and if you see, administer the cautery that we have said or chapter of the extraction of the artery, with the cautery which has .ij. coutelz; and this cautery is better than that one and more helping.
de la dolor des oreilles de part froidor	of the pain of the ears from cold
Quant en l’oreille vient dolor de froit, et on i a ovreit de medicines solutives et des autres cures que nos avons dit en la division, et li dolors ne se muet, adonques eschaufe cest cautere qui est apelez «poins», de coi ci est li forme:	When in the ear comes pain from cold, and there is opened of medicines solutives and other cures that we have said in the division, and the pains do not move, then takes this cautery which is called "point", for this reason is the form:
Aprés pointoie tout entor l’oreille malaide, ou entor les .ij. se la dolor tient en ambedous, et t’esloigne un poc ensus de la racine de l’oreille puis que tu as signiet le leu d’enche; et ait .x. poins entor chescune oreille; aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	After point all around the ear of the sick, or between two if the pain holds in both, and you distance a bit above the root of the ear after that you have marked the place to burn; and have ten points around each ear; after cure the place until it is healed.
de la torture de la bouche	of the torture of the mouth
Torture qui doit estre curee par cautere nen est fuers que de celles que muevent de fleume, si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladie; et ne faire point de cautere as semblances que vienent de sechor et de spame de ners.	Torture that must be cured by cautery are not others than those that move from phlegm, as we have said in the divisions of diseases; and do not make cautery on appearances that come from dryness and sprain of nerves.
Quant tu cures ceste semblance de torture qui muet de fleume d’ydres et d’espurgemens de chief et de gargarisme, et ceu ne vaut, adonc covient que tu cauterizes le malaide de .iij. cauteres: l’une en la racine de l’oreille, et l’autre un poc defuers la temple, et le tier en l’ajostement des .ij. levres; et met le cautere en la partie qui apert saine, et li fai cautere endroit le chief de l’oreille desus un poc desoz la corne dou chief, et un autre en la temple ausi longe com uns poce; et laisse le cautere tant sus que li moitiez dou keur soit arse; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	When you cure this appearance of torture that moves from phlegm of the eyes and expectorations of the head and gargles, and it does not work, then it is necessary that you cauterize the patient with three cauteries: one at the root of the ear, and the other a finger's breadth from the temple, and the third in the adjustment of the two lips; and put the cautery in the part that opens healthy, and let him cauterize the place above the head of the ear a finger's breadth below the horn of the head, and another one in the temple as long as a finger's breadth; and leave the cautery there until half of the heart is burned; and this is the form of the cautery:
Et est li semblance dou cutellaire que nos avons mise devant, mais il est un poc plus subtilz et covient que li coutelz soit un poc plus gros; aprés cure lou leu si com j’ai devant dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And is the appearance of the cautery that we have put before, but it is a little more subtle and it is necessary that the knife be a little thicker; after curing its place as I have said before, until it is healthy.
Quant apoplexie est ancieinne et tu la cures ensi com nos avons dit, et il ne profite mie, et li malaides n’ait fievre, adonques li fai .iiij. cauteres: .ij. sus les .ij. cornes dou chief, et .i. emmi le chief, et .i. ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz» si com nos avons devant dit, et lou derrien cautere sus la bouche de l’estomac; et soit curez si com nos avons dit devant.	When apoplexy is old and you treat it as we have said, and it does not benefit, and the patient has no fever, then I make .iiij. cauteries: .ij. on the .ij. horns of the head, and .i. in the middle of the head, and .i. where it is called «vessels» as we have said before, and the last cautery on the mouth of the stomach; and be cured as we have said before.
de litargie	Of lethargy
A cest maladie covient doner au malaide yeres grans et pilules mondifians le cerveil; aprés reis lou chief dou malaide tout, et li met sus l’occipite l’emplaustre de sinapi qui est escrit ou traitier des emplastres; et c’est li maniere dou cautere: si lou fai si com j’ai dit.	For this illness it is necessary to give the patient large doses of herbs and pills that clarify the brain; after which raise the head of the patient, and place on the nape of the neck the ointment of mustard which is written in the treatise of ointments; and this is the manner of cautery: if I do as I have said.
S’il est sanez ensi, boin est; et s’il ne l’est, se li fai .iij. cauteres des emmi le chief en dessendant jusc’a col, et ait d’espaice entre chescun cautere .i. doi de gros; et le cure si com les autres, et se tu i vues ajoster, et li malaides est soffrans, se li fai .i. cautere en mileu; et se mestiers est, .ij. autres sus les .ij. cornes, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare», si com j’ai devant dit.	If he is healthy like this, good is; and if he isn't, make him 3 cauteries from the midst of his head descending to his neck, and have space between each cautery 2 finger widths; and cure it as the others, and if you see it join, and the patient is suffering, make 1 cautery in the middle; and if need be, 2 others on the 2 horns, and cure it until it is healthy; and be the cauteries which are called "olivare", as I have said before.
de la froidor dou chief	of the cold of the head
Il covient que li chief soit mundifiez de yeres et de ceu que nos avons devant dit; aprés reis le chief dou malaide, puis li fai cautere emmi le chief et sus chescune corne, et .i. derrier et .iij. sus l’espinee dou col; et se tu en as plus mestier, et li cors est moiste et li malaides est soffrans, et li maladie est fors, se li fai .iiij. cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos; et li laisse tant que li plus dou keur soit ars, et lieve ta main; aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare» que nos avons devant dit.	It is necessary that the head be purified with herbs and of what we have said before; after raise the head of the patient, then make cautery in the midst of the head and on each horn, and 1 behind and 3 on the spine of the neck; and if you need more, and the body is moist and the patient is suffering, and the illness is strong, make 4 cauteries on the spine of the back; and leave him until the most of the heart be burned, and raise your hand; after cure it until it is healthy, and be the cauteries which are called "olivare" as we have said before.
de l’epilempsie	of epilepsy
Li epilentiques ne doit useir de cautere fuers que cil qui est fleumatique, et covient premier mondifier le cerveil de yeres et d’autres cures que nos avons dites en la division quant li malaides est grans et soffrans de penre medicine.	The epileptics must not use cautery fires except those who are phlegmatic, and it is necessary first to modify the brain with herbs and other remedies that we have said in the division when the patient is great and suffering from a lack of medicine.
Et se c’est uns enfes qui ne lou puisse soffrir, se li fai gargarisme et mastication mondifiant le cerveil sovent avec bones viandes; aprés li reis lou chief em mileu, et i fai .i. cautere selonc ce que nos avons dit devant, et .i. cautere sus lou vassel, et sus chescune corne; et se li malaides est fors et soffrans, se li fai cauteres si com j’ai dit a celui qui ait paralisie et mollification de cors, sus l’espinee dou dos et dou col, et soit li cauteres olivier selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	And if it is a child who cannot endure it, make gargarisms and mastication modifying the brain often with cooked meats; after which the king makes a point in the middle, and there I put 1 cautery according to what we have said before, and 1 cautery on the vessel, and on each horn; and if the patient is weak and suffering, then I make cauteries as I have said to the one who has paralysis and softening of the body, on the spine of the back and neck, and be the cauteries olive oil according to the manner that I have said.
Se li malaides est enfes, se li fai .i. cautere subtil selonc ceste maniere:	If the patient is a child, make 1 subtle cautery according to this manner:
Quant par la cause de melancolie sunt les superfluitez ou les moistors corrumpues et fleume grosse, adonques lou cauterize de teils cauteres com nos avons dit a celui qui ait paralisie.	When because of melancholy there are the superfluities or the moistures corrupted and thick phlegm, then one should cauterize with these cauteries as we have said to him who has paralysis.
Et se par la cause de melancolie est li superfluitez declinans a melancolie, et est li cors dou malaide moistes, adonc li done a boivre chose par coi li cervelz soit mundifiez, selonc ceu qu’il est devant en la division.	And if because of melancholy there are the superfluities inclining to melancholy, and the body of the patient is moist, then one gives him to drink something by which the brain should be purified, according to that which is before in the division.
Aprés reis lou chief dou malaide; aprés fai .i. torteil de lin bien fait, ausi com .i. cercle, si le met emmi le chief; et li malaides sié croisiez, et soit bien tenus de toutes pars; aprés presente le linement, et vaut mues de burre de berbis ancien; et lou chaufe a feu tempreement, si que li dois s’on li boute le puisse soffrir; aprés vuide le cercle par dedens emmi le chief, et lou laisse refroidier; et fai ce a malaide chescune semaine une fois avec autre governement boin, tant qu’il soit sanez.	After you have reset the head of the patient; after that make one tortell of flax well made, as well as one circle, and put it in the middle of the head; and the patient sits crossed, and be held well on all sides; after present the liniment, and worth muffs of mutton fat old; and heat it to fire moderately, so that the two if it is put on him he may suffer; after empty the circle from inside the head, and let it cool; and make this to the patient every week once with other good governance, until he be healed.
Ou se tu vues cauterize lou en faisant poins plusors a tot le cautere.	Or if you see to cauterize it, doing points more on all the cautery 
Ceste maniere de cautere amoistit le cerveil igaument; et puis met sus coton moilliet en burre et en graisse de geline.	This manner of cautery moistens the brain greatly; and then puts on cotton moistened in butter and fat of goose. 
de l’awe des eulz	from the weeping of the eyes
Quant awe vient premierement as eulz par les signes que j’ai dit en la division, adonques encomence et done boivre au malaide chose mundifiant le chief, et le warde de toutes moistors, et lou fai suer ou bain plusors fois a jeun.	When weeping comes first to the eyes by the signs that I have said in the division, then begin and give the patient things purifying the head, and warding off all moisture, and make him sweat or bathe many times fasting.
Aprés li comande a rere son chief, et li fai cautere emmi le chief, et li fai .ij. cauteres sus les .ij. temples se li dessendemens de l’awe est as .ij. eulz ensamble, ou en .i. se li dessendemens est en .i.; et cope a tout le cautere toutes les voines et les arteres que sont desoz le keur, et soient li cautere lonc selon lou large de la temple; et te warde de decorrement de sanc, et se tu vois trop de sanc issir, si li estainche de teil pooir com tu as.	Afterward, command him to rear his head, and make a cautery in the middle of the head, and make two cauteries on the two temples if the descent of the weeping is to the two eyes together, or one if the descent is to one; and cut all the veins and arteries that are under the heart with every cautery, and let the cautery be long according to the width of the temple; and ward off the discharge of blood, and if you see too much blood issuing, restrain it as best you can.
Et je t’enseignerai en l’estraction des arteres et a l’incision la cautele coment tu l’estencheras; et aucune fois fait on cautere ou hatereil desoz les .ij. os derrier.	And I will teach you in the extraction of arteries and in the incision the caution how to stop it; and sometimes one makes cautery or a knife under the two bones behind.
dou cors des larmes	of the tears of flesh
Quant les larmes des eulz sont ancienes et acostumees et sont sus les voines, ou delez les arteres que sont en l’aparance dou chief defors; et on voit que c’est des superfluitez froides fleumatiques, adonques li fai le cautere que j’ai dit en l’encomencement de l’awe dessendant as eulz: .i. cautere emmi le chief, et .ij. cauteres sus les .ij. temples, et .ij. cauteres ou haiterel desoz les .ij. os; et s’il i a besoigne plus, si le cauterize saigement desus le sorcil a tout .i. petit cautere.	When the tears of the eyes are old and accustomed and are on the veins, or near the arteries that are in the appearance of the head outside; and one sees that they are cold phlegmatic superfluities, then I make the cautery that I said at the beginning of the above concerning the eyes: 1 cautery removing the head, and 2 cauteries on the 2 temples, and 2 cauteries or incisions under the 2 bones; and if there is a need for more, one cauterizes carefully above the eyebrow with all 1 small cautery.
dou cors des larmes par dedens les eulz	of the tears of flesh within the eyes
Quant tu le medicines selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et il ne profite mie, adonques done a boivre a malaide .iij. nuis cochies; aprés li reis le chief, et li fai cautere ou mileu dou cautere olivaire; et fai .ij. cauteres dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis» sus les .ij. sorcis, un poc desoz les chevous; et te warde de l’artere que tu ne la coper.	When you medicate according to what we have said in the division, and it does not help, then give the patient three cups of wine; after that, cover the head and make a cautery or middle cautery with olive oil; and make two cauteries with the cautery called "clavilis" on the two ears, one just below the eyebrows; and guard yourself from the artery so that you do not cover it.
Et c’est li forme dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis»:	And this is the form of the cautery called "clavilis":
Quant li papiere de l’oil est mollifie de maladie et de moistor, adonques la cautarize de cest cautere qui est apelez «olivare».	When the paper of the eye is softened by disease and moisture, then the cauterization with this cautery which is called "olivare".  
de coi ci est li forme:	of which this is the form: 
Et se tu vues si fai .ij. cauteres sus les .ij. sorcis ausi lons com li sorcilz sont; et n’i lassiez mie la main fors que tant que li tierce partie de la papiere soit arse, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	And if you see so make two cauteries on the two eyebrows as long as the eyebrows are; and do not leave the hand except until a third of the paper is burned, according to the manner that I have said.
dou poil qui point l’oil	Hair which pricks the eye
Aucune fois avient que li poil des oilz sont convertit au pardedens, et poignent l’oil, et i fait on cauteres selonc .ij. manieres: c’est a savoir de feu, ou de medicine ardant.	Sometimes it happens that the hairs of the eyes are converted to the eyelids, and prick the eye, and in this case one makes cauteries according to two manners: that is to say, of fire, or of burning medicine.
Ou cautere de feu comande au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient lons et igals; et s’il le poignent a lor nassance, se li estraint les eulz qu’il ne se muevent tant qu’il naissent.	For the fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
Quant il naissent et i sont igalz, adonques met le malaide en ton sain; aprés seigne sus la papiere des eulz une figure que soit ausi com li fuelle dou mirte, et soit li comencemens dou signe delez les poilz; puis i met coton moilliet en glaire d’uef et muscillaige de persillion sus l’oil, puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	When they are born and are even, then place the patient on your healthy side; after draw a figure on the paper of their eyes that is like the leaf of myrtle, and let it be the beginning of the sign near the hairs; then put cotton moistened in the white of an egg and muscilage of persimmon on the eye, then heat the cautery of this which is the form:
Aprés cauterize sus la figure que tu as signiet poc et poc mout de fois, que li keurs soit ars lai endroit; et li signes de la santeit de l’uevre est que tu voies la papiere retraite, et les poilz levez a la pointure de l’oil; adonques lieve ta main, et laisse ensi .iij. jors, puis i met coton moilliet en burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	After cauterize on the figure that you have signed little by little many times, that the kernels be burned in that place; and the sign of the healthiness of the work is that you see the paper retracted, and the hairs raised at the height of the eye; then lift your hand, and leave it thus for 3 days, then put cotton moistened in butter until the burning is removed; after the cure of ointment until it is healed.
Et se aprés ceu vienent li poilz, et li papiere est mollifie adonques rencomence le cautere sus cel leu meisme, si com tu as fait premiers; et se li poil sont defuer, si le cauterize tant que li papiere soit levee a son leu natureil, et soit igals, et ne poignent mie li poil l’oil.	And if after this the hairs come, and the paper is softened then begin again the cautery on that same place, as you did first; and if the hairs are few, cauterize until the paper is raised to its natural place, and is even, and do not prick the hairs the eye.
Li cauteres de medicine ardant est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient grans et igalz, puis fai de parchemin la forme de la foille de mirte; puis pren de savon fransois et de vive chalz, de chescun une .З., et broie ensamble bien; et le fai hastanment, si qu’il ne refroide, puis en espant sus la forme que tu es fait sicom la foille dou mirte, et met sus la papiere des eulz; et se li maladie tient en .i. oil soulement, si doit on ovrer en .i., et se en ambedous ausi; et met desoz l’oil coton moilliet en abin d’uef; et li chiés dou malaide soit en ton sain et met ton doi mostrant sus la medicine, et presse .i. poc et lou muef toutes les fois que li malaide sent mordication de la medicine, car il sent mordication ausi com de feu.	The cauteries of medicine burning is that you command the patient to let the hairs grow long and even, then make of parchment the shape of the leaf of myrtle; then take of French soap and live coal, of each one part, and grind together well; and do it hastily, so that it does not cool, then spread on the form that you have made like the leaf of myrtle, and put under the eyes; and if the patient holds in one eye alone, so must we work in one, and if in both also; and put under the eye cotton moistened in the white of egg; and the head of the patient be in your health and put your hand showing on the medicine, and press one piece and the other every time that the patient feels burning from the medicine, for he feels burning as well as fire.
Quant tu as ceu fait longement, si oste la medicine a ton doit.	When you have done this lengthwise, so remove the medicine with your hand.
Et quant li mordication sera passee, si leve le leu d’awe, et rewarde se tu vois la papiere levee ausi com s’ele estoit levee par constraignement de feu ou par incision; et s’il est ensi, si est bien.	And when the cauterization is passed, then raise the place of awe, and examine if you see the paper lifted as if it had been lifted by the constraint of fire or by incision; and if it is thus, then it is well. 
Se ceu non, si remet encor de la medicine sus lou leu ou li medicine n’ait ovreit, tant que tes ovraiges soit igalz, et tes eulz mis a point; puis met sus coton moilliet en burre tant que li keurs ars soit cheus, aprés cure le leu de l’oignement qui est apelez «dyafenis» et d’autre, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If this is not done, put back medicine on the place where the medicine has not worked, until your works are equal and your eyes are set; then put on cotton moistened in butter until the burned skin is healed, after cure the place of ointment called “diafenis” and another, until it is healed. 
Et se t’est mestier que tu te warde bien a ton ovraige par grant warde qu’il ne chiece point de la medicine as eulz.	And if it is necessary for you that you guard yourself well to your work by great care that it does not fall from the medicine into the eyes. 
Et se li papiere devient mole aprés, et li poil poignent en l’oil, si recomence la medicine sus celui leu qui est mollifiez de la papiere proprement, ensi com tu as fait devant; aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et c’est li forme de la fuelle dou mirte:	And if the paper becomes soft afterwards, and the hair pricks in the eye, then begin again the medicine on that part which is softened by the paper properly, as you have done before; after the cure until it is healed; and this is the form of the myrtle leaf: 
Et saichés que li eul des homes sont divers en grandor et en petitece, et selonc ceu soit tes constraignemens; et ne soit mie reponue li droite voie a celui cui est li estude de cest art.	And know that the eyes of men are diverse in size and smallness, and according to these be your constraints; and let not the right way be returned to him whose is the study of this art.
de la cure de fistule par cautere	Of the cure of fistula by cautery
Quant tu cures fistule si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladies, et tes cures ne profitent mie, adonques covient il que tu li fais cautere selonc ceste maniere.	When you cure a fistula as we have said in the divisions of diseases, and your treatments are of no use, then it is necessary that you make cauterization according to this manner.
Comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain; et teigne li menistres son chief entre tes mains en teil maniere qu’il ne se mueve, ne ne demoinne son chief; aprés met coton moilliet en abin d’uef ou en jus de persillion sus l’oil; aprés chaufe le cautere qui est teilz: et est chevez au chief si com li forme d’une penne de vouteul, ensamble la queil soit li cautere; se tu vues, si soit apointé des l’un chief dusc’a l’autre, et se tu vues, si soit ausi com une tente; mais toutevoie, cist qui est chevez vaut mues por ton ovraige.	Instruct the patient to put their head on a healthy place; and hold the head between your hands in such a manner that it does not move, nor does he move his head; after putting moistened cotton in the egg white or in parsley juice on the eye; after heat the cautery which is such: and it is shaped to the head like the shape of an arrowhead, together with whatever the cautery may be; if you see, so pointed from one end to the other, and if you see, also like a tent; but nonetheless, this which is shaped is useful for your work.
Aprés presse la fistule s’ele est overte, et en trai la porriture, et la seche; et s’ele est close, si la oevre, et trai fuers la bowe; aprés met sus le cautere chaut forment, et tien ta main au cautere a la partie dou neif ensus de l’oil, que ta mains ne faice folie; et met le cautere en la graisse de l’oil, et la corromp.	After press the fistula if it is open, and treat the rottenness, and dry it; and if it is closed, so operate it, and treat away from the bow; after put on the hot cautery shape, and hold your hand to the cautery at the part of the nose above the eye, that your hands do not make a mistake; and put the cautery into the fat of the eye, and corrupt.
Se tu viens au comencement dou cautere jusc’a l’os, si serait bien.	If you come to the beginning of the cautery up to the bone, it would be good.  
Se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere encor une fois, et autre se tu en as mestier, et le laisse III jors; aprés i met sus coton moilliet en burre, et lou cure de l’oignement desiccatif tant qu’il soit sanez, et se XL jors passent qu’il ne soit sanez, si met sus medicine ague corrosive tant que li os soit descovers; et lou reis selonc ceu que il venrait en son chapistre.	If this is not so, start the cautery again once more, and another if you need it, and let it sit for III days; after which he puts cotton moistened in butter on top, and cures with the ointment drying until it is healed, and if XL days pass and it is not healed, then put on medicine of corrosive aqua until the bone is uncovered; and the king according to what would come in his chapter.  
Et i a une maniere de cautere de fistule que aucun des anciens dirent.	And there is a manner of cauterizing a fistula that none of the ancients said. 
Entens a fistule, et fens le leu; aprés met en la fendure I camahan subtil de coi ci est li forme:	Attend to fistula, and make the opening; after put into the fissure a subtle camahan of which this is the form: 
et i font a la quantiteit d’une .З. de plonc; et tien ta main ou camahan fermement, et ne se mueve li malaides nes point, que li plons fondus ne corre a son oil; et covient c’on mette sus l’oil a malaide coton moilliet en abin d’uefz ou en awe: li plonc si art lou leu de fistule, et lou saine per mervillouse saniteit.	and it is made to the quantity of three points; and hold your hand or camel’s hair firmly, and let not the patient move at all, lest the melted wax run to his eye; and it is necessary that one puts on the eye of the patient cotton moistened in a balm of eggs or in honey: the wax will close the place of the fistula, and the healing by miraculous health.
Et se li fistule est sanee per le cautere que nos avons dit, c’est boin.	And if the fistula is healed by the cautery that we have said, it is good.  
Se ce non, si covient aministrer pertus au neif, et ramener la fistule au cors dou neif selonc ceu qu’il covient en som propre leu.	If this is not so, then it is necessary to administer pus to the nostril, and bring the fistula back to the body of the nose according to what is appropriate in its proper place.  
des crevaices en levres	Openings in lips
Mout de fois avienent crevaices en levres que sont apelees «poil», et meismement en levres des enfans.	Many times openings in the lips appear that are called "pores," and even on the lips of children.
Quant tu cures ces crevaices de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et li cure ne profite, adonques eschaufe .i. petit cautere cultellaire selonc ceste forme:	When you treat these openings as we have said in the divisions, and the treatment does not benefit, then burn a small scalpel cautery according to this form:
Et le met hastanment en celles crevaices tant qu’il viegne jusc’a font; aprés cure le leu de cerote tant qu’il soit sanez.	And put it carefully into those hollows until it comes to the end; after that care for the place with cerote until it is healed.
de l’aposteme de la goule	Of the abscess of the throat
Quant apostume vient en la racine de la goule ou en l’uve, ou ou palais, ou as racines des dens, aprés fait porriture et ront et est enveillis et devient fistule; et tu le cures si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie: adonques covient il que tu aies .i. cautere selonc la quantiteit de la fistule; aprés le bote ou pertus de la fistule, et tien ta main tant que li fer chaus viegne au font de li, et ou derrien leu; et fai ensi une fois ou .ij., aprés le cure de ce que nos avons dit en cures, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il est curez ensi, c’est boin; et se ceu non, si covient descovrir le leu et oster l’os corrumput, selonc ceu que vos le troverez en son chapistre.	When an abscess comes in the root of the throat or in the uvula, or palate, or at the roots of the teeth, after it has rotted and swollen and becomes a fistula; and you cure it as we have said in divisions, and it does not benefit; therefore it is necessary that you have one cautery according to the quantity of the fistula; after which burn or pierce the fistula and hold your hand there until the iron glows at its end; and do this once or twice, after curing as we have said in cures, until it is healed; and if it is cured thus, it is well; and if not, then it is necessary to uncover the place and remove the rotten bone, according to what you will find in your chapter.
dou movement des dens	Of the movement of the teeth
Quant les gencives sont mollifies par moistor et les dens muevent, et tu le cures per medicines et ceu ne vaut, adonc met le chief dou malaide en ton sain; aprés eschaufe le cautere dont li forme venra ci aprés en teil maniere que tu mettes une cainne sor le dent; et met dedens le cautere chaut hastanment, et tien tant ta main que li malaides sente la chalor venant a la racine dou dent; aprés lieve ta main et rencomence le cautere selonc ta volenteit; aprés emplisse li malaides sa bouche d’awe salee, et la teigne une houre et raiche fuers.	When the gums are softened by moisture and the teeth move, and you treat them with medicines and it does not help, then put the head of the patient in your healthy one; after heat the cautery whose form will come here after in such manner that you put a chain over the tooth; and put inside the hot cautery until, and hold so long as the patient feels the heat coming to the root of the tooth; after lift your hand and recommence the cautery according to your will; after fill the mouth of the patient with salt water, and let it stay one hour and spit out fiercely.
Et en teil maniere li dens qui estoit movans si est confermez, et li gencive mollifie restrainte, et li moistors corrumpue sechie.	And in such manner the tooth which was moving is thus confirmed, and the softened gum restrained, and the moisture corrupted dried.
de la dolor des dens	of the pain of the teeth
Quant dolor de dens vient por froidor, ou il i a froidor ou veir, et les cures de medicine ne valent, adonc i ait mestier de cautere selonc .ij. manieres: et cautere de burre et cautere de feu.	When pain of teeth comes from cold, or there is cold or dampness, and the treatments of medicine are not helpful, then there is need for cautery according to two ways: and cautery of butter and cautery of fire.
Cautere de burre si est telz que tu preignes burre de vaiche, et le bout en une cuillier de fer ou d’arain; aprés pren coton et envolope sus la pointe d’une tente, et la moille en burre bulit, et met sus le dent dolant hastanment et tien tant qu’il soit refroidiez; et ensi fai sovent tant que sa vertus viegne a la racine de la dent, et se tu vues si moille laine et coton en burre froit, et met sus le dent doillant, et met sus .i. fer chaut tant que li feus viegne au chevement dou dent.	Cautery of butter is such that you take butter of whey, and the end in a spoon of iron or steel; after take cotton and envelop on the point of a tent, and moisten it in hot butter, and put on the aching tooth gently and hold until it is cooled; and thus do often as long as its virtue comes to the root of the tooth, and if you see so moisten wool and cotton in cold butter, and put on the aching tooth, and put on one iron hot until the heat comes to the tip of the tooth.
Li cauteres ensamble feu si est telz que tu preignes uns cainne de fer ou d’arain, et soit grosse si que li feus ne viegne a la bouche dou malaide; aprés chaufe le cautere, de coi li forme venra ci aprés, et le met sus le dent et tien ta main tant que li cauteres soit refroidiez; fai ceu sovent, car li dolor sera ostee celui jor meisme ou l’endemain.	The cautery assembled with fire is such that you take a chain of iron or steel, and it be thick so that the fire does not come to the mouth of the patient; after heating the cautery, of which its form will come later, and put it on the tooth and hold your hand until the cautery cools; do this often, because the pain will be removed that day or the next. 
Et covient que li malaides emplisse sa bouche de boin burre en l’empressement de cel cautere, et puis le raiche fuer; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	And it is necessary that the patient fill his mouth with good butter at the time of this cautery, and then the root be driven; and this is the form of the cautery:  
Et fai cautere dou queil chief que tu voudras, et selonc ceu que tu as pooir; et c’est li forme de la caine:	And make a cautery where you want, and according to what you are able; and this is the form of the cautery:
des scrophules	Of the scrofulous
Quant les scrophules sont de fleume et de moistors froides, et ne sont obeissans a digestion par medicines, adonques eschaufe le cautere cheveit de coi ci aprés vient li forme, et ait II aovertures por les fumees a issir au cautere de l’autre partie; et met le cautere chaut sus l’apostume une fois, ou II se mestier est, tant qu’il viegne au font de l’apostume; et se li apostume est petis si met cautere selonc la quantiteit de l’apostume, et le laisse ensi III jors; et met sus coton moilliet em burre tant que li arsure soit ostee; aprés cure le leu d’oignemens et de tentes tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the boils are of phlegm and cold moisture, and are not obedient to digestion by medicines, then cauterize with a heated iron as described here afterward comes the form, and it has openings for the fumes to issue to the cautery on the other side; and put the cautery hot on the abscess once, or where it is necessary, until it comes to the bottom of the abscess; and if the abscess is small put cautery according to the quantity of the abscess, and leave it so for III days; and put on moistened cotton in butter as long as the burn is gone; after cure the place of dressings and tents until it is healed. 
Li forme de la cainne:	The form of the dog: 
Quant les moistors vainquent sus les chenals dou pormon, et meismement quant ce vient de froide complexion, adonc covient que li malaides soit voidiez premiers par medicines solutives; aprés li fai cautere a la racine de la gorge, et te garde que tu ne venir mie jusc’a la gorge, et n’ardre dou keur mais c’un poc.	When the humors prevail upon the channels of the pharynx, and also when it comes from a cold complexion, then it is necessary that the patient be first cleared by resolutive medicines; after which you make cautery at the root of the throat, and guard that you do not come even up to the throat, and burn only as much as one point. 
Aprés li fai I autre cautere a la jointure dou col au chief de l’espinee, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» de coi nos avons la forme devant; et cure le leu si com nos avons devant dit tant qu’il soit sanez.	After the fire cautery to the joint of the neck at the head of the spine, and be the cautery which is called "clavicle" for that we have the form before; and cure the place as we have said before until it is healed.  
de la toust	of the pain
Quant tous et maladie de pormon sont de moistors froides, et li malaides nen ait fievre ne sechor, et est li maladie anciaine, se li fai ij cauteres sus la forcele en leus vuis; et .i. autre cautere emmi le pis entre .ij. mameles; et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» selonc la forme qui est devant dite.	When all and disease of the cold, and the patient has no fever nor dryness, and the sickness is old, if one makes two cauteries on the flank in their joints; and one other cautery between the two breasts; and be the cauteries that are called 'clavicle' according to the form which is said before.
Et se tu vues, fai cautere en poignant a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins» de coi li forme est ci devant en la maladie des oreilles; et soient li poins jusc’a XXX, ou enqui entor.	And if you see, make cautery pricking at all the cautery which is called "points" because its form is before in the malady of the ears; and let the points be up to XXX, or as much as enters. 
Aprés cure le leu selonc ceu qui est devant dit, et soit li cauteres a III rains selonc ceste forme:	After curing the place according to what has been said before, and let the cautery be at III reigns according to this form: 
Et por ceu sont li cautere plus legier, por ceu que tu en fais .iij. a cop.	And for these are the cauteries lighter, because you make three per copy.
de la dislocation de l’ajutoire	of the dislocation of the shoulder
Quant li chiés de l’ajutoire est desaloiez par cause de moistor, et on le remet a leu, et il n’i puet demorer ains revient adés et desalue par petit movement qui avient, si com nos avons esproveit, adonques covient il que tu ramoinnes la dislocation premierement.	When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first reset the dislocation.
Aprés soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos et sus son costeit; aprés lieve le keur qui est dedens le titillite as dois de ta main senestre; et se li jointure est desaluee dedens, si eschaufe le cautere qui a .ij. ners douqueil ci est li forme:	Afterward, support the patient on his back and sides; after lifting the heart which is inside with the tip of your left hand; and if the joint is dislocated inside, then apply the cautery which has two nerves as this is its form:
et cauterize lou keur tant qu’il le perce jusc’a costeit, et venrait li fugure dou cautere ensamble .iiij. cauteres; et por ceu est faite cautere avec le cautere qui a .iij. ners, por coi li figure de cauterization sunt sis cauteres; et sont li nerf selonc la subtiliteit d’une tente et c’est li forme dou cautere qui a .iij. ners:	and cauterize the heart until it pierces to the ribs, and let the figure of the cautery come together with four cauteries; and for this is made cautery with the cautery which has three nerves, so that the form of cauterization are six cauteries; and the nerves are according to the subtlety of a tent and this is the form of the cautery which has three nerves:
Et aucune fois est ajostez sus ce .i. nerf por coi il i a .viij. cauteres.	And sometimes is adjusted on this, i.e. nerve for which there are viii. cauteries.
Aprés met sus le cautere porrelz broiez avec seil; aprés fai reposer le malaide, et ne soit meus li membres par lonc tens tant qu’il soit bien confortez.	After place on the cautery perlz bruised with seil; after make rest the patient, and do not move the limbs for long time until it be well fortified.
Et s’il est desaloiez desus, liquelz chose avient poc, adonques fait cautere sus l’epaisse dou cautere clavile, ou mout de cauteres en poignant.	And if it is dislocated above, which thing happens rarely, then make cautery on the thick part of the clavicle, or many cauteries in pricking.  
Car li jointure est refermee, et est ostee li moistor et est sanez li malaides.	For the joint is set, and moisture is removed, and the patient is healed. 
Quant en l’estomac vienent froidures et mout de moistors tant qu’il l’estraient a sa complexion, et sont multipliet li catharre a lui, et es manieres de cures acostumees et il ne profite mie, adonc covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus son dos, et estende ses jambes et ses mains.	When in the stomach come colds and much moisture until it changes its complexion, and are multiplied the catarrh to him, and the customary manners of cures and he does not benefit, therefore it is necessary that the patient be treated on his back, and extend his legs and hands. 
De ceu en aprés li fai III cauteres I desoz la cuillier dou pis per la quantiteit d’un doi, a tout le cautere clavile, et II cauteres defuers les II costez tant que li figure des cauteres soit a III angles, et ait teil espaice entre l’une et l’autre qu’elles ne soient jointes ensamble quant elles giteront porriture; et soient li cautere si parfont qu’il porpreignent les II pars dou keur, et soit li figure des cauteres selonc ceste forme sens ajostement:	After this, I make III cauteries 1 below the shoulder bone on each side by the quantity of one dice, to all the clavicle cautery, and II cauteries outside the II ribs until the figure of the cauteries is in III angles, and have such space between one and the other that they are not joined together when they will rot; and let the cauteries be so deep that they touch the II parts of the heart, and let the figure of the cauteries be according to this form without adjustment: 
Et se tu vues cauterize d’un grant cautere enmi l’estomac selonc ceste forme; et celui qui avra paour de cest cautere, cauterize en poignant et seigne sus l’estomac i. point selonc la quantiteit que tu vues d’enche; puis le cauterize a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins».	And if you see to cauterize with a large cautery in the stomach according to this form; and he who will have fear of this cautery, cauterize by pricking and seizing on the stomach I. point according to the quantity that you see of it; then cauterize at all the cautery which is called «points». 
Aprés le cure de la cure que nos avons eut devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	After the cure of the cure that we have had before, as long as it is healed.  
Quant au foie vient dolor de froit et de moistor et de grosse ventositeit, tant qu’il est fuer mis de sa complexion natureil per les superfluitez; et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne li profite mie, si covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus son haitereil; et signe d’enche III cauteres selonc ceste forme et ceste figure et ceste quantiteit sus lou foie, defuer les ypocondres, lai ou li coutes de l’ome vient; et ait d’espaice entre chaicun cautere la groissece d’un doi; et soient li cautere dou lonc dou cors, et ne presser mie mout ta main a tot le cautere; et soit arse tant soulement li moitiez dou keur, et soit li malaides drois sus ses piez; et s’il ne peut, si soit gisans, et estende ses jambes, et lieve ses brais; et c’est li forme:	When the liver comes pain from cold and moisture and great flatulence, as long as it is taken out of its natural complexion by superfluities; and the patient is cured with what we have said in divisions, and it does not benefit him, so it is necessary that the patient be treated on his back; and sign III cauteries according to this form and this figure and this quantity on the liver, away from the hypochondria, where the coat of man comes; and there be spacing between each cautery the size of a finger; and let the cauteries be long of the body, and do not press your hand too hard on all the cautery; and let it burn only the half of the heart, and let the patient lie straight on his feet; and if he cannot, let him be lying, and extend his legs, and raise his arms; and this is the form:
Et se ta volentez est, si cauterize ces cauteres dou cutellaire, se tu es subtilz et saiges en l’art, et te warde que tu n’ardes mie tout le keur, car tu feroies sechier tout le cors; et qu’il ne viegne jusc’a boueil, car li keurs est mout subtilz lai endroit, et lou saiches por voir.	And if your will is, so cauterize these cauteries of the knife, if you are subtle and wise in the art, and guard that you do not burn all the heart, for you would make the whole body dry; and that it does not come to boil, for the hearts are very subtle there, and you know how to see.  
Quant il a apostume au foie, et tu vues savoir s’il est en la char dou foie ou en la toile: s’il est en la char, se sent li malaides dolor ne mie trop fort; et s’il est en la toile, si sent dolor forsenee.	When he has an abscess on the liver, and you want to know if it is in the flesh of the liver or in the membrane: if it is in the flesh, the patient feels pain not too strong; and if it is in the membrane, he feels pain sharper.  
Et lors quant ceste cure desoit les mires, si covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus sa teste; et puis seigne d’enche le leu ou li apostumes est, et puis chaufe le cautere qui est semblans au rais, de coi ci est li forme:	And then when this cure is done, it is necessary that the patient be supported on his head; and then place a poultice on the spot where the abscess is, and then heat the cautery which is similar to the root, for that is the shape: 
Et cauterize I cautere tant que li keurs soit ars, et viegne jusc’a syphac, tant que li porreture soit toute fuers; aprés la cure selonc la cure des essues tant qu’il soit sanez; et ne covient mie que de cest cautere use nuls fuers que cil qui ait estudieit longement en l’art de medicine, et par cui mains cestes maladies ont corrut aucune fois.	And cauterize the cautery until the kernels are burned, and come up to the shaft, as long as the protuberance is whole; after the cure according to the cure of the wounds until it is healed; and it is not right that from this cautery use anyone except those who have studied a long time in the art of medicine, and by whose hands these diseases have been cured once. 
Adonques puet il hardiement ovrer, et toutevoies il me semble que mues vaut li laissier.	Therefore he may boldly work, and it seems to me always that he leave it.  
dou cautere de pleuresin	of the cautery of pleuresin
Li ancien dirent que on doit faire a pleuresin cauteres de racines d’aristologe, et en teil maniere: pren une racine d’aristologe longe, la plus grant que tu poras troveir, et soit seche, et soit ausi grosse et ausi longe comme tes dois; et la moille en oile, et l’emprens au feu, et cauterize .i. cautere entre la forcele et lou col, et .ij. petis cauteres un poc en dessendant en la partie qui est desoz la barbe; et .ij. cauteres entre la quinte coste et la sisime, en declinant derrier un poc; et .i. cautere emmi le pis, et .i. autre sus l’estomac, et .i. entre .ij. espaules, et .ij. as .ij. costez dou pis defuers le cautere qui est entre .ij. espaules; et ne presser mie ta main, ains fai apertement ausi com en odorant.	The ancients said that one must make on the pleuresin cauteries of roots of aristologe, and in such manner: take a root of aristologe long, the greatest that you will be able to find, and be dry, and also as thick and as long as your two hands; and the moisten in oil, and the impress at the fire, and cauterize one cautery between the shoulder and the neck, and two small cauteries a little going down in the part which is under the beard; and two cauteries between the fifth rib and the sixth, declining behind a little; and one cautery between the hip, and one other on the stomach, and one between the two shoulders, and two as two ribs from the lower side of the cautery which is between the two shoulders; and do not press your hand, but make openly as if smelling.
Et dirent aucun ancien que aucun home usent de cautere de feir semblant a I raseur, et l’eschaufent et le mettent entre les costes, tant qu’il vient a cel aposteme; et saut fuers li dolor, si com nos avons dit en l’aposteme dou foie.	And they said that any old man uses cautery of fire similar to the razor, and they heat it and put it between the ribs, until it comes to this abscess; and goes out the pain, as we have said in the abscess of the liver. 
Mais en cestui ovraige est paour ou li malaides muert maintenant, ou fistule i vient qui ne puet estre sanee.	But in this work there is fear where the patient dies now, or a fistula comes that cannot be healed. 
de la mice	of the mouse
Quant tu cures la maladie de la mice de ceu que nos avons dit as divisions des cures, et il ne profite mie, adonques i afierent .iij. manieres de cautere que tuit sont boin.	When you treat the illness of mice according to what we have said about the divisions of treatments, and it does not benefit, then there are three kinds of cauteries that are all good.
Desquelz li une maniere si est que tu faices III cauteres, ou IIII, en lignant selonc la longor de la mice, selonc la figure dou cautere dou foie que nos avons dit devant; et n’apresser mie ta main a tout le cautere, et soit li malaides sovins sor son dos; et une autre maniere de cautere si est que tu eschaufe le cautere qui a II ners, si com nos l’avons mostreit en la dislocation de l’espaule; et lieve le keur qui est endroit la mice, ou li coutes dou malaide vient devers senestre, et soit li elevations dont tu lieves le keur selonc la keur, selonc la longesce dou cors, et li cautere soient selonc la largesce dou cors.	Of which the one manner is that you make III cauteries, or IIII, in lining according to the length of the mice, according to the figure of the cautery of the liver that we have said before; and do not hasten your hand to the whole cautery, and let the patient be lying on his back; and another manner of cautery is that you heat the cautery which has II ners, as we have shown it in the dislocation of the shoulder; and lift the heart which is located in the mice, or the cuts of the patient come from the left, and let the elevation by which you lift the heart be according to the heart, according to the length of the body, and let the cauteries be according to the width of the body. 
Aprés i boute les II ners enflamez tant que li keurs soit perciez de l’autre part, et puis trai fuers le cautere, et ensi en i avra IIII Et se tu vues, si cauterize a tot le cautere a III ners.	After it burns the II nerves inflamed as long as the hearts are pierced from the other side, and then withdraws the cautery, and thus in it will have IV. And if you see, so cauterize all the cautery to III nerves. 
Aprés le cure quant il a geteit porriture par lonc tens, et ce vaut mues que li autre des cures devant dites.	After the wound when it has gotten rot for long time, and this is worth moves than the other cures before said. 
de ydropisie	of dropsy
Cautere ne vaut a ydropique, fors c’a la maniere qui est apelee «asclytes».	Cauterizing is not good for edema, except for the manner which is called "asclites". 
Quant tu la cures selonc les manieres que nos avons dit en divisions, et ta cure ne profite mie, adonques covient il que tu li faices IIII cauteres entor la boude, et I sus l’estomac, et un sus le foie, et I sus la mice, et II derrier le dos sus l’espinee, et I endroit le pis; et soit li cauteres bien pres de l’espés dou keur.	When you cure it according to the manners that we have said in divisions, and your cure does not profit at all, then it behooves you to make four cauteries around the head, and one on the stomach, and one on the liver, and one on the mouse, and two behind the back on the spine, and one place on the breast; and let the cauteries be close to the heart.  
Aprés laisse le cautere aovert por giter porriture lonc tens, et ne lassier mie la cure dou malaide aprés le cautere; et sanation se hasterait, et seront ensamble les .ij. ententions avec l’aide de Deu.	After leave the cautery open for to fight corruption long time, and do not let the care of the sick after the cautery; and healing will hasten, and will be together the two intentions with the help of God.
Li forme dou cautere por le ventre soit li clavile que nos avons devant mostreit; et cil por le dos soit olivaire, selonc ceu qu’il est ci devant mis.	The form of the cautery for the belly is the key that we have in front shows; and the one for the back is olive, according to what it is here before put.
de l’enfleure des piez	of the swelling of the feet
Quant li piez sont enflez a celui qui est ydropique, et sont plain d’awe citrine, il covient que tu cauterizes sus le dos dou piet entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire; et lieve ta main avec le cautere sens torner.	When the feet are swollen in the one who is hydrophic, and are full of yellow bile, it befits that you cauterize on the back of the foot between the little finger and the ring finger; and lift your hand with the cautery without turning. 
Et n’entrer mie trop em parfont, ensi sarrait fuers li awe citrine, et soit li cauteres selonc cest forme:	And do not enter too deep with it, then tighten the outside of the cautery well, and let the cautery be according to this form. 
Aprés fai sus .ij. jambes .ij. cauteres en chescune jambe a la pointe dou cutellaire; et soit li cauteres dou lonc, l’un desoz le genoil devant et l’autre defuers, enmi la jambe; et laisse les cauteres aovers longement sens curer, que li awe en isse; aprés le cure des autres cures que nos avons dit.	After do on two legs two cauteries in each leg at the point of the knife; and let the cauteries be long, one below the knee forward and the other outside, in the middle of the leg; and leave the cauteries open lengthwise without curing, that they may become inflamed; after the cure of the other cures that we have said.
de la menoison	of the house
Quant solution de ventre vient de froidor et de moistor, tant que li vertus retentive et digestive qui est ou stomac et en l’intestine est afleboie, et ne puet estre curez par manieres de cures; et tu vois le malaide bien soffrant et de fort vertut, si fai .i. grant cautere sus l’estomac selonc ceu qu’il en a parleit ci devant ou cautere de l’estomac, au cautere circule; et .iiij. cauteres entor la boude subtilz a tout .i. cautere clavile subtil, et .ij. cauteres sus les hainches.	When solution of the belly comes from cold and moisture, so that the retentive and digestive virtues which is in the stomach and in the intestine are weakened, and cannot be cured by means of cures; and you see the patient suffering greatly and of great virtue, then do one great cautery on the stomach according to what has been said before about the cautery of the stomach, at the circulating cautery; and four cauteries around the navel subtle to each cautery clavile subtle, and two cauteries on the hips.
Et se tu vois les moistors habundans et le malaide soffrant, se li fai cautere sus le poignil, et .i. cautere sus chaicun yle, et .ij. petis cauteres sus l’estomac delez le grant, car li cure est profitans quant il i a bone aide.	And if you see the humors abundant and the patient suffering, make a cautery on the thigh, and one cautery on each hip, and two small cauteries on the stomach near the large one, because the cure is beneficial when there is good help.
de la cure des emorroydes	Of the cure of hemorrhoids
Quant les emorroydes sont ou fondement, ou une ou plusors, et sont ancienes et sont de grosses humors froides et moistes corrumpues, et sont curees si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie, si fai cauteres: III sus l’espine dou dos, celi qui est tout defuers desoz almecdate poc et poc en triangulant, et I cautere desoz la boude II dois; et se tu penses que ses estomac soit refroidiez, et li viande ne cuise, et on voit enfler la faice, adonques li faice on I grant cautere sus le stomac, si com il est devant dit, et I autre sus le foie, et I autre sus la mice a tout le cautere clavile; et laisse le cautere overt lonc tens.	When hemorrhoids are at the foundation, or one or more, and they are old and are large humors cold and moist corrupted, and they are cured as we have said in divisions, and it does not benefit, if you do cauteries: III above the spine of the back, which is all outside of the small intestine pocket and pocket in triangulating, and I cautery below the belly II should; and if you think that its stomach be cooled, and the meat does not cook, and one sees swell the face, then on the face one I large cautery on the stomach, as it is said before, and the other on the liver, and the other on the mouse to all the cautery clavicle; and leave the cautery open long time. 
Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	After cure the place until it is healed. 
de la charnositeit qui est nommee «thelul»	of the carnosity that is called "thelul"
Quant tu copes althelul, si eschaufe le cautere qui semble .i. raseur, et puis le met tout embraseit sus cel althelul copeit; et i laisse tant ta main que li cauteres viegne a la naissance de la voine, de coi li sans cort; fai ceu une fois ou .ij., et s’il i a mout d’althelul, si cauterize chaicun si com nos avons dit; aprés les cure d’oignemens profitans tant qu’il soient sanez; et se tu cauterizes d’un cautere grant sus alchatim, si avra plus grant aide.	When you cut thelul, then heat the cautery which seems like a razor, and then put it all ablaze on top of that thelul cut; and let it there as long as your hand  that the cauteries comes to the birth of the vein, from which the blood flows; do this one or two times, and if there is much thelul, then cauterize each one as we have said; after cure with ointments beneficial as long as they are healed; and if you cauterize with a large cautery on alchatim, it will have more help.
de plaie mal curee	of a poorly healed wound
Quant li malaides ne puet soffrir tailleure ne overture, que nos raconterons en son leu, si vient teil maladie que ne puet estre sanee fuer que par cautere.	When the patient cannot endure incision or opening, which we will recount in its place, there comes such a malady that can only be healed by cautery.
Quant a aucun vient fistule, et est enveillie et giete porriture et moistors corrumpues, si la doies prover a tot une tente subtil, et garde que tu saiches a tot la tente combien elle a de parfont.	When to any comes fistula and is filled and has rotting and corrupted moisture, so the one should prove at once a tent subtle, and keep that you know at once the tent how much it has of breadth. 
Aprés eschaufe le cautere qui semble I raseur, et le boute en la fistule selonc la quantiteit que li tente i est entrée, et rencomence lou cautere tant que cil cors porris et corrumpus soient ars, une fois, ou II ou III, selonc la quantiteit de som besoing; et te warde d’ardre lé nerf qui sunt enqui, et des grans voinnes.	After sharpening the cautery like a razor, and putting it into the fistula according to the quantity that the one who went there entered, and reheat the cautery until the corrupted and rotten flesh is burned, once or II or III times, according to the quantity of the need; and guard not to burn the nerves which are therein, and the great veins. 
se li fistule vait au cors de la vesie et a l’intestine, si te warde de ces leus, et ne faire ceu fuers que en leu charnut, et pense qu’ele n’est mie persans; aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez, et se li leus est saielez, et les matieres sont ostees lonc tens, adonc saiches que li leus est sanez entierement; et se les matieres ne sont ostees, saiche que li leus est troez, et corrumpus li os au font; et ensi com un de ces que nos dirons en son leu.	If the fistula goes to the body of the bladder and the intestine, then guard these places, and do not make those fires except in their fleshy place, and think that she is not pierced; after curing the place as long as it is sound, and if the places are healed, and the materials are removed for a long time, then know that the places are entirely healed; and if the materials are not removed, know that the places are rotten, and corrupted the bone at its root; and thus like one of these that we will say in its place. 
de la maladie des reins	of the malady of the kidneys
Quant dolor de froit vient as rains, et de grosse ventositeit, et ne prent talant de femme, adonc covient il que tu li fais cautere sus les rains d’une part et d’autre au cautere clavile que nos avons devant dit; et se nos le cauterizons em mileu, si avra .iij. cauteres en ligne, et se feront plus grant aide.	When pain from cold comes with great windiness, and does not take root in woman, then it is necessary that you make a cautery on the loins on one side and the other with the cautery of the clavicle that we have said before; and if we cauterize it in the middle, then there will be three cauteries in a line, and they will give more aid.
de la vessie	of the bladder
Quant li vessie est mole et foible de froit et de moistor, si que li malaides retient l’urine, adonc li fai cautere en la partie defuers sus la vessie, la ou encomencent li poil dou poignil, et .i. a destre et .i. a senestre, et soit chescuns cauteres si lons com li nous d’un poce; et li fais .i. cautere defuers le dos, ou .ij. se tu en as besoing; et soit li cauteres clavile selon la forme devant dite.	When the bladder is soft and weak from cold and moisture, so that the patient retains urine, then I make a cautery in the outer part above the bladder, where the hairs of the groin begin, one on the right and one on the left, and each cautery as long as my thumb; and I make one cautery outside the back, or two if you need it; and let the cauteries be clavicle-shaped according to the form said before.
de la marris	of the marshes
Quant li marrix est froide et moiste, et ne laisse mie por ceu a concevoir, et les flors sont corrumpues et lor termines tarde; et quant elles vienent, si sent grant dolor: adonques covient il c’on li faice .iij. cauteres entor la boude, si com nos avons dit ou cautere de la vessie, et .ij. cauteres defuers le dos; et soit li cauteres clavile, si com nos avons dit.	When the marshes are cold and moist, and do not allow for this to conceive, and the flowers are corrupted and their ends late; and when they come, there is great pain: therefore it is necessary that one make three cauteries around the bud, as we have said of the cautery of the bladder, and two cauteries above the back; and let the cautery be clavil, as we have said.
de la hainche	of the hip
Quant les moistors viscouses dessendent a la boiste de la hainche, et por ceste cause si se muet de son leu, et li signes est que li cuisse est plus longe que li autre quant on le mesure ensamble; et est trovez li leus dou departement vuis, si covient que tu cauterizes le malaide sus la boiste de la hainche a .i. cautere semblant au cercle, et seigne devant le leu entor la boiste si com elle torne, si que li boiste soit dedens le cercle; et si soit li cauteres telz com cil dont on a cauterizeit le stomac.	When the viscous moistures descend to the bone of the hip, and for this cause it moves from its place, and the sign is that the thigh is longer than the other when measured together; and it is found the location of the viscus department, then it is necessary that you cauterize the patient on the bone of the hip with one cautery seeming to a circle, and mark before the location around the bone as it turns, so that the bone be inside the circle; and let the cautery be such as that used to cauterize the stomach.
Et se cist cauteres ne t’est presens, se li fai .iij. cauteres de l’olivaire grans, et soit li cauteres ausi parfont com tous li keurs; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if this cautery is not present to you, make iii. cauteries of the olive large, and let the cauteries be as perfect as all the others; and cure until it is healed.
de la dolor de la hainche	of the pain of the hip
Quant dolor vient en la boiste de la hainche, et c’est de froidor et de moistor, et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en la division et li cure ne vaut, et li maladie est anciene: adonc covient il que tu purges le malaide des grosses humors de pilules fetides, ou autres pilules bones semblans.	When pain comes in the hip joint, and it is from cold and moisture, and the patient is cured of what we have said in the division and the cure does not work, and the illness is old: then it is necessary that you purge the patient of the gross humors with fetid pills, or other good-seeming pills.
Aprés li fai cautere; et li maniere dou cautere si est selonc II manieres: c’est a savoir ensamble medicines ardans, et cautere de feu.	After the fire cautery; and the manner of the cautery is according to two manners: that is to say together burning medicines, and fire cautery. 
Cautere de feu si est selonc mout de manieres, desquelz li uns est telz: que tu cauterize sus la boiste de la hainche III cauteres triangulalz selonc ceste forme, et i fai bone profunditeit et grant, et ait entre chaicun cautere d’espaice la groissece d’un doi, et soit li cauteres olivaire; aucune fois fait on cautere en mileu sus lou chief de la hainche, por coi il en i a IIII selonc ceste forme:	Cauterization by fire is according to many ways, some of which are such: that you cauterize on the bone of the hip III triangular cauteries according to this form, and make good depth and great, and have between each cautery spacing the size of a finger, and let the cauteries be olive; sometimes one makes cautery in the middle on the top of the hip, for which there are IIII according to this form: 
Et se tu vues, si le cauterize au cautere dou cercle que nos avons devant dit en la dislocation de la hainche; mais fai en teil maniere que li cercles conteigne toute la hainche, et tous li espés dou keur soit ars.	And if you see, so the cauterize with the cautery of the circle that we have said before in the dislocation of the hip; but do in such manner that the circles contains the whole hip, and all the spaces of the heart be burned.
Et c’est li maniere c’on fait en sciatique, quant li dolor tient en la hainche, et ne parvient mie jusc’a la cuisse ne jusc’a la jambe.	And this is the manner in which it is done for sciatica, when pain holds in the hip, and does not reach to the thigh nor to the leg. 
Et s’ele vient jusc’a la cuisse et la jambe, se li fai II cauteres lai ou li malaides dit que li dolor li tient, et I cautere desus la cheville IIII dois, a la partie senestre un poc; et soit li cauteres cutellaire, et soit arse li espesseté dou keur; et se li malaides sent que li dolor s’estende jusc’a dois dou piet ou pres d’enqui, se le cauterize la ou il sent la dolor III poins ou IIII au cautere qui est apelez «poins».	And if it comes as far as the thigh and leg, make two cauteries there where the patient says that the pain holds him, and the cautery above the ankle four points, to the left side one point; and whether the cautery is cuticular, or whether it burns the thickness of the heart; and if the patient feels that the pain extends as far as two fingers of the foot or near it, cauterize it where he feels the pain three points or four at the cautery which is called «poins». 
Et se mestiers est, se li en fai plus; et se il seit que li dolor soit desoz le genoil vers la cuisse, se li fais cautere au cautere cutellaire ou circulaire, et te done bien garde en tous tes cauteres que tu n’i lassier mie tant le cautere que tu brules les ners et les grans arteres, et que tu ne faices au malaide plus grant nuisance et contraction.	And if it is necessary, then one makes more; and if he knows that the pain is below the knee towards the thigh, then one makes a cautery with the cuticular or circular cautery, and be well warned in all your cauteries that you do not leave so much of the cautery that you burn the nerves and the great arteries, and that you do no more harm and contraction to the patient.
Et je meisme ai veus plusors qui ont fait cautere sus la cheville dou piet, et li lasserent tant que li jambe fut toute enflee, et li piez ausi, et fut perciez et corrumpus toz li piez.	And I myself have seen many who have had cauterization on the ankle of the foot, and they left them until the leg was all swollen, and the foot too, and it was pierced and corrupted throughout the foot. 
Aprés une solution de ventre dont il ot la mort.	After a belly solution from which he had death. 
Et se li dolors est en II parties ensamble, fai cautere en l’une et en l’autre, selonc ceste maniere.	And if the pain is in two parts together, make cautery in one and in the other, according to this manner. 
Et li saige dirent en la cautere de la hainche, de coi ci est li maniere, fai I tel fer et soit au chief ausi gros com uns nauvillon de dacte, ou un poc moins, et soit par entrechetres et soit des l’un entrechetres jusc’a l’autre d’espaice la quantiteit d’un nou de poce; et soient li entrechetres aovers de II pars, et soient aussi comme noez, et i ait I mainche de fer bien fait; et c’est li forme:	And the wise men said in the cautery of the hip, because this is the manner, make such iron and be at the chief also thick as a thimble or a little less, and be by interspaces and be from one interspace to another of space the quantity of a knuckle's breadth; and let the interspaces be towards two parts, and be also like nuts, and let there be in the hip of iron well made; and this is the form: 
Et soit eschaufez tant qu’il soit toz rouges et giete senteles, et puis le mette on sus la boiste de la hainche malaide, et soit tornez sus lou sain costeit; et lou cauterize une fois .i. cautere reont et lou laisse .iij. jors; et puis fai emplaustre de burre, et laisse la plaie aoverte lonc tens; aprés la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	And be heated until it is all red and feels hot, and then put it on the bone of the sick hip, and be turned on the healthy side; and cauterize once 1 cautery reont and let it lie for 3 days; and then make a plaster of butter, and leave the wound covered for a long time; after the cure of oiling until it is healed.
Albucasim dit que nos usons poc de cest cautere por la paor de son regart, et se voions poc qui en usent; et toutevoie ceu est des boins cauteres, qui le puet soffrir, et lai ou il s’afiert.	Albucasim says that we use little of this cautery because of the fear of its appearance, and we see few who use it; and nevertheless those are good cauteries, which can endure it, and where it is applied.
Li cauteres de medicine ardant si est que tu faices I estrument a entrechetres en coi dessende li marge de la porte, et soit d’arain ou de fer a une paroit longe, et en la hautece ait II nous, et ait entre chaicun la quantiteit de la groissece d’un doi; et soient overt defuer et desus, et se joignent ensamble selonc ceste forme:	The cauteries of medicine burning so are that you make the instrument with interlacing in which descends the margin of the door, and be of iron or of an armor a one part long, and in the height it has two, and between each one the quantity of the thickness of a finger; and be open outward and upward, and join together according to this form: 
Aprés met sus la boiste de la hainche au malaide gisant sor suin costeit sain, et apresse ta main mout sus la boiste de la hainche; aprés giete entre les II cercles de l’awe chaude qui soit chaufee au feu I poc, et li laisse une houre dou tens, et soffre li malaides la chalor et l’arsure de li.	After put upon the boil of the hip to the patient lying on his healthy side, and after your hand much upon the boil of the hip; after throws between the II circles of the hot awl which be heated in the fire 1 poc, and let him one hour of ten, and suffers the patient the heat and the burn of him.
Car il i trueve mordication ausi com de feu; et quant li mordications iert passee, se lieve ta main avec l’estrument et leve la hainche d’awe douce, et laisse ensi III jors, et met sus burre tant que ceu qui est noir de l’eschaudure soit osteit; et lou laisse III jors que porriture en istrait; et ceu serait li derriene aide aprés le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	For there is found mordication also as of fire; and when the mordication is passed, lift your hand with the instrument and raise the hip with a gentle movement, and leave so III days, and put upon butter until that which is black from the burn is gone; and leave it III days that rot may drain out; and this would be the last help after the cure of ointments until it is healed. 
Et se li dolor s’est estendue jusc’a la cuisse ou jusc’a la jambe, se li fai I estrument que teigne awe selonc ceu que tu as fait en la hainche igaument; et c’est li maniere de l’awe chaude, et je l’ai escripte ou traitier de la rectification de medicine.	And if the pain has extended to the thigh or to the leg, do what you have done in the hip augmentation; and this is the manner of the hot weal, and I have written it or treated in the rectification of medicine. 
Pren alcali et chaulz vive, autant de l’une com de l’autre, et les broie ensamble, et les met en I nuef pot.	Take alkali and quick lime, as much of one as of the other, and grind them together, and put them in a new pot. 
ou il ait I petit pertuis defuer se que li pointe d’un raisor i puisse entreir; et met desor celui pot I autre pot bien plombeit, et met sus alcali et chalz et awe douce sus, tant qu’il en i ait I doi desus les poudres cant tu l’avras bien preingte a ta main; et le laisse ensi tant qu’il en dessende awe ague et chiece ou pot plombeit, puis pren toute cele awe, et la giete sus chalz et sus alcali si com devant.	Where there is the small hole of fire where the point of a razor can enter; and put one pot over the other well plugged, and put alkali and salt and sweet wine on top, until there is the due amount of powders as you will have well primed in your hand; and let it thus until it descends the vinegar and urine or pot plugged, then take all this and lay it on salt and alkali as before. 
Et lors si sera mout ague et est aministree en mou d’ovraiges de medicine et en cauteres d’autres membres Car elle fait auteil oevre com feus, et si a autres medicines dont on cauterize bien la hainche ensi com tesisie et miel anacardi et chalz avec savon, toutes ces choses mellees ensamble.	And then if it will be very good and is administered in the work of medicine and in cauteries of other members Because she does auteil oevre like fire, and if there are other medicines with which one cauterizes well the hip as well as tessie and honey anacardi and chalz with soap, all these things mixed together. 
Et Galiens nos raconte une cure dont uns hons fut curez de la dolor de la hainche et de la voine sciatique, et lou loe mout, et dit que on n’i fist autre cure, et qu’il en fut sanez a une soule fois quant on ot fait ceste cure, et il se fut baigniez si com il l’enseigne ci aprés.	And the Gauls tell us of a cure of which one man was cured of the pain of the hip and sciatic vein, and that he liked it very much, and said that no other cure was done, and that he was healed in one go when this cure was done, and he bathed himself as he teaches afterwards. 
Et dist en teil maniere que tu preignes dou litargire vert fres et sec, et le broie mout avec I poc de graisse, et met sus la hainche et sus la cuisse et sus la jambe ou la dolor tient, et la lie; et li laisse III houres et par la quantiteit que li malaides ne sente plus l’arsure.	And say in this manner that you take some litarge green fresh and dry, and grind it well with a little grease, and put it on the hip and thigh and leg where the pain holds, and the limb; and leave it for three hours and by the quantity that the patient feels no more burning. 
Et puis le fai entrer ou bain tant que li cors li soit un poc arousez, et lou fai entrer ou lit, et li dolor s’en ira toute et sera sanez.	And then you make him enter into bath until his body is a bit aroused, and you make him enter into bed, and the pain will go away all and will be healed.  
Et saiches que nuls ne doit user de cautere de telz medicines, se ceu n’est aprés l’evacuation de cors.	And know that none should use cauteries of such medicines, if not after the evacuation of the body. 
Et Dyascorides dist que quant li voine sciatique est cauterizee de fiens de chievre, si i aide mout; et doit estre fais li cauteres en teil maniere.	And Dioscorides says that when the sciatic vein is cauterized with fire of goat, it helps a great deal; and must be done the cautery in such manner. 
Prenez lainne et la beurez d’oile vielz, et metez sus la fossete qui est entre le pouce dou piez et l’autre qui est apelez foscile.	Take lamb's wool and moisten it with old oil, and put it on the hollow which is between the thumb of the foot and the other one that is called the fossa. 
Aprés pren fiens de chievre sec, et l’empren a feu tant qu’il soit charbons, et lou met sus la laine, et le laisse tant qu’il soit estains; et refai encor ensi, et ne cesser de faire ensi tant que tu penses par sens qu’il viegne jusc’a la hainche, et que li dolor soit cessee; et cist manieres de cautere est apelez «cautere de chievre».	After take fine of sheep dry, and the empren to fire until it is charcoal, and put it upon the wool, and let it until it is stained; and redo again thus, and do not cease to do thus until you think by sense that it comes up to the hip, and that the pain be ceased; and this manner of cautery is called «cautery of sheep». 
de la dolor dou dos	of pain of the back
Quant dolor vient au dos, ou par cheoir ou de percussion ou par trop grant evacuation, ou par semblans de matiere espandue froide, a nule de ces semblances ne vaut cauteres, fuer que a celi qui vient de infusion de froide matiere.	When pain comes to the back, whether by falling or percussion or by too great evacuation, or by similar appearance of cold expanded matter, none of these appearances are worth cautery, except for that which comes from the infusion of cold matter.
Il covient c’aprés ceu que li malaides est voidiez de pilules fetides ou d’autres semblans, que on li faice sus lou dos, lai ou li dolor tient, trois lignes signies d’enche, et en chescune ligne .v. cauteres ou plus selonc la vertut et la quantiteit que li malaides puet soffrir; et soit fait li cauteres selonc le cautere qui est apelez «poins»; et se tu vues, fai .iij. cauteres ou .iiij. au cautere clavile moien selonc ceste forme:	It behooves after these things that the patient is void of fetid pills or other similar ones, that one makes on his back, where the pain holds, three lines marked with incisions, and in each line five cauteries or more according to the virtue and quantity that the patient can endure; and let the cautery be made according to the cautery that is called 'point'; and if you see, make three or four cauteries at the clavi middle cautery according to this form:
Maintes fois vient ceste maladie as petis enfans, et li signes de l’encomencement si est qu’il ont estroite alainne quant il se lievent, et paor; et tu trueves en la derriene espinee dou dos et en nous l’apparance qui vient sus les autres espinees.	Many times this illness comes to small children, and the signs of its beginning are that they have a narrow spine when they are lying down, and fear; and you find in the last spine of the back and in us the appearance which comes above the other spines.
Quant tu vois ceu et tu le vues curer, si le cauterize au cautere de celcle selonc ceste forme.	When you see this and you want to cure it, cauterize it with the cautery of this kind according to this form.
Si que li cautere porpreigne chescune partie de l’espinee egaument.	So that the cautery touches each part of the spine equally. 
Et se tu vues, si cauterize entor l’espinee au cautere poignant II lignes ou III, et soient li poins pres l’uns de l’autre.	And if you see so, cauterize around the spine with a sharp cautery two or three lines, and let the points be near each other.  
Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez selonc ceu que nos avons dit, et warde que tu n’amenistrer cautere en gilbositeit qui soit en spame de nerf.	After curing the wound until it is healed according to what we have said, and be careful that you do not apply a cautery in glibosity that is in the space of a nerve. 
de la dolor des jointes	of the pain of the joints
Quant dolor de jointes sunt de moistors que sont espandues a chaicun membre dou cors, et quant dolor vient em piez, que li mire apelent «podagre» proprement, et quant elle est de froide cause et cures de medicines ne la puent curer, si est curez par cauteres en teil maniere: fai li mout de cauteres entor la jointure dou piet, et soit li cauteres olivaire selonc ceste forme:	When pain of joints is from moistures that are spread to each member of the body, and when pain comes in feet, which the wise call "podagra" properly, and when it is from cold cause and cures of medicines cannot cure it, then it is cured by cauteries in this manner: make the cautery around the joint of the foot, and let the cautery be olive-shaped according to this form:
Et s’il i a besoigne que tu poignes sus la faice dou piet, se li fai cautere a tot le cautere c’on claime «point».	And if there is need that you prick upon the face of the foot, to it do cautery at all the cautery which one claims “point”. 
Et se les dolors viegnent jusc’a genous et as autres jointures, et ceu avient maintes fois, se li fai cautere sus chaicun genoil III cauteres ou IIII de chescunne partie, a tout le cautere olivaire; et se tu as mestier de plus, si en fai plus, mais n’i tenir mie ta main fuers que tant que li espés dou keur soit ars.	And if the pains come to the knees and other joints, and this happens many times, then you make a cautery on each knee III cauteries or IV of each part, with all the olive cautery; and if you need more, you do more, but don't hold your hand too much longer than when the kernel is burnt.   
Et se les dolors dessendent jusc’a genoil et au dos, se li aministre le cautere que nos avons dit en son chapistre.	And if the pains descend to the knee and back, administer the cautery as we have said in our chapter.  
Et se les dolors sunt as mains, si fai poins entor le foscile II lignes; et s’il remaint point de dolor as dois, si fai poins sus chescune jointe et sus lou poil de la main; et se les dolors vienent jusc’as coutes ou jusc’as espaules, si cauterize chescune partie, et fai boin governement au malaide et penre medicines.	And if the pains are in the hands, make points around the bone two lines; and if there remains no pain in the arms, make points on each joint and on the hair of the hand; and if the pains come up to the elbows or shoulders, cauterize each part, and make good governance to the patient and proper medicines. 
Car se tu li fais boin governement et tu purges fleume, si sera saneis a l’aide de Deu.	For if you give him good governance and purge phlegm, he will be healed with the help of God. 
de la routure dou syfac	of the rupture of the sinew
Quant routure vient en angres, et li bouelz dessendent as coions et c’est novelement, si covient que quant tu lou vues curer, qu’il ne menjuce mie celui jor; et qu’il use choses qui laichent lou ventre, si que li fiens dessende de son ventre; aprés le fai seoir sus son dos entre tes mains, et li comande qu’il teigne son alaine tant que li boueil soient repairiet, et les ramoinne a tes dois, et seigne d’enche desoz la routure sus l’os dou poignil, et a tout un signe que soit semblans a la moitiet d’un cercle a desus dou cors; puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	When rupture comes in the angles, and the boils descend to the hips and it is new, so that when you see him healed, he does not move that day; and that he uses things that lie on his belly, so that the fiends descend from his belly; after that make him sit on his back between your hands, and command him to hold his wing as long as the boils are repaired, and bring them to your heels, and mark with fire beneath the rupture over the bone of the fist, and all a sign like half a circle above the body; then heat the cautery with this form:
tant qu’il soit blans et qu’il giete senteles.	until it is white and he feels them 
Puis ramoine les bouels a lor leu; et li ministres teigne sa main sus qu’il ne retornent arrier; et oevre bien les cuisses au malaide, et met desoz lui I cussin et I serjant sus les cuisses, et I autre sus lou pis qui li teigne les mains; puis met le cautere sus lou signe a tout ta main, et lou tien droit et lou tien tant que tu ateignes l’os, et se tu ne l’ateins la premiere fois, si le rencomence encor une autre tant que tu viegnes jusc’a l’os; et te warde subtilment que li boueil ne saille quant tu fais lou cautere; que tu ne le brulasses; et que par ceu li malaides ne muere, ou autre malz.	Then reset the bones in their place; and the minister keeps his hand on it so that they do not return backward; and work well the thighs of the patient, and put under him the cushion and the sergeant on the thighs, and the other on the hip which holds his hands; then put the cautery on the sign with all your hand, and hold it straight and hold it until you reach the bone, and if you do not reach it the first time, do it again another time until you come to the bone; and be careful that the bone does not jump out when you do the cautery; so that you do not burn it; and that by this the patient does not die, or other harms. 
Et saiches que quant tu ne viens jusc’a l’os au cautere, tes ovraiges ne vaut rien.	And knows that when you do not come to the bone with the cautery, your works are worth nothing. 
Et covient que li cauteres des enfans soit subtilz selonc la mesure d’ous, et des grans gens aussi grans selonc lor mesure; aprés III jors cure lou leu dou cautere de burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés le cure d’autres oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez, et gise li malaides XL jors sus son dos tant que li plaie soit bien soudee; et covient que ses norrissemens soit lassatis longement, si que li boueil ne saillent quant il se preigdra d’aler en chambres.	And it is necessary that the cauteries of children be subtle according to the measure of them, and of great people also great according to their measure; after III days cure the place with butter cautery until the burning is removed; after the cure of other ointments until it is healed, and lie the patient XL days on his back until the wound is well joined; and it is necessary that his dressings be laid long, so that the boils do not come out when he wants to go into chambers. 
Et aprés XL jors, quant il se voudra lever, se li amenistre une faixe bien faite, et la porse XL autres jors; et ait boin repos, qu’il se travaille poc et se warde de trop grant repletion de boivre et de mengier, et de trop haut braire; et quant il fait cest enseignement si est sanez entierement.	And after 40 days, when he wants to rise, administer a well-made splint to him, and wear it for another 40 days; and have good rest, that he works little and keeps himself from too much repletion of drinking and eating, and from too much high braire; and when he does this teaching, he is entirely healed.  
Et je dirai ci aprés la cure de taillier en son chapistre.	And I will say after this the cure of tailoring in its chapter. 
de la routure dou ventre	of the rupture of the belly
Quant routures vienent en autres ventres et sont connisans, et tu vues qu’elles ne croissent plus, se li fai I cautere dou cautere reont selonc sa quantiteit, et soit ars li tiers dou keur; aprés le cure selonc ceu que nos avons dit; et aucun des anciens ont dit c’on le doit cauterizer au cautere a III angles selonc ceste forme:	When wounds come in other bellies and are known, and you see that they do not grow anymore, then to it apply the cautery according to its quantity, and be one third of the heart; after the cure according to what we have said; and none of the ancients have said it should be cauterized with the cautery at III angles according to this form: 
mais signe premier le leu d’enche et fai une ligne per la largesce desus la routure, et une autre defuers, et main ta main emmi a tout le cautere clavile.	but first sign the place of the incision and make a line across the width above the break, and another below, and hold your hand over the entire cautery clavicle. 
Mais li premiers cauteres est plus legiers et muedres.	But the first cauteries are lighter and more moved. 
de dolor anciene en aucun membre	of old pain in no member
Quant dolor vient en aucun membre, ou de cheoir ou de ferir, et cele dolor tient lonc tens, et li cure de medicine n’i vaut, adonc covient qu’il soit cauterizeis au cautere qui est apelez «poins», et soit li cauteres selonc la longesce dou membre et la petitece et sa foibleteit et sa vertut et sa location de torcions et de sa dolor.	When pain comes in any member, from falling or striking, and this pain lasts a long time, and the cure of medicine does not work, then it is necessary that it be cauterized with the cautery which is called "point," and let the cautery be according to the length of the limb and its smallness and its weakness and its virtue and its location of twists and turns and its pain.  
s’il est sanez dou premier cautere, c’est bien; se ceu nom, recomence I autre cautere sus celui, car teilz costume est qu’il se doit muer au membre que li est prochiens, por coi il covient que tu faices les cauteres tant que li malaides soit saneis.	If he is healed from the first cautery, that is well; if not, begin another cautery on top of it, because such custom is that it must change in the limb where it is near, which is why you must make cauteries as long as the patient is healed.  
de meselerie	of meselary
Li meseil sont aidiet aucune fois par cautere par grant aide, et meismement li maladie que vient de la putrefaction de fleume et de melancolie.	The ulcers are helped at times by cautery with great help, and also the illness that comes from the putrefaction of phlegm and melancholy. 
Cant tu la vues cauterizer, pren warde se li maladie est au comencement, et s’ele est curee selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et ne dessent ne ne demoure, et tu doutes que li corruption ne porpreigne tout le malaide, adonques li fai V cauteres sus lou chief: I emmi le chief a nouf, et l’autre vers lou front a la fin des chevous; et II sus les II cornes, et I derrierre sus le haiterel; et i laise tant ta main que li cauteres viegne jusc’a l’os, et tant que les escorces en issent fors si que les vapors des grosses humors s’en puissent issir; et le cauterize sus la mice selonc ce qu’il est devant.	When you see the cauterization, take care if the patient is at the beginning, and if she is cured according to what we have said in the division, and does not send or linger, and you doubt that corruption does not spread throughout the patient, then make V cauteries on his head: I am under the head nine, and the other toward the front at the end of the hair; and II on the II horns, and I behind on the haiterel; and there leave your hand so that the cauteries come up to the bone, and as long as the scorces exit outside so that the vapors of the thick humors may issue; and cauterize on the mice according to what it is before. 
Et se li meselerie est partout esparse; et elle pert manifestement, si covient que tu lou cauterizes de ces cauteres que nos avons dit ou chief, et .i. cautere en som lou neis, et .ij. cauteres sus l’espinee dou col, et .vj. cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos, et .i. grant sus la crupie et .i. autre delez, et .ij. sus les .ij. espaules; et .ij. sus les coutes, et .ij. sus les tendrons dou pis, et .i. sus chascune jointe des mains et des piez, et sus les fosses des mains; et te warde des ners que sunt sus lou derrien calcant, que tu ne les bruler; et aucune fois fait om cautere sus l’os dou poignil, et .i. autre sus l’os de l’estomac, et .i. autre sus lou foie.	And if the malady is spread everywhere; and it is manifestly felt, it is necessary that you cauterize it with these cautery tools that we have said or chief, and 1 cautery in its neck, and 2 cautery on the spine of the neck, and 6 cauterys on the spine of the back, and 1 large one on the hip and another near, and 2 on the 2 shoulders; and 2 on the knees, and 2 on the tendons of the thigh, and 1 on each joint of the hands and feet, and on the hollows of the hands; and guard yourself from the nerves that are on the last calf, so that you do not burn them; and at no time is cauterization made on the bone of the thumb, and 1 other on the bone of the stomach, and 1 other on the liver.
Et saiches que quant plus i fais de cautere, plus li fais d’aide, et mues li profite; et saiches que li malaides ne sent point de dolor au cautere si com li sain le sentent, por ce que li cors est ja toz corrumpus.	And know that when more cautery is done, the more it helps, and benefits him; and know that the patient feels no pain from the cautery as much as the healthy ones do, because the body is already all corrupted.  
Et covient ke li cautere soient grant et petit selonc les membres et les jointures, selonc ceu que vos lou troverez en manieres des fers.	And it is necessary that the cautery be large and small according to the limbs and joints, according to what you will find in ways of iron.  
Aprés cure lou leu de farine de veces avec miel et autres cures tant qu’il soit saneis.	After cure the place with flour of eggs with honey and other cures until it is healed.  
Quant enfleure vient en aucun membre et est curee par medicines et oiles et emplastres, et il n’est mie sanez, adonques li fai cauteres sus le membre selonc la grandour et la petitece dou membre; et soit li cauteres un poc entrans en l’espés dou keur; puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	When inflammation comes in any limb and is cured by medicines and oils and plasters, and it is not healed, then I make cauteries on the limb according to the size and smallness of the limb; and let the cautery be one point entering into the thickness of the flesh; then cure with ointment until it is healed. 
Et aucune fois fait on cautere et a la main et au piet et au dos, a l’issue dou nerf que muet le membre, et ensi si est ostee li enfleure; et toutevoie ne s’en entremette nuls s’il n’est conoissans des membres et des issues des ners movans lou cors.	And sometimes one makes cautery and to the hand and to the foot and to the back, at the exit of the nerve that numbs the limb, and thus so is the swelling removed; but nonetheless let no one interfere unless he is knowledgeable about the members and the exits of the nerves moving the body. 
de albaras	of  albaras
Quant li maladie qui est apelee «albaras» est enveillie, et li engien de medicine n’i valent rien, adonques le cauterize d’un cautere un poc parfont, selonc la quantiteit de l’espés dou keur, tant que li blenchour soit ostee, et soit muee sa color; puis le cure de farine de veces et de lentilles avec oile roset et foilles de plantain, et sanc de colon et sanc d’alondre, de chescun une partie; et soit mellez tout ensamble, et soit liiez d’un drapel, et soit aers au leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the illness that is called “albaras” is present, and the means of medicine are of no avail, then cauterize with a cautery a point in depth, according to the quantity of the thickness of the flesh, until the blanching is removed, and its color has changed; then cure with flour of chickpeas and lentils with rose oil and plantain leaves, and blood of colon and blood of alder, of each one part; and be mixed all together, and be bound with a cloth, and be aerated in place until it is healed.
li cure de chancre par cautere	The cure of an ulcer by cautery
Quant chancre vient au comencement, et tu lou vues arrester, si le cauterize au cautere qui semble I cercle, tout entor au tour dou chancre.	When an ulcer comes at the beginning, and you see it arrested, then cauterize it with the cautery which seems like a circle, all around the circumference of the ulcer. 
Et toutevoie li saige dirent que on faice cautere ausi au mileu dou chancre; et toutevoie ceu ne me semble mie boin, car je redous que il ne soit ulcerez et corrumpus, et je l’ai ja veut avenir aucune fois; et plus droituriere chose est qu’il soit cauteriés entor, au cautere qui est apelez «circule», si com nos avons dit en mout de cauteres.	And nonetheless the wise say that one makes a cautery also in the middle of the ulcer; and nonetheless this does not seem good to me, because I fear that it may be ulcerated and corrupted, and I have already seen it happen any time; and more correct thing is that it be cauterized around, with the cautery which is called «circule», as we have said in many cauteries. 
de l’enfleure qui ne puet meurer	of the swelling that cannot die
Quant aucuns ait une maladie qui est apelee «adubelati», et elle tarde de meurer ou por la superfluiteit qu’ele fait ou por l’eaige dou malaide quant il est decrepites (c’est a dire trop vielz) et il a poc de sanc, ou por lou tens; et tu la vues haster de meurer: adonques le cauterize entor de mout de petis cauteres en poignant; aprés le laisse ensi.	When some one has a disease called “adubelati,” and it delays in dying or because of the superfluity that it makes, or because of the blood of the patient when he is decrepit (that is to say too old) and he has little blood, or because of the time; and you see it hastening to die: then cauterize it around with many small cauteries by pricking; after let it be as before.  
Car elle se hastera de meureir.	For she will hasten to die. 
Et se tu la vues percier a tout le cautere, si chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	And if you see it inspected with the whole cautery, so heat the cautery of which this is the form:
Et met ta main en mileu de cele maladie qui est apellee «adubelati» tant que li cauteres ait perciet lou keur, et soit telz li cauteres que li malaides lou sente defuers en teil maniere que li cours de la porriture soit alegis.	And put your hand in the middle of this illness which is called “adubelati” until the cautery has pierced the core, and let the cautery be such that the patient feels it burn in such a manner that the course of the rot be alleviated. 
Aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	After the cure until it is perfectly healed. 
li cure dou feu par fer	The cure of fire by iron
Une autre maniere de maladie i a qui est apelee «corrodens», et n’est autre chose que une mengeson de membre, car ele menjut les membres ausi com li feus les leignes seches.	There is another manner of illness that is called "corroding", and is nothing else than a wasting away of a limb, for it dries up the limbs like dead vines. 
Se tu vois ceste maladie en leu qui puisse soffrir cautere ensamble feu, adonques eschaufe les cauteres clavile mout petit et grant, selonc ceu qu’il covient au leu ou li maladie est; aprés le cauterize de toutes pars tant que tu erraiche toute la corruption, et nen remaigne rien de li, que tout ceu qui est corrumpus ne soit osteit.	If you see this illness in a place that can suffer cautery with fire, then sharpen the cauteries small and large, according to what is necessary for the place where the illness is; after cauterize all parts as much as you reach all the corruption, and nothing remains of it, that all that is corrupted be removed.  
Et puis le laisse III jors, et met sus les leus cauterizez soffre broiet avec oile tant que les eschaudures dou feu soient ostees, et toute li corruption.	And then let him stay III days, and put on the burned places softened ointment with oil until the charring from fire is removed, and all the corruption. 
Aprés lou cure d’oignemens engendrans char.	After the cure of suppurations which produce flesh. 
Et se tu vois aprés III jors que chars saine ne naisse, c’est boin; et se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere sus ceu qui est demoreit des leus corrumpus.	And if you see after III days that no healthy flesh is born, it is good; and if not, begin the cautery again on those that are still decayed. 
Et ceste mengeson est aucune fois esteit curee de medicine ague en leu de cautere de feu; mais toutevoie cautere de feu est de plus grant aide, et j’ai ja dit la cure de la medicine ague en la division: pren la quant tu en as mestier.	And this manginess has sometimes been cured with ague medicine in place of fire cautery; but nevertheless, fire cautery is of greater aid, and I have already said the cure of ague medicine in the division: take it when you need it. 
des porrelz qui vienent as piez	of the tendons that come to the feet
Mout de fois avient que as piez par defuers naist une maladie qui est apelee «clos» selonc nostre entencion, et est une grosse chose fautree qui blece lou piet.	Many times it happens that the foot by fire is born a sickness which is called "clos" according to our understanding, and is a large thing faulty which blunts the foot. 
Et li cauteres de ceste maladie si est selonc II manieres.	And the cautery for this disease is according to II manners.  
C’est a savoir cautere de feu, et cautere d’aigue chaude.	This is to know fire cautery, and water cautery hot.  
Cautere de feu si est que tu eschaufe I cautere cheveit ausi com est une penne de vouteul, et soit fait de boin fer a la mesure qu’il puisse porpenre le clou de toutes pars, et qu’il i ait subtilz marges; aprés le met tout chaut sus lou clou, et torne ta main tot entor le clou tant qu’il viegne au font dou clou; et lou laisse ensi III jors tant qu’il encomence giter porriture; puis li fai un emplaustre de malves savaiges broiies avec seil, et laisse l’emplaustre sus toute la nuit, et li clous cherra et sera desracinez de ses racines.	Cauterization with fire is that you heat the cautery like a goose feather pen and it should be made of good iron to the size that it can touch the nail from all sides, and that it has subtle margins; after putting it hot on the nail, and turn your hand around the nail until it comes to the bottom of the nail; and leave it so for III days until it begins to rot; then I make a poultice of wild mallows crushed with wine, and leave the poultice on all night, and the nail will fall out and will be uprooted from its roots. 
Puis cure le leu d’oignement enjanrant char tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then cure the place with ointment enclosing flesh until it is healed. 
Et s’il sont convertit par defuers lou cors, et maintes fois avient et en mains et em piez, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere d’aigue chaude; et est en teil maniere: pren une cainne d’arain ou de fer, ou une penne de vouteul, et met sus lou clou et l’althelul, c’est asavoir porrelz verrues; et met la cainne sus si qu’ele porpreigne tout entor, puis i met un poc d’awe chaude, et retien bien ta main, et presse ta main en tornant si que li marge de la cainne viegne a la racine dou clou, et puisse trover l’aigue chaude voie parfonde jusc’a la racine; et soffre li malaides un poc la mordication de l’aigue chaude une houre; puis le laisse ensi, et il se derracinera tous a tout ses racines.	And if they are converted by fire the body, and many times happen in hands and feet, it is necessary that you bring them cautery of hot water; and is in this manner: take a chain of iron or steel, or a pen of steel, and put on the nail and the head of the nail, that is to say corns or warts; and put the chain on so that she protrude all around, then put a drop of hot water, and hold well your hand, and press your hand turning so that the edge of the chain comes to the root of the nail, and may find the hot water way deep up to the root; and suffer the patient a little the burning of the hot water an hour; then let him go like this, and it will deracinate all in its roots. 
Ensi fai un aprés autre, tant que tu esraiches toz ces qui sont au cors, puis les cure des oignemens qui engenrent char.	Thus do one after another, until you have cauterized all of those which are on the body, then treat the wounds that generate pus. 
li cure dou trembler	The cure of trembling
Quant aucuns tremble de froidor de ners, ou de fievre quartaine ou d’autre, si covient que tu li faices .iiij. cauteres ou .iv. sus l’espinee dou dos, .i. cautere entre chescune espinee; et .i. cautere ou pez, et .i. sus l’estomac au cautere olivaire; si laissera lou trembler, et se hastera li santez de la maladie froide.	When some tremble from cold or from quartan fever or another, it is fitting that you make for him 4 cauteries or 4 on the spine of the back, 1 cautery between each spine; and 1 cautery or weight, and 1 on the stomach at the olive cautery; so let the trembling leave, and hasten the health from the cold disease.
des pustules puans	of bursting pustules
Aucune fois apperent par defuers le cors bathes, ou pustules puans, que vienent de grosses matieres corrumpues.	At no time appear by fire the body bathed, or boils prickling, that come from large corrupt matters. 
si covient au premier quant eles apperent que on faice cautere sus chescun chief de la pustule: un cautere subtil de fust de mirte, de coi li pointe soit emprise au feu, ou de racine de aristologe longe, ou au cautere lenticulaire.	If it is necessary in the first instance when they appear that one makes a cautery on each head of the pustule: a subtle cautery of myrtle wood, so that the point is taken hold of by fire, or of long aristolochia root, or of the lenticular cautery.  
Et aucune fois les cauterize on au comencement quant il aperent, selonc ceste maniere, et il ne puent croistre des enqui en avant, mais est desrompue li superfluitez dont il vienent, et sont sanez; mais il covient que ceu soit fait aprés l’evacuation de sanc.	And sometimes when they appear, the cauterize at the beginning, according to this manner, and they cannot grow from them forward, but are broken the superfluities from which they come, and are healed; but it is necessary that this be done after the evacuation of blood.  
quant li artere est copee	when the artery is cut
Maintes fois avient grans decorremens de sanc de l’artere qui est copee a la plaie que vient au pardefuers, ou a l’incision de l’aposteme, ou au cautere dou membre, et as semblans choses; et est mout grief chose d’estenchier.	Many times there are great discharges of blood from the artery that is cut at the wound that comes to the outside, or in the incision of the abscess, or in the cautery of the member, and similar things; and it is a very grievous thing to prolong.
Et toutevoie quant ceu avient a aucun, si te haste de mettre ton doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne, et l’estrain mout tant que li sans soit apaisiez desoz ton doi, et que goute n’en isse plus; puis met au feu les cauteres olivaire plusors petis et grans tant qu’il soient tuit rouge; puis empren .i., ou grant ou petit selonc la plaie et lou leu en coi li artere est route, et met le cautere sus cele voine ou tu tiens ton doi, et tien le cautere tant sus que li sans soit restainchiez.	And nevertheless when this happens to anyone, quickly place your index finger on the wound of the vein, and strain it very hard until the bleeding is appeased under your finger, and no more drops issue; then put olive cauteries, several small and large ones, onto the fire until they are all red; then take one, or a large one or a small one according to the wound and its location where the artery is cut, and place the cautery on that vein where you hold your finger, and hold the cautery there until the bleeding is stopped.
Et s’il saut fuers quant tu lieves ton doi desus la voinne, et li cauteres estint, si pren hastivement .i. autre des cauteres qui sont au feu.	And if it jumps out when you lift your finger from the vein, and the cautery is extinguished, then take hastily another one of the cauteries that are on fire.
Et ne cesser de faire ceu l’un aprés l’autre tant que li sans soit estenchiez; et warde que tu n’ardes lou nerf qui est delez, et que autre malice ne viegne sus lou malaide; et saiches que quant sans decourt de l’artere, c’on ne lou puet mie bien restenchier meismement quant li artere est grans, se ceu n’est par une des .iiij. manieres que nos avons dit: ou par cautere, ou par extraction quant ele n’est mie traite, ou par fort liement de fil, ou par medicines mises sus qui ont pooir de restenchier sanc; et soit liee et estrainte avennament.	And do not cease to make these one after the other until the vein is stretched; and guard that you do not burn the nerve that is nearby, and that another malice does not come upon the patient; and know that when a vein departs from the artery, it cannot be well stretched even when the artery is large, unless by one of the .iiij. ways that we have said: or by cautery, or by extraction when it is not treated, or by strong tying of thread, or by medicines put upon which have power to stretch a vein; and be bound and strained properly.
Qui i amenistrera restenchement de liier estroitement de drapelz ou de metre choses ardans sus, ou autres semblans choses, se n’i profite se poc non.	Whoever will bring about a tightening of the binding, or tight bandage with strips or to put fiery things upon, or other similar things, if it does not profit them not.
Et se ce avient a aucun et il n’ait mie mire ne medicine present, si doit mettre son doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne si com nos avons dit, et bien estrendre tant qu’il soit restenchiez desus la plaie et desus la voinne; et ne remuer lou doit, mais lou moille d’awe froide sovent que soit mout froide tant que li sans soit congelez et engrossiez et restenchiez; et faice des enqui en avant ceu dont il a mestier de cauteres et de medicines.	And if this happens to anyone and he has not medicine present, then he must put his two fingers on the wound of the vein as we have said, and bind tightly until it is stretched above the wound and above the vein; and do not move the band, but moisten with cold water often that be very cold until the vein is congealed and thickened and stretched; and make then those things which he needs of cauteries and medicines.
Ci encomence li secons livre des cures de taille	Here begins the second book of the cures of tail
Nos vos avons dit ou premier chapistre toute maladie en coi il covient cautere de feu, ou de medicine ardans, et les oquisons et les causes et les estrumens et les formes des cauteres; et ai mis celui chapistre des lou chief jusc’a piez, et je irai en cest chapistre par celi meisme voie por ceu c’on trueve plus legierement ceu c’on voura.	We have told you in the first chapter all illnesses where it is necessary to use fire cautery, or burning medicine, and the incisions and causes and instruments and forms of cauteries; and I put that chapter from the head to the feet, and I will in this chapter by the same way for those who more easily find what they want.
Et ainsois que je encomence ceu, il covient, chier fil, que vos aprenez que en cest chapistre a plus de peril et de paor que ou premier des cauteres, et por ceu il covient plus grant cautele.	And therefore as I begin this, it is necessary, dear student, that you learn that in this chapter there is more danger and fear than in the first of the cauteries, and for that reason it is necessary to take more great care.
Car en l’ovraige de cest chapistre avient maintes fois evacuation de sanc a l’ovrir la voinne, et a l’incision sus aposteme, et as cures des plaies, et a l’estraction des saiettes, et a l’incision sus la piere, et les semblans choses; ou il a doutance et paor, et en vient li mors a plusors.	For in the work of this chapter, there is often the evacuation of blood when opening a vein, and incising an abscess, and in the treatment of wounds, and in the extraction of arrows, and in cutting into stones, and similar things; where there is doubt and fear, and many die.
Et je vos amoneste que vos n’entreprenez folie.	And I admonish you that you do not undertake folly. 
Car mout de manieres de gens vienent en cures.	For many kinds of people come to cures. 
si vienent de telz qui s’aïrent si avec lor maladie qu’il muerent legierement por la forsenerie qu’il trueve de sa maladie, et de la grandour de son malice; et de ces doit on avoir paor.	If they come from those who have so become afflicted with their illness that they die easily for the hardship that they find in their illness, and the greatness of their wickedness; and of these one must have fear. 
Et de ces i a qui te done son sens, et dit: «atendez, je sui garis»; et li maladie est despitouse.	And of these there is one who gives his sense and says: “wait, I am cured”; and the patient is deceitful.  
Il ne covient mie que vos vos consentez a ces qui vienent a vos qui ont ceste maniere, mais mettez plus grant cusanson en vostre honor qu’en vostre covoitise, et n’ovrez mie folement mais saigement de ceu dont vos estes certain, et dont vos poez avoir pris et los; et usez de pronostication et de indication en cures de vos malaides a coi salus soit convertie; et ceu vos aidera a aquester bone renommee, et gloire, et memoire de loenge.	It is not fitting that you consent to those who come to you who have this manner, but put more consideration in your honor than in your covetousness, and do not operate foolishly but wisely of those whom you are certain of, and whom you can have taken and praised; and use prognosis and indication in the cures of your patients so that health may be converted; and this will help you to acquire a good reputation, and glory, and memory of length. 
Tres chier fil, Nostres Sires vos doint boin entendement et droiture, et se vos vuelle espireir de la sainte inspiration de sa main, amen.	Most dear son, Our Lords give you good understanding and rightness, and if you want to be inspired by the holy inspiration of his hand, Amen.
Or je vos ai ordeneit cest chapistre en devisant par chapistres, selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre des cauteres, que je vos ai deviseit des le chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que vos trovez plus legierement ceu dont vos avrez mestier.	Or I have ordered you this chapter in devising by chapters, according to those that it is before or chapter of cauteries, that I have devised them from the head to the feet, for those that you find more easily those that you will need.
dou chief plein d’aigue	The chief full of water
Saiches que ceste maladie vient mout de fois as enfans a l’enfanter, et quant li baille estraint trop fort le chief de l’enfant; et aucune fois vient ceu de cause reponue que on ne seit.	Know that this disease comes many times to children at birth, and when the delivery is too strong the head of the child; and some times it comes from a cause unknown which one does not know.
Et je ne vis onques ceste maladie fuers qu’en enfans, et a toz ces que j’ai veus se hastait li mors; et por ceu me semble qu’il me vaut mues lassier l’ovraige en teilz cures.	And I have never seen this disease except in children, and to all those that I have seen it hastened death; and for that reason it seems to me that it is better for me to leave the work on such cures.
Et je vis .i. enfant de coi li chiés estoit plains d’aigue, et li chief engroissoit chescun jor tant qu’il ne lou pooit sostenir; et crut tant li moistor qu’il fut mors, et ceste moistor si est assemblee desoz l’os sus lou syphac, entre lou keur et l’os; et li ovraiges si est telz se li moistor est entre lou keur et l’os, et li apostemes est petis, que tu fendes emmi lou chief une fendure large; et soit ausi longe com .ij. nous, tant que li mostor corre; et vez ci la forme dou spatumile:	And I saw one child of whom the shoulder was full of water, and the head grew larger each day until he could not bear it; and so much moisture had gathered that he died, and this moisture is assembled under the bone on the scapula, between the heart and the bone; and the work is such if the moisture is between the heart and the bone, and the abscess is small, that you open the head with a wide incision; and be as long as two thumbs, as much as the moisture goes; and see here the shape of the spatula:
Se li moistor est plus creue, et li aposteme soit plus grans, si fai .ij. fendures en maniere d’une croix, selonc ceste forme:	If the moisture is more swollen, and the abscess is larger, make two incisions in the shape of a cross, according to this form:
Et se li moistor est desoz l’os, et li signes que tu vois les commissures dou chief overtes de chescune partie, et li aigue saut fuer quant tu la presses de ta main au dedens, et ceu ne t’est mie reponut: si covient que tu fendes enmi lou chief .iij. fendures selonc ceste maniere:	And if the moisture is under the bone, and the signs that you see are the commissures of the head open from each side, and the water jumps out when you press it with your hand inside, and this does not return to you: then it is necessary that you make three incisions in the head according to this manner:
Et aprés l’incision estrai la moistor toute fuers.	And after the incision, extract the moisture all out. 
Aprés estraint les fendures de drapelz et de poudres, et i met vin et oile, et laisse ensi jusc’a cinquieme jor; puis le deslie, et cure la plaie par tentes et par oignemens, et laisse estraindre le chief egaument, et done mengier au malaide viande seche de poc de moistor tant que li membre soit confortez et sanez.	After extracting the splinters of cloth and powders, and place wine and oil, and leave so until the fifth day; then untie it, and treat the wound with bandages and ointments, and let the main bandage remain fastened, and then feed the patient dry meat of little moisture until the limb is fortified and healed. 
Et une autre maniere d’incision est que tu regardes ou apert li grandor de l’aposteme, et li assemblé de l’aigue; car aucune fois est elle devant; aucune fois derrier; aucune fois en destre; et aucune fois en senestre.	And another manner of incision is that you watch where the greatness of the abscess opens, and the assembly of the water; for sometimes it is in front; sometimes behind; sometimes on the right; and sometimes on the left.
Taille donques lai ou li aposteme apert, et l’emplissement de l’aigue, et lou fent selonc ce que tu en as le pooir; et warde que tu ne coper l’artere; et veigne flun de sanc, si que li malaides muere dou decorrement de sanc et de l’evacuation de moistor.	Then cut where the abscess opens, and the gathering of the water, and follow it according to what you are able; and beware that you do not cut the artery; and vein blood flows, so that the patient dies from the loss of blood and the evacuation of moisture.
de reume	of summary
Quant il avient a aucun une maladie qui est apelee «catarre» as eulz ou au pis, et li maladie est anciainne, et li cure de medicine ne profite mie, adonques li derraine cure si est li cauteres avec ceu c’on li copera les .ij. arteres.	When it happens to anyone a sickness called "catarrh" in the eyes or on the breast, and the sickness is old, and the cure of medicine does not profit, therefore the last cure is cauterizing with this one which one covers the two arteries.
Il covient donques, cant tu les vues coper, que li malaides faice rere son chief; aprés li frotte lou leu d’un drapel aspre tant que les arteres aperent, puis estraingne li malaides son col a tout I drapel; puis regarde ou li voine bait, et li leus de l’une et de l’autre sont aprés les oreilles, et poc sont reponues; puis signe les leus d’enche, puis cope l’une et l’autre d’un spatumile agut de II pars, tant que li taille veigne jusc’a l’os, et ceu soit par lou large dou chief.	Therefore, when you see them cover, that the patient do make backward his head; afterwards he rubs the place with a rough cloth until the arteries appear, then draws the patient's neck to all the cloth; then look where the vein bites and the ears of one and the other are after the ears, and thus they are replaced; then signs the ears of each, then cut one and the other with a sharp spatula from II parts, so that the tail comes until the bone, and this is by the large of the head. 
Et se tu vues, boute le spatumile desoz l’artere et la cope au desus, en taillant ausi com .ij. dois au traver.	And if you see, put the spatula below the artery and cut it above, cutting also like two fingers across.
Et quant li voinne est copee, si saut li sans en haut continuelment fuers.	And when the vein is cut, the blood leaps out continuously upwards.
Et se li artere n’apert au sentir, si covient que tu mesures la quantiteit de l’espaice de III dois, puis seigne d’enche et fent jusc’a l’os; et ceu qu’il covient dou sanc mettre fuers si est VI c/, et par aventure un poc plus ou moins, selonc ce que li malaides puet soffrir, et la repletion de l’artere; puis regarde la plaie: s’il remaint sus l’os point dou syphac, si le cope que apostemes chaus n’i veigne, puis estrain la plaie et lie, et la cure d’oignement tant qu’ele soit sanee.	And if the artery does not open at the feeling, it is necessary that you measure the quantity of space of III fingers, then seigne's and make until the bone; and what it is necessary to put out the blood is VI c/, and perhaps a little more or less, according to what the patient can suffer, and the repletion of the artery; then look at the wound: if it remains above the bone point of the syphac, so he chops that pus does not come, then strain the wound and bind, and the cure of ointment until it is healed.  
de emigrainne	of migraine
Quant emigrainne anciaine vient, et catarre agut, por les moistors des larmes et les chalors en temples et sode anciene forsenee et semblans choses, et il est medicinez par manieres de cures de medicine et tout ceu ne li profite mie, si estraions les arteres des temples et lou cauterizons, si com nos avons conteit.	When an old migraine comes, and acute catarrh, because of the moisture of the tears and the heat in the temples and ancient soreness and similar things, and it is medicated by means of cures of medicine and all those do not benefit him, then we drain the arteries of the temples and cauterize them, as we have recounted.
Et li maniere de l’estraction d’elles si est que li malaides faice rere les poilz de ses temples, et entende a l’artere qui apert en la temple, car elle apert bien par son batement, et est poc reponue fuers que en aucuns homes qui sont trop froit; et s’elle est reponue, si estraigne son col li malaides d’aucuns drapelz, puis frote le leu d’aucun aspre drap, et arose le leu d’aigue chaude tant que li artere apere manifestement; puis pren le spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	And the manner of extracting them is that the patient makes rear the hairs of his temples, and attends to the artery which opens in the temple, for it opens well by its beating, and is poorly returned outside than in some men who are too cold; and if it is returned, he strains his neck from the patient with some cloths, then rubs the place with some rough cloth, and raises the place with hot water until the artery appears manifestly; then take the spatula of which this is the form:
puis escorche le cuir legierement tant que tu veignes a l’artere, puis la trai en haut as pinceures, et la depart bien des toiles que sont desoz li de chescune partie; et se li artere est subtilz, si la torne a la pointe de l’uncine, puis la cope de celle partie selonc la quantiteit des II chiés.	Then scrape the skin lightly until you come to the artery, then treat it upwards with pincers, and depart well from the webs that are under each part; and if the artery is subtle, turn it at the tip of the probe, then cut it off from that part according to the quantity of the two joints.  
Car s’elle n’est copee, si ne saut mie li sans dou tout en tout.	For if it is not cut, it does not leap without pain at all.  
Et trai dou sanc des .vj. c/, jusc’a .iij.; et se li artere est grans, si covient que tu la lies en .ij. leus d’un fil double fort de soie, que porriture n’i veigne devant le soudement de la plaie, et veigne decorremens de sanc; puis cope la superfluiteit qui est entre les .ij. liiens en celle houre meisme, et puis, se tu vues, si lou cauterize dou cautere cutellaire jusc’a l’os tant que li chiés soient copez; et c’est li muedre oevre, se li malaides n’a fievre et il est de chaude complexion.	And draw out the blood of the six points, up to three; and if the artery is large, it is necessary that you tie it in two places with a double thread strong silk, so that putrefaction does not come before the soldering of the wound, and comes hemorrhage; then cut the superfluity which is between the two ties in the same hour, and then, if you wish, cauterize it with the cutellaire cautery up to the bone until the chies are cut; and this is the best work, if the patient does not have fever and he is of a hot complexion.
Car li cauteres est aide por finir les moistors: por ceu est il de plus grant aide as moistors.	For the cautery is help to finish the moistures: for this reason it is of greater help to moistures.
Ou il covient por l’estraction des arteres que om emplisse lou leu de viel coton et mette on sus tentes bien faites; et quant on les desliera, si soit curez de medicines seches que font naistre char, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se sans cort de l’artere tant dis com tu i oevres, si te haste dou coper par cautere, ou tu emple lou leu de vitriole et l’estrain a ta main que li sans soit estainchiez; et se tu n’as ceu present, si met sor le leu ton doit tant que li sans soit congelez, et arose le leu d’aigue froide tant que li sans cesse, et soit estraint si com il covient; et ceu qui est muedre et plus legier en l’estraction de l’artere est que tu cauterizes la voinne de cest cautere trenchant de .ij. pars, mais li trenchant soient bien espés por warder plus longement lor chalor.	Where it is necessary for the extraction of arteries that one fills their place with old cotton and puts on tents well made; and when they are untied, let them be covered with dry medicines which make flesh grow, and with tents, until it is healed; and if without cord of the artery as much as you work upon it, then hasten to cover by cautery, or you employ the place with vitriol and restrain it to your hand that the wound be stanched; and if you have not these things present, put on the place your finger until the bleeding ceases, and rise the place of cold water until the bleeding stops, and be restrained as it is necessary; and what is more mature and lighter in the extraction of the artery is that you cauterize the vein of this cautery trenching of .ij. parts, but the trenchings be well spaced to keep longer their heat.
Car quant li estrumens est trop tenves, si tient moins sa chalor.	For when the instruments are too hard, it holds less its heat.
Et doit avoir entre les .ij. coutelz .i. doit de gros d’espaice, et puis quant tu as signiet d’enche les .ij. leus, et tu mes lou fer ardant sus tant qu’il viegne jusc’a l’os, et cope la voinne en .ij. leus; et soient esloigniet entre les .ij. chiés car il n’est mie soudez de cest cautere dou tout en tout; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	And it must have between the two knives one must of wide space, and then when you have signed of them the two points, and you place the burning iron over it until it comes to the bone, and cut the vein in two points; and be separated between the two shoulders because it is not joined of this cautery at all; and that is the form of the cautery:
des larmes	of tears
Quant les larmes des eulz sont dessendans des voinnes que sont sus lou test dou chief de fuer, et il ne profite mie cure de medicine c’on i faice, et tu vois la faice dou malaide enrougir, et sent ou front ambulation si com de fremis; et sui oil sont tenve et moiste si que li poil des papieres sont cheut, et sont eschaufees les papieres, et escorchies de l’ardor des larmes, si ait mestier de ceste cure.	When the tears of the eyes are descending from veins that are on the skin of the head's forehead, and it does not profit any medicine one makes, and you see the face of the patient become contorted, and feels on the forehead a walking as if of trembling; and where oil is being held and moist so that the hair of the eyebrows is falling, and the eyebrows are burned, and scorched by the heat of the tears, then there is need for this cure.
Et l’apelerent li ancien «cure contuse», et est que tu faices a rere au malaide qui a ceste maladie les poilz qu’il ait ou front, puis li fai III fendures ou front igalment selonc la longesce dou front; et soit l’une des fendures ausi com II doi tout emmi lou front en avalant aval jusc’a neif, et les autres II as II costelz par desus les papieres, et te garde de l’incision des arteres que sont as II costez par desus les papieres; et aloigne ta main de la continuation des II mandibules, et soit chescune plaie la quantiteit de III dois au traver joins; et aies apparillie une piece d’esponge et mout de drapelz ses por essuer lou sanc, puis boute le spatumile agut de II pars de coi ci est li forme:	And they called it in the old days "contused cure", and you will do to the patient who has this disease that hairs will have or front, then he makes III cuts on the front evenly according to the length of the forehead; and let one of the incisions be as II should go all through the forehead down to the ear, and the other II as II ribs above the cheekbones, and keep yourself from the incision of the arteries that are at the II ribs above the cheekbones; and remove your hand from the continuation of the II jawbones, and let each wound be the quantity of III does across; and have prepared a piece of sponge and much of cloth for wiping the blood, then put the spatula sharp of II parts of this which is the form:
des l’incision qui est dever la temple jusc’a la seconde incision; et escorche tout le keur qui est entre les .ij. fendures a tot lou syfac qui est sus l’os, puis fai autreteil des la moiene incision jusc’a l’autre seconde, et puis estrai fuer cest spatumile.	from the incision which is below the temple to the second incision; and scrape all the kernel that is between the two incisions to the entire surface that is on the bone, then make another part from the middle incision to the other second one, and then extract far this spatula.
si boute en la premiere fendure l’estrument qui est apelez «cultellaire», et est tresbien trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part est souef, ne mie trenchans, et c’est li forme:	If it is put into the first fissure the instrument which is called "cultellaire", and is very sharp on one side, and on the other side is blunt, not sharp, and this is its form:
Et met le costeit taillant vers la char aerse au keur, et lou costeit souef vers l’os, et lou boute tant qu’il veigne a la moiene fendure.	And place the rib cutting toward the flesh toward the heart, and the rib itself toward the bone, and the point until it reaches the middle fissure. 
Et cope toz les vasselz que dessendent dou chief as eulz tant que l’incision soit continue jusc’a ceu qui apert dou keur, et puis autreteil fai en la moiene fendure jusc’a l’autre defuer; et puis estrai dou sanc igalment, et espresse lou leu por le sanc pris; puis met en chescune fendure une tente de viel coton, et met sus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile et en aisil, et garde que apostemes chaus n’i veigne; et au tier jor deslie lou liien, et i amenistre grant planteit d’aigue tede, puis lou cure d’oignement basilicon avec oile roset, et d’autres cures dont on cure plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And cut all the vessels that descend from the head as eyes until the incision is continuous to those that open the heart, and then another part make in the middle fissure until the other end; and then extract the blood equally, and express it out there for the blood taken; then put in each fissure a tent of old cotton, and put over cloths moistened in wine and oil and aisil, and keep that no abscesses come; and on the third day untie the ligature, and there administer great poultice of tepid water, then the cure of basil ointment with rose oil, and other cures of which one heals wounds, until it is healed.  
dou reume des eulz	of the eyes
Quant a aucun vienent catarre agut acostumeement, et tu vois les eulz tenves et petis, et afoiblir la veue, et les papieres brulees; et li poil chieent, et ou chief en parfont a dolor ague, et li malaides esternue; adonques saiches par ces accidens que celles matieres et cil catharre ne vient fuer que de maintes voines, et li muedre cure que i est, si est ceste.	When to any come catarrh acute customarily, and you see the eyes sunk in and small, and weakening of sight, and the papers burned; and the hair falls out, and where chief in they do a pain acute, and the sick one sneezes; therefore know by these accidents that those matters and this catarrh ne comes from many veins, and the change cure that is, so is this.
Et est que tu comande au malaide a rere son front, puis fai une grant fendure emmi lou front, et une autre dou large I poc.	And it is that you command the patient to raise his forehead, then make a great fissure in the middle of the forehead, and another through the wide I-beam.  
Et comence des la fendure de la temple senestre a la temple destre, et soit li incision jusc’a l’os; et esloigne ta main des ners des temples que muevent au mengier; et quant li os est descovers, si essue tout le sanc a une esponge, et puis desevre entre les II levres de la fendure et i met coton viel, et tentes de lin; puis lie desus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile, et te garde d’aposteme chaut; quant il est ostez, si covient que tu frottes l’os tant que chars i comence a naistre, puis le cure de choses exiccatives, que font enjanrer char.	And begins from the fissure of the left temple to the right temple, and let the incision be up to the bone; and keep your hand away from the nerves of the temples that move to eat; and when the bone is uncovered, wipe all the blood with a sponge, and then sew between the two lips of the fissure and put old cotton there, and linen bandages; then tie above with cloths moistened in wine and oil, and guard against a hot abscess; when it is removed, it is necessary that you rub the bone until cartilage begins to grow, then treat it with drying things that cause cartilage to form. 
En teil maniere: pren .ij. parties de flor de froment, et de colofoine .iiij. parties, et en fai emplaustre; et l’aministre en ces plaies por enjanrer char per tout.	In such manner: take .ij. parts of flower of wheat, and .iiij. parts of colofine, and make thereof a plaster; and administer it in these wounds to cause flesh to grow throughout.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	of the stopping of the ears
Tout ceu que chiet ens oreilles est une des .iiij. choses: ou grains, ou beste, ou piere de mine ou semblans chose si com fer; ou semence, si com jaisses, feves, pois; ou chose defluans si com aigue et aisilz et semblans choses.	Everything that falls into the ears is one of four things: or grains, or beast, or stone or semblance such as iron; or seed, such as peas, beans, lentils; or flowing thing such as water and oil and semblance things.
Quant il chiet en l’oreille piere ou autre maniere de chose que ne s’ajoste mie a l’oreille, ne ne croist en l’oreille, si met l’oreille au solel.	When it falls into the ear, stone or any other thing that does not join to the ear, nor grows in the ear, put the ear in the sun. 
Se tu vois la piere, si distille aucun poc d’oile violet ou oile de sisament, puis i amenistre extraction; et lou fai esternuer de condisi, et li estoupe les narines quant li esternuemens vient, et met entor l’oreille pieces de drapelz ou laine; et estent l’oreille au desus.	If you see a stone, if there distills any drop of violet oil or sesame oil, then administer extraction; and have him sneeze from condiments, and stop his nostrils when the sneezes come, and put around the ear pieces of cloth or wool; and keep the ear upwards. 
Mout de fois vient fuer par ceste cure; et s’elle ne vient fuer, se li amenistre extraction as pinceures subtilz, de coi ci est li forme:	Many times a fever comes from this cure; and if it does not come fever, to him administer the extraction as pincers subtle, of which here is the form. 
S’elle saut fuer as pinceures, c’est boin; se ceu non, si amenistre extraction a l’oncine subtil de petite doubleure; et s’elle ne saut par ceu, si fai une caine d’arain et boute lou chief de la cainne ou pertuis de l’oreille fort, et estoupe ceu qui est entor la cainne de cire mole si que li vens n’i puisse entrer avec la cainne; puis le trai fuer forment, car mout de fois vient fuer si com nos avons dit; et s’elle ne vient fuer en teil maniere, si prent glut de coi en prent les oisiaus, et met en som aucun estrument qui soit a point por ceu faire, et met un poc de coton entor; puis presse le glut sus la piere ou quel chose que ce soit, et trai fuer.	If it jumps out with the tweezers, that is good; if not, administer extraction with a fine, double-edged needle; and if it does not come out by this, make a cane of iron and thrust the head of the cane or puncture of the ear strongly, and stop those around the cane with soft wax so that no air can enter there with the cane; then try to pull it out, for many times it comes out as we have said; and if it does not come out in this manner, take a piece of glue that is used to catch birds, and put it on any instrument that is pointed for this purpose, and put a dab of cotton around it; then press the glue onto the stone or whatever it may be, and try to pull it out.
Et s’elle ne saut fuer de toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si te haste de fendre l’oreille ainsois que aposteme chalz i veigne, et spasme; et li maniere de la fendure si est que tu faices premier sainier lou malaide de la cephalique, et estrai dou sanc selonc la mesure de sa vertu, puis fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains et li torne l’oreille au desus, et fent une petite fendure en la racine de l’oreille a la graisse ou leu dependant; et soit li fendure ausi com une lune, tant que tu viegnes a la piere, puis l’oste selonc ton pooir, et la suce hastanment a ta bouche; et la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if she does not come out of all these things that we have said, then you must hurry to cut the ear thus as an abscess comes and spasms; and the manner of cutting it is that you first bleed the patient from the cephalic vein, and extract blood according to the measure of his virtue, then make the patient sit between your hands and turn the ear upwards, and make a small cut at the root of the ear to the fat or where it depends; and let the cut be like a crescent moon, as far as you come to the bone, then the bone according to your strength, and suck it diligently with your mouth; and the cure until it is healed.
Et se c’est grains qui est ens et il enfle, si aministre extraction; et si’il ne puet issir, si amenistre .i. spatumile tenve subtil selonc ceste forme:	And if it is grains that are inside and it swells, then administer extraction; and if it cannot come out, then administer one spatula thin according to this form:
et amenistre incision de celui grain.	and administer an incision to that grain.  
Mais ne faire mie ceu quant tu penses que li grains est moistes por la moistor de l’oreille, tant que tu en aies fait maintes pieces; puis l’estrai as pinceures subtilz et au succier, si com nos avons dit, si que li estractions soit aligie.	But do not do this when you think that the grain is moist because of the moisture of the ear, until you have made many pieces of it; then extract with fine tweezers and suction, as we have said, so that the extraction be gentle.  
En l’aigue donques que chiet en l’oreille covient que li malaides use d’esternuement de condisi premiers, et ample l’oreille de viel coton.	In the ear then that falls down it is necessary for the patient to use a remedy of first condition and fill the ear with old cotton.  
Et soit gisans sus celle oreille meisme ou li aigue est.	And lie on that same ear where the water is. 
s’elle saut fuer per ceu, c’est boin.	If it jumps out for this, it is good. 
se ceu non, si prent maintes pieres selonc li longesce de ton doit tenves et legieres, et les eschaufe un poc au feu; et em mette li malaides une ou pertus de son oreille, et saille sus i. de ses piez d’autre part, et fiere d’une autre piere sus la piere qui est en l’oreille; et ne cesse de faire ceu de piere em piere tant que li aigue isse toute fuer, et ensi saut elle toute fuer; et se tu vues, si prent I jonc, et boute l’un des chiés en l’oreille, et l’autre chief emprent de feu tant que li plus dou jonc soit ars; puis refai autreteil d’autres jons tant que li aigue isse toute, si com nos avons dit en la piere.	If not so, take many stones according to the length of your thumb, light and fine, and heat them a little in the fire; and put one on the patient's ear where it hurts, and raise it up from his feet with another foot, and set another stone on the stone that is in the ear; and do not stop doing this from stone to stone until the water flows entirely, and thus it will all flow out; and if you see it, take a reed, and put one end in the ear, and the other end put into fire until the most tender reed burns; then do another part of reeds until the water flows completely, as we have said about the stone.
En l’estraction de la beste, s’elle est de petit cors, si com puce et semblans chose, cure la si com nos avons dit en la division; mais s’elle est de grant cors c’on la puisse sentir, si amenistre extraction de pinceures; et c’est li chose plus legiere a oster qui soit en l’oreille.	In the extraction of the beast, if it is of small body, such as a flea and similar thing, cure it as we have said in the division; but if it is of great body that one can feel it, then administer the extraction with forceps; and this is the lightest thing to remove which is in the ear.
En l’estraction des vers enjanrez as oreilles, quant tu lou cures si com nos avons dit en la division et ou traitier des distillations, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu regardes l’oreille au soleil: s’il i apert nulz vers, si les trai as pinceures subtilz, et s’il n’aperent, si prent la cainne de coi ci est li forme:	In the extraction of worms from the ears, when you cure them as we have said in the division and where we treat distillations, and the cure does not help, then it behooves you to look at the ear in the sun: if there appears no worms, then you treat them with subtle forceps, and if they do not appear, then take the instrument of which this is the shape:
Et soit estroite desoz et large desus.	And it is narrow below and wide above.  
Et boute lou plus subtil chief en l’oreille selonc la quantiteit de la soffrance dou malaide, puis succe forment a tot la caine; fai ceu sovent tant que tuit li ver issent.	And put the most subtle chief into the ear according to the quantity of the suffering of the patient, then succeed and form to all the chain; make this often as long as all the worms come out. 
Et s’il n’obeissent a issir, si estoupe entor la cainne de coton si com j’ai dit en la piere; et s’il ne saillent fuer si com nos avons dit, si aministre distillations que li ancien ont esprovees en l’ocision des vers, et tu les troveras ou traitier des distillations; et si distille tes oiles et tes medicines en l’oreille a tout cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme si com tu vois:	And if they do not obey to this, stuff the ear with cotton as I said in the case of stones; and if they do not protrude far as we have said, administer distillations that the ancients have proven in the excision of worms, and you will find them treating distillations; and distill your oils and medicines into the ear with all these instruments, for this is the form as you see:  
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain estrois desoz a .i. petis pertuis, et desus overs por distiller; et por presser dedens la distillation a .i. estrument d’arain bien fait por ceu, et se tu vues pren .i. raseur et envoloupe entor la pointe avenanment coton; puis i giete ton oile ou ton jus, et ceu que tu vues de tes medicines en la cainne, et li caine soit en l’oreille; puis boute dedens lou raseur a tout lou coton, et presse ta main tempreement tant que li oile soit distilleit ou chevement de l’oreille; et lou sente li malaides dedens, et soit li distillations .i. poc eschaufee au feu ainsois c’on la distille en l’oreille; et garde qu’elle ne soit trop froide, car li medicine ne seroit mie si bone.	And it should be of silver or brass, narrow below to one little holes, and wide above to distill; and for pressing within the distillation one instrument of brass well made for this, and if you see take one razor and wrap around the point conveniently cotton; then I throw your oil or your juice, and what you want from your medicines into the canine, and the canine be in the ear; then put within the razor to all the cotton, and press your hand temperately until the oil is distilled or at the end of the ear; and feel the patient inside, and let the distillations one pock be warmed by the fire then one distills it into the ear; and keep that it be not too cold, for the medicine would not be so good.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	of the stopping of the ears
Aucun enfant naissent qui n’ont nul pertus ens oreilles; et ceste meisme chose avient as homes par estoupement de plaie, ou de char nee dedens l’oreille, et cist estoupemens vient aucune fois em parfont en l’oreille, si c’on ne lou puet veoir; et aucune fois avient .i. poc defuer lou pertus, et lou voit om bien.	No child is born without any holes in their ears; and this same thing happens to men by clogging of a wound, or of flesh born inside the ear, and these blockages come sometimes from deep within the ear, if one cannot see them; and sometimes they happen i.e. one point of fire, and it can be seen well.
Celle donques que vient em parfont, si c’on ne la puet veoir, est de grief sanation em plusors dispositions, et en cele c’on voit covient que tu mettes l’oreille dou malaide au soleil; et regarde dedens: se tu vois l’opilation apparent, si la oevre a tot cest spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	That which comes from deep within if one cannot see it, is of great damage in many dispositions, and in this, you should put the ear of the sick person to the sun; and look inside: if you see the apparent opening, then the work has all this spatula form:
Et soit agus et trenchans devant et derrier tout plain, si qu’il ne blece l’oreille; se li opilation est de char nee ou cors de l’oreille, si la tien as pinceures subtilz, et la cope legierement, tant que celle chars soit toute ostee.	And be sharp and trenchant in front and behind all plain, so that it does not bleach the ear; if the opening is of flesh born or a part of the ear, then hold it with subtle pincers, and cut lightly, until that flesh is entirely removed.
Et se li opilations est em parfont en l’oreille, si pren I raseur subtil legier et l’eschaufe un petit au feu, puis li met ou cors de l’oreille.	And if the suppuration is in the ear, take a thin razor light and heat it a little at the fire, then put it in the body of the ear. 
Se tu sens l’opilation dont li malaides sent grieteit a l’oïr, perce legierement, et garde que tu ne grever les ners de l’oreille; puis met en l’oreille une tente selonc la largesce dou pertus, et la moille en l’oignement egyptien.	If you feel the opilation of which the patient feels great pain in hearing, pierce lightly, and keep that you do not wound the nerves of the ear; then put in the ear a tent according to the width of the opening, and moisten it with Egyptian ointment. 
Fai ceu aucun jor tant que li plaie soit soudee, ou tu pren une tente et la moille en aigue rose, et poudre sus vitriole broiet; et se tu vois enflee l’oreille, si couvient que tu traies la tente et remue une autre tente moillie en cerote qui soit fait d’oile roset et de cire, tant que li enfleure soit ostee; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Do this with no day until the wound is healed, or you take a tent and moisten it in rose water, and powder on powdered vitriol; and if you see the ear swollen, then it is necessary that you pull out the tent and move another tent moistened in cerote which is made of rose oil and wax, until the swelling is gone; then cure it until it is healed.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si plonge une esponge et drapelz en aigue froide, et le met sus l’oreille, et use d’autres cures qui oste lou decorrement de sanc qui sont ou traitier des destillations.	And if bleeding comes, then dip a sponge and cloth in cold water, and put it on the ear, and use other cures that stop the bleeding which are or treated by distillations.
de la char des papieres	of the skin of the papers
Cist althelul que vienent em papieres des eulz quant ils sont moiste et sont sec, si covient que tu les estendes de tenailles et de pinceures, et le cope d’un spatumile de ses racines; puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet.	This althlul that comes in papers of the eyes when they are moist and are dry, then it is necessary that you extend them with tweezers and pincers, and the cut off with a spatula from its roots; then put on their place powdered vitriol.
Et se sans en decort, si le cauterize dou cautere lenticulaire subtil, et li cauterizeir aprés l’incision vaut mues; et maintes fois repairent, cant aucune chose demoure de lor racines; et quant elles sont cauterizees par feu, si sont arses celles racines et ne revienent mie.	And if without it decorts, then cauterize them with the subtle lentil cautery, and the cauterization after incision is worth a move; and many times they return, because nothing remains of their roots; and when they are cauterized by fire, those roots are burned and do not return at all.
de la gresle	of the groin
Maintes fois vienent em papieres des eulz unes choses que semblent gresle en sa forme et en sa duresce, et por ceu est ceste maladie apelee «grandine», et est une assemblee de moistor grosse en la papiere desus et desoz; li ovraiges est telz: pren warde se li grandine se muet d’une part et d’autre, et c’est legiere chose a savoir; fent la donques dou large, puis l’escorche de chescune partie legierement, puis la prent as pinceures, et la cope.	Many times come in the papers of the eyes things that seem glassy in their shape and in their hardness, and for this reason this illness is called “hailstorm,” and it is an assembly of moisture thick in the paper above and below; the work is such: take warde if the hailstone moves from one part and another, and this is a light thing to know; then do it with the broad edge, then the scab of each part lightly, then take it with the tweezers, and the cut. 
se tu ne la pues coper sens percier un poc la papiere, si ne grieve rien au malaide; et se li fendure est grans, si l’assemble a une costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee; et s’elle est petite, si n’i faire point de force, car li oignemens la restoure tantost et enjanre char.	If you cannot cover it without feeling a bit of the paper, do not harm the patient; and if the tear is large, assemble it with a suture, and cure it until it is healed; and if it is small, do not use force, for the flesh will restore itself soon and cause no scarring.  
Et se li grandine est dessendans au dedens de l’oreille vers la partie desus, si enverse la papiere, et estent la grandine a unes pinceures, et la cope et presse d’une part et d’autre; et se li papiere est esloignie par l’incision, ce ne grieve rien; et quant li grandine est copee, si leive l’oil d’aigue salee, et cure le leu de ceu qui enjanre char tant que li malaides soit sanez.	And if the gravel is descending into the inside of the ear toward the top part, then turn over the paper, and being the gravel with tweezers, and cut it and press on one side and the other; and if the paper is separated by the incision, it grieves nothing; and when the gravel is cut, let leave the eye of salty water, and cure the place from that which prevents flesh as long as the patient is healed.
de la graisse des eulz	of the fat of the eyes
Exinach est une graisse qui est enjanree en toiles des papieres desus, et ce avient plus as enfans c’a nules gens, et grieve mout a lor eulz, et li vienent li catharre as matinees, et ne pueent regardeir la lumiere dou soleil por ceu que les larmes se hastent a lor eulz; et por ceu se couchent il sor lor faices adés, et dorment sus, et sont lor papieres desoz lor sorcilz moistes que li enfleure et li apparance ont covert de l’exinach qui apert en l’oil.	This is a fatty substance which is produced in the membranes of the eyes above and this happens more to children than adults, and it grieves much their eyes, and they come down with catarrh in the mornings, and cannot look at the light of the sun because the tears hasten to their eyes; and for that reason they lie down on their faces sideways, and sleep on top, and are their membranes under their eyebrows moist so that the swelling and appearance have covered with exinach which opens in the eye.  
Et quant tu presses lou leu a tes dois et sent l’exirnach entr’ous.	And when you press the place with your thumbs and feel the exit between them. 
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain; et puis pren .i. drapeil de lin, et appareille une tente em maniere d’un cercle selonc la quantiteit que conteigne exirnach de chescune partie, puis le met sus li; et presse a tes dois d’une part et d’autre, si que li exirnach soit assemblez emmi le cercle; puis fent em mileu de la moistor au spatumile trenchant une fendure dou large, et ne soit mie plus grans que li plaie c’on fait a la sainie de voinne; et fent le cuir em parfont tant que tu veignes a l’exirnach; et em plusors dispositions vient exirnach de la fendure, selonc la forme d’une piece de graisse blainche.	And the manner of working it is that the patient puts his head on your thigh; and then take one drapeil of linen, and prepare a tent in the manner of a circle according to the quantity that contains exinach from each part, then place it on top; and press with your fingers on one side and the other so that the exinach is assembled within the circle; then make in the middle of the moisture with a spatula trenching a fissure of the width, and not be more than large as the wound made on the vein's opening; and making the skin in parts until you reach the exinach; and in many dispositions comes exinach from the fissure, according to the form of a piece of white fat.
Estrai la donques a tout une piece de drap charpit entre tes dois au defuer, et torne ta main a destre et a senestre tant qu’il soit espars; et garde que tu n’ajoster en la fendure, que tu ne viegnes a tout le spatumile jusc’a l’oil, que tu ne le bleces.	Extract then with a whole piece of cloth between your fingers on the outside, and turn your hand to right and left until it is spread; and keep that you do not add in the fissure, that you do not reach all the spatula up to the eye, that you do not blind it.
Et se li exirnach n’apert en l’encomencement de la fendure, si acroi un poc la fendure legierement tant qu’il apere; puis l’estrai si com nos avons dit, puis moille drapelz en aisil et en aigue, et met sus le leu, et estrain de bendelz.	And if the exit does not open at the beginning of the split, so gently widen the split until it opens; then extract as we have said, then moisten bandages in oil and water, and put them on top, and restrain with bandages.
Et si a de tels homes qui broient seil et mettent sus por corrompre cele moistor qui est demoree.	And if to such men who grind seeds and put on top to corrupt the moisture which is delayed.  
Puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then heal until it is healthy.  
Et s’il vient au leu aposteme chaut, si lou cure d’emplaustres assouajant tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if it comes to the place of a hot abscess, so treat with plasters soothing until it is healed.  
des poilz des papieres	of hairs of the papers
Quant em papieres naissent poilz ajostez autre que li naturez, et sont enveillit, si nuisent as eulz, et font venir manieres de maladies si com larmes acostumees et mollifications des papieres et albugine, tant que c’est cause de la destruction des eulz; et est li cure selonc .iiij. manieres: ou par cautere ensamble feu, ou par medicine ague selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre de cautere, et est fais ou par incision et costure ou par caines, selonc ceu que je dirai.	When on papers hairs are born aligned other than the natural, and are grown, they harm the eyes, and bring manners of maladies as tears accustomed and softening of the papers and albuginea, until it is cause of the destruction of the eyes; and is the cure according to .iiij. manners: or by cautery entire fire, or by medicine ague according to what it is before or chapter of cautery, and is done or by incision and stitching or by canes, according to what I will say.
Il covient que tu mettes lou chief dou malaide en ton sain, puis torne la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre; s’elle est convertie, c’est boin; se ceu non, si i boute une aguille a tout .i. fil desus; et soit ce delez la marge de la papiere ou li poil naissent delez ces poilz, et trai .i. fil au desus a tout la papiere, et la torne au raseur; puis fent en la partie desoz la papiere, desoz les poilz ajostez, a tout le spatumile copant, des le grant larmier jusc’au petit; puis estrai .i. fil, et met desoz la papiere une petite tente de couton et de drapeil, puis seigne sus la papiere une figure d’enche, si com la fuelle de mirte, et toutevoie il covient que li figure soit selonc la quantiteit que tu vues eslever la papiere qui est devisez a toz.	It behooves you to put the head of the patient in your healthy one, then turn the paper of the eye with your left hand; if it is converted, it is good; if not, it puts an needle to all .i. thread above; and let it be below the margin of the paper or where the hair grows near these hairs, and draw .i. thread to the top of the paper, and turn it to the razor; then make in the part below the paper, below the aligned hairs, to all the spatula, from the great tear to the small; then extract .i. thread, and put under the paper a small tent of cotton and cloth, then lay on the paper a figure of enche, like the leaf of myrtle, and nevertheless it behooves that the figure be according to the quantity that you see to raise the paper which is divided to all.
Et si a teil qui a mestier c’on cope grant quantiteit de la papiere selonc ceu que li papiere est mollifie; puis fent a tout le spatumile sus les II lignes que tu as signiet, et comence des lou grant larmier jusc’a petit; et soit li une des fendures pres des poilz naturez en la groissece d’un raiz, puis boute l’oncine en l’un des II angles dou keur, puis l’escorche toute; puis assemble les II levres a une costure d’une aguille a tout I fil de laine subtil, et essue le sanc, et fai aerdre la superfluiteit des filz sus les II sorcilz a tout aucunes choses gluans, se tu vues faire ce; et se ce non, si n’en aies cure, puis laisse la costure et les filz jusc’a III jors ou IIII; puis cure la plaie sens costure de choses sechans et constrignans, car li papiere se relive au soudement de la plaie et l’assemblement de li, mais li costure est muedre (si com dirent li ancien), et c’est ovraiges sens paor; et si a une autre maniere: et est que tu seignes la papiere d’une figure qui soit ausi com li fuelle de mirte, si com nos avons conteit, a III oncines desevrez selonc la forme qui est ci:	And if there is one who needs it, cut a large quantity of the paper according to how softened the paper is; then make a whole spatula on the two lines that you have marked, and start with wide tears up to small ones; and let one of the slits be near the natural hairs in the thickness of a root, then put the scalpel into one of the two angles of the heart, then peel it completely; then assemble the two lips with a suture of a needle with all the fine wool thread, and wipe away the blood, and make air to flow on the excess of hair above the two eyebrows with nothing sticky, if you want to do this; and if not, take care of it, then leave the suture and the hairs up to three days or four; then treat the wound without sutures with dry and constricting things, because the paper comes back together with the joining of the wound and its assembly, but the suture is moving (as the ancients say), and this work without fear; and in another manner: and it is that you mark the paper with a figure which is like the leaf of myrtle, as we have counted, at three scalpel points according to the form which is here:
puis cope ceu qui sormonte as petites forces igalment selonc la forme qui est ci:	then cut what rises above the small strengths equally according to the form which is here:
Et se tu n’as pooir de tenir les tenailles, et li chose n’est mie igalz, si prent une aguille ou il ait I fil, et la boute emmi la figure; et boute I autre fil delez lou grant larmier, et lou secont fil delez lou petit, et assemble entre tes dois les filz igalment; puis lieve ta main igalment, et lieve tout le cuir sus coi tu as signiet, si com nos avons conteit, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie par costure, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et se aposteme vient a ton incision, si l’apaise de cerote et de semblans oignement assouajans; et aucune fois avient que li poil de la papiere sont convertit: si covient que tu uses ceu que nos avons dit de l’incision; mais li costure en l’une et en l’autre est plus artificialz.	And if you do not have the power to hold the pliers, and the thing is not equal, take a needle which has thread, and put it in the middle of the figure; and put the other thread along the great tear, and the second thread along the small one, and assemble between your two threads equally; then lift your hand equally, and lift all the skin over what you have signed, as we have counted, then assemble the two lips of the wound by stitching, and cure it until it is healed; and if an abscess comes to your incision, soothe it with cerote and similar soothing ointment; and sometimes it happens that the hair of the paper are converted: so it is necessary that you use what we have said about the incision; but the suture in one and the other is more artificial.  
Li cure des caines si est selonc ceste forme: et est que tu convertisses la papiere et la fent dedens selonc ceu que j’ai dit, et puis fai .ij. caines par art, et .ij. liiens subtilz ausi lonc com li papiere et li largesce dou spatumile est; et cope as .ij. chiés de .ij. pars ou tu tiens les filz; puis assemble l’un et l’autre subtilment sus ceu que sormonte de la papiere de l’oil, et estrain les .ij. cainnes des .ij. parties forment; et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, et li cuir qui iert estrainte morra et nercira et porrira, tant qu’il cherra par lui.	The cure of the cauteries is as follows: and it is that you convert the paper and its make inside according to what I have said, and then make two cauteries by art, and two threads subtle also long as the paper and the width of the spatula is; and cut the two heads from two parts where you hold the threads; then assemble the one and the other subtly upon those that summit over the paper of the eye, and strain the two cauteries of the two parts form; and let it thus for some days, and the skin which is strained will die and shrink and hold, as long as it seeks by itself.
S’il tarde, si le cope a unes forces, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et quant li plaie iert soudee, et si ert levee li papiere, et ne poindront plus li poil; et c’est li forme des II cainnes que tu feras selonc ceste figure, et selonc ceste quantiteit de lonc et de large:	If it is delayed, if the wound has strength, then cure it until it is healed; and when the wound is joined together, and if the paper is lifted, and they will no longer prick the hairs; and this is the form of the two cauteries that you shall make according to this figure, and according to this quantity of long and wide: 
li ovraiges est telz que tu preignes une aguille subtil, et i boute .i. fil de soie souef et subtil; puis assemble les chiés et noe l’un et l’autre subtilment, et soit li longesce des filz une palme de lonc; puis ordene en la chasse .i. autre fil subtil de soie briément, et noe les chief dou fil; puis mette li malaides son chief en ton sain; et soit delez lou soleil si que li ovraiges soit declairiez, car c’est uns ovraiges subtilz et menus, puis boute l’aguille a tout la chasse en la racine dou poil ajosteit, et la fai percier en la papiere hastanment tant que tu la traies desus lou poil natureil; puis estrai le poil jusque sus la chasse, et boute en la chasse celui poil, s’il en i a .i. ou .ij. ou .iij. ou plusors; puis estrai ta main tant que li poilz veigne fuers a tout la chasse en la papiere avec lou poil natureil.	The work is such that you take a fine needle, and it puts 1 silk thread fine and subtle; then assemble the shoulders and knot them one and the other subtly, and let the length of the threads be a palm long; then order in the chase another fine silken thread briefly, and knot the chief of the two threads; then put the patient's head on your healthy; and let it be towards the sun so that the work is clear, because it is a subtle and small work, then put the needle to all the chase into the root of the hair adjusted, and make it pierce the paper hastily until you draw it above the natural hair; then extract the hair up to the chase, and put in the chase that hair, if there are 1 or 2 or 3 or more; then extract your hand until the hairs come out all the chase in the paper with the natural hair.
Et se li chasse est traite et li poilz ne vient fuer avec li, si trairas la chasse au desoz a tout le fil que tu i as ordeneit, tant que li chasse veigne fuer dou pertus desus et que tu la voies par la vision de l’oil; adonques si trairas la chasse et le fil, et clo l’oil et lou laisse clo .ij. jors ou .iij., tant que li poil s’aerde en son leu et naisse li char sus; et se li poilz est petis, si acompaigne .i. poil lonc des chevoulz naturez, et soit alevez avec celui ou tu le laisse, tant qu’il soit eslongiez et puis le lieve.	And if the chase is treated and the hairs do not come out with it, so you will draw the chase down to all the thread that you have ordered it, until the chase comes out from the hole above and you see it by the vision of the eye; then you will draw the chase and the thread, and close the eye and leave it closed for 2 or 3 days, until the hair hardens in its place and lets the flesh grow up; and if the hairs are small, accompany 1 long hair from the natural ones, and let it be raised with that one or you leave it, until it is lengthened and then lift it.
de la porriture de l’oil	Of the rot of the eye
Quant ceste maladie qui est apelee «aleacrati» ou li porriture vient en l’oil, si en i a de II manieres: l’une natureil, et l’autre innatureil.	When this sickness which is called "aleacrati" or the rot comes to the eye, there are two ways: one natural and the other unnatural.  
Et avient par soudement de plaie, ou de tailleure ou de cautere, et par semblans choses.	And it happens by sudden blow of a wound, or cutting or cautery, and similar things. 
Et li maniere de l’ovraige en li est que tu fendes celle soudure, et dessevre les levres de li, et met dedens tentes de lin, et la lie tant qu’elle soit sanee; et ne covient mie que tu uses en la cure de li de choses que sechent et restraignent.	And the manner of the work in it is that you split that suture, and separate the lips of it, and put inside tents of linen, and leave it until it is healed; and it is not right that you use in the cure of it things that dry and constrict. 
Car se tu fais ceu, si revient li maladie pire que li premiere; mais i oevre de choses amollissans, si com fenugreic; et l’arose d’aigue ou altee et semence de lin soient cuites, et oignemens dyaquilon fondut en aucun des oiles, et i envoloupe une tente, et le cure de ceu.	For if you do this, the sickness returns worse than at first; but there is a work of softening things, such as fennel; and rose water or alcohol and flaxseed cooked, and oil of diaquillon melted in any oil, and wrapped in a tent, and cure it with this.  
Et li tresors de ta cure si est que tu te dones en garde qu’ele ne soude mie selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant; et cist ovraiges que nos avons dit nen est fuers que adresemens de ceste maladie, qu’elle ne reviegne selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant.	And the treasure of your cure is that you take care that it does not close according to the form it was before; and this work that we have said is nothing but a treatment for this illness, that it may not return according to the form it was before.
de la char qui vient en l’oil	of the flesh which comes in the eye
Ceste maladie que est desoz qui vraiement est apelee «axacrati», et est naturelz et accidens.	This disease which is dislocation is truly called “axacrati”, and it is natural and accidental. 
Li accidens vient de plaie et de fendure et de cautere et de choses semblans; et li voie de l’ovraige en li si est que tu preignes un aguille, en coi il ait I fil double, et la fiche en la char, et li fai percier des le senestre larmier tant c’a destre, si que li filz veigne en II chiés de la char; puis estent la char au desus a tout l’aguille, et la cope a I spatumile large.	The accidents come from wounds and cuts and cautery and similar things; and the way of the work is that you prick a needle, which has a double thread, and stick it in the flesh, and make it go from the left tear to the right, so that the thread comes into the two cheeks of the flesh; then hold the flesh above the entire needle, and cut with a spatula wide.  
Et se li figure de la papiere revient selonc ceu qu’il covient, c’est boin; se ceu non, si pren I raseur et le met en la fendure, et torne la papiere, et fent II fendures ou costeit dedens la papiere; et soient li chiés des II fendures des II angles de l’incision que tu as copeit, et soit fais uns angles si que quant elles sont assemblees, que li figure soit ausi com li figure d’une lettre qui a non «I griesche»; puis oste celle char, selonc la quantiteit que ses costez est agus desoz, de ceu qui enseut la papiere, puis ajoste les II parties desevrees, et les cout d’un fil de lainne; puis lou cure de ceu que nos avons dit des medicines mollifians, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the figure of the paper returns according to what is fitting, it is good; if those are not, then take the razor and put it in the fissure, and turn the paper, and make II fissures where cost it inside the paper; and be the heads of the II fissures of the II angles of the incision that you have cut, and be made an angle so that when they are assembled, that the figure is as the figure of a letter which has no «I griesche»; then remove that flesh, according to the quantity that its costs are raised from below, of what follows the paper, then adjust the II parts severed, and the cout of a thread of wool; then cure of those that we have said of mollifying medicines, and of tents, as long as it is healed. 
Et se li maladie vient de fendure ou de costure ou de cautere, si covient que tu fendes une fendure plainne desoz les poilz des papieres, et selonc ceu qui est ci devant; puis desevre entre les .ij. leivres d’une tente, si com j’ai dit; et doit on faire l’ovraige selonc la forme de la maladie, car elle est mout diverse en forme, et li saiges maistres appareille engien de tout som pooir coment il faice revenir la figure a sa forme natureil; et li malaides meisme, selonc ceu qu’il i covient d’ovraige et d’estrumens em plusors dispositions.	And if the illness comes from a rupture or stitch or cautery, it is necessary that you make a plain cut under the hairs of the papers, and according to what is said above; then bind between the two leaves of a tent, as I have said; and one must do the work according to the form of the illness, because it is very diverse in form, and the wise masters equip everything of all their power how it makes return the figure to its natural form; and the sick man himself, according to what is necessary of work and instruments in many dispositions.
dou soudement de la papiere	of the paper
Quant ceste soudure avient a mains homes en teil maniere que li papiere desus est sodee avec le blanc de l’oil, et ne puet movoir ne faire ses ovraiges naturez, si covient donques que tu i boutes la pointe d’un raseur desoz la papiere, et la lieve en haut; et l’estent as pinceures, tant que tu copes ceu qui est aert au spatumile subtil, qui ne soit mie trop agus ne trop trenchans, si que li malaides ne puisse soffrir que li spatumile trop agus ne blecent l’oil; et soit ton incision, dont tu escorche celle assemblee, legierement, si que li papiere reviegne selonc sa forme natureil; et est sanee toute celle assemblee, et font aucune fois en l’oil aigue salee, et le leve d’aigue douce, et de coliere; puis met entre la papiere et l’oil une tente de lin, et met sus l’oil laine moillie en abun d’uef; et aprés le tier jor use dou coliere et des choses soudans tant qu’il soit sanez.	When this suture occurs to hands of men in such a manner that the paper above is sewn with the white of the egg, and cannot move nor make its natural works, then it is necessary that you put the point of a razor under the paper, and lift it up; and the while as pinches, until you cut what is attached to the spatula, subtle, which is not too sharp nor too blunt, so that the patient may not suffer that the spatula be too sharp nor pierce the eye; and let your incision, with which you scrape together that assembly, be slight, so that the paper returns according to its natural form; and it is healed all that assembly, and do at no time in the eye salt water, and the lift of sweet water, and of collier; then put between the paper and the eye a tent of linen, and put on top of the eye wool moistened in abundance of egg; and after the third day use the collier and things soothing until it is healed.
de l’ungle de l’oil	of the angle of the eye
Saiches que li ungle est selonc .ij. manieres: elle est nervouse et semblans a .i. dur syfac, et une autre qui n’est mie nervouse, mais est semblans a blainche moistor congelee, que quant on la touche de fer et on la cuide panre as pinceures, si ne puet om; et l’une et l’autre semblance encomence devers le grant larmier, et croist poc et poc tant qu’ele cuevre toute la veue et toute la lumiere et le movement de l’oil.	Know that the angle is in .ii. manners: it is nervous and seeming to .i. hard syfac, and another which is not nervous but is seeming to white moisture congealed, that when one touches it with iron and one cuide panre as pinces, it cannot om; and the one and the other semblance commences towards the great tear, and crosses poc and poc until it covers all sight and all light and the movement of the eye.
Et li maniere de l’incision si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz; et lieve la papiere a ta main, puis coil l’ungle as pinceures de petite doubleure, et l’estent au desus; puis pren une aguille, et i met .i. poil de cheval, ou de vaiche, ou de buef, et .i. fil fort; et double la pointe de l’aguille un poc et la fiche emmi l’ungle, et la perce a tout l’aguille, et lie l’ungle d’un fil et l’estent au desus, et escorche a tout lou poil le costeit de l’ungle qui enseut la prunele et la soie au poil jusc’au chief, puis cope lou remanant en la racine dou larmier a tout lou spatumile subtil et as petites forces, et laisse la char natureil ou larmier, si que par l’incision ne veigne li cors des larmes acostumeement; et aucune fois s’estent li ungle a l’oncine soulement, et au fil, si com nos avons dit; puis l’escorche on a tout le spatumile souef de coi ci est li forme:	And the manner of the incision is that the patient puts his head in your hand, then the one opens the eyes; and lifts the paper with your hand, then coil the angle as pinces with a small doubleure, and the one on top; then take a needle, and put in it .i. hair of horse, or calf, or ox, and .i. strong thread; and double the point of the needle a poc and place it into the angle, and pierce it through the whole needle, and tie the angle with a thread and the one on top, and scrape at all the hair the side of the angle which follows the prunele and silk to the hair until the head, then cut the remaining in the root of the tear to all the spatumile subtle and as small forces, and leave the flesh naturally or tear, so that by the incision does not come the body of tears customarily; and no times is the angle on the one only, and to the thread, as we have said; then the scraping one has all the spatumile souef of this is the form:
Et garde que li spatumile ne touche la toile charnue et la rompe, et que li prunele ne soit percie; et aprés l’incision giete en l’oil un poc de seil broiet, et dou coliere fait de litargire, et le laisse jusc’a l’autre jor; puis le cure de ceu qu’il i covient tant qu’il soit sanez.	And guard that the spatula does not touch the fleshy cloth and tear it, and that the needle is not pierced; and after the incision put in the eye a little bit of ground silk, and from the collar made of lead ore, and leave it until the next day; then cure it as it is necessary until it is healed.
Et se li ungle n’est mie nervouse, et tu ne pues bouter l’aguille, et li uncines n’i puet entrer, maintes fois est curee ceste semblance d’ungle de medicines; et naissent sicom j’ai conteit en la division, et se tu la vues coper, si oevre l’oil dou malaide, et pren le spatumile legier poc agut selonc ceste forme:	And if the nail is not nerved, and you cannot push the needle, and the tweezers cannot enter, many times this semblance of a nail is cured with medicines; and they grow as I have recounted in the division, and if you see it covered, so operate on the eye of the patient, and take the spatula light point acute according to this form:
Et reis l’ungle desus subtilment, et se tu vois qu’elle amenuise point et li rasion i apresse, si distille de ta bouche en l’oil coliere fait de litargire et dou coliere rouge et seil broiet, et estoupe l’oil jusc’a l’autre jor; puis rencomence l’autre ovraige selonc ceste meisme oevre, tant qu’elle soit toute ostee.	And lift the nail up subtly, and if you see that it diminishes not and the reason hastens, then distill from your mouth into the eye collar made of lead ore and red collar and ground silk, and plug the eye until the next day; then begin the other work according to this same operation, as long as it is completely removed.
Se aucune chose ne t’est contraire en l’oil, si com aposteme chaus, adonques la lait, et cure premier l’aposteme chaut tant qu’il soit sanez, puis rencomence l’ovraige si com devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If no thing is contrary to you in the eye, such as an abscess of chaus, then milk it, and cure first the abscess hot until it be healed, then begin again the work as before, until it be healed.
Et se li apparance de la chair dou larmier nuit en l’oil par grant nuisement, si la sospent a l’oncine, et en cope une partie et non mie tot, que cors de larmes n’i viegne; puis distille en l’oil coliere rouge qui est fais de litargire.	And if the appearance of the flesh by the tear hurts in the eye by great annoyance, then suspend it to the bone and in cut a part and not half too, that body of tears doesn't come; then distill in the eye colic red which is made of litharge.
de la char qui naist sus la prunelle	of the flesh that arises on the iris
Es eulz d’aucuns homes naist aucune fois char rouge, et cuevre la prunele et restraint sus les papieres et les torne au defuer, et semble une rose de balauste; et li ovraiges si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz, et coil toute celle char as uncines convenaubles a ceu, et la sostien a la force; puis cope la premiere char, et vai tout copant au raseur jusc’a la fin, et te garde que tu ne bleces l’oil a l’ovraige; et soit li incision dou spatumile que nos avons dit en l’incision de l’ungle et as petites forces de coi on oste lou sebel, si com li forme aprés cest chapistre lou demostre; et quant li incision est acomplie et ostee toute li char, si emple l’oil de seil broiet ou tu i distille coliere rouge et semblans medicines corrosives, et met sus l’oil defuer coton avec abin d’uef, si qu’il soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut; et s’il i demore rien, et li sans chaus te sormonte, et tu doutes aposteme chaut, si laisse l’oil et cure l’aposteme de choses apaisant aposteme chaut; puis revien a ton ovraige tant qu’il soit sanez, et ensi fai cant chars est ajostee en l’oil par ceste semblance.	The eyes of some men are born sometimes red and cover the eyelid and restrain upon the papers and turn to the fire, and seems like a rose of the balcony; and the work is that the patient puts his head in your healthy, then he opens the eyes, and coil all that flesh with suitable needles to those, and holds it with force; then cuts the first flesh, and goes cutting to the razor until the end, and keep that you do not bleed the eye during the operation; and let the incision be of the spatula as we have said in the incision of the angle and the small forces of which one removes the shell, as the form after this chapter shows it; and when the incision is completed and all the flesh is removed, then apply the oil of silk crushed or you distill red ochre and similar corrosive medicines, and put upon the eye fire cotton with yolk of egg, so that it be assured of hot pus; and if it remains nothing, and the blood of your body is mounting, and you doubt hot pus, so leave the eye and cure the pus with things soothing the hot pus; then return to your work as long as it is healed, and so do until all the flesh is attached in the eye by this resemblance. 
Mais toutevoie il covient que tu aliges la cure de chescun oil foible de la voie natureil; et de la voie accident, en ovraige de fer; et ne bouter mie ta main en aucun de ces ovraiges tant que tu voies que cist membres soit soffrans celui ovraige.	But nevertheless it is necessary that you apply the cure of each weak oil from the natural way; and from the accidental way, in the work of iron; and do not put your hand in any of these works as long as you see that this member be undergoing that work.
des voines des eulz	of the veins of the eyes
Sebel sont voinnes rouges que sont covertes sus l’oil, et tolent a la veue son ovraige et afoiblissent l’oil toz jors.	Red veins are seen that are covered over the eye, and they take away from the sight its function and weaken the eye every day. 
Mestier est donques au premier que tu regardes se li oil, en coi sebel est, est fors, et n’i a autre maladie fuers que lou sebel; adonques le coil en teil maniere: comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain, puis sospent celles voines a tout l’oncine selonc sa sapience, et soit li oncines subtilz double selonc ceste forme:	It is therefore necessary for the first that you look if the eye, in what it is, is affected, and there is no other disease except the cataract; therefore, command the patient to put his head on your shoulder, then support those veins all around according to his knowledge, and let the incisions be subtle double according to this form:  
Et soient dui oncine par degrez en .i. cors selonc ceste forme:	And let the two outlines by degrees in one body according to this form:
puis c’on coil as forces celles voinnes subtilment, et essue lou sanc houre aprés autre, tant que tu voies removoir celles voines fuers de l’oil; et garde que tu ne blecier l’oil as pointes des spatumiles, et fai cest ovraige a houre de midi devant lou soleil, et soies mout fervans en ton ovraige si que tu ne copes fuer que celles voinnes; et quant tu avras ce fait, si distille en l’oil coliere vert et rouge por corrumpre ceu qui est demorez dou sebel.	Then the coil as forces those veins subtly, and wipe the blood hour after another, until you see remove those veins out of the eye; and guard that you do not prick the eye with the points of the spatulas, and do this work at the hour of midday before the sun, and be very fervent in your work so that you do not cut further than those veins; and when you will have done this, then distill in the eye green and red collyrium to corrode what is remained of the red vein.
Et se tu n’as pooir de coillir tout ceu en celle houre, si fai emplastre sus l’oil de choses apaisans la dolor des eulz, et le laisse aucuns jors tant que li dolors soit apaisie et soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut, puis rencomence selonc ceste maniere qui est devant tant qu’il soit sanez; et c’est li forme des forces:	And if you cannot collect all of these in that hour, then make a plaster on the eye of things soothing the pain of the eyes, and let it for some days until the pains are calmed and it is assured of a hot abscess, then begin again according to this manner which is before until it is healed; and this is the form of forces.
de la fistule de l’oil	of the eye fistula
Li mire si nomment «arissati» fistule: quant tu la cures per cautere et par medicine ague ardant selonc ceu que j’ai devant dit, et elle n’est mie sanee, si est engien en li que tu fendes sus l’aposteme, lai ou il doit meurer, et trai toute la moistor que i est, tant que li os soit descovers.	The mire is called "arissati" fistula: when you treat it with cautery and with medicine burning according to those that I have said before, and it is not healed, then there is something in it that you cut into the abscess, where it must die, and treat all the moisture that is there, until the bone is uncovered.
Et quant li os iert descovers, et tu verras la corruption et la noiror, si la reis a tout l’estrument de coi ci est li forme; et est apelez «aspre chief», et soit fait de feir inde a .i. chief reont, et soit pointoiez si com une lime si com il est en la presente forme:	And when the bone is uncovered, and you will see the corruption and the blackness, if the king has all the instruments of what here is the form; and it is called «aspre chief», and it is made of iron one head, and it is pointed like a file as it is in the present form:
Et met sus lou leu de l’os corrumput, puis le torne entre tes dois, et presse ta main un poc tant que tu saiches que celle corruption est rese; et fai ceu aucune fois, puis restoure lou leu de medicines exiccatives.	And put it on the place of the corrupted bone, then turn it between your two hands, and press your hand a little while you know that this corruption is reset; and do this several times, then restore the place with medicinal drying agents.
se li leus est soudez, et char i naist, et li cors de la bowe est soudez, et remaint ensi XL jors, et il ne renovele et n’est mie apostemez, et accidens mavais n’i vient, saiches qu’il est sanez; se ceu non, si n’i a autre engien que de ramener la fistule au pertus dou neif selonc ceste forme: et est que tu descuevre de l’os la seconde fois par fer, et par medicines agues, et quant il iert descovers si prent I foret selonc ceste forme, et soit li chiés de fer a III angles, et li fust soit atenuis jusc’a chief si com tu vois ci:	If the leus is soldered, and flesh grows there, and the body of the bow is soldered, and remains so for XL days, and it does not renew and is not in any way an abscess, know that it is healthy; if this is not the case, if there is no other remedy than to bring the fistula back to the opening according to this form: and it is that you uncover the bone a second time by iron, and by sharp medicines, and when it is uncovered, take the forest according to this form, and let the shoulder be of iron at III angles, and the shaft be thinned up to the head as you see here: 
puis le met sus l’os delez lou larmier, et esloigne ta main de l’oil I poc, puis torne a tot le foret tant qu’il perce l’os et le sent li malaides par ceu que li vens en ist s’il tient sa main sus son neif; et pues restoure lou leu de medicines seches, si com je t’ai ensigniet, et quant li char naist et endurcist li leus, si vait li matiere au neif; si est plus legiere chose au malaide.	Then place it on the bone below the tear duct, and move your hand away from the eye a little, then turn to all sides until it pierces the bone and the patient feels it through what comes in this, if he holds his hand on his cheek; and then return to the place of dry medicines, as I have taught you, and when the flesh grows and hardens the joints, then the matter goes to the cheek; so it is a lighter thing for the patient. 
de l’issue de l’oil	of the issue of the eye
Quant li eulz apert fuer dou tout en tout, et il ne vient point de destorbier au nef, ne amenuisement, si covient que tu lies lou malaide; puis le saine, puis li met ventouses ou haterel sens ferir por succier, puis met sus l’oil .i. liien fait d’acaice et de aloe et d’encens et de sarcocolle, et puis estrain l’oil, et l’emplaustre sus de bendes et de drapelz; et li maniere des drapelz si est que tu preignes drapelz assez molz, et double chescun en .iiij., et puis met l’un sus l’autre selonc la quantiteit que li eulz en ait mestier; puis l’estrain par desus d’un bendeil dur forment, et rencomence les ventouses por succier sens ferir; puis oste les ventouses et laisse l’oil estraint jor et nuit, et se li liiens amolist, si covient que tu l’estraignes mout; puis oste lou liien aprés le jor et la nut, et se tu vois l’oil repairier, c’est boin; se ce non; si rencomence l’emplaustre et les drapelz et lou liien et les ventouses tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the eyes are open and throughout entirely, and nothing comes to disturb the forehead, nor diminishes, then it is necessary that you bind the patient; then heal, then place suction cups or a halter without hurting for sucking, then put on the eye  1 layer made of acacia and aloe and incense and sarcocolla, and then strain the eye, and plaster above with bandages and cloths; and the manner of the cloths is that you take cloths soft enough, and double each one in 4, and then put one on top of the other according to the quantity that the eye has need for; then strap it from above with a strong bandage, and restart the suction cups for sucking without hurting; then remove the suction cups and leave the eye strained day and night, and if the layers soften, it is necessary that you tighten it very much; then remove the layer after the day and night, and if you see the eye healing, it is good; if not; then restart the plaster and cloths and the layer and suction cups until it is healed.
dou derrompement de toile uvee	of the dislocaiton of a sleeve
Quant disruptions vient en la toile uvee, puis apert, et vient fuer des papieres si com .i. grain de resins, et est espoantauble a veoir; adonques se tu la vues coper, li ovraiges est telz que tu boutes une aguille en la racine des la partie desoz jusc’a celi desus, puis boute une autre aguille ou il ait .i. fil double des la partie dou larmier; et la fai percier, et laisse la premiere aguille selonc la disposition; puis cope lou leu dou fil double et lie une partie de l’uve entor, et l’estraint bien, puis estrai l’aguille et met sus l’oil lainne moillie en abun d’uef; et le laisse tant que li filz chiece avec l’uve, puis cure l’oil de choses confortans tant que li plaie soit sanee; et aucune fois li plaie est restrainte par l’uve chescune part d’un cercle de drap, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	When disruption comes in the sleeve, then open it, and it comes out like a piece of resin, grain by grain, and is easy to see; therefore if you see it covered, the work is such that you put a needle at the root of the lower part until the upper one, then put another needle where there is one double thread from the lachrymal part; and make it pierce, and leave the first needle according to the disposition; then cut the place of the double thread and tie one part of the vine around, and restrain it well, then extract the needle and put over the other eye half in a circle of an egg; and let him until the threads fall with the vine, then cure the eye with comforting things as long as the wound is healed; and any time the wound is restrained by the vine on each side by a circle of cloth, until it is healed.
Et se li eulz done grant apparance, si le perce au spatumile subtil qui viegne em parfont de l’oil, et corre la moistor albuginé et dessende li eulz, et entre ens tantost; puis l’estrai tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the eyes show a great appearance, then pierce them with a fine spatula that comes from the eye itself, and correct the albuminous moisture and descend the eyes, and enter into them immediately; then extract it as long as it is healed.
de la bowe de l’oil	of the eye cavity
Ceste maladie qui est apelee «alcunnati» nen est fuers que bowe qui est assemblee en l’oil, semblant a aigue dessendant, et ce n’est mie aigue; et li maniere de l’apparance de l’ovraige si est que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus I siege appareilliet et droit, puis prent le chief entre tes mains de II pars, et lou muef tant que tu voies la bowe venir au desus a tes eulz; puis soit ens fichie, et ne dessende et soit descombree li lumiere, et voie li malaides les choses si com il soloit; et s’elle ne dessent desoz, saiches que c’est aigue, et se li dessendemens de la bowe n’est appareilliez si com nos avons dit.	This sickness which is called «alcunnati» is nothing else than a bow which is assembled in the eye, seeming like water descending, and it is not water; and the manner of the appearance of the work is that you make the patient sit on the prepared and straight seat, then take the head between your hands of two parts, and move it as much as you see the bow come upward to your eyes; then be sure, and do not descend and let it be disordered the light, and let the patient see things as if he would; and if it does not descend below, know that it is water, and if the descending of the bow is not prepared as we have said.  
si fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, puis prent le spatumile subtil et fent sus la toile cornee I poc par la continuation de la conjunctive avec la toile cornee et la corone, tant que li bowe isse; et quant elle ert issue, si distille en l’oil aigue chaude mellee a miel, ou aigue ou fenugreic est boillis et miel, puis soit curee d’autre cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	If you make the patient sit between your hands, then take the sharp spatula and go upon the cornea with a prick along the continuation of the conjunctiva with the cornea and the corona, until the bow is issued; and when it is issued, distill in the eye hot water mixed with honey, or water or fenugreek boiled and honey, then be cured with another cure until it is healed. 
des aigues de l’oil	of the eye's sharp points
Nos avons jai les semblances des aigues en la division, et ceu qu’il covient por percier; si en oevre selonc la santeit.	We have seen the likeness of swords in the division, and those that it befits to examine; so work according to healthiness.  
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains croisiet, fuers de la lumiere por le soleil, et li lie l’oil sain et estreint mout fort; puis met la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre se li eulz est senestres, ou a ta main destre se li eulz est destres; puis prent en ta main destre, se li eulz est senestres, l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda», ou a ta main senestre, se li eulz est destre; puis met la pointe de l’estrument delez la corone par la groissece d’un rait en celle blenchor de l’oil a la partie dou menor larmier, puis boute l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda» vertuousement, et trestorne ta main tant qu’il perce en la blenchor de l’oil, et sente que almagda viegne a la chose vuide; et covient que li mesure de la voie almagda soit au parfont de la mesure des l’espaice qui est des la prunele jusc’a la fin de la noirour; et c’est li corone de l’oil; si verras l’os en celle papiere por la clarteit de la toile cornee, et pues met l’estrument jusc’a leu ou li aigue est, puis l’espresse desoz une voie aprés autre.	It is necessary that you make the patient sit between your hands crossed, away from the sun's light, and bind his healthy eye and hold it firmly; then place the paper of the eye on your left hand if the eyes are left, or on your right hand if the eyes are right; then take in your right hand, if the eyes are left, the instrument which is called “almagda,” or with your left hand, if the eyes are right; then put the point of the instrument beside the crown by the thickness of a fingernail in that whiteness of the eye at the part of the tear duct's lower end, then push the instrument called "almagda" carefully, and straighten your hand until it pierces into the white of the eye, and feel that the almagda comes to the empty space; and it is necessary that the measure of the way almagda be at the full extent of the space that is from the pupil to the end of the darkness; and this is the crown of the eye; so you will see the bone in that paper for the clarity of the corneal web, and then put the instrument up to where the liquid is, then express it out of one way after another.  
se li aigue dessent maintenant, si voit li malaides devant lui et l’estrument en son oil.	If the water descends now, the patient sees before him and the instrument in his eye. 
Aprés repose I petit, et se li aigue remonte la seconde voie, met la fuer avec l’estrument, et quant elle est ens fichie et ele ne monte, si estrai almagda legierement en tornoiant ta main poc et poc; et puis remette en aigue un poc de seil gemme, et leive de ceu l’oil dedens.	After rest a little, and if the water returns by the second way, put the force with the instrument, and when it is ens fixed and it does not rise, extract the algida lightly by turning your hand back and forth; and then put back in water a bit of seil gemme, and leave out of this the oil inside. 
Puis met par defuer l’oil estoupes ou lainne moillie en oile roset et en abun d’uef, et lie avec l’oil sain.	Then put by means of a cloth, or moistened rag in oil rose and in abundance of egg, and tie with the healthy eye. 
Nos, et cil qui sont de nostre tens, mettons sus comin broiet avec abun d’uef.	We, and those who are of our time, put on top a mixture of ground up with an abundance of egg. 
Et se almagda n’i puet entrer en l’oil par sa duresce, car il i a de teilz homes qui ont trop durs les eulz, si covient que tu preignes l’estrument qui est apelez «alberit», de coi ci est li forme:	And if almagda cannot enter into the eye because of its hardness, for there are some men who have their eyes too hard, then it is necessary that you prick the instrument which is called "alberit," of this it is the shape:
Et perce donques la conjunctive soulement, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, mais fai I leu subtil, puis i boute almagda, si com nos avons dit; et au complissement de l’uevre appareille au malaide I dorteur avenant, en coi il dorme sus son dos en I leu tenebrous; et soit deveez de toz movemens, et preigne legieres viandes, et ne mueve son chief ne a destre ne a senestre, et soit liiez selonc sa disposition jusc’a tier jor; puis le deslie en cele maison meisme tenebrouse, et esprueve sa veue, et lou fai veoir aucunes choses, et puis li remet lou lien jusc’a septime jor; et ne covient mie que tu faices ceu en l’oure de la cure ou aprés l’incision maintenant, mais il covient que tu aliges ceu, por ceu que li aigue monte hastanment.	And pierce therefore the conjunctive alone, and do not go too deeply in by force, but make it subtle, then put almagda as we have said; and at the completion of the work equip the patient with the bed beforehand, in which he sleeps on his back in the dark place; and be devoid of all movements, and eat light meats, and do not move your head neither to the right nor to the left, and be bound according to his disposition up to the third day; then untie it in the same dark house, and try his sight, and let him see some things, and then put the ligature back until the seventh day; and it does not come that you do this in the hour of the cure or after the incision now, but it is necessary that you align this, for those who rise quickly. 
se apostemes chaus vient, que tu desliies l’oil devant le septime jor, et l’adrece de ceu qui assouaige aposteme; et quant il est apaisiez, si deslie la veue et met sus sa faice I orilliet por covrir aucun jor, et soit adés en celle maison tenebrouse.	When an abscess comes, that you should unbind the eye before the seventh day, and apply a poultice to those who soothe the abscess; and when it is appeased, then unbind the eye and put upon its face a small piece of cloth to cover any day, and let it be in that dark place. 
Et puis isse de la maison poc et poc, et se convertisse en ses cas; et saiches que nulz deciples ne se doit entremettre en cest cas.	And then it goes out of the house to and fro, and converts itself into its cases; and know that none of the disciples must interfere in this case. 
Et uns vint a nos qui estoit de la Yrach, qui nos dist que en som pais faisoit om almagda perciet, a coi on succe l’aigue, mais toutevoie je n’en vis onques nul en nostre terre, ne je ne lou lis onques en livres des anciens; et par aventure c’est une novele chose.	And one came to us who was from the Yrach, who told us that in their country they made almond pierce, to which one sucks the liquid, but nonetheless I have never seen any in our land, nor have I ever read it in books of the ancients; and perhaps it is a new thing.
Et ce sont les semblances des formes de almagda, por ceu que cil qui ne les conoit les voie; et soient d’arain proprement:	And these are the resemblances of the forms of almonds, for those who do not know them see them; and they are properly of arrain.
Et soient li chief d’aus de ceste meisme subtiliteit, et li derriene en .iij. angles ague.	And let the head of these be of the same subtlety, and the last in three angles acute.
de la char sor le neis	of the bone about the birth
Aucune fois naissent ou neis chars ajostees diverses, de coi il i a aucunes qui semblent scorpions a mout de piez; et si i a de telz ou il ait char enchancree de fuxe color, et si a char souef de bone color.	At times, diverse conjoined joints are born, of which some seem like scorpions with many feet; and if there are such ones where the flesh is discolored from wood, and if it has flesh of good color. 
En celle donques de ces chars qui est souef, et ne mie enchancree, covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains encontre lou soleil; et oevre ses narines, et giete l’oncine a celles chars, et les trai fuers; pues cope ceu que tu em pues sostenir au spatumile subtil agut d’une part, tant que tu saiches que celle char est toute ostee.	In that case of these wounds which are raw and not yet crusted, it is necessary for you to make the patient sit between your hands facing the sun; and open his nostrils, and place the oncin on those wounds, and pull them out; then cut what you can hold with the fine sharp spatula on one side, until you know that this wound is completely cleaned. 
Et s’il en remaint aucune chose c’on ne puisse coper, si l’ovrez a tout .i. des estrumens subtil legierement, si qu’il n’i demoure rien; et se sans te sormonte, ou aposteme chaus, si lou secort si com il covient; et se c’est apostemes malignes, si te haste et lou cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez et soient ostees toutes les chars, puis giete ou neis aisil et aigue ou vin.	And if any thing remains that one cannot cover, open it completely, i.e., with subtle instruments lightly, so that nothing remains; and if without the swarm or abscess clothes, secure it as it is proper; and if it is malignant abscesses, hasten and cauterize it until the blood is extinguished and all the pus is removed, then pour in water or wine.
Se li neis oevre, et moistors en vient jusc’a palais, saiches qu’il est sanez; et se moistors ne perce si com il covient, saiches qu’il i a char nee en l’os desus, a coi li estrumens ne vient mie por taillier: adonques covient il que tu i boutes I fil de lin un poc gros, et soit noez de mains nous, et ait entre chescun nout d’espaice I doit ou moins; et mette li malaides lou chiés dou fil en son neif a som pooir, et traie en odorant tant qu’il viegne par lou neif dedens la bouche; et maintes fois font ensi li enfant as escoles, et c’est legiere chose a celui qui le vuet faire; puis tien le chief qui vient par lou neif a une main, et l’autre chief qui vient par la bouche a l’autre main, et saiche l’un aprés l’autre en soiant as nous qui sont ou fil.	If the nose works and moisture comes up to the palate, know that it is healthy; and if the moisture does not pierce as it should, know that there is cartilage in the bone above, which prevents the instruments from coming to cut: therefore it is necessary that you put I thread of linen a bit thick, and be knotted by hand, and have between each knot a space of little or less; and put the patient's shoulder on the thread in his nose at the tip, and pull by smelling until it comes out through the nose inside the mouth; and many times do children so in schools, and it is a light thing to him who wants to do it; then hold the head which comes through the nose with one hand, and the other head which comes out of the mouth with the other hand, and feel each one after the other, being careful as to where the threads are. 
Fai ceu tant que tu saiches que li nout ont corrompue celle char, puis trai lou filz, essue le sanc, et moille lou fil en oignement egiptien, et le remet derechief au neis si com devant; fai ceu III jors ou plus, tant que li oignemens corrode tout ceu qui est demorez de char; et puis met ou neis une caine de plonc aucuns jors tant qu’il soit sanez, et s’il a mestier de medicines sechans, si en use; et c’est li forme de l’estrument por purgier lou chief, a coi on distille les oiles et les medicines ou neis:	Do what you know that the new have corrupted that flesh, then treat the wound, wipe the blood, and moisten the wound in Egyptian ointment, and put it back straight to the nose as before; do this III days or more, until the ointment corrodes all that is left of flesh; and then put on the nose a band of wool for some days until it is healed, and if it needs drying medicines, use them; and this is the form of the instrument for purging the nose, to which one distills the oils and medicines in the nose. 
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, semblant a une lampe overte, si com une cainne, et li conduis ausi; et se tu vues, si fai une cainne close, et soit li estrumens plains por espurgier lou chief; et ait .i. mainche au chief por lou tenir quant on chaufe l’oile ou aucune liquor.	And be it of silver or iron, resembling an open lamp, as a basin, and lead it thusly; and if you see fit, make a closed basin, and have the instruments clean for purging the head; and let it have one handle on the top to hold it when heating the oil or any liquor.
de la char sor le neis	of the bone about the birth
Maintes fois naist au chief dou neis une maladie qui est apelee «telul», et croist et devient grans adés, tant qu’il est vis chose au regarder; et por ceu covient que tu lou copes au comencement, et l’oste tout fuer, puis met sor leu lou cautere ou la medicine ardant; et s’on le tarde a coper tant qu’il soit grans, si pren warde s’il est durs, de fuxe color, de povre sens: si ne lou touchier mie de fer car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, car quant on le cope aucune fois, si en vient grant malice au malaide; et se li apostemes est de soef touchement, non mie de fuxe color, et tu vois c’on le puisse tout coper, si vuide le malaide et lou cope sens paor, et cure le leu de choses sechans et restraignans.	Many times at the head of the bone a malady which is called "telul" is born, and grows and becomes great onwards, until it is visible to behold; and for this you should cut it at the beginning, and pull all out the bone, then put on its place the cautery or the burning medicine; and if one delays to cut it until it is great, then take care if it is hard, of foul color, of poor feeling: if not touch it with iron because it is an infected abscess, for when one cuts it any time, it comes great misfortune to the patient; and if the abscess is of soft touching, not of foul color, and you see that one can cut it all, then empty the patient and cut it without fear, and cure the place with drying and restraining things.
quant li neis est copez et cosus	When the bone is cut and closed
Saiches que quant solutions de continuation vient en une de ces cartillagines ovraiges, i profite poc, fuer que en aucuns homes.	Know that when a solution of continuation comes in one of these cartilaginous works, it profits little, because in no men. 
Il covient donques cant ceu avient a aucun, si regarde se li plaie est fresche a tout son sanc; et adonques ajoste les II levres a une costure, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et se les levres sont ja desevrees d’une part et d’autre, si covient que tu escorches toutes les parties de lor keur tant qu’elles sainent, puis assemble les II levres a une costure, et l’estraint, et poudre sus poudre de sanc de dragon, et encens broiet; et met sus les poudres une piece d’emplaustre de fort ou d’autre emplaustre soudant, et le laisse tant qu’il chiece par lui, puis le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	It is therefore necessary that when this happens to anyone, if you see that the wound is fresh and full of blood; and then join the two lips together with a suture, and treat it until it is healed; and if the lips are already opened on one side and the other, it is necessary that you scar all parts of their center until they heal, then bring the two lips together with a suture, and restrain them, and powder on top of dragon's blood powder, and ground incense; and put on top of the powders a piece of strong ointment or another binding ointment, and leave it until it dries out by itself, then treat it with ointment until it is healed. 
Li maniere de la costure si est que tu assembles la solution: ou par aguilles, si com nos avons dit en la costure dou ventre; ou par fil, si com je le t’ai fait savoir.	The manner of the suture is that you assemble the solution: either with needles, as we have said in the suturing of the belly; or by thread, as I have told you.
des apostemes des levres	of abscesses of the lips
A mains homes avient dedens les levres aposteme dur, semblans a grains de veces, et menor et plus grant; adonques couvient que tu tornes les levres, et fendes sus chescun nout, et le prent as pinceures et le cope en chescune partie; puis emple lou leu aprés l’incision de vitriole broiet, tant que li sans soit estainchiez; et puis lou leive d’aisil, et cure lou leu de choses seches tant qu’il soit sanez.	In men's mouths there happen abscesses hard, resembling grains of sand, and smaller and larger; therefore it is necessary that you turn the lips, and cleave on each knot, and take with pincers and cut in each part; then apply to the place after incision of ground vitriol, until the blood be stanched; and then the ointment of oil, and cure the place with dry things until it be healed.
de la char des gencives	of the flesh of gums
Maintes fois naist sus les gencives char ajostee, que li ancien apelent «albulus»; si covient que tu la sostienes as tenailles, et la cope a sa racine, et laisse corre la bowe ou le sanc; puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet, ou autres poudres restraignans et desiccatives; et se celle char revient aprés l’incision, et maintes fois avient, si la cope la seconde fois, et la cauterize: si ne revient mie aprés le cautere; et ce sont les formes des estrumens por coper.	Many times there is born on the gums flesh attached, which the ancients call "albulus"; therefore it is necessary that you hold it with pliers and cut it at its root, and leave to flow the pus or blood; then put on the place ground vitriol, or other restraining and drying powders; and if that flesh returns after the incision, and many times happens, so cut it a second time, and cauterize it: if it does not return after cauterization; and these are the forms of instruments for cutting.
des sordens	of deaf people
Aucunes fois sont assemblees au chief des dens, dedens la bouche entre les gencives, escorces qui sont laides et aspres; et aucune fois sont li dent noir et citrin et vers, tant que li corruption vient a la gencive, et sont li dent puant; si covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, et ses chiés soit en ton saint, et reis les dens ou les escorces aperent, tant qu’il n’i demore rien; et ensi fai de la noiror et de la verdor, et de la jaunice et des autres taiches, tant qu’elles soient mondees; et s’on oste ceu que i est a la premiere rasion, c’est boin; se ceu non, si rencomence a rere le secont jor et lou tier, tant que tu aies tout reis; et saiches que li dent ont mestier de diverses formes d’estrumens por reire, selonc ceu que li oevre lou demoustre, por ceu que li raseur dont on reit defuer les dens ont autres formes que cil dont on reit entre les dens; et cestes formes et autres soient avec toi appareillies.	Sometimes they are assembled at the head of the teeth, inside the mouth between the gums, scabs which are ugly and rough; and sometimes the teeth are black and yellowish and green, as long as the corruption comes to the gum, and the teeth are foul-smelling; so you must make the patient sit between your hands, and his jaws be in your saint, and remove the teeth or scabs appearing, until nothing remains; and thus do with the blackness and greenish color, and yellowness and other spots, as long as they are visible; and if one removes those that are at the first reason, it is good; if those not, then it begins again to scrape the second day and the third, until you have removed everything; and know that teeth need different types of instruments to remove, according to what the work demonstrates to you, because the rasp used to remove outer teeth has other forms than that which removes between the teeth; and these forms and others be with you prepared.
Il covient quant tu cures lou dent de sa dolor que tu tardes dou traire tant com tu pues, car ce ne doit om mie faire; car c’est une substance mout haute jusc’a donc c’on n’ait point d’excusation dou raier.	It is necessary when you cure the tooth of its pain that you take care to drain as much as you can, because one must not do otherwise; because it is a very high substance until one has no excuse for scraping.
Adonques quant li malaides est constrains dou traire, si covient que tu soies certains dou dent doillant.	Therefore when the patient is constrained to drink, it behooves you to be certain of the tooth aching. 
Maintes fois desoit li dolor lou malaide, et cuide qu’elle soit ou dent saint, et fait traire le boin dent; et toutevoie ne se depart mie li dolor per ceu, tant que li malvais estrais, car nos l’avons ja veut faire a ces sainors; et quant tu es bien certains dou dent doillant, si covient que tu escorches entor lou dent a tout i. spatumile fort por warder la gencive de toutes pars; puis le mues a tes dois ou as tenailles subtilz au premier poc et poc, tant qu’il soit bien eslochiés, puis i afferme bien les tenailles; et soit li chiés dou malaide en ton saint entre tes genous, et lou tien bien si qu’il ne se mueve.	Many times the pain afflicts the patient, and he thinks that it is a toothache, and makes milk from the good tooth; and nevertheless, the pain does not depart at all by this, as long as the evil remains, because we have already done this to our elders; and when you are well certain of the aching tooth, then it is necessary that you scrape around the tooth on all sides with a spatula. strong to protect the gums from all parts; then move it with your two fingers or tongs subtly at the first point and point, until it is well loosened, then hold firmly with the pliers; and let the head of the patient be in your lap between your knees, and hold it well so that it does not move.  
Aprés estrai lou dent droitement sens brisier, et s’il ne saut fuer, si prent aucun de ces estrumens et le boute dedens de chescune part legierement, et lou remuef si com tu as fait premier.	After the tooth is extracted straight without breaking it, and if it does not come out easily, take one of these instruments and put it gently inside each side, and move it like you did at first.  
Et se li dens est perciez et mengiez, si covient que tu l’emplisses de drapelz, lai ou li pertus sont; et si l’estraint subtilment as tenailles, que il ne brise a l’estraindre; et covient mout saigement ovrer entor la gencive por deschaucier lou dent.	And if the tooth is pierced and broken, it behooves you to fill it with cloth, where the holes are; and hold it carefully with tweezers so that it does not break when held; and it behoove s most skillfully to work around the gum to loosen the tooth. 
Et te done bien en warde que tu ne le brises, et en remaigne une partie, et reveigne au malaide par la malice de la racine plus grans dolors de la premiere.	And so give good care that you do not break it, and remain a part of it, and return to the patient by the malice of the root greater pains than the first. 
Et te warde que tu ne faices mie ensi com font li ignorant sainor, qui par lor haste et par lor hardiesce brisent aucune fois le charreit, et n’i amenistrent mie ceu que nos avons conteit; mais font venir aucune fois par l’oquison de ceu grant maladie por les racines que i demorent, ou por lou charreit qu’il brisent, si com nos avons sovent veut; et quant li dens est trais, si lavez lou leu de vin ou d’aisil et de seil; et se decorremens de sanc i vient, que sovent avient, si emple lou leu de vitriole broiet; et se ceu ne vaut, si le cauterize.	And guard that you do not do as the ignorant healers do, who by their haste and boldness sometimes break the bone, and do not bring them what we have recounted; but they cause to come many times by the opening of those great illnesses for the roots that remain there, or for the bone they break, as we have often seen; and when the tooth is pulled, wash its place with wine or oil and salt; and if a bleeding comes, which often happens, apply the place of vitriol powder; and if that does not work, cauterize it. 
Les formes des estrumens, a coi om muet les dens premier, soient a longes pointes et a gros mainches, qu’il ne doublent mie quant tu trairas le dent; et ce sont les formes:	The forms of the instruments, to which one must file teeth first, should be with long points and thick handles so that they do not bend when you pull the tooth; and these are the forms:
Et soient de gros membres si qu’il ne ploient mie au traire, et soient de fer inde bien fait, et soient dentez por mues tenir.	And be thick members so that they do not bend when pulling, and be well-made iron, and be toothed for grip.
de la racine des dens	From the root of the teeth
Quant li racine demoure au traire, si covient que tu mettes sor le leu coton moilliet em burre I jor ou ij.,	When the root remains in the breast, it is necessary that you put on top moistened cotton in butter one or two days. 
tant que li leus soit amolis, pues i boute les tenailles qui sont apelees «algefri», de coi li chiés semblet bec de soigne; et soient dedens faites ausi com une lime et c’est li forme:	as long as the eyes are softened, then put in the tongs that are called “algefri”, so that the shoulder seems like a bird's beak; and be inside made as well as a file and this is the form: 
Et se les racines ne vuellent issir a tout ces tenailles, si covient que tu descuevre la char tot entor la racine, et i met l’estrument qui est apelez «althali», c’est a savoir palainche, de coi ci est li forme:	And if the roots do not want to come out with all these tongs, it is necessary that you uncover the flesh around the root, and there put the instrument which is called "althali," that is to say a spatula, because of its shape:
Et soit fors et gros si qu’il ne brise mie, et se li racine saut par ceu, c’est boin; se ceu non, si t’aide de toz les estrumens, de coi les formes vienent ci aprés:	And be it strong and thick so that it does not break, and if the root jumps out by those means, it is good; if those do not, then help yourself with all the instruments, of which the forms come after:
Et si s’aide on de cest estrument qui ait .ij. rains, de coi ci est li forme:	And if one helps oneself with this instrument which has two prongs, of which shape comes here:
et d’autres ferremens qui sont devant en la rasion des dens, et de cest estrument qui semble unes grans tenailles, dont ci est li forme:	And other instruments which are before in the direction of the teeth, and of this instrument which resembles a large pair of tongs, of which shape comes here:
Et soit cist estrumens fors qu’il ne puisse brisier, et saiches que mout d’estrumens de dens sont; et ausi d’autres estrumens, qui ne sont mie contez; et li saiges maistres subtilz trueve par soi meisme son estrument, selonc ceu que ses ovraiges et li maladie li demoustre, car il i a de teilz maladies ou li ancien n’enseignerent point d’estrument por la diversiteit d’au;s et s’om brise point dou charreit ou des autres os, ou il porrit, si i cerche as estrumens qu’il i covient, que je t’ai dit, et t’aide des gestes, de coi ci est li forme:	And be this instrument so that it may not break, and know that many instruments are of teeth; and also other instruments, which are not mentioned; and the wise masters subtle find by themselves their instrument, according to what their works and the disease show them, for there are such diseases where the ancients do not teach any instrument for the diversity of others and if one breaks not a bone or other bones, or where it can be broken, then search for the instruments that you need, which I have told you, and help yourself with gestures, according to what is here the form:
Et soient gros et bien tenant por tenir l’os, qu’il n’eschaipe, mais le puisse tenir et oster; et puis restoure lou leu de medicines convenant a ceu, et s’il ait en l’os porriture, et elle est petite, si la reis a tout cest estrument:	And let them be thick and well holding to hold the bone, so that it does not escape, but it can hold and remove; and then restore its place with medicines suitable for these, and if there is in the bone rot, and it is small, then the king has all this instrument:
Quant li dent apperent ne mie selonc lou cors natureil, et li forme est laide, et meismement en femmes puceles, si covient que tu saiches se li dens est neis aprés lou dent, et n’est mie en droit leu, et on ne lou puet soier ne limer: adonques lou raie; et s’il est aers avec lou dent, si prent cest estrument dont ci est li forme, et est semblans a .i. petit bec, et soit de fer inde agut en som:	When the tooth appears not according to the natural body, and the form is ugly, and especially in virgin women, then it is necessary that you know if the tooth is new after the tooth, and is not in its right place, and one cannot file or smooth it; therefore, the ray; and if it is with the tooth, then take this instrument whose form is here, and is similar to a small beak, and be of sharp iron at its summit:
Et lou cope poc et poc em mains jors por la duresce dou dent, et por ceu que tu ne mueves les autres, et s’il est apparans c’on le puisse limer, si lou lime d’une teil lime com ci est li forme:	And the cup is put and put in hands for several days for the hardness of the tooth, and because you do not move the others, and if it appears that it can be filed, then the file of a kind of file as this is its form:
et est ausi com li lime de coi on fait les aguilles; et en lime lou dent poc et poc em mains jors legierement, si qu’il ne se mueve tant qu’il chiece; puis la plaine en la fin a tout aucun raseur, et se li dens est trop trenchans et il blece la lengue, si covient limer l’aspreteit tant qu’il soit igalz, si qu’il ne blece la lengue ne ne corrompe la parole.	And it is also like the file that one makes needles with; and in filing the tooth little by little in several days lightly, so that it does not move until it falls; then the plane at the end has no trace, and if the tooth is too sharp and it pricks the tongue, then it is necessary to file the roughness until it is equal, so that it does not prick the tongue nor corrupt speech.
quant li dent lochent	When the tooth loosens
Quant li dent devant lochent, ou par percussion ou par cheoir, et li malaides ne puet presser sus ceu qu’il menjue qu’il ne chient, et tu les as curez de medicines restrignans, et ceu ne vaut; si les covient restraindre d’un fil d’or, car li filz d’argent devient vert et porrit, mais li ors ne se mue onques; et soit li filz moiens ne trop gros ne trop menus, selonc la quantiteit de l’espaice entre les dens; et se tu vues adrecier les dens, si pren lou fil et lou boute double entre les II dens sains, puis met les chiés entre les dens meus, s’il en i a I ou plusors, tant que tu veignes saigement jusc’au dent sain d’autre part; puis rencomence la coverture jusc’a la partie ou tu encomensas, et estrains ta main subtilment et saigement, tant qu’il ne se mueve point; et soit ta lieeure a la racine dou dent si qu’il ne puist eschaper.	When the front tooth is loosened, either by percussion or by falling, and the patient cannot press on it so that it moves without falling out, and you have treated them with constricting medicines, and this does not work; if it is necessary to restrain it with a gold thread, because the silver thread becomes green and corrodes, but gold never changes; and let the thread be neither too thick nor too thin, according to the quantity of space between the teeth; and if you see the teeth are close together, then take the thread and put it double between the two healthy teeth, then put the loosened teeth between the sound teeth, if there is one or more, until you come cleverly to the sound tooth on the other side; then begin the covering again up to the place where you began, and strain your hand subtly and cleverly, so that it does not move; and let your ligature be at the root of the tooth so that it cannot escape. 
Puis cope les chiés dou fil a unes tenailles, et les assemble, et les repont entre le dent sain, et le met ensi qu’il ne blece la lengue; et puis le laisse ensi estroit tant com il puet demorer, et s’il deslie, ou li filz ront, si l’estraint d’un autre fil; si demorrait et servira ensi tout son tens, et c’est li forme des dens et li figure de l’adrecement des II dens sains, et des II meus, si com tu vois:	Then hold the jaw bones with pliers and assemble them, and put them between a sound tooth and put it so that it does not bite the tongue; and then leave it this way as tight as it can stay, and if it loosens, or the wires are broken, then restrain it with another wire; let it remain and serve in this way all its time, and this is the form of the teeth and the figure of the arrangement of the two healthy teeth, and the two bad ones, as you see. 
Et quant li dent chiet, si lou remet on en son leu, de fres en fres, si com nos avons dit; et ne s’en entremette mie qui n’est saiges et soffrans, et aucune fois fait on la forme d’un dent d’os de vaiche, et lou met on au leu ou li defaute est, et l’estraint on si com nos avons dit, et demore et sert ensi lonc tens.	And when the tooth falls, then it is put back in its place, from fresh to fresh, as we have said; and let no one interfere who is not wise and experienced, and sometimes the form of a tooth of bone of the vein is made, and it is put in the place where the deficiency is, and it is restrained as we have said, and remains and serves like this for a long time.
de coper lou liien de la lengue	to cover the ligament of the tongue
Aucune fois est cist liiens qui vient desoz la lengue ou naturez, que on naist ensi; ou par accident de plaie soudee; et li ovraiges est telz que tu oevre la bouche dou malaide, et ait sa teste en ton sain, et li lieve la lengue; puis cope lou liien nervous dou large, tant que li lengue soit desloie de son tenement, et se il i a duresce ou nout, et c’est de soudement de plaie, si i boute l’uncine et cope dou large celui liement; et garde que li fendure ne soit mie trop em parfont, por l’artere qui est desoz; et quant tu as fait, si leve le leu d’aigue rose et d’aisil, ou d’aigue froide, puis met desoz la lengue une tente de lin; et la teigne li malaides chescune nuit, que li leus ne puisse soder.	At no time is this ligament that comes from under the tongue or nature, that one is born thus; or by accident of a wound joined together; and the work is such that you operate on the mouth of the patient, and have his head in your hand, and lift the tongue; then cut the nervous ligament wide, until the tongue is dislocated from its place, and if there is hardness or knot, and this is from the joining of a wound, then you put the awl in and cut wide that ligament; and keep that the incision be not too deep, for the artery which is below; and when you have done, lift the dew of rose water and of ease, or of cold water, then put under the tongue a tent of linen; and stitch the patient every night, that the place may not be joined. 
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si met sor le leu vitriole broiet; et se li sans te vaint, si le cauterize au cautere lentiginout, qui est boin a ceu; puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez,	And if bleeding occurs, put on the place powdered vitriol; and if the blood does not stop, cauterize it with the dull cautery, which is good for this; then treat it with other treatments until it is healed. 
et se tu lou vois de fusse color ou noir ou dur, si que li malaides ne lou sent, si n’i touchier point, car c’est chancre; et s’il est declinans a blenchor, et il i a moistor, si i giete l’oncine, et lou fent d’un spatumile subtil, et lou delivre d’une part et d’autre; et se li sans te vaint a ton ovraige, si met sus vitriole broiet tant qu’il soit estainchiez, puis revien a ton ovraige tant que tu traies tout fuer; puis leve lou leu d’aisil et de seil, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you see it of rusty color or black or hard, so that the patient does not feel it, then touch it not, for it is a chancre; and if it is declining to whiten, and there is moisture, then put in the probe, and make it with a fine spatula, and deliver it on one side and the other; and if the bleeding does not stop at your work, then put on powdered vitriol until it is bleached, then return to your work until you extract all pus; then lift the place with vinegar and salt, and cure it with other cures until it is healed.
des apostemes de la gorge	Of abscesses of the throat
Aucune fois vient dedens la gorge boces qui sont apelees «godath», et les apele on proprement les II amandres, et quant tu les cures, si com nos avons dit en la division, et elles ne sont sanees, si pren garde: se c’est apostemes dur de petit sens et de fusse color, si ne lou touchier mie de fer.	Sometimes come from within the throat bumps that are called «godath», and they call them properly the II almonds, and when you cure them, as we have said in the division, and they are not healed, if take care: if it is a hard abscess of small size and fusse color, do not touch it with iron.   
Et s’il est rouges et li racine est grosse, si ne lou touchier mie de fer, ausi por lou decorrement de sanc; mais lou laisse tant qu’il soit meur, et adonques tu lou partiras, ou il rompirait par soi; et s’il est de blainche color reont, et li racine est subtilz, si aies apareilliet l’estrument por coper, mais regarde premierement se li apostemes chalz repose et est apaisiez.	And if it is red and the root is thick, do not touch it with iron, also for the decorrement of blood; but let it alone until it is mature, and then you will split it, or it would break by itself; and if it is of white color again, and the root is subtle, have prepared the instrument to cover, but first look whether the abscess calms down and is appeased. 
Adonques fai seoir lou malaide devant lou soleil, et ses chiés soit en ton sain, et li oevre la bouche et lou preigne li serjans entre ses mains, et presse la lengue desoz a tout l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme; et soit d’argent ou d’arain subtil ausi com uns coutelz:	Therefore make the patient sit before the sun, and his arms be in good health, and he works the mouth and the tongue of the pliers between his hands, and presses the tongue below to all the instrument, from this is the form; and be it of silver or iron subtle like a knife: 
Cant tu presses la lengue a tout cest estrument, et tu vois l’aposteme, si pren l’oncine et lou fiche en l’amandre, et la trai fuer au desus plus que tu pues; et trai aucune chose des toiles avec, puis la cope a l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme, que semble unes forces; et toutevoie li chief sont corbé, et l’un endroit l’autre, et sont molt agut, et est fait de fer inde ou d’andainne:	And you press the tongue on all this instrument, and you see the abscess, so take the oncine and put it in the almond, and push it upwards more than you can; and do nothing of the cloths with, then the cope to the instrument, of this is the form, that seems ones forces; and nevertheless the chief are curved, and one place the other, and are very sharp, and is made of iron inde or d’andainne:
Et se tu n’as cest estrument present, si lou cope as tenailles, de coi ci est li forme:	And if you do not have this instrument present, so you cope it with pliers, of this is the form:
Et soit trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part nom; et quant tu as copeit l’une des amandres, si cope l’autre selonc cele meisme maniere, et aprés l’incision gargarize li malaides aigue chaude, et aigue et aisil, et se decorremens de sanc avient, si gargarize li malaides aigue, ou escorces de pomes grenates soient cuites, ou fuelles de mirte, et semblans choses, tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et aucune fois naissent en la gorge autres apostemes que les .ij. amandres, si les cope donques ensi com les .ij. amandres igament.	And be cutting on one side, and the other side no; and when you have cut one of the almonds, so cut the other according to the same manner, and after the incision gargle the patient hot water, and water and thus, and if a discharge of blood happens, so gargle the patient with water, or peels of pomegranates that are cooked, or leaves of myrtle, and similar things, until the wound be cleansed; then cure it as long as it be healed; and at no time rise in the throat other abscesses than the two almonds, so cut them then just like the two almonds.
Et je medicinai une femme d’un aposteme que li estoit neis dedens la gorge, c’est a savoir I aposteme de petit sens; et avoit jai bien pres close toute la gorge, si que li femme ne pooit expirer por le conduit qui estoit estoupez, et ne pooit ne mengier ne boivre, et fust morte s’elle demorast ensi I jor ou II.	And I treated a woman of an abscess that was inside her throat, that is to say the small abscess; and I had well almost closed all of the throat, so that the woman could not expire through the conduit which was stopped up, and could not eat nor drink, and would have died if she remained thus one day or two.  
Et li apostemes estoit jai si montez qu’il avoit fuer mis II rains par les II pertuis dou neis.	And the abscess was so high it had to have been put in two reigns by the two openings of the nose. 
Je hastai donques tantost, et fichai en l’un I oncine, puis lou traï fuers, et en traï grant porcion de bowe; puis refis autreteil en l’autre pertus dou neis, et li ovrai la bouche et li pressai la lengue; aprés fichai l’oncine en ces apostemes, et en copai une partie, et n’en issit fuers que un poc de sanc; et ensi fut destoupez li conduis de la gorge la femme, et comensa maintenant a boivre aigue et puis vin, et ne cessai de taillier de cel aposteme par lonc tens; et li apostemes recroissoit adés, et remplissoit lou leu que je avoie vuidiet, tant qu’il refut mout gros; adonques je l’engignai et lou cauterizai dedens la gorge: ensi demora sens croistre; et me partis de ces parties, et ne soi que Deus fist de li aprés moi.	I therefore did, and placed one in the one nostril, then pulled the other outside, and in the other a large portion of bowel; then I put another piece in the other nostril, and opened its mouth and pressed the tongue; after placing the instrument in these abscesses, and scooping out part, only a little blood came out; and so was unstopped the conduit of the throat of the woman, and she began now to drink water and then wine, and did not cease to cut that abscess for long time; and the abscess grew back full, and filled the place that I had emptied, until it became very large; therefore I burned and cauterized it inside the throat: thus remained without growing; and I departed from these parts, and know only that God did with her after me. 
de l’uve	of the grape
Quant reume dessent a l’uve, et elle est enflee et elle est longe, si est apelee «perpendiculaire»; et s’elle est desoz grosse et reonde, si est apelee «uve».	When it is rolled up to the vein, and it is filled and long, it is called "perpendicular"; and if it is short and round, it is called "vein". 
Quant elle est curee si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, et tu vois que li chaus apostemes est apaisiez, et elle est subtilz, si covient que tu la copes; et celle qui est reonde assemblee et n’est mie longe; et elle est sanguine ou de fusse color ou noire, si covient que tu eschues l’incision de li.	When it is cured as we have said in the division, and the cure does not benefit, and you see that the head of the abscess is appeased, and it is subtle, then it behooves you to cut it; and the one which is rounded assembled and is not long; and it is sanguine or of fuschia color or black, then it behooves you to escape the incision of it. 
Car il i a grant peril sus lou malaide.	For there is great peril upon the patient.  
Il covient donques, quant tu la vois, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit, de sa blenchor et de sa longesce, que tu faices seoir le malaide devant lou soleil, et li presse la lengue a l’estrument dont nos avons fait la remembrance ci devant; puis fiche l’oncine en l’uve, et la trai desoz, et la cope a I des II estrumens que j’ai dit en l’incision des II amandres.	It is therefore necessary, when you see it, according to the manner that I have said, of its whiteness and of its length, that you make the patient sit before the sun, and press the tongue to the instrument of which we have made mention before; then insert the awl into the eye, and remove it, and the coping to the one of the two instruments that I have said in the incision of the two almonds.  
Et covient que tu ne coper mie fuer que la superfluiteit qui est outre le termine natureil; car se tu en copes plus, si grieves a la voix, et a la parolle; et aprés l’incision, use de ceu que nos avons dit en l’incision des II amandres, et le cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And it is necessary that you do not cut more than the superfluity which is beyond the natural limit; for if you cut more, it grieves the voice, and the speech; and after the incision, use what we have said in the incision of the II almonds, and cure it until it is healed.  
Et se li malaides a paor dou coper, si covient que tu i use d’engien a la cauterization de li sens paor.	And if the patient is afraid to be cut, it is necessary that you use an implement to the cauterization of the senses fear. 
Et li maniere dou cautere si est aigue ague.	And the manner of the cautery is sharp acute. 
Et est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, et puis li presse la lengue a l’estrument que nos avons dit ou chapistre de cautere, et confis avec aigue vive chaus, si qu’elle ne soit mie trop espesse ne trop clere; et en emple le chevement de cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme:	And it is that the patient puts his head on your healthy side, and then presses the tongue to the instrument that we have said or in the chapter of cautery, and confides with a sharp quick cloth, so that it is not too thick nor too light; and in using the end of this instrument, for this reason here is the form: 
Et ait ou chief une cheveure ou om met la medecine, si com li chevemens d’une cuillier, et met l’estrument a tout la medicine sus l’uve; et li malaides soit gisans sus son costeit, si que li salive et li muscillaige corre de sa bouche de la medicine dedens, si qu’ele ne dessende a la gorge, et lou blece; puis tien ta main a tout la medicine et la presse sus l’uve, la quantiteit de la moitiet d’une houre, tant que tu la vois nercie et li mordications de la medicine soit apaisie; et se tu vues, pren coton et l’envoloupe sus aucun estrument, et moille lou coton en la medicine, et boute l’estrument a tout le couton en la cainne desus, tant que li coton s’aerde sus l’uve; et fai ceu sovent, tant que li cauteres soit parfais, puis la laisse elle seche, et chiet aprés .iiij. jors ou .v. Et se tu as mestier de rencomencier lou cautere de la medicine, si le rencomence, et aprés le cautere l’essue entor l’uve, de couton embut em burre, et mundifie ceu qui est entor de la medicine; et soit arosez d’aigue froide, et soit curez de gargarismes tant qu’il soit sanez.	And it has or chief a hair where one puts the medicine, as like the handle of a spoon, and put the instrument to all the medicine on the grape; and the patient be lying on his side, so that the saliva and the muscle correct from his mouth of the medicine inside, so that it does not descend to the throat, and the palate; then hold your hand to all the medicine and press it on the grape, the quantity of half an hour, as long as you see it burning and the irritations of the medicine are appeased; and if you see it, take cotton and envelop it on any instrument, and moisten the cotton in the medicine, and put the instrument to all the cotton in the cavity above, until the cotton dries on the grape; and do this often, as long as the cauterization is perfect, then leave it dry, and lie after four or five. And if you have need to restart the cautery of the medicine, start it again, and after the cautery wipe around the grape, with cotton buttered, and purify what is around the medicine; and be rinsed with cold water, and be cured by gargles as long as it is healed.
Ceste cure est plus save de l’incision, ne que li cautere; s’elle est curee de fumigation selonc ceste maniere, pren calament et ysope et origanum et rue et camomille et avronne et semblans herbes, et les assemble toutes ou aucunes d’eles en .i. pot, et i met aisil, et fai bullir; et li potz soit bien gluez de fort terre, et enmi le pot ait .i. estrument cheveit selonc ceste maniere:	This cure is safer than incision, nor the cautery; if it is cured by fumigation according to this manner, take calament and ysope and origanum and rue and camomille and avronne and similar herbs, and assemble all or some of them in one pot, and put it therein, and make boil; and let the pot be well glued with strong earth, and inside the pot have one instrument hollowed according to this manner:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, et soit li uns des chiés boutez en la bouche dou malaide tant que li vapor monte a l’uve par la caine, tant que li uve soit mortifie; aprés lou rencomence sovent, tant que li uve seche, et garde que tu ne faices ceu au comencement de l’avenement de l’aposteme chaut, car plusors choses i avienent; et ne faire mie ceu fuer que a la declination d’aposteme chaut.	And be it of silver or of iron, and let one of the heads [be] put in the mouth of the sick person until the vapor rises to the uvula by the vein, until the uvula is dead; after that, he begins again, until the uvula dries, and keep that you do not make this at the beginning of the coming of the hot abscess, for many things happen; and do not make this except at the declination of the hot abscess. 
Et se cist estrument n’est presens, si pren une caine et met dedens lou chief une craiffe d’uef, si que li bouche au malaide n’ait mie trop chaut; car li craiffe d’uef ne lait mie la vapor grever la bouche, et c’est bone cure ensamble salut.	And if this instrument is not present, then take a dog and put inside its head a piece of lead, so that the mouth of the patient is not too hot; for the piece of lead does not make the vapor heavier in the mouth, and it is good treatment and whole salvation. 
Maintes fois s’aert a la gorge os ou espinee de poisson, ou aucune chose; si covient donc que tu traies ceu que tu pues veoir, et li presse la lengue au soleil a tout l’estrument, si que tu voies mues la chose; et ceu que ne t’apert mie et est reponus en la gorge, covient que tu faices vomir le malaide ainsois que li viande soit cuite en l’estomac; par aventure si istra li chose aerse par le vomissement; ou li malaides englutisse une piece d’esponge, ou une piece de navel, ou une racine de laitue, ou .i. morceil de pain sec; et lie a l’esponge .i. fil, et puis la transglutisse; et quant elle venra au leu, si s’aerdra, et puis trairas fuer; et s’elle ne vient fuer de ceu que nos avons dit, si pren .i. estrument de plonc selonc ceste forme:	Many times a thorn or fish spine gets lodged in the throat, or something else; so it behooves you to draw out what you can see, and press the tongue to the sun with all the instrument, so that you see move the thing. And what does not appear to you and is returned to the throat, it behooves you to make the sick person vomit thus as the food is cooked in the stomach; perhaps then the thing will be released by vomiting; or the sick person swallows a piece of sponge, or a piece of navel, or a root of lettuce, or one morsel of dry bread; and tie to the sponge one thread, and then swallow it; and when it comes to the place, it will lodge itself, and then draw it out further; and if it does not come out through what we have said, then take one instrument of wood according to this form:
Et soit li estrumens corbés au chief si qu’il puist plus legierement entrer en la gorge, et ait le chief en haut leveit; et warde que tu ne touchier l’epiglote, que li tous ne li viegne, ne ne bouter mie l’os dedens; et mues vaut que li malaides i boute l’estrument, por ceu qu’il seit mues ou li chose est aerse; si la boute aval, ou il la traie fuer a tout l’estrument igalment, tant qu’elle soit fuer.	And let the instruments be curved at the head so that it can more easily enter into the throat, and have the head lifted high; and guard that you do not touch the epiglottis, lest all come undone, nor put the bone inside; and it is better that the patient puts out the instrument, for he will know if the thing is blocked; so he pushes down, or he draws back the whole instrument equally until it is out.
de la sansue de la gorge	Of the bleeding of the throat
Aucune fois est medicinee li sansue, si com j’ai dit en la division, par la cure de medicines; et quant ceu ne profite mie, adonques regarde en la gorge dou malaide au soleil, puis que tu li presses la lengue a l’estrument que je t’ai dit.	Sometimes medicine is given to the sick without using medication; and when this does not help, then look at the throat of the sick person in the sun, then that you press his tongue with the instrument I told you about.  
Et se tu vois la sansue, si la trai a tout I petit uncine, ou as tenailles subtilz que valent a ceu.	And if you see the snare, then treat it with all small tweezers, or subtle pliers that are suitable for this. 
Et se ceu ne vaut, si pren une caine chevee, et la boute en la gorge dou malaide, puis boute ou chevement de la caine I fer chaut, et fai ce sovent.	And if this does not work, then take a shaved dog and put it in the throat of the sick person, then put where the tail is, make it hot iron, and do this often. 
Et se teigne li malaides d’aigue toute jor.	And the patient stays in water all day.  
puis pren plein I voirre d’aigue froide, et oevre la bouche, et la giete ens sens englutir, et la mueve a sa main sovent; et si tost com li sansue sent l’aigue, si chiet.	Then take full a cup of cold water, and work the mouth, and place it in without swallowing, and move it with your hand often; and as soon as the patient feels the water, he will fall.  
Et s’elle ne chiet si com nos avons dit, si subfumige lou malaide d’asefetide, a l’estrument que j’ai dit en la fumigation de l’uve; fai ceu maintes fois, car elle cherra sens targier.	And if it does not fall as we have said, then fumigate the patient with asafoetida, with the instrument that I have mentioned in the fumigation of the grape; do this many times, for it will cure without fail. 
Et li maniere de la fumigation si est que tu preignes I pot ou il ait charbons vis, et soit li pos covert d’un coverseil perciet en mileu, et en celui pertus soit li chiés de l’estrument; puis i giete ta fumigation, et li malaides mette lou chief de la cainne en sa bouche, et cloie la bouche, si que li fumee n’en isse mie, mais viegne jusc’a la sansue; et la sansue cherra maintenant, et s’elle ne chiet, si rencomence la fumigation par maintes fois; et soffre li malaides soif, et menjuce choses salees et als, et ne boive point d’aigue; et adonques li iert mestier qu’elle isse fuer par cest governement.	And the manner of fumigation is that you take a pot or it has burning charcoal, and the bottom is covered with a cloth pierced in the middle, and in this one there is the head of the instrument; then you put your fumigation, and the patient puts the head of the pipe into his mouth, and closes his mouth so that the smoke does not come out, but comes until the nose; and now the nose will drain, and if it doesn’t drain, then start the fumigation again many times; and let the patient suffer thirst, and chew salty things and others, and do not drink water; and then it is necessary that it is cured by this government. 
Et li forme de l’estrument a coi on trait la sansue, si est, quant on la puet veoir, semblans a tenailles corbés por mues entrer en la gorge; et ait semblance au bec de soigne, et i ait asperiteit de lime, si que ceu qu’elle prent, elle ne puet lassier; et vez ci la forme:	And the form of the instrument with which one treats the gums is, when one can see it, like tongs bent so as to enter into the throat; and it has the appearance of a bird's beak, and it has asperities of lime, so that when it takes hold, it cannot let go; and behold here the form:
li chapistres des apostemes	The chapters on abscesses
Mout de semblances d’aposteme sont, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient ci aprés d’un et d’autre en cest livre, et sont diver en perforation et en taille; et c’est en II manieres dont l’une est en sa semblance meisme, et de ceu qu’il tient moistor.	Many kinds of abscesses are, according to what memory comes later in this book, both one and the other; and they differ in perforation and size; and it is in two ways which one is in its own likeness, and from that which it holds moisture. 
Et li seconde maniere si est por les leus ou il sont au cors.	And the second manner is for the limbs which are on the body. 
car li apostemes dou chief est autres que cil dou fondement, et li apostemes dou leu charnut est autres que cil qui vient en jointures, et chescuns ait son jugement en l’uevre.	for the abscess of the head is other than that of the foundation, and the abscess of the fleshy part is other than that which comes in joints, and each has its judgment in the work.  
Et si a apostemes c’on ne doit mie percier, tant que li bowe est meure selonc son acomplissement; et si a de telz qu’il covient percier quant il sont crut, et ne meurent mie selonc lor acomplissement, si com aposteme qui sont delez jointures.	And if to abscesses one should not pierce until the boil is ripe according to its completion; and if to some it befits to pierce when they are crusty and do not die according to their completion, such as abscesses which are near joints.  
Car quant apostemes vient delez jointures, et on le laisse tant qu’il est porris entor, par aventure si sont corrumput li liien et li nerf de la jointure, par coi ce est cause de contraction en celui membre.	For when abscesses come near the joints, and it is left until it is completely rotten, by chance the ligaments and nerves of the joint are corrupted, which is the cause of contraction in that limb. 
Ou li aposteme est delez lou membre principel, et se tu tardes la perforation tant qu’il soit meurez, si nuira au membre principeil; ou il est delez lou fondement, si le perce on ainsois qu’il soit meurs; et ne covient mie que tu perces aposteme crut sens digestion acomplie, fuers que celui qui est delez lou fondement, qu’il ne porrisse em parfont, et soit alongiez dedens, et i viegne fistule; et ne puisse saner en grant termine.	Ou the abscess is near the principal member, and if you delay the perforation until it is ripe, it will harm the principal member; where it is near the base, then pierce it so that it is ripe; and it is not fitting that you pierce an abscess without complete digestion, except for the one which is near the base, lest it become too long and open inward, and there comes a fistula; and cannot heal in a great time.  
Et covient que tu saiches l’oure de la perforation de l’aposteme qui est meur selonc l’acomplissement, et c’est quant li dolor est apaisie, et li departemens de la fievre, et l’amenuisement de la dolor et de la roujor, et dou debatement et de l’aguisement dou chief de l’aposteme, et les autres signes; et covient que tu faices seoir la perforation ou plus dependant leu de l’aposteme, et la ou il apert mues; et soit li perforation dou lonc dou cors, et se li apostemes est as mains ou as piez, ou en jointures et au ners et as arteres, et en toz leus igalz ou il n’a point de ploieure.	And it is necessary that you know the time of the perforation of the abscess which is mature according to its completion, and this is when the pain has subsided, and the fever has decreased, and the lessening of the pain and redness, and of the swelling and softening of the head of the abscess, and the other signs; and it is necessary that you make the perforation where more depends the place of the abscess, and where it opens pus; and be the perforation long in the body, and whether the abscess is on the hands or feet, or in joints and nerves and arteries, and in all their equal places where there is no fold.
En ces que ploient, par selonc celui membre.	In these that are crooked, according to which limb. 
Et quant apostemes est en leu charnut, si vaut mues que tu laisses la perforation tant qu’il soit confermez en digestion acomplie, si com nos avons dit.	And when an abscess is in a fleshy place, it is worth knowing that you let the perforation remain as long as it is confirmed in complete digestion, as we have said.  
Car se tu lou perces devant ceu, si iert alongiez li cors dou venim de lui, et est plains de mout d’ordure; et par aventure endurcissent les levres et li parfondetez de lui.	For if you pierce it before those things, then the body of the sperm will be lengthened from him, and is full of much filth; and by chance harden the lips and the depths of him. 
Et si a aucun aposteme que sont perciet selonc le large dou cors, selonc ceu que li membres en ait mestier.	And if on any abscess that are pierced according to the width of the body, according to what the limb needs. 
Et covient que tu amenistres em petis apostemes, petis pertus; et en grans apostemes, grans pertus, et maintes fendures selonc la semblance de la grandor de l’aposteme; et si a de tels apostemes ou il covient chever lou keur, et coper; quant il est jai devenus ausi com I drapelz, et est amortis, si covient faire ausi com on fait as bubes: et si a de telz que sont fendut en III angles, et si a de telz dont on cope ausi com la fuelle de mirte, si com apostemes des angres; et si a de telz ou on fait une reonde taille, et autres tailles et semblant copeure.	And you must make small abscesses in small abscesses, small incisions; and in large abscesses, large incisions, and many cuts according to the semblance of the size of the abscess; and if there are such abscesses where it is necessary to cover the heart, and to cover; when it has become as thick as cloth, and is closed, you must do as with boils: and if there are such that are cut in III angles, and if there are such as are covered like the leaf of myrtle, like abscesses of the angles; and if there are such where one makes a round incision, and other sizes and similar incisions. 
Cil qui n’ont point de chief, si com aposteme souef superficial, il covient que tu lou perces plainnement; et covient quant li apostemes est gros, et il a coillit grant bowe, et tu lou perces, si ne traire mie toute la bowe en celle houre, mais en trai une partie; puis estoupe l’aposteme jusc’a l’autre jor, puis en trai aucune chose derechief; fai ceu par maintes fois de greit en greit, tant que li bowe isse toute; meismement se li malaides est de foible vertut, ou femme portans, ou petis enfes, ou viez hons decrepites.	Whoever has no chief, such as a superficial abscess, it is necessary that you pierce it thoroughly; and it is necessary when the abscess is large, and it has gathered much pus, and you pierce it, if you do not draw out all the pus in that hour, but drain part of it; then stop the abscess until the next day, then drain nothing further; do this many times little by little, until the pus is all gone; same thing if the patient is of weak virtue, or a woman carrying, or young children, or old men decrepit. 
Car li esperis tressaut aucune fois avec l’issue de la bowe, que par aventure muert li malaides, et tu ne t’en persois.	For the spirit sometimes twists with the exit of the gut, which by chance kills the patient, and you do not lose heart. 
Eschuez donques cest chapistre par grant cautele, et quant tu as perciet ton aposteme, si essue la plaie, et regarde se li plaie de l’aposteme est petite; et se c’est une tailleure plainne, si amenistre tentes de lin ou de viez coton; et se c’est uns grans apostemes, et il i a mout de pertus, si covient que tu boutes en chescun une tente si qu’ele viegne l’une contre l’autre; et se tu as copeit en l’aposteme une partie dou cuir, et tu l’as cheveit entor, si covient que tu l’emplisses de viel couton ou de rasure de dras de lin sens moistor, et le lie jusc’au tier jor; puis l’oste, et le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	Avoid therefore this chapter with great caution, and when you have pierced your abscess, so wipe the wound, and see if the wound of the abscess is small; and if it is a plain cut, administer tents of linen or old cotton; and if it is a large abscess, and there are many openings, it is necessary that you put in each one a tent so that it comes one against the other; and if you have cut into the abscess a piece of skin, and you have covered it inside, it is necessary that you fill it with old cotton or lint shavings of linen without moisture, and tie it until the third day; then remove the bandage, and cure it with ointment until it is healed. 
Et se decorremens de sanc avient a ton ovraige, si amenistre aigue froide et aisil, et moille I drapeil, et met sor le leu decorrant par maintes fois.	And if blood flow happens in your work, then administer cold water and thus, moisten the cloth, and place it on the bleeding spot many times. 
Et se li decorremens de sanc persevere, se i amenistre governement et cure, et les poudres que j’ai dit em mains leus en cest livre, et se c’est ou tens d’iver, et li leus ou li apostemes est est mout nervous, si couvient que tu mettes sus tentes et drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile chaut; et se c’est en esteit, et li leus est charnus, si covient que tu mes sus drapelz moilliez en aigue et en oile, ou en vin et en oile froit, jusc’au tier jor, si com nos avons dit; et puis deslie l’aposteme et l’essue et le cure, si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the flow of blood persists, administer governance and care to it, and the powders that I have said in this book with your hands, and if it is in winter time, and the wounds or abscesses are very nervous, then it is necessary that you put on tents and cloths softened in wine and hot oil; and if it is in summer, and the wound is fleshy, then it is necessary that you put on cloths softened in water and oil, or in cold wine and oil, until the third day, as we have said; and then untie the abscess and wipe it and cure it, as it befits, until it is healed. 
Et ceu covient il conoistre universement en cures des apostemes: or vos ai dit coment on doit aler avant as cures des apostemes, et vez ci le chapistre.	And this is what one must know universally in the treatment of abscesses: I have told you how one should proceed before treating abscesses, and see here the chapter.
des soros	of sores
Ou keur dou chief vienent petis apostemes, et sont manieres de nous que sont en toiles, ausi com li josier d’une geline, et mout en i a de semblances.	Where the heart of the head come small abscesses, and are manner of us that are in cloths, like as the joints of a gherkin, and much in it of likenesses.   
Il en i a de gras et de telz ou il a moistor ausi com poulz; et si a de telz qui sont dur et pierous au taillier, et n’i a point de doutance se li artere n’i fait contraire.	There are some that are fatty and such that have moisture as well as pulses; and there are some that are hard and stony at the waist, and there is no doubt if the artery does not work against it. 
Et li ovraiges de la taille si est que tu esprueve a tout I estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», de coi li forme vient ci aprés, quel chose il contient.	And the work of the waist is that you provide to all the instrument which is called "enteroscopist," because its form comes here after, what thing it contains. 
Car s’il contient moistor, si lou fent par desus dou lonc.	For if it contains moisture, then cover it from above with a long cloth.  
Et quant li moistor est vuidie, si escorche sens rien laissier la peil qui contient celle moistor, car il revient adés quant on i laisse rien; puis plonge coton en oignement egiptien, s’il est presens; se ceu non, en aigue et en seil, et en emple la plaie, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor; et ceu corront ceu qui est demorez dou nit.	And when the moisture is dried, then peel away without leaving the hair that contains that moisture, because it returns back when one leaves it alone; then dip cotton in Egyptian ointment, if it is present; if not, in water and wine, and apply it to the wound, and leave it until the next day; and remove what remains of the pus. 
Et pues rencomence lou coton, si com devant, le second jor, et lou tier, tant que tu saiches bien qu’il ne demoure point dou nit; puis cure la plaie d’oignement a ceu convenauble, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And then begin again the cotton, as before, the second day, and the third, until you know well that it does not remain of the pain; then cure the wound with ointment as is fitting, until it is healed. 
Et se li apostemes tient I nout gras, si le cope selonc ceste forme, dou lonc; et i giete tes oncines, et l’escorche de toutes pars, et met toute ta cure de traire fuer la cotte ou il gist; et se li artere te fait contraire, si fai ceu que je t’ai dit aprés.	And if the abscess holds in the flesh, so cut it according to this form, long; and throw your forceps there, and the scab from all sides, and put all your care into drawing out the pus where it lies; and if the artery opposes you, then do what I have told you afterwards. 
Et ausi fai de l’aposteme s’il est pierous, et dou taillier et dou curer si com je t’ai dit.	And also do with an abscess if it is foul, and of cutting and curing as I have told you. 
Et li taille sus l’aposteme pierous et le moiste, si est plus legiere, car il sont de poc de sanc.	And the tail on the purulent abscess and the moist one is lighter because they are of little blood. 
Et si a aucuns de ces apostemes ou chief ou il n’a point de moistor, et de ces fut I apostemes que je copai ou chief d’une vielle femme; et trovai l’aposteme ausi com une piere xourde, aspre et blainche, et ne pooit brisier; et s’on en eust ferut aucun, on li eust ausi bien fait plaie com d’une piere.	And if to some of these abscesses or chiefs where there is no moisture, and of these former abscesses that I copied or chief of an old woman; and found the abscess as a hard stone, rough and white, and cannot break; and if one had done any, one would have done him as well a wound as with a stone. 
En autres apostemes venans ou chief, fuer que ces qui vienent as chief des enfans et as racines des oreilles, li overture si soit toz jors au plus dependant leu, por mues issir la bowe; et les cure si com il covient.	In other abscesses coming or chief, for that which come at the top of children and the roots of the ears, the opening should be always at the most dependent place, in order to let out the pus; and the cure as it is fitting. 
des scrophules	Of the scrofulous
Maintes fois avienent cist aposteme au col, et desoz les asseles, et ens angres, et aucune fois vienent autre part ou cors, et sont mout, et sont enjanrees l’une avec l’autre.	Many times these abscesses occur at the neck, and under the arms, and in the groins, and sometimes they come elsewhere on the body, and are numerous, and interlaced with one another. 
Et chescune scrophule est proprement dedens sa cote, si com li nout et li aposteme dou chief, si com nos avons dit; et les semblances de ces scrophules sont maintes.	And each scrofula is properly within its side, as the nodule and abscess of the head, as we have said; and the appearances of these scrofulas are many.  
Il i a de teles que contienent moistor, et si a de malignes qui ne vuellent obeir a santeit.	There are some who contain moisture, and there are some who do not want to obey health. 
en celle donques que tu vois de bone disposition au tochier, et est semblans a la color dou cors, et muet de chescune part et n’est mie aerse as ners dou col ne a l’artere ne au conduit, et n’est mie parfonde; si covient que tu la copes par desus, et l’escorche de chescune partie, et estent les II levres dou keur as oncines, se tu en as mestier, si com nos avons dit en apostemes dou chief; et la trai poc et poc, et soies seur que tu ne coper lou nerf ne la voine, et ne soit mie li spatumile agus ne trenchans, que li mains n’eschaipe, et ne voise trop avant, que tu ne coper mie ceu que tu ne dois.	In that which you see of good disposition in the touch, and similar to the color of the body, and mute from each side and is not a bit fierce to the nerves of the neck nor to the artery nor to the conduit, and is not too deep; then it befits you to cut it from above, and to scrape it from each part, and extend the two lips of the heart as incisions, if you have need for it, like as we have said in abscesses of the head; and treat little by little, and be sure that you do not cut the nerve nor the vein, and be not the spatula too sharp or trenching, that the hand does not slip, and do not see too far forward, that you do not cut what you should not. 
Et se tu copes la voinne ou l’artere, et ceu ne te laisse ovrer, si met en la plaie vitriole broiet, ou aucunes poudres que restainchent sanc, et estraint la plaie; et la laisse tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et soit amollie li plaie, et encomence a porrir.	And if you cut the vein or artery, and it does not let you work, then put in the wound powdered vitriol, or some powders that restrain blood, and hold the wound; and leave it until the abscess is appeased, and the wound is softened, and begins to rot. 
Et quant li sans est estainchiez, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que tu l’acomplisses; puis quier a ton doit indice s’il i demoure nules petites scrophules, si les cope et les munde.	And when the wound is cleansed, return to your work, until you complete it; then carefully examine with your index finger if there remain any small scabs, and cut them and remove them.  
Et s’il a en la racine de la scrophule voinne grant, si ne covient mie que tu copes celle scrophule en sa racine, mais la lie d’un fil double fort, et la laisse cheoir par li, sens nuisement; puis emple la plaie de viel coton plongiet en oignement egiptien, puis la cure.	And if there is a vein in the root of the scrofula large, then it does not behoove you to cut that scrofula at its root, but tie it with a double strong thread, and let it hang by it, without causing pain; then apply the wound of old cotton dipped in Egyptian ointment, then cure it.  
Et se tu copes toute la scrophule, si covient que tu assembles les II levres de la plaie, et les cout maintenant, puis qu’il n’i a point demoreit de superfluiteit por la grandor de la scrophule.	And if you cut all of the scrofula, it is necessary that you assemble the two lips of the wound, and sew them now, since there is no delay of superfluity for the size of the scrofula.  
si covient que tu entendes a coper la racine de li, et traire fuer, et la cout si com nos avons dit.	If it is necessary that you understand to cover the root of it, and milk furred, and cut as we have said. 
Celles scrophules que tienent superfluiteit, perce lai ou il apert meure; et la perce ensi com celle devant dite, en dependant, puis i amenistre tentes avec oignement et semblans choses, si qu’elle corrompe ceu qui est demorez de la corruption; et quant li plaie est bien mundee, si la cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Those scrofulas that hold superfluity, pierce there where it appears more; and pierce thus as that before said, depending, then administer ointments with similar things, so that it corrupts what remains of the corruption; and when the wound is well cleansed, then the cure of ointment bringing forth flesh, until it is healed.  
de squinance	Of squinting
Li ancien dirent et parlerent de la tailleure de la gorge; mais je ne vis onques en nostre terre qui la feist, et c’est li escripture de lor parole.	The ancients said and spoke of the cutting of the throat; but I have never seen in our land who did it, and this is the scripture of their word.
A ces qui ont squinance, il covient que li fendure de la gorge qui est apelee «epiglote» soit eschuee; et c’on ne faice aide par ceu, por ceu que toutes les voines et li pormon dou malaide sont a ces qui ont aposteme chaut en la bouche, ou en la gorge ou en .ij. amandres.	For those who have squinance, it is necessary that the slit of the throat which is called "epiglottis" be cut; and one should not help them with this because all the veins and arteries of the patient are hot at those who have an abscess in the mouth, or in the throat or in two almonds.
Quant li maladie est en la chenal dou pormon, il covient coper l’epiglote por fuir la perdition qui vient de l’estranglement.	When the disease is in the channel of the artery, it is necessary to cover the epiglottis to avoid the perdition that comes from strangulation.
Il covient donques, quant nos volons fendre l’epiglote, que nos le fendons desoz III cercles ou IIII une petite fendure dou travers, entre les II cercles ou par la quantiteit de la fendure dou syfac, ne mie en la cartillaige; et cil leus si est covenaubles a la section de l’epiglote qu’il n’i a point de char, et li vasseil sont lonc d’enqui.	It is therefore necessary when we want to cut the epiglottis that we cut it below III circles or IV a small incision through the, between the II circles or by the quantity of the incision of the syfac, not in the cartilage; and this its so suitable for the section of the epiglottis that there is no flesh, and the vessels are long enough. 
Et se li maistres est paourous, si covient qu’il estende le cuir de la gorge a tout l’oncine, puis fende lou keur tant qu’il viegne a la cheneil; et eschue les vasselz de sanc, se tu vois aucune chose, et puis cope lou syfac, si com nos avons dit; et est demostrez par la section dou fleume de la cheneil ki saut fuer par le leu qui est rompus, et par la defaute de la voix; et laisse la plaie overte une piece.	And if the master is fearful, it is necessary that he extend the skin of the throat to all the spine, then fends the heart as far as it comes to the channel; and escape the vessels of blood, if you see nothing, and then cut the syfac, as we have said; and it is demonstrated by the section of the phlegm of the channel that salt is thrown out from the place which is broken, and by the lack of voice; and leave the wound open a piece. 
Et quant li houre est passee de coi on doute l’estranglement, assemble les .ij. levres de la plaie dou keur, et la cout toute soule sens la cartillaige; puis aministre medicines qui font naistre char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when the hour is past because one doubts the strangulation, assemble the .ij. lips of the wound of the heart, and sew all alone sense the cartilage; then administer medicines that make flesh grow, as long as it is healthy.
Albucasim dist c’on ne faice ce jusc’a tant que li gorge est toute estoupee, et li malaides est jugiez a mort, et li defaut li alaine.	Albucasim says that one should not do this juice until the throat is completely stopped up and the patient is judged to be dead and the lack is in the wing.
Adonques cope on l’epiglote por ceu que li malaides ne puet alener, et il respire par la plaie, et ensi est gardez de mort; et por ce commanderent li anciain a laissier la plaie overte tant que li malice de la maladie soit passee, et elle est passee en III jors ou en IIII Et adonques il comanderent a coudre la plaie et curer, tant qu’elle fut curee; et je vos dirai ceu que je vis.	Therefore, cover the epiglottis because the patient cannot breathe and they breathe through the wound, and thus are kept from death; and for this reason, ancients commanded to leave the wound open until the malice of the disease has passed, and it passes in III days or in IIII. And then they commanded to sew up the wound and cure it, until it was cured; and I will tell you what I saw. 
Je vis que une damoisele prist I coutel, et le ficha en sa gorge, et copa partie des chenelz dou pormon; et je fui apelez por li curer, et la trovai ausi com morte.	I saw that a young woman took a knife and stabbed it in her throat, and cut part of the channels of the windpipe; and I was called by her to cure her, and I found her as dead. 
Je descovris la plaie, et trovai le sanc qui en estoit issus, et soi bien qu’elle n’avoit mie copeit voine ne conduit fuer que la gorge, et li vens issoit fuer par la plaie.	I discovered the wound, and found the blood that was coming from it, and I well know that it had not been cut to a vein nor led anywhere but to the throat, and the veins were passing through the wound.
Je me hastai, et cousi la plaie, et la curai tant qu’elle fut sanee; et n’avint a la damoisele fuer qu’elle fut roge de voix, et revint aprés a sa disposition; por ceu di je que en la tailleure de l’epiglote n’ait mie paour.	I bandaged it, and thus I healed the wound, until it was cured; and did not happen to the maiden that she would be hoarse, and returned after to her disposition; for this reason I say that in the cutting of the epiglottis is no fear. 
de la grosse gorge	of the large throat
Cist apostemes est apelez «hernie de gorge», et est uns grans apostemes en color d’une jaisse, et est molt en femmes; et est selonc II manieres: naturez, et accidens; ou natureil n’a point d’engien.	This abscess is called "throat hernia," and it is a large abscess in the color of a boil, and it is mostly in women; and it is according to II manners: natural, and accidental; where natural has no cause. 
Et li accidens est selonc II manieres, de coi l’une est semblans a gras nous, et li autre maniere est semblans a aposteme qui vient de nous d’artere; et il i ait paour, et ne covient mie ovrer de feir fuers que en celi qui est petite, et le prueve et cerche a tout l’intromissoire: se tu le trueves ausi com I nout gras, et ne pent a nulle voine, si le cope, si com on cope les nous, et le trai a tout sa coife, s’il en i a point; et encerche bien tot, et le cure si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	And the accident is according to II manners, of which one is similar to fat us, and the other manner is similar to an abscess that comes from our artery; and there is fear, and it does not become to work to do outside than in this one that is small, and proves and searches all the introduction: if you find it as I am fat, and cannot at any vein, so cut it, as we cut the us, and the train to all its coat, if there is any; and encircle well quickly, and cure it as it befits, until it is perfectly healthy. 
des nous	of ours
Maintes manieres de nous sont, dont je dirai toutes les semblances; et or covient que je die toute la difference qui est entre nout et issue.	There are many ways to us, which I will tell all the likenesses; and now it befits me to say all the difference that is between our and outcome. 
Je dis que issue est chalors et fievre tenans, tant que li ebulicions est passee, et est acomplie li porriture; adonques repose li fievre et li chalor.	I say that others is sometimes and fever-holding, as long as the boils are passed, and is completed the corruption; therefore rests the fever and the heat.
Avec lou nout n’a ne chalor ne fievre ne dolor, et contient I syfac, qui est ses propres sac et est selonc la color dou cors, et encomence ausi com une jaisse, et devient gros; et sont selonc ij semblances, ou grais, ou moiste, et mout de color sont si com j’ai dit en la division.	With the new one there is neither heat nor fever nor pain, and contains it its own sack and is according to the color of the body, and begins also as a boil, and becomes big; and are according to two appearances, or fatty, or moist, and many colors are as I have said in the division.  
Il covient, quant tu viens a la cure dou nout, que tu esprueves et l’enquier premierement a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», selonc ce que sa forme venra ou chapistre qui est aprés.	It is necessary, when you come to the cure of the wound, that you first examine and inquire about all the instrument which is called "intropositor," according to its form or chapter which is after.
Et li maniere de l’inquisicion des apostemes des nous est que tu preignes ou plus moiste leu que tu trueves en l’aposteme, et torne tes dois poc et poc, tant que tu saiches que li estrumens ait perciet le keur, puis que ce soit selonc la grandor de l’aposteme; puis estrai l’entromissoire, et pren garde en ceu que saut fuer.	And the manner of inquisiting the abscesses by us is that you prick or more moist place that you find in the abscess, and turn your two points and points, until you know that the instrument has pierced the core, then according to the size of the abscess; then extract the introducer, and take care in those that jump out may. 
Se moistor corrans cort, queil color elle ait, si le fent si com j’ai dit des autres apostemes; et se aprés l’entromissoire nen vient moistor, saiches qu’il est gras, si le fent donques en croix, et le prent as pinceures, et l’escorche legierement de chescune part et warde la cotte ou il gist que tu la traies saine avec le nout; et se tu ne la pues traire saine, si la trai par pieces si qu’il n’i demoure rien.	If the moisture runs short, what color it has, do as I have said of other abscesses; and if after the introducer there comes no moisture, know that it is fat, so make it in a cross, and take it with tweezers, and scrape it lightly on each side and ward the coat where it lies so that you draw it out clean with the needle; and if you cannot draw it out clean, then draw it by pieces so that nothing remains.   
Car s’il i demoure rien, si revient li nous par maintes fois; et s’il en demore un poc, et li sans te grieve, si emple la plaie d’aucunes poudres corrosives agues, et estraint la plaie, et met sus choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li nous est grans, si cout les II levres de la plaie, et le cure de ceu qui enjanre char.	Car if it remains nothing there, it returns to us many times; and if it remains a little bit, and the patient does not grieve, then apply some corrosive powders to the wound, and restrain the wound, and put on soothing things above an ointment hot, and cure it with other cures until it is healed; and if the lump is large, then cut the two lips of the wound, and cure it with what generates flesh. 
et se li voine batans t’est contraire ou autre si te haste et emple le leu de vitriole broiet, et lou laisse liiet .ij. jors ou .iij., tant que li plaie porrisse, et repose li ebulicion dou sanc; puis revien au coper ceu que i est demoreit dou nout.	and if the vein pulsating is against you or otherwise hurry and apply the place of pulverized vitriol, and let it lie for two days or three, until the wound festers, and repose the boiling of blood; then return to copper what is remaining of the out.
Vez ci les formes des estrumens entromissoires, et sont de III manieres: grans et moien et petit; et s’en i a III quarrez qui sont apelez «albaret», et I qui est apelez «breb», et s’en i a de III manieres: grant, moien, et petit, por encerchier les apostemes de fistule; et sont ausi com les aguilles dont on cout les sorceles, et sont d’arain citrin, ou de fer, ou d’argent, et mues valent cil qui sont jaune, et sont plus esprovez de plonc noir por encerchier les corbeures de fistule; et sont de III manieres: grans, moiens, et petis, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce des pertus.	See here the forms of the instruments for inserting, and they are in 3 ways: great and medium and small; and there are 3 squares that are called "albaret", and 1 that is called "breb", and there are in 3 ways: great, medium, and small, to surround the abscesses of fistula; and they are also like needles with which one sews the sorceresses, and they are of citrine iron or silver, and those who are yellow are worth more, and they are more proven by black flint to surround the curves of fistula; and they are in 3 ways: great, medium, and small, according to the quantity of the breadth of the openings.  
Les formes des oncines sont de mout de semblances, si com tu vois ci: grans, moiens, et petis; et si a oncines qui ont II corbeures de III manieres ausi; et si a oncines qui ont III corbeures, et sont ausi de III manieres; et si a oncines qui ont II corbeures, et oncines d’une corbeure soulement, et sont de III manieres; et tuit cist sont necessaire en lor leu.	The forms of tweezers are of many resemblances, as you see here: large, medium, and small; and there are tweezers that have two curves in three ways also; and there are tweezers that have three curves, and they are also in three ways; and there are tweezers that have two curves, and tweezers of a single curve only, and they are in three ways; and all of these are necessary in their place. 
Li chief de ces a coi on fent sont trenchant, et de telz i a qui ne taillent mie fuer que d’une part, dont on escorche les nous, por ceu c’on ne cope la voine ne le nerf; et de ces intromissoires sont les alemeles reponues en mainches, si que li malaide ne s’en persoivent a l’overture des apostemes; et sont de III manieres: grant, petit, et moien, si com tu vois; et n’en use on mie fuer que en leu charnut, si com jambes, et bras, et mameles, et as angres, et en semblans leus; et aucune fois fait on I autre estrument petit, semblant a escorces de fistices, selonc ceste forme, a coi on estainche sanc:	The head of these things is to be cut, and there are some that do not cut more than one side, which we scrape the skin for; so that one does not cut the vein nor the nerve; and among these instruments are the alemeles put back in handles, so that the patient does not feel them at the opening of abscesses; and they are of III manners: large, small, and medium, as you see; and one does not use them except in fleshy parts, such as legs, arms, breasts, and armpits, and similar places; and sometimes one makes another instrument small, resembling a fist, according to this form, for which one drains blood. 
et le met on aucune fois au leu qui saine a copement des voines, et as arteres, et aucune fois reont selonc ceste grant forme:	and one puts it sometimes in the place that heals with incision of veins, and arteries, and sometimes re-enters according to this great form:
Aucune fois enflent les mameles d’aucuns homes quant cil encomencent estre corrumput, tant qu’eles semblent mameles de feme; et demorent laides et enflees, et qui les vuet curer, si le covient soier selonc ceste forme des ceste ligne .b. jusques a .g.:	Sometimes the breasts of some men swell when they begin to rot, until they resemble female breasts; and remain discolored and swollen, and whoever wants to cure them, it is necessary to follow this form from this line .b. up to .g.. 
puis escorche la graisse, et emple la plaie de medicine enjanrant char, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie a costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee; et se li mamele cline aval, et est amolie por sa grandor si com il avient as femmes, si la fent en II costelz desus, par II semblans fendures; de coi l’une soit tenans a l’autre a la fin de l’une et de l’autre, si que li plus grans ligne conteigne la menor selonc ceste forme, des ceste ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.; puis escorche le cuir qui est entre les II levres, et oste la graisse, et i amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de costure et de poudres, et ceu qui est necessaire en la cure, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il n’est sanez, ou li incision n’est mie toute faite, por ceu que li malaides ne vuet reposer, ou por le decorrement de sanc, si covient que tu emplisses la plaie de coton moilliet en oignement corrosif; et le laisse tant qu’il menjuce le remenant et la graisse, puis le cure tant qu’il soit saneis.	then scrape the fat, and apply medicine to the wound preventing flesh, then assemble the two lips of the wound together with stitching, and cure it until it is healed; and if it swells downwards, and softens as it happens to women, make it in two ribs above, by two similar cuts; so that one holds onto the other at the end of one and the other, so that the larger line contains the smaller according to this form, from this line .b. up to the line .g.; then scrape the skin which is between the two lips, and remove the fat, and there administer what we have said of stitching and powders, and what is necessary in the cure, until it is healed; and if it is not healed, or the incision is not entirely made, because the patient does not want to rest, or for the blood loss, then it behooves you to fill the wound with cotton soaked in corrosive ointment; and leave it until it softens the remaining and the fat, then cure it until it is healed. 
des apostemes des asselles	of abscesses of the buttocks
Cist apostemes que vienent desoz les asseles sont manieres de scrophules dures ou il ait cotes, et s’en i a que contienent moistor.	These abscesses that come under the buttocks are types of hard scrofulous ulcers or boils and some contain moisture.
Cil donques qui contienent moistor covient qu’il soient copez selonc ceste forme, des la ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.:	Those who contain moisture should be cut according to this form, from the line .b. to the line .g.: 
Et quant toute li bowe qui est en l’aposteme est vuidie, si emple la plaie de viel coton, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor, puis oste tout le coton, et cure d’oignement avenant a ceu tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when all the pus that is in the abscess is emptied, then apply to the wound old cotton, and leave it until the next day, then remove all the cotton, and care with ointment following this until it is healed.
Et se li apostemes est de semblances de scrophules, si le fent si com nos avons dit en fendures des scrophules, et se li plaie rent bowe, si amenistre cautere si com nos avons dit devant.	And if the abscess is similar to boils, then treat it as we have said for incisions of boils, and if the wound returns with pus, then apply cautery as we have said before.
de la routure de l’artere	of the rupture of the artery
Quant li artere est route, et li cuir est soudez qui est sus, si en vient maintes fois apostemes, et tout aussi avient il a la voine enflee et aposteme; et si le conoist on ensi quant c’est por l’artere, si est li apostemes lons em parfont; et quant tu le sens a tes dois, si sens I estraignement; et quant c’est por la voine, si est reons defuer aparans; et c’est folie de coper cest aposteme, et meismement quant il est desoz les asseles et as angres et ou col et em mout d’autres leus, et est mout grans.	When the artery is wounded, and the skin is sutured which is on top, there often come abscesses, and just as well it happens to the vein swollen and abscess; and if you know it's for the artery, then the abscess is long in making; and when you feel it with your fingers, you feel a tightening; and when it is for the vein, it appears red from being inflamed; and it is foolishness to cover this abscess, and even when it is under the armpits and around the neck and at many other places, and is very large.  
Il covient donques eschuir la cure de fer, et celui qui est a chief covient eschuir ausi, et en celui qui est d’enfleure d’artere fent par desus le cuir dou lonc; puis oevre la taille as oncines, et depart bellement l’artere des toiles, tant qu’ele soit descoverte; puis boute desoz li une aguille, et la fai percier jusc’a l’autre costeit, et estraint l’artere d’un fil double en II leus, selonc ceu que je t’ai ensigniet en l’estraction des II arteres qui sont en temples; puis point le leu qui est entre les II liens d’un intromissoire tant que li sans en isse qui i est, et soit deliiez li aposteme; puis amenistre la cure que enjanre bowe, tant que li liien chient; puis cure ceu d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li apostemes est por la taille de la voinne, si covient que tu teignes a ta main ceu que tu pues de l’aposteme a tout le cuir, puis boute l’aguille desoz le leu que tu tiens a ta main, et la fai percier, et i ait I fil double, si que tu le trais de l’autre costeit; puis lie l’aposteme, si com je t’ai dit, ou liien de l’une de II pars as II chiés dou fil; et se tu doutes que li filz n’isse fuer, si i reboute une autre aguille a tout I fil desoz tout l’aposteme a l’incision de la premiere aguille, et estraint les filz en IIII leus; puis cope l’aposteme tant que li superfluitez en isse, puis cope la superfluiteit dou keur et laisse ceu qui est liiez; puis met sus I drapeil moilliet en vin et en oile, puis li amenistre cures de tentes et d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	It behooves then to seek the cure of iron, and whoever is at the chief behoove as well, and in that one who is inflamed by artery making from above the skin long; then work the size as incisions, and depart beautifully the artery from the cloths, so long as it is discovered; then put under it a needle, and make it pierce until the other side, and restrain the artery with a double thread in II lengths, according to what I have taught you in the extraction of the II arteries which are in temples; then point the place that is between the II links of a trocar as long as the blood that is there, and be relieved the abscess; then administer the cure that engenders bowe, so long as the thread hangs; then cure those of ointment coming to those, until it is healed; and if the abscess is for the size of the vein, then it behoove you to hold in your hand what you can of the abscess to all the skin, then put the needle under the place that you hold in your hand, and make it pierce, and there be the double thread, so that you draw it from the other side; then tie the abscess, as I have told you, or thread of one of II parts as II heads of the thread; and if you doubt that the threads are not issued, then put another needle to all the thread under all the abscess to the incision of the first needle, and restrain the threads in IIII lengths; then cut the abscess so long as the superfluities are issuing, then cut the superfluity of the skin and leave what is tied; then put on top the cloth moistened in wine and oil, then administer them cures of tents and ointments until it is healed.
des apostemes des ners	of abscesses of the nerves
Ausi com aposteme vienent en l’artere et en la voine, vienent aposteme as ners quant il sont ferut, ou par trop grant travail, et semblans choses.	Also as abscesses come in the artery and in the vein, abscesses come to the nerves when they are injured, or from too much work, and similar things.
Et ceu avient plus sovent as adjutoires et as dois et en toz leus ou il ait jointures, et c’est I grief apostemes, et sa color semble la color dou cors, et est em plusors dispositions sens dolor; et quant on l’estraint forment, si sent li malaides dolor, et n’est mie em parfont dou cors, mais desoz lou keur; et muet bien de toutes pars, et ne va ne avant ne arrier, ne desoz ne desus, et celui qui est en jointures ne covient mie coper par fer: par aventure i vanroit contraction; et cil qui est ou chief ou ou front, fent le cuir au spatumile.	And this happens more often to shoulders and hips and in all the places where there are joints, and it is a grief abscesses, and its color seems the color of the body, and it is in many dispositions without pain; and when one constrains it, the patient feels pain, and is not quite in accordance with the body, but below the heart; and moves well in all directions, and does not go forward or backward, neither down nor up, and the one that is in the joints should not be covered with iron: lest there may be contraction; and the one who is on the head or on the forehead, makes the skin to the spatula.
Se li apostemes est petis, si le tien a unes tenailles, et le cope en sa racine; et s’il est grans, si le sospent a l’oncine, et l’escorche, puis l’oste et assemble la plaie a la costure, et lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	If the abscess is small, then hold it with tweezers and cut it at its root; and if it is large, then suspend it with a bandage, and scrape it, then remove the pus and assemble the wound with sutures, and treat it until it is healed. 
des grosses boces pendans	of great boils hanging
Aucune fois avient en ventres et ne mie autre part thelul, et est une maladie qui est apelee «funge» par la semblance d’aus, et est li racine subtilz, et li chiez gros; et en i a de petis et de mout grans; et je vis I home qui en avoit II ou ventre qui estoient plus semblans a funges que ai autre chose, et n’i avoit point de difference, et estoient blanc, et avoient menue racine, et estoient jai fendut, et en corroit adés moistor.	Sometimes it occurs in the belly and nowhere else; and is a disease which is called «fungus» because of its resemblance to mushrooms, and are the roots subtle, and the head large; and there are some small and very large; and I saw the man who had two in his belly which were more like mushrooms than anything else, and there was no difference, and they were white, and had fine roots, and they were slightly split, and moisture flowed out of them.  
Je les copai et trovai en l’un XVIII onces pesant, et en l’autre VI З., et li ovraiges en l’incision si est que tu regardes se li malaides est moistes, et li color de l’artelul est blainche et moiste et de subtil racine; si le cope au spatumile large, et soient en ta presence li cautere au feu.	I cut them and found in one XVIII ounces weighing, and in the other VI З., and the work in incision so that you look if the patient is moist, and the color of the artery is pale and moist and of subtle root; if the cut to the spatula wide, and be in your presence the cautery to the fire. 
Car au taillier vient maintes fois trop grans decorremens de sanc, et se li sans te vaint, si te haste donques dou cauterizer; et se tu vois le malaide espoanteit et paourous de l’incision dou fer, si prent I fil de plonc bien fait, et en lie l’artelul si com nos avons dit, et le laisse II jors; et puis le restraint, et ne cesser d’estraindre lou fil de plonc tant qu’il cope l’artelul, et chiece par lui sens travail; et se les racines sont grosses, si a paour au coper meismement por le ventre, mais tu em pues bien coper la moitiet, puis le cauterize qu’il ne reviegne; puis cure la plaie, et garde que tu ne coper le thelul qui est de fuxe color et de povre sens et de lait regart.	For at the waist often come great hemorrhages and if the blood does not stop quickly then hasten to cauterize; and if you see the patient frightened and afraid of the incision of iron, take a thread of flax well made, and tie it in the artery as we have said, and let it remain for days; and then restrain it, and do not cease restraining the thread of flax until it cuts off the artery, and comes to an end by itself without working; and if the roots are large, fear to cut even for the belly, but you may well cut half, then cauterize that it does not return; then cure the wound, and keep that you do not cut the thread which is of pale color and poor sense and of milk secretion. 
Car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, et je venrai a la cure de chancre ci aprés.	For it is a boil, inflamed, and I shall come to its treatment later on.
quant li boude ist fuer	When the blister has become full
Se li apparance de la boude vient par cautere de plaie ou de fendure de syfac, et est sus le ventre et en ist aucuns des bouez, si com il avient en autres routures, ou de sanc qui cort de voines ou d’arteres selonc ceu qui est devant, ou de ventositeit; et se c’est par la routure dou syfac et par l’issue dou bouel, si est li color de l’aposteme semblans a la color dou cors, et est legiere chose sens dolor, et apert de diverse issue.	If the appearance of the boil comes from cautery of a wound or cut of the flesh, and is on the belly and in some cases of the boils, as they happen in other ruptures, or of blood that flows from veins or arteries according to what is before, or of wind; and if it is through the rupture of the flesh and by the issue of the boil, then the color of the abscess seems like the color of the body, and it is a light thing without pain, and open of diverse exit.  
Et se c’est por l’issue de l’intestine, adonques est il plus divers, et quant on le presse a ses dois si se repont, et puis revient, et par aventure si est sarrez, et agrandist mout a l’entree dou bain et por fort travail.	And if it is for the issue of the intestine, then it is more diverse, and when one presses it at its ends it rises, and then returns, and perhaps it is scarred, and enlarged much at the entrance of the bath and for hard work.
Et se c’est por moistor, c’est legiere chose, et apert bien quant tu le presses a ta main, ne ne constraint mie; et se c’est por sanc, si apert par ces signes li apostemes gros et dur, et est fichiez selonc une quantiteit; et se c’est por ventositeit, si est souef au tochier, et li ovraiges si est que tu regarde se li apparance est por le sanc de l’artere, ou de la voine, ou ventositeit.	And if it is for moisture, it is a light thing, and open well when you press it with your hand, nor constrain it at all; and if it is for blood, then it opens by these signs the abscesses large and hard, and are fixed according to a quantity; and if it is for windiness, it is soft to the touch, and the work is that you look whether its appearance is for the blood of the artery, or of the vein, or windiness. 
Si covient que tu laisses la cure.	So it is proper that you leave the care. 
Car il en a doutance et paor, si com je t’ai dit ou chapistre des apostemes, por l’artere et por la voine.	For there is doubt and fear in it, as I have told you in this chapter of abscesses, for the artery and for the vein.  
Et se li apparance est por l’intestine ou lou boueil, si covient que tu comandes au malaide qu’il teigne son alaine, et soit estendus tout drois, puis seigne d’enche tout entor la boude; puis le comande a gesir sovin entre tes mains, puis va entor le leu que tu as signiet a tout le spatumile, puis estent la moitiet de l’aposteme au desus a tout le grant uncine; puis le lie entor d’un fil fort, ou d’une corde de fort soie fermement, et soit li nous dou liien assolz; puis oevre la moitiet de l’aposteme estendut sus le liien, et i boute ton doit indice, et quier l’intestine; se tu le trueves pris dou liien, si le deslie, et boute l’intestine au defuer dou ventre; et se tu trueves le boueil, si le prent a l’oncine, et en cope la superfluiteit; et se li artere te fait contraire, ou li voine, si vai belement entor, puis revien a ton ovraige et pren II aguilles, et i boute II fors filz, et boute les II aguilles entor ceu que tu as fait en crois que tu feis percier; puis estrain l’aposteme en IIII leus sus les aguilles, et se tu vues, oste les aguilles, et laisse lou leu tant qu’il porrisse, et chiece li char morte par soi; ou tu la cope quant elle iert subtiliie et porrie, puis le cure de ceu qu’il covient, et cheve l’aposteme si com nos avons dit; et estrai le sanc ou la moistor que tu trueves, puis cure le leu de ceu qu’il couvient, et soude le leu.	And if the appearance is for the intestine or the bowel, then it befits that you command the patient to hold his arm, and let it be stretched straight, then sign all around the belly; then command him to seize firmly between your hands, then go around the place that you have signified to the whole spatula, then extend half of the abscess above to the entire great incision; then tie it around with a strong thread, or a cord of strong silk firmly, and let the wound be bound by the linen; then operate the half of the abscess extended on the linen, and put your index finger in, and seek the intestine; if you find it caught in the linen, then untie it, and put the intestine outside of the belly; and if you find the bowel, then take it at the incision, and cut away the superfluity; and if the artery makes it contrary to you, or the vein, then go beautifully around, then return to your work and take II needles, and put II through threads, and put the II needles around that which you have made in a cross as you make it perceive; then strain the abscess in IIII places on the needles, and if you see it, remove the needles, and leave the place as long as it will rot, and let the dead flesh decay by itself; or you cut it when it is subtle and rotten, then cure it of what is necessary, and heal the abscess as we have said; and drain the blood or moisture that you find, then cure the place of what is necessary, and suture the place.
dou chancre	Of the ulcer
Nos avons dit en la division les semblances de chancre, et coment on i doit ovrer par medicines, et coment on doit eschuer la cure de fer; et disons le chancre enjanreit en la marris, et grant cautele a en la cure, et dirent li ancien que quant chancres est en leu ou on le puet raier si com chancre qui est em mameles, et en la cuixe, et en semblans leus, et le doit tout oster quant il est en l’encomencement; et quant il est grans et anciens, si ne covient mie que tu l’aproches, car je n’en poi onques nul saner; ne nulz n’en sana onques devant moi.	We have said in the division the likenesses of an ulcer, and how one must work on it by medicines, and how one must avoid the cure of iron; and let us say that the ulcer is generated in the marshes, and great caution should be exercised in its cure, and the ancients said that when a chancre is in a place where one can scrape it away like a chancre that is in the armpits, and in the groin, and similar places, and it must all be removed when it is at the beginning; and when it is large and old, then it does not behoove you to approach it, for I have never been able to heal any of them; nor has anyone ever healed any before me.
Et li ovraiges, quant il est en leu ou on le puet oster, si com nos avons dit, est que tu purge aucune fois le malaide de cole noire; puis le fai sainier s’il ait manifeste repletion, puis afaite le malaide .i. boin leu por faire l’ovraige; puis giete tes oncines ou chancre, et le cheve de toutes pars, et l’oste de toutes pars sens rien laissier; et laisse corre le sanc tout fuer, et espreint bien le leu a ta main ou a aucune chose, et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire de l’incision de l’artere ou de la voine, si le cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the work, when it is in a place where one can remove it, as we have said, is that you purge the patient once of black bile; then let him bleed if there is manifest repletion, then make the patient's  good place to perform the work; then throw your curette or ulcer, and shave it on all sides, and ossify it on all sides without leaving anything; and allow the blood to flow out completely, and press well on the place with your hand or any thing, and if the bleeding from the incision of the artery or vein is against you, then cauterize it as long as the blood is extinguished; then cure it with another cure until it is healed.
de ydropisie	of dropsy
Nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’idropisie, et en queil maniere li assemblee de l’aigue est faite, et les signes de chescune semblance, et la cure qui est faite par medicines, et cele qui est curee par fer: si est eclites soulement; et ne doit on touchier de fer en ces II semblances: c’est a savoir, tympanites et yposarche, car c’est mortelz chose; donques quant tu medicines ceste semblance de ydropisie qui est apelee «eclites» de medicines, et li cure ne profite, si regarde se li malaides est foibles, ou s’il ait autre maladie que ydropisie, si com toust et solution de ventre et semblans choses; si n’i touchier de fer, car il i a doutance; et se tu vois le malaide de fort vertut, et il n’a autre maladie que ydropisie soulement, et il n’est mie trop jones ne trop vielz, si dois ensi ovrer: lieve le malaide droit sus tes mains, et li ministres presse le ventre em boutant l’aigue a la plus basse partie dou pis, puis pren le spatumile espinous selonc ceste forme:	We have just said in the division the likenesses of dropsy, and in what manner the assembly of water is made, and the signs of each likeness, and the cure which is made by medicines, and that which is cured by iron; so it is only lit; and one should not touch iron in these two likenesses: that is to say, tympanites and hydrops arche, because it is a mortal thing; therefore when you medicate this likeness of dropsy which is called "lit" by medicines, and the cure does not profit, see if the patient is weak, or if he has another illness besides dropsy, such as cough and solution of the belly and similar things; if one does not touch iron, because there is doubt; and if you see the patient of strong virtue, and he has no other illness besides dropsy alone, and he is neither too young nor too old, then you must work thus: lift the patient straight up on your hands, and the ministers press the belly pushing the water to the lowest part under the ribs, then take the spinal spatula according to this form: 
Et soit trenchans de II pars.	And let it be trenchant of the two parts. 
a pointe, et toutevoie ne soit mie si entrans qu’il puist venir jusc’a l’intestine quant on le fiche ens, et ne le puist blecier; puis regarde se li ydropisie est enjanree devers les intestines: si covient que tu fendes ensus de la boude III dois droit desoz sus lou poignil; et se li ydropisie est por la maladie dou foie, si soit ta fendure au senestre de la boude III dois; et se c’est por la miuce, si soit a destre, et ne covient mie que li malaides gise sus la fendure que les superfluitez ne corrent a celui foible leu; puis perce tout le cuir a l’estrument, et le boute, et lieve ta main a tout le spatumile entre le cuir et le syfac ausi com en escorchant a la quantiteit d’une ungle ou enqui entor; puis perce lou syfac tant que li spatumile viegne au leu vuit, et c’est li leus de l’aigue, puis le trai fuer, et i boute cest estrument de coi ci est li forme:	At the point, and yet do not go in so far that it can come to the intestine when you put it in, and do not pierce it; then look if the dropsy is near the intestines: if it should be, cut into it above the belly III two right below the nipple; and if the dropsy is because of the liver disease, then make your incision on the left side of the belly III two; and if it is because of the spleen, then on the right, and do not let the patient lie on the incision so that the superfluities run to that weak place; then pierce all the skin with the instrument, and put it in, and lift your hand throughout the spatula between the skin and the fascia as much as when you are scraping a quantity of an ungle or more; then pierce the fascia until the spatula comes to the place eight, and this is the level of the water, then pull the thread out, and put this instrument back from what here is the form:
Et est semblans a une caine d’argent subtil, et est d’arain ou d’archaut legier, et a en la partie desoz I petit pertus; et ou costeit d’une part, III pertus; et II d’autre part, et I d’autre; et est li chiés tailliez si com une penne, et c’est li forme de l’incision dont li escrivains taille la penne:	And it is similar to a silver needle, and is of iron or light bronze, and in the lower part there is one small hole; and on one side there are three holes; and two on the other; and one on the other; and the head is cut like a pen, and this is the form of the incision with which scribes cut the pen.  
au chief desus est li alemele, si que quant li estrumens vient a l’aigue, si dessent maintenant sus l’estrument; vuide la donques la moitiet ou la tierce part, car se tu en vuides plus qu’il ne covient en celle houre, par aventure si muert li malaides por la resolution de son esperit de l’arme, ou il chiet paumez, ou il aproche a la mort; mais en vuide selonc la quantiteit de sa vertut, et selonc ceu que les dispositions de la vertut dou malaide signifient, et ses poulz; puis trai l’estrument et retien l’aigue, et elle est retenue maintenant por le keur qui estoupe le pertus qui est sus le syfac, de coi j’ai parleit, que tu perces selonc ceste maniere; puis rencomence l’estrument l’autre jor, se tu vois le malaide soffrant ceu, et trai de l’aigue une petite quantiteit; fai ce aucun jor, et te garde de foloier tant qu’il ni demore mais c’un poc d’aigue.	At the head above is the alemele, so that when the instrument comes to the point, it descends now on the instrument; empty therefore half or a third part, for if you empty more than is fitting in that hour, perhaps the patient dies for the resolution of his spirit from the weapon, or he falls unconscious, or he approaches death; but empty according to the quantity of his virtue, and according to what the dispositions of the virtue of the patient signify, and his pulses; then treat the instrument and retain the point, and it is retained now by the heart which stops the passage that is on the syfac, because I have spoken, that you pierce in this manner; then begin the instrument the other day, if you see the patient suffering from it, and treat of the point a small quantity; do this any day, and keep yourself from flowing until there remains no more than a bit of point. 
Et se tu doutes sus le malaide, et tu i lais mout d’aigue, si le cure de la sepulture ou sablon chaut, et par mout sueir ou bain et au soleil, et se teigne de boivre; et le cure de medicines desiccatives tant qu’il soit sanez, et cauterize sus l’estomac et sus lou foie et sus l’esplen aprés l’estraction de l’aigue, si com j’ai dit devant.	And if you doubt about the patient, and you let him drink a lot of water, so treat with burial or hot sand, and with much sweat or bath and in the sun, and keep him from drinking; and treat with drying medicines until he is cured, and cauterize on the stomach and on the liver and on the spleen after the extraction of the water, as I have said before. 
de l’estopement de la verge	of the stopping of the penis
Aucune fois naissent enfant qui n’ont point de pertus en la verge, ou li pertus est petis, ou il n’est mie en son leu.	Sometimes children are born who have no opening in their penis, or the opening is small, or it is not in its place. 
Si le covient tantost qu’il n’aist percier a tout I spatumile molt subtil selonc ceste forme:	If this is appropriate then he shall be able to see through the whole spatula very delicately according to this form. 
puis met ou pertus I clo subtil de plonc, et le lie et le tien ensi III jors ou IIII et quant il vuet faire urine, si soit ostez li clos, et faice urine, et puis li remet; et par aventure nen i couvient point, car li urine qui vient fuer ne lou laisse close.	Then put or pierced I the small plug of plank, and tie it and keep it so III days or IIII and when he wants to make urine, be it removed the plug, and do urine, and then put it back; and by adventure he does not need it, because the urine that comes forward does not leave it closed. 
Cil de cui li pertus est petis, si est medicinez dou clo de plonc, si com nos avons dit, si s’eslargera.	He whose wound is small, so is medicated with the cloth of plan, as we have said, and it will widen.  
Cil qui n’ont mie le pertus en lor leu sont bleciet, car aucun naissent qui ont le pertus au chief de la verge, por coi il ne puient pissier avant s’il ne lievent lor verge en haut; et ne pueent enjanrer por ceu que li matiere ne puet venir jusc’a la marris, et c’est une male maladie.	Those who do not have the foreskin in its place are pale because none are born with the foreskin at the head of the penis, so they cannot urinate until they lift their penis up; and cannot ejaculate because the matter cannot come to the urethra, and it is a bad disease. 
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, puies estent le chief de la verge et le cope ausi com la taille d’une penne, si ke li pertus chiece em mileu, si com il covient; et te garde de decorrement de sanc qui i vient maintes fois, et s’il avient, si l’estainche de ceu qui estainche sanc, et cure la plaie tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the manner of the work is that the patient lies often on his back, and the head of the penis and the scrotum are extended as long as a feather, so that the hole falls in the middle, as it should; and keep watch for blood loss which often comes, and if it happens, let the stanch who stanches blood do so, and cure the wound until it is healed.
des pustules de la verge	of the pimples of the penis
Maintes fois vienent cist albathe en la verge, et est une apparance de char laide; et en i a malignes et non malignes; si covient que tu les preignes a .i. oncine subtil, et les cope et munde toutes, puis met sus coton moilliet en oignement egiptien; puis le cure d’oignement diafinicon tant qu’il soit sanez.	Many times these blemishes come on the penis, and is an appearance of ugly flesh; and there are malignant and non-malignant ones; so it is necessary that you prick them with i. one fine needle, and scrape and clean all, then put cotton moistened in Egyptian ointment; then cure with diafinicon ointment until it is healed.
Et se li albathe est maligne, de pute color et depuant, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere.	And if the abscess is malignant, of bad color and pus-filled, then it is necessary that you bring a cautery to it. 
Quant tu l’as copeit, et se li albathe est en som la verge, et en ait partie dedens la peil et partie defuer, si covient que tu oste l’albathe qui est dedens premier; et quant il est soudez, si le cure defuer.	When you have captured it, and if the splint is in some the staff, and has part inside the skin and part outside, then it behoves that you remove the splint that is inside first; and when it is healed, then care for the outside. 
Car quant tu le cures ensamble, si n’est mie asseurez li chiez de la verge qu’il ne soit perciez, et vient noiror et corruption en son la verge et ou coion; si covient chever tout ceu qui est noir et corrumput, puis lie sus l’emplaustre de miel et de farine qui soit fait d’escorce de poumes grenates et de veces, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	For when you treat it together, if the head of the shaft is not made sure that it is pierced, and blackening and corruption come in its shaft and where the opening; so it befits to shear everything that is black and corrupted, then put on top the plaster of honey and flour which is made of bark of wild quince and vines, then treat it with other dressings until it is healed. 
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si amenistre le cautere lunaire selonc ceste forme:	And if bleeding occurs, administer the lunar cautery according to this form: 
Li cauteres si aide as II dispositions ensamble: c’est asavoir, au decorrement de sanc, et a la corruption; et se li chiés de la verge est corrumpus et retrais, si covient que tu boutes ou conduit de la verge une cainne de plonc, et pisse li malaides parmi; et quant li pelz iert aerse au chief de la verge qui avient a ces qui n’ont mie esteit circoncis, ou il avient por plaie ou por aposteme, si covient donques que tu l’escorches a I estrument cheveit, tant que li liiens soit desliiez, et soit delivrez li chiez de la verge de toutes pars; et se c’est grief chose de deviser ceu, si covient que tu l’escorches a I spatumile aucun poc dou chief de la verge et de la peil; puis dessevre belement entre II, et i met I subtil drapeil de lin moilliet an aigue froide, qu’il n’aerse derechief.	The cautery helps with two things: that is to say, for drawing blood and for corruption; and if the head of the penis is corrupted and retracted, it is necessary that you put or conduct on the penis a cane of lead, and piss the patient among; and when the skin is raised at the head of the penis which happens to those who have not been circumcised, or where there is a wound or an abscess, then it is necessary that you scrape it with the instrument called "cheveit" until the ligaments are untied, and the head of the penis is delivered from all sides; and if it is a painful thing to consider this, it is necessary that you scrape it with the spatula any point at the head of the penis and the skin; then separate well between them, and put between them the fine veil of linen moistened in cold water so that it does not raise. 
de la circoncision	of circumcision
Circoncision n’est mie desliemens de continuation si com les autres plaies; toutevoie quant nos faison ceste oevre de nostre volenteit, et proprement as enfans, si est mestier que nos faisiens la millor oevre, et la plus legiere a salut.	Circumcision is not of the healing kind like other wounds; however, when we perform this work by our will and properly on children, it becomes necessary that we do the best work, and the easiest to heal.
Je dis que li ancien ne dirent mie la circoncision de lor enfans, car il n’en usent mie en lor loi, et n’en avons mais que ceu que nos avons aquis par experiment.	I say that the ancients did not speak of circumcision for their children, because they did not practice it in their law, and we have more than what we acquired through experience.
Car j’ai veut la plus grant partie des maistres et des sainors qui faisoient circumcision entor .i. dal, et as forces, et a tout une novacule; si fuioit li keurs car il i a .ij. toiles, et par aventure si cope on celi desus et demore celle desoz.	Because I wanted the most part of the masters and surgeons who did circumcisions near .i. dal, and as forces, and with a whole novacule; so fuioit the keurs because there are .ij. cloths, and perhaps if one cuts the above and leaves the below.
Or la recovient coper, et est li dolor double, et a la mundification qui est dou dal n’est mie asseuree li pointe dou membre; et a la mundification de l’ungle par aventure eschaipe li fer, et corront l’uevre, et maintes fois naissent ensi qu’il n’ont mestier de mundification et je l’ai veut.	Or it is convenient to cut, and the pain is doubled, and to the purification which is due dal it is not assured the point of the member; and to the purification of the angle perhaps the iron escapes, and runs the work, and many times they are born as if they do not need purification and I have wanted.
De la mondification qui est faite as forces a tout le liien de fil ai je troveit la bonteit de l’experiment, car les forces taillent justement ausi bien desus com desoz.	Of the purification which is done with force to all the line of thread I have found the goodness of the experiment, because the forces cut justly as well above as below.
Car quant tu presses ta main, si tailles igalment en I tout soul tens; mais que li filz soit bien estrois entor lou cuir; et soit li maniere dou premier ovraige si est que tu faices penser l’enfant, s’il entent, que tu ne li fais fuer que liier le fil entor la verge tant soulement, et pues le fai esjoir en toutes les manieres que tu pues; puis le fai ester entre tes mains tout droit, et repont les forces entre tes mains ou desoz tes piez que li enfes ne les voie, ne aucun des estrumens; puis boute ta main a la verge et souffle ou keur, et la trai en haut tant que li chiés de la verge soit ens; puis la mundifie bien de l’ordure qui i est assemblee, puis lie le leu signiet d’un fil double, puis la lie desoz I poc a I autre liien; et la tien as II dois par la seconde lieeure au pouchet et au doit indice, et cope entre les II liiens, puis lieve le keur desus hastanment et trai le chief de la verge; puis laisse corre le sanc poc et poc, car c’est li muedres; et met poudre sus et sus la poudre I drapeil glueit d’un moieuf d’uef cuit destempreit d’aigue rose, confit avec oile roset boin et fres, et lou laisse sus jusc’a l’autre jor, et le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	For when you press your hand, make it even in I all stretch; but that the thread be well wrapped around the skin; and let the manner of the first work be such that you make the child think, if he understands, that you are only tying the thread around the phallus just so, and then let him jump around in all the ways he can; then make him lie between your hands straight, and support the forces between your hands or under your feet that the child does not see them, nor any of the tools; then put your hand to the phallus and blow or heart, and pull it up until the head of the phallus is in; then clean it well of the dirt that is assembled there, then tie the place sign with a double thread, then tie it below I pock at the other lien; and hold it as II two by the second lieure to the pouch and to the index finger, and cut between the II liens, then raise the heart upwards gently and pull the head of the phallus; then let the blood flow drop by drop, for that is the cure; and put powder on and on top of the powder I drape it with a cloth of an egg cooked destempreit d’aigue rose, mixed with good and fresh rose oil, and let it lie there until the next day, and cure him from other cure until he is healthy.  
Li forme des forces a la mundification si est ceste: li dui chiés soient tenves et soient trenchans, et soient li chiés ausi grant com li mainche igalment:	The form of the forces at the fortification is this: the two shoulders be held and be sharp, and the shoulders also as big as the hands equally.
li error de la mundification si est quant li keurs dedens fuit a l’incision; donques il covient que tu l’estendes a ton ungle, ainsois que li leus faice aposteme; et le cope igalment, et se tu ne lou pues tenir a ton ungle, si le tien as tenailles, et puis le cope.	The error of the fortification is when the kernels inside are at the incision; therefore it behooves you to extend it to your finger, so that the lesions make an abscess; and cut equally, and if you cannot hold it with your finger, then take pliers, and then cut.
Et s’il trespassent .iij. jors, et ceu qui est desoz la verge est enflez, si le laisse tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et l’escorche legierement; si le cope si com tu pues mues, et te garde de la partie de la verge, ce ne li nuira niant.	And if they pierce .iij. days, and that which is below the shaft is swollen, leave it until the abscess heals, and gently scrape it; then cut it as much as you can move, and guard yourself from the part of the shaft, it will do it no harm.
Cure donques le leu de choses soudans plaie de poudre, que nos avons dit ou traitier des poudres, et s’on cope dou keur outre mesure, et il va au desus, si ne nuira point; cure le donques, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Cure therefore the place of things suddenly wound with powder, which we have said or treated of powders, and if you cut beyond measure the kernel, and it goes upwards, it will do no harm; cure therefore it, as we have said, until it is healed.
dou retenement de l’urine	Retention of urine
Li retenue de l’urine si est d’opilation de piere, ou de sanc congeleit, ou de bowe, ou de char nee, ou de semblans choses, que nos avons dit en la division; et se li urine n’est desliie , et tu vois estre la retenue por la piere qui est jai ou col de la vessie, si covient que li malaides soit corbés sus ses genoulz; et li soient mis li piez sor le dos, et estende son ventre de la partie desus lou dos, et restraigne li malaides s’alainne tant com il puet; et adonques est constrains li colz de la vessie a l’expression de la piere au desus, por coi li urine est desliie e; et s’elle ne vient, si com nos avons dit, et li malaides sent grant dolor, si covient que tu i aministres extraction a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «siringue», de coi ci est li forme: et soit d’argent subtilz legiere chevee, si com li penne d’un oiseil; et soit li caine d’une palme de lonc et demie, et soit subtilz au chief.	The retention of urine is due to the stone in the bladder or blood congealed, or bowel, or new flesh, or similar things, that we have said in the division; and if the urine is not released, and you see the retention because of the stone which is at the root or neck of the bladder, then it is necessary that the patient be bent on his knees; and the feet should be placed on the back, and extend the belly from above the back, and restrain the patient's legs as much as he can; and then the neck of the bladder is constrained to the expression of the stone upwards, so that the urine is released; and if it does not come, as we have said, and the patient feels great pain, then it is necessary that you administer extraction with all the instrument which is called "syringe", of which this is the form: and be of fine silver light capped, like the feather of a bird; and let the shaft be half a palm long, and be fine at the tip. 
Et li maniere de l’issue de l’urine si est que tu pren I fil double, et lie au chief I poc de laine ou de couton, et boute le chief dou fil dedens la siringue; et cope la superfluiteit de la lainne et le boute jusc’au chief de la siringue, puis oint la siringue d’oile ou de burre et d’aubin d’uef, et fai seoir le malaide sus I siege, et li arose la vessie et la verge d’oile moiste et d’oile d’olive et d’aigue tede; puis met legierement la siringue en la verge, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la verge, puis double la verge desus devers la boude; puis boute la siringue avant jusc’a la vessie, et la sente li malaides venir jusc’a la chose vuide, et ceu n’est mie fait selonc cest ordre fuer que por ceu que li conduis ou elle vait est tors; puis estent le fil a tout la laine poc et poc, et li urine en suit la laine, puis l’estrai fuer, et fai corre l’urine; et rencomence la siringue tant que li vessie soit vuidie, et soit aligiez li malaides.	And the manner of the issue of urine is that you take the double thread and tie it to the head of the wool or cotton piece, and put the head of the thread inside the syringe; and cut the superfluity of the wool and put it up to the head of the syringe, then anoint the syringe with oil or butter and rue of egg, and make the patient sit on the seat, and raise the bladder and penis with moist oil and olive oil and tepid water; then gently insert the syringe into the penis, until it reaches the root of the penis, then double the penis from above towards the bud; then push the syringe forward until it reaches the bladder, and let the patient feel it come to the empty thing, and this is not done according to this order for that which leads or where it goes is twisted; then hold the thread at all the wool piece and piece, and the urine follows the wool, then extract it, and make correct the urine; and restart the syringe until the bladder is emptied, and the patient is aligned. 
des maladies de la vessie	of the diseases of the bladder
Quant escorcheures ou sanc vient en la vessie, ou porriture i est assemblee, et tu i vues distiller aigues et medicines, si fai a tout l’estrument qui est apellé «clepsedre», et c’est li forme:	When sores or blood comes in the bladder, or there is assembled rotting, and you see it distilling sharp waters and medicines, so do to all the instrument which is called "clepsedre", and that is the form:
Elle est close, et si a III pertus: II d’une part, et I d’autre, si com tu vois; et li leus chevez par coi li medicine cort soit telz qu’il estoupe bien la verge sens adition, si c’on em puisse traire la moistor, et bouter quant mestier est; et quant tu vues giter tes medicines en la vessie, met le chief dou keusteur en la moistor, et trai au traiant qui est ens; si trairas la moistor au kesteur, et puis reboute fort le traiant ens; si entrera li moistors ens, et venra a la vessie maintenant, si que li malaides la sentira; et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil dont on clisterize la vessie: si est ci:	It is closed, and if it has III openings: II on one side, and I on the other, as you see; and the leaus (cheves) because of which the medicine should be such that it well stops the rod without addition, so if one can drain the moisture, and push when necessary; and when you see fit to put your medicines in the bladder, put the chief of the speculum in the moisture, and draw with the syringe that is inside; so draw the moisture to the speculum, and then firmly replace the syringe inside; so will the moisture enter inside, and come to the bladder now, so that the patient feels it; and this is the form of the subtle enema by which one enemas the bladder: so it is here.
Et est d’argent ou d’archaut, et est li chiés plus haut; et desoz a I sein ou li liiens chiet; puis pren une vessie de mouton et i met la moistor dont tu vues clisterizer la vessie, puis la lie entre les II seins forment d’un boin fil double, et chaufe I poc celle moistor sus le feu; puis boute le chief dou clistere en la verge, puis estrain ta main sus la vessie a tout la moistor avenanment, tant que li malaides sente que celle moistor est jai venue a la vessie; et se tu n’as la vessie, si pren une piece de parchemin, et en fai I cercle, et le perce rondement entor; puis boute I fil fort en ces pertus, puis assemble le cercle si com on assemble I dal, et met dedens ceu que tu vues d’oile et de moistor et d’aigue, et le lie en l’estrument; et fai si com tu as fait de la vessie, de presser a ta main tant que li moistor veigne a la vessie.	And it is of silver or of copper, and the head is higher; and below to the chest where the ligaments fall; then take a sheep's bladder and put in the moisture which you see to enema the bladder, then tie it between the two breasts with a good strong double thread, and heat the point of the enema on the fire; then insert the tip of the enema into the anus, then strain your hand on the bladder throughout the entire administration of the moisture, until the patient feels that the moisture has reached the bladder; and if you don't have the bladder, then take a piece of parchment, and make it in a circle, and pierce it roundly all around; then put a strong thread into these holes, then assemble the circle as one assembles a dial, and put inside that which you see of oil and moisture and water, and tie it in the instrument; and do as you have done with the bladder, pressing with your hand until the moisture comes to the bladder. 
de la piere	of the stone
Nos avons jai dit en la division les manieres de piere, et l’estraction ensamble medicines; et ai dit la difference entre la piere enjanree as rains, et toz les signes, et en queil piere on doit ovrer de taille; et en la vessie, et en la verge; et je le vos dirai apertement et briément.	We have said in the division the manners of stone, and the extraction together with medicines; and I have said the difference between the stone engendered as rains, and all the signs, and in what stone one must work of size; and in the bladder, and in the penis; and I will tell you it openly and briefly.
Je dis que li piere qui est enjanree en la vessie si avient plus sovent as enfans, et c’est signe que li aigue saut de la vessie semblans a aigue en sa subtiliteit; et i apert harene, et graite li malaides sa verge, et li pent maintes fois, et puis enroidist; et a mout de ces saut li fondemens; et est legiere li sanation des enfans jusqu’il ont .iiij. ans, et est mout grief en viellars, et est as jones moiene, a ces qui sont entre jonesce et viellece; et est li cure plus legiere de ces qui ont la piere grans, que de ces qui l’ont petite.	I say that the stone which is engendered in the bladder often happens to children, and it is a sign that the water jumps from the bladder seeming like water in its subtlety; and it appears hareng, and hardens the patient's penis, and he can many times, and then urinates; and with many of these jumps the foundations are formed; and it is light the healing of children until they have 4 years, and it is very grievous in old men, and it is as the middle for those who are between childhood and old age; and the cure is lighter from those who have the large stone, than from those who have the small one.
Et quant nos venons a la cure, si couvient premier mundifier le malaide per clistere, por traire tout le fiens qui est as intestines.	And when we come to the cure, it is necessary first to cleanse the patient by enema, to draw out all the phlegm that is in the intestines. 
Car il encombre aucune fois a querir la piere.	For it often hampers seeking out the stone.  
Puis prenez le malaide par les piez, et lou deboutez et movez au desoz, si que li piere dessende au parfont de la vessie, et saille aucune fois dou leu haut; puis le fai seoir entre tes mains appareilliet, et ses mains soient desoz ses cuisses, si que li vessie soit toute declinans aval; puis la quier et la touche dedens; se tu sens la piere en l’espaice, si te haste maintenant de taillier sus la piere.	Then take the patient by the feet, and push them out and move them downward, so that the stone descends to the opening of the bladder, and sometimes comes out from its high place; then make him sit between your hands properly arranged, and his hands be below his thighs, so that the bladder is entirely inclined downward; then feel and touch inside; if you feel the stone in the space, then haste now to cut above the stone. 
Et s’elle ne chiet au touchier dou tout, si moille ton doi indice d’oile de la main senestre, se li malaides est enfes, ou ton doi moien, se li malaides est jovencelz acomplis; et le boute en son fondement, et quier la piere, et quant tu la sens a ton doi, si l’amoine au col de la vessie; puis presse sus a ton doi, et la boute au defuer lai ou tu vues taillier.	And if it does not fall to the touch of all, moisten your index finger with oil from the left hand, if the patient is a child, or your middle finger, if the patient is a young man; and put it in its foundation, and seek the stone, and when you feel it with your finger, bring it to the neck of the bladder; then press upon it with your finger, and put it out on the outside where you see fit to cut. 
Et comande au ministre qu’il presse la vessie a sa main, et li comande qu’il estende a sa main destre les coions en haut, et a sa main senestre oste le cuir qui est desoz les coions en la partie ou on fait la taille; puis i boute le spatumile copant, de coi ce est li forme:	And command the minister that he presses the bladder with his hand, and command him to extend with his right hand the testicles upward, and with his left hand remove the skin which is below the testicles in the part where one makes the incision; then put the spatula cutting, for this is its form:
Et fent entre ceu qui est entre les coions et le fondement, ne mie em mileu mais au costeit de la naige senestre; et soit drois sus la piere, et tes dois soit adés ou fondement, et soit li taille dou traver si qu’ele soit large par defuer, et dedens estroite, selonc la quantiteit de la piere, ne mie trop grans; par aventure la presse si li dois qui est ou fondement, qu’elle saut fuer sens travail; et saiches qu’il i a teil piere ou il a angles, et marges: si est griés a issir; et si a teil qui est souez, semblans a une glant, et reonde, dont li issue est legiere.	And make between that which is between the hips and the foundation, not in the middle but at the side of the left hip; and be straight on top of the stone, and your two sides should be wide or foundation, and let the tailpiece be so wide as for it to be wide outside, and inside narrow, according to the quantity of the stone, not too large; by chance the press those who are at or foundation, that she may jump out without work; and know that there is such a stone where it has angles, and margins: if it is grated to issue; and if there is one that is smooth, resembling a gland, and round, whose outlet is light.  
A celi donques ou il a angles et marge, fai la taille plus grant; et s’elle ne saut, si covient que tu estraignes sus as tenailles qui sont ausi com une lime au chief, por mues estraindre la piere si qu’elle n’eschaipe; ou tu boute desoz li I estrument subtil corbé au chief; et se tu ne la pues engignier ensi, si eslarge I poc lou pertus, et se li sans decort, si l’estrainche de vitriole; et s’il i a plus d’une piere, si boute premier la plus grant au col de la vessie, puis cope sus, puis le trai fuer, et les petites aprés s’il en i a plusors.	To him then where there are angles and margins, make the cut larger; and if it does not come out, it is necessary that you pull up with pliers which are also like a file at the head, so as to force the stone out so that it does not escape; or you put underneath the subtle instrument curved at the head; and if you cannot manage it this way, then widen the hole of the opening, and if it is hard, restrain it with vitriol; and if there are more than one stone, first put in the largest at the neck of the bladder, then cut up, then pull out the larger, and after that the smaller ones if there are more.
Et s’elle est mout grans, si la covient soier, et faire plus grant plaie.	And if it is very large, then it should be treated, and a larger wound made. 
Car II choses avienent au malaide: ou il muert, ou li urine vient adés par lai que li leus ne puet souder; mais toutevoie t’efforce dou traire, ou dou debrisier as tenailles, tant que tu la traies par pieces; et quant tu as acomplit ton oevre, si emple la plaie d’encens et d’aloe et de sanc de dragon, et l’estraint, et met par sus I drapeil moilliet en oile et en vin, ou en oile et en aigue rose et aigue froide, por apaisier l’aposteme chaut; puis resovine le malaide sus son col, et ne desliier lou lien jusc’au tier jor.	For two things happen to the patient: either he dies, or the urine comes back through where the urethra cannot close; but nonetheless, you force to drain it, or to tear it with tweezers, until you pull it in pieces; and when you have completed your work, apply the wound of incense and aloe and dragon's blood, and restrain it, and put on top the cloth moistened in oil and wine, or in rose water and cold water, to appease the hot abscess; then bind the patient on his neck, and do not untie the bandage until the third day. 
Et quant tu le desliies, si arose mout bien lou leu d’oile et d’aigue, puis le cure d’oignement dyafinicon et d’oignement basilicon, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you loosen it, moisten the place well with oil and water, then treat it with diaphania ointment and basilicon ointment, until it is healed.
Et se apostemes chaus vient en la plaie et corrosions, et congelemens de sanc en la vessie, et soit par ceu retenue li urine, qui est conue en teil maniere que sans saut avec l’urine: boutes donques ton doi en la plaie, et estrai celui sanc, car s’il i remaint, si corront la vessie, et la porrit; puis leve la plaie d’aigue et d’aisil et de seil, et li aide en toutes les manieres que tu seis, tant qu’il soit sanez; et covient que toutes les oures que tu le cures, que tu li lie les II cuisses, et assemble les medicines sus le leu.	And if an abscess comes in the wound and corrosions, and congealing of blood in the bladder, and by this is retained the urine, which is known in such manner that without jumping with the urine: then you do in the wound, and extract that blood, for if it remains there, it will corrupt the bladder, and burn it; then lift the wound of water and of ash and of silk, and help him in all the ways that you know, until it is healed; and it is necessary that all the hours that you cure him, that you bind his two thighs, and assemble the medicines on the spot. 
Et se li piere est petite, et ele est ou conduit de la verge, et fichie ens, et li urine ne puet issir; si le cure de ceu que je dis ainsois, que tu lou tailles maintes fois, est on escusez de la taille per ceste cure.	And if the stone is small, and it is where the urethra leads, and it is stuck there, and the urine cannot pass; so the cure of those that I say thus, that you cut it many times, is excused from the cutting by this cure. 
Je ai ja ce proveit ensi.	I have already proven this thus.  
Pren .i. foret de fer selonc ceste forme et soit a .iij. angles fichiees en .i. tison:	Take one piece of iron according to this form and have it made with three angles on one stick:
puis pren I fil et lou lie entor la verge desoz la piere, si qu’ele ne puist venir arrier en la vessie; puis boute le foret en la verge legierement, tant qu’il viegne a la piere; et torne le foret a ta main en la piere poc et poc, tant que tu puisses percier la piere d’autre part; si venra tantost li urine, puis presse ta main sus ceu qui est demorez de la piere qui est dedens la verge.	Then take a thread and tie it around the rod below the stone, so that it cannot come back into the bladder; then push the forest into the rod gently, until it reaches the stone; and turn the forest with your hand in the stone poke and poke, as long as you can feel the stone on the other side; soon will come the urine, then press your hand upon what remains of the stone which is within the rod. 
Si est tantost brisie, et saut fuer avec l’urine, et est garis li malaides; et se tu ne pues ce faire por aucune chose qui le deffent, si lie I fil desoz la piere et I autre desus, puis fent la verge endroit la piere entre les II liiens, puis l’estrai fuer, et deslie lou liien, et mundifie lou sanc congeleit qui est en la plaie; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	If it is immediately broken, and jump out with the urine, and the patient heals; and if you cannot do this for any reason that prevents it, then tie I thread under the stone and the other above, then making the rod right on top of the stone between the two threads, then extract it, and untie the thread, and purify the frozen blood which is in the wound; and cure it until it is healed. 
de la piere des femmes	of the women’s stones
Poc avient que piere soit enjanree en femmes, et s’il avient aucune fois, si est li cure grief, et est deffendut por .iij. choses: l’une est que per aventure li femme est vierge; et li seconde est c’on ne puet trover femme bien saichant qui se descuevre as mires, meismement quant elle est caste.	It happens that stones are engendered in women, and if it happens at any time, it is the grief of cure, and it is forbidden for three things: one is that perhaps the woman is a virgin; and the second is that one cannot find a woman well knowing who exposes herself to the mires, especially when she is chaste.
Et li tierce maniere si est que par aventure on ne puet trover femme bien saichant en cest art de mains; et li quarte maniere si est que li piere de la femme si est plus em parfont que li piere de l’ome, por coi il i couvient faire plus parfonde taille, et grant paour i a. Et se necessitez semont a ceu, si covient que tu preignes une mieresse bien sachant, et a poines la trueve on, et se tu n’en trueves, point si quier I caste mire subtil; et li presente une baile bien saige en la vie des femmes, ou une femme qui saiche une partie de l’art, et li comande qu’ele faice ceu que tu li comandes de l’inquisicion de la piere; et regarde mout bien se li femme est vierge: adonques li covient bouter son doit ou fondement et querir la piere; et s’ele la trueve, si la constraigne desoz son doit, et li recomande qu’elle boute son doit ou con la malaide, et quiere et presse sa main senestre sus la vessie forment.	And the third manner is that by chance one cannot find a woman well knowing in this art of hands; and the fourth manner is that the stone of the woman is more deep than the stone of the man, for which it is necessary to make a deeper incision, and great fear there is. And if necessity demands this, it is necessary that you choose a midwife well knowing, and by force find one, and if you do not find one, do not so much as ask; cast mire subtle; and present her with a wise woman in the life of women, or a woman who knows part of the art, and command her to do what you command her of the investigation of the stone; and look well whether the woman is virgin: then it is necessary to put her loin or foundation and seek the stone; and if she finds it, constrain her below her loin, and recommend that she put her loin or with the patient, and seeks and presses her left hand on the bladder forming. 
S’elle la trueve, si covient qu’elle la mueve de greit en greit des l’entree de la vessie jusque desoz, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la cuisse; puis cope sus la piere en la racine de la cuisse encontre le mileu dou con, lai ou il est mues apparilliet, et sent la piere en celle partie; et ne mueve son doi desus la piere ou desoz, et soit li taille au premier petite; puis boute lou rait en la taille, se tu sens la piere si acroi la plaie tant que li piere puisse issir fuer, et saiches que maintes manieres de pieres sont: c’est a savoir, petites et grans et aspres et souez, longes et reondes, et qui ont rains.	If she finds it, then it is necessary that she move it from great to great from the entrance of the bladder down to below, until it comes to the root of the thigh; then cut upon the stone at the root of the thigh against the middle of the buttock, where it appears pushed out, and feel the stone in that part; and do not move her foot above the stone or below, and let the tail be at first small; then push the point into the waist, if you feel the stone so much on the wound as the stone can pass out, and know that many kinds of stones are: that is to say, small and large and rough and smooth, long and rounded, and which have veins.  
si saiches les semblances por savoir l’issue.	if you know the likenesses to know the outcome. 
Et se li sans te vaint, si met au leu vitriole broiet, et li tien une houre tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer, et aies des estrumens que je t’ai dit en l’estraction de la piere as homes por toi aidier en ton oevre; et se li sans te vaint, et c’est de l’artere qui est copee, si met la poudre sus le leu et l’estrain de tentes et de bendelz, et ne rencomencier plus ceu, et laisse la piere et ne la traire mie, que par aventure morroit li malaide; puis cure la plaie.	And if the stone should not come out, put crushed vitriol on it and hold it for an hour until the stone is softened; then return to your work, as long as the stone remains firm, and have the instruments that I told you in extracting stones from men to help you in your work; and if the stone does not come out, and it is an artery that is cut, put the powder on the place and strain it with bandages, and do not start over, and leave the stone and do not drain it, for fear of killing the patient; then cure the wound. 
Et quant li chalor dou sanc est apaisie, et li leus porrist, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer.	And when the heat of the blood is appeased, and the tissues are healed, then return to your work as long as the stone is weak.
de hernie carnouse	of a fleshy hernia
Ramice aquouse n’est autre chose que assemblee de moistor ou blanc syfac, qui est desoz lou keur des coions, que contient l’uef; et est apelez «syfac», et aucune fois est proprement en la toile de l’uef, si c’on cuide que ce soit .i. autre oef; et c’est li cuir dou coion entre lou blanc syfac que nos avons dit; et ceu n’avient se poc non.	Ramice aquouse is nothing else than a gathering of moisture or white syfac, which is the substance under the shell of eggs, that contains the egg; and it is called "syfac," and sometimes is properly in the membrane of the egg, if one thinks that it is another egg; and this is the skin of the egg between the white syfac that we have said; and these do not have any other part.
Et li generation de cest ramice si est de foibleteit que vient as coions, et est espandue celle matiere.	And the generation of this ramice is so weak that it comes from the eggs, and is spread out that matter.
Et aucune fois si vient de percussion sus les coions, et ceste moistor si a maintes colors: ou c’est color declinans a jaunice, ou c’est sans rouge, ou noir, ou aquous blans, et ce avient plus; et ce sont li signe de conoistre ceste assemblee, car s’elle est ou blanc syfac que nos avons dit, si est li apostemes reons, I poc lonc si com li figure d’un oef, et n’apert mie li coions, car il a moistor tout entor.	And sometimes it comes from percussion on the joints, and this moisture has many colors: either declining to jaundice, or it is without red, or black, or aqueous white, and this happens more; and these are the signs of knowing this assembly, because if it is white as we have said, then the abscess is ripe, I long like the figure of an egg, and does not open the joints, because it has moisture all around. 
Et s’il a moistor en la propre toile, si est li apostemes reons avec une partie de l’uef, et por ceu pense on que c’est uns autres oef; et se li moistor est entre le cuir des coions et le blanc syfac, si le sent om bien; donques quant tu vues savoir la color de la moistor, si esprueve a tout l’intromissoire quarreit, de coi li forme est ci devant.	And if there is moisture in the skin itself, then the abscesses redden with a part of the yolk, and for that reason it is thought to be another yolk; and if the moisture is between the skin of the scrotum and the white syfac, then one feels it well; therefore when you want to know the color of the moisture, you should examine the entire intropositor quarreit, for its form is as above. 
Selonc ceu donques qui vient aprés l’intromissoire, juge de ceu qui est dedens.	According to this therefore which comes after the introducer, judge of this which is within.
Et quant nos la curons par fer, si covient que li malaides soit sainiez selonc som pooir et la repletion de son cors; puis le sovine sus son dos, sus une chose un poc haute, et met desoz lui mout de drapelz; puis sié sus sa senestre, et comande au ministre qu’il sié a destre, et estende la verge a l’un des II costelz dou keur des coions; puis pren le spatumile leit, et cope le cuir des coions parmi leu dou lonc jusque delez lou poignil, et soit ta fendure toute droite en devisant le cuir des coions jusc’a syfac blanc, et l’escorche subtilment selonc tom pooir; puis perce lou syfac plain d’aigue a I large pertus, et estrai toute l’aigue, et puis met tes oncines, et estent lou syfac amont; et ne touchier le keur des coions, mais que le syfac soulement; cope tout ou par pieces meismement le costeit de lui subtil, que se tu ne le copes bien saigement, si revenra li aigue; et se l’uef saut fuer a ton oevre, si le ramoinne en son leu quant tu avras acomplit l’uevre dou syfac; puis assemble les II leivres dou keur des coions a une costure, puis le cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when we treat it with iron, it is necessary that the patient be healthy according to his ability and the filling of his body; then place him on his back, on something a little high, and put under him a lot of cloths; then he sits on his left side, and commands the minister that he sit on his right, and extend the rod to one of the two ribs near the heart of the sides; then take the spatula, and cut the skin of the sides among them as long as up to the armpit, and let your incision be straight in dividing the skin of the sides until the white fat, and exfoliate subtly according to your ability; then pierce the fatty layer full of water with a large opening, and extract all the water, and then put your dressings, and place the fatty layer above; and do not touch the heart of the sides, but only the fatty layer; cut all or in pieces equally the costal side of him subtly, that if you don't cut it well carefully, it will return the water; and if the work has gone wrong, put it back in its place when you have finished the work of the fatty layer; then assemble the two leaves of the heart of the sides with a suture, then cure it like the other wounds, until it is healed. 
Et se tu trueves l’uef corromput d’autre maladie, si covient que tu lies les vasselz que sont suspensoire, en doutant le decorrement de sanc; puis cope le coion a tout le suspensoire, et estrai l’uef, et le cure si com nos avons dit.	And if you find the sheaf corrupted by another illness, then it befits that you tie the vessels that are suspended, in doubting the discharge of blood; then cut the stone to all the suspender, and extract the sheaf, and cure it as we have said.
Et se aigue est assemblee en II parties ensamble, saiches que ce sont II ramices; si cope l’autre partie si com tu as fait la premiere igalment, puis essue lou sanc, et met en la plaie lainne moillie en oile roset; et met defuer autre laine moillie en vin et en oile, et met sus les II coions, et met desus drapelz doublés, et le lie sus a tout le liien qui est selonc ceste forme:	And if the wound is assembled in two parts together, know that these are two branches; so cut the other part as you have done the first evenly, then wipe the blood, and put on the wound a layer of wool soaked in rose oil; and put above the two piles a layer of wool soaked in wine and oil, and put bandages over them, and tie it with a bandage all along according to this form: 
Puis pren II drapelz, et les emple de laine charpie selonc ceste semblance et soient assemblez par cousture en la gorle des braies, et li uns des chiés preigne sus le fondement jusc’au dos, et li autres a la partie dou poignil; et li autre dui chief sus les II angres, et soit toute assemblee li restreinture en la boucle dou braier; et aucune fois est medicinee ceste ramice de cautere en leu de taille de fer, et est que tu preignes I cautere cultellaire subtil, et cope le cuir des coions, et soit eschaufez si com nos avons dit, si que li syfac blanc que contient l’aigue est descovers; si pren lou cautere selonc ceste forme, et perce celui syfac as oncines, et l’escorche a cest subtil cautere chaut:	Then take two pieces of cloth and employ them with woolen padding according to this semblance and let them be assembled by stitching in the crotch of the breeches, and one of the chiefs pricks above the foundation to the back, and the other at the armpit part; and the other of the chief over the two shoulders, and let the whole restraint be assembled in the buckle of the bracer; and sometimes is medicine this twig of cautery instead of iron size, and it is that you prick the cautery dagger subtle, and cut the skin of the testicles, and let it be heated as we have said, so that the white syrup containing the water is uncovered; then take the cautery according to this form, and pierce that syrup at once, and scorch it with this subtle hot cautery. 
Et lou cope en toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que tu esraiches tout; et garde que li feus ne touche l’uef; et saiches que ceste oevre est plus salve; et mues gardans de decorrement de sanc, et muedres que li ovraiges de taille; et se nulle chose te fait contraire, ou aposteme chaus ou decorremens de sanc ou autre chose, si cure ce qui te fait contraire, selonc ceu qui est devant dit.	And the cap in all ways that you can, as long as you sear everything; and keep that the fire does not touch the egg; and know that this work is more salve; and moves guarding against bleeding, and measures that the works of size; and if anything makes contrary to you, or abscess chaws or bleeding or other thing, so cure what makes contrary to you, according to what is said before. 
Et se li malaides est paourous, et ne vuet atendre cest ovraige por son horribleteit, si amenistre perforation, si com je te di, et est que quant tu es bien certains par les significations que nos avons dit que ramice aquouse est lai, si fai seoir le malaide sus I siege leveit; pues perce l’aposteme an la partie desoz a tout le spatumile large, et met la perforation dou lonc dou cors; et soit larges li pertus, si que toute li aigue corre fuer; puis met coton sus le leu, et le lie, et laisse por corre le remenant de l’aigue, puis le cure tant que li plaie soit sanee; et se li blainche toile ne laisse issir l’aigue en la bouche de la plaie, si covient que tu i boutes une penne ou l’estrument dont on trait l’aigue des ydropiques, de coi li forme est ci devant; et eslarge I poc la plaie, et saiches que li aigue revient, et est assemblee aprés VI mois ou enqui entor, et quant elle est assemblee si com devant, et ensi passera li malaides ses jors.	And if the patient is fearful, and does not want to wait for this work because of its horror, so administer a perforation, as I tell you, and it is that when you are well certain by the significations that we have said that watery root is there, so make the patient sit on the raised seat; then pierce the abscess in the part below all the spatula wide, and put the perforation long from the body; and let the punctures be wide, so that all the water flows; then put cotton on the place, and tie it, and leave to drain the remaining of the water, then cure it until the wound is healed; and if the white cloth does not allow the water to flow out at the mouth of the wound, so you should put a quill or the instrument that one treats the water of the dropsy, of which the form is before; and enlarge the place of the wound, and know that the water returns, and it is assembled after six months or until then, and when it is assembled as before, and thus will pass the days of the patient. 
de l’aposteme des coions	of the abscess of the testicles
Saiches que en la section de ceste ramice a paor em plusors dispositions, por coi il me semble que mues vaut c’on la laisse; et je vos dirai l’ovraige et les semblances de l’aposteme.	Know that in the section of this branch there is fear in many dispositions, so it seems to me better to leave it; and I will tell you the work and appearances of the abscess. 
Je dis donques que maint aposteme vienent ou cors, et meismement as coions; et c’est par mout de cas.	I say therefore that many abscesses come to the body, and also to the joints; and this is by many causes.
C’est a savoir par superfluiteit aigre et ague, qui est espandue as coions, ou de percussion; et est li color de l’aposteme selonc la color dou cors; et ne trueve point de dolor, et est aposteme grief; et par aventure est uns apostemes griés paourous et pierous, et de fuxe color, et aucune fois vient de nout d’artere, ou d’enfleure de voine.	This is to know by superfluity sour and acute, which is spread to the groin, or from percussion; and it is the color of the abscess according to the color of the body; and does not find any pain, and is a grievous abscess; and perhaps there are some abscesses grievous fearsome and stony, and of dusky color, and sometimes comes from our artery, or swelling of vein. 
Quant c’est par nout d’artere, si est conus par la disposition d’aposteme chaut, quant tu la presses a tes dois; et ne covient mie que tu i touches.	When it is from an artery, it is known by the arrangement of a hot abscess, when you press it with your hands; and it is not right that you touch it. 
Cil qui est fais d’enfleure de voine est conus par sa disposition a l’expression dou touchement des dois, et puet om bien faire la taille sus ceste semblance, et sus les autres chars; et est que tu cope lou keur des coions, puis estent l’uef en haut, et le trai fuer dou blanc syfac, et delivre lou suspensoire de toutes pars de l’uef.	He who is made of vein inflation is known by his disposition to the expression of the touch of the fingers, and can well do the size on this likeness, and on the other arms; and that you cut the heart of the veins, then being the egg on top, and the train of the white thereof, and deliver the suspenders from all parts of the egg. 
Se li uef est ja sodez avec ces chars nees, si covient donques que tu traies l’uef, et lou cope; et s’il est aers au syfac, ou en ceu qui est dedens les vasselz, si covient que tu delivre toute celle tenve, et la cope reondement.	If the egg is already cooked with these new dishes, then you must pull out the yolk, and cut it; and if it is in the yolk sac, or in what is inside the vessels, then it is necessary that you deliver all that membrane, and cut it roundly.  
Et se li naissance de la char est ou leu derrier, si covient que tu la copes toute, et estrai l’uef, si com nous avons dit.	And if the birth of the flesh is or its rear, then it behooves you to cut it completely, and extract the egg, as we have said.
Et quant tes ovraiges est acomplis, si emple la plaie de laine moillie en oile roset et en vin, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when your works are accomplished, then apply the wound with wool soaked in rose oil and wine, then cover it with other dressings until it is healed.
de l’aposteme des coions	of the abscess of the testicles
Cis est uns apostemes envoloupez d’un envoloupement semblant a I borjon, avec le mollifiement des coions, et se muet li malaides griement quant il vait; et li cure de ceste maladie si est bien pres ausi paourouse com ceste ci devant, et toutevoie nos vos dirons l’ovraige de li, selonc ceu que li ancien firent.	This is an abscess wrapped in a covering resembling the border, with the softening of the edges, and the patient moves painfully when he walks; and the cure for this illness is as well frightening as the one before, but nonetheless we will tell you the work of it, according to what the ancients did. 
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus I siege aleveit, puis li boute le suspensoire des coions aval a tes dois, a tout le vasseil qui sont prochien a la verge, et les teigne li maistres, et les estende forment; puis cope au spatumile trenchant large dou traver endroit les vasselz, tant qu’il soient descovert, et puis escorche de chescune part, si com nos avons dit en l’estraction des arteres qui sont en temples; puis i fiche une aguille ou il ait I fil double, et le lie au premier leu ou li vis est venue, et le lie derechief a l’autre chief; puis les cope em mileu droitement, selonc la longesce dou cors, et en trai les moistors corrumpues; puis cure la plaie si com les autres ou on enjanre bowe, si que aucun vassel chiecent que norrissent l’un des coions; car par ceu n’i vient point de mal, et se a toz les vasselz vient vis, si covient traire les coions a tout les vasselz; si que li oes ne perde son norrissement por l’incision des vasselz, et sechent et ne se puient aidier.	It behooves you to have the patient sit on an elevated seat, then bind the suspender of the reins down to his hips, over all the vessels that are near the penis, and thread them together with the masters, and stretch them out; then cut into the vessels with a sharp spatula in a wide furrow throughout the vessels, until they are uncovered, and then peel from each side, as we have said in the extraction of the arteries that are in the temples; then insert a needle where the vein has come, and tie it to the first place where the vein came, and tie it straight to the other end; then cut them in the middle directly, according to the length of the body, and draw out the corrupted humors; then cure the wound as with the others where you want to heal the flesh, so that no vessel spills that nourishes one of the reins; for by these none comes harm, and if to all the vessels blood comes, it behooves to draw the reins to all the vessels; so that the testicle does not lose its nourishment because of the incision of the vessels, and dries up and cannot be aided. 
de la routure dou syfac	of the rupture of the sinew
Li avenemens de ceste ramice si est par la section que vient ou syfac, ou l’estension sus le ventre en la partie des angres, por coi li intestine dessendent de celle routure a l’un des coions; et ceste routure est ou dou syfac, ou de l’estension de li, et vienent ces II manieres de mout de causes: ou de percussion, ou de saut, ou de braire, ou de levement de grief faix, et par semblans choses; et li signes quant c’est de l’estension dou syfac, si est qu’il avient poc et poc, en lonc tens, et ne vient mie soudainnement; et est li apostemes igalz jusque vers le parfont, por ceu que li syfac apresse l’intestine.	The events of this branch are by the section that comes or where it is extended on the belly in the part of the angles, so that the intestines descend from that rupture to one of the corners; and this rupture is either at the site of the syphax, or of the extension of it, and come these II manners of mouth from causes: either by percussion, or by jump, or by braying, or by lifting of heavy load, and by similar things; and the signs when it is of the extension of the syphax, is that there are pops and pops, over a long time, and does not come suddenly; and the abscesses are equal up to the height of the navel, because the syphax presses the intestines.  
Et li signes est quant c’est de la section dou syfac, qu’elle fait venir a l’encomencement dolor soudaine, et est li apostemes divers apparans, desoz le cuir pres, et c’est por l’issue de l’intestine et le cors au defuer dou syfac.	And the signs are when it is of the section of the pus, that it brings at the beginning sudden pain, and the abscess is various appearances, under the skin near, and this because of the issue of the intestine and the body to the outside of the pus.
Et aucune fois dessent li cirbes avec l’intestine, et est retenus enqui, et fait grant dolor soffrir au malaide, meismement quant il est pressez.	And sometimes it descends the edges with the pus, and is held in, and causes great pain to suffer the patient, even when it is pressed.
Et en ces cures de fer a paor, por coi il s’en covient eschuir.	And in these cures of iron there is fear, so it should be avoided.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que tu comande ou malaide qu’il ramoine l’intestine a sa main au dedens en la plaie, s’il i puet rentreir; puis soit sovinez sus son col. entre tes mains, et lieve les cuixes; puis estent le keur au desus, et cope tout le cuir des coions dou lonc; puis boute dedens les leivres de la taille uncines selonc ceu que tu en as mestier por ovrir la plaie, et soit telz que li oes em puist issir; puis escorche lou syfac que est desoz lou cuir des coions, tant que li blans syfac dur soit descovers de toutes pars; puis boute ton doi indice en ceu qui enseut lou coion, en ceu qui est entre lou blanc syfac qui est desoz lou cuir de l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac, et depart ceu qui est derrier l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac; et pues muef a la main destre dedens lou keur des coions, et estent lou blanc syfac en haut a ta main senestre, et lieve l’uef a tout lou syfac devers la taille; et comande au ministre qu’il estende l’uef en haut, et deslie ceu qui est aers derrier le liement; et quier a tes dois s’il a point de l’intestine envoloupeit ou blanc syfac dur, et se tu en trueves aucune chose, si le boute au ventre desoz; puis pren une aguille ou il ait I gros fil fait de X filz, et la boute en la derriere partie dou syfac, qui est aprés lou cuir des coions; aprés la taille, puis cope les chiés qui apperent des filz, tant qu’il i ait IIII filz; puis les assemble l’un sus l’autre en maniere de croix, et en lie lou syfac, dont nos avons dit qui est desoz lou cuir des coions, d’un fort liien de II pars; puis envoloupe les chiés des filz, et les lie forment de II pars, si que nuls des vasselz que les norrissent ne puissent entrer en ous, que aposteme chaus n’i viegne; et met derechief le liien selonc le premier liien lonc II dois de celui, et aprés ces II liiens laisse dou syfac qui est desoz lou keur des coions le grant d’un doi; et aprés tout l’autre selonc la rondesce que li euf porte; puis cope en la partie qui est desoz le cuir des coions, tant qui li sans corre, et li bowe, si com nos avons dit ci devant; puis amenistre laine moillie en oile, et met em plaies, et i amenistre le liien que nos avons dit.	And the manner of the work is that you instruct the patient to bring the intestine back into his hand inside the wound, if he can enter it; then be careful on his neck between your hands, and raise the hips; then hold the heart above, and cut all the skin of the groin long; then put within the folds of the waist needles according to what you need to open the wound, and let it be such that the eyes can issue; then scrape the syfac that is below the skin of the groin, until the white syfac hard is uncovered on all sides; then put your index finger into what follows the groin, in what is between the white syfac which is under the skin of the womb, and between the second syfac, and depart from what is behind the womb, and between the second syfac; and then move with the right hand inside the heart of the groin, and hold the white syfac on top to your left hand, and raise the womb onto all the syfac towards the waist; and command the minister that he extend the womb upwards, and untie what is behind the ligament; and inquire with your fingers if there is any intestine surrounded or white syfac hard, and if you find any of these things, put it into the belly below; then take a needle which has a thick thread made of X threads, and put it in the back part of the syfac, which is after the skin of the groin; after the waist, then cut the hairs that appear of the threads, until there are IIII threads; then assemble them one on top of the other in the manner of a cross, and tie the syfac, about which we have said that it is below the skin of the groin, with a strong thread of II parts; then wrap the hairs of the threads, and tie them together of II parts, so that none of the vessels that nourish them can enter inside, except the abscess may come; and put straight the thread according to the first long thread II fingers of it, and after these II threads leave the syfac which is below the heart of the groin the large one of a finger; and after all the others according to the roundness that the womb carries; then cut in the part which is below the skin of the groin, as much as the scar, and the bow, as we have said before; then administer wool soaked in oil, and put it into the wounds, and put in the thread that we have said. 
Et aucune fois est cauterizez li blans syfac que nos avons dit, aprés l’incision, par doutance de decorrement de sanc.	And no time is cauterized the white suture that we have said, after the incision, out of fear of blood flow.
Car ce avient maintes fois, et laisse le liien tant qu’il chiece per lui; et s’il tarde au cheoir, si soit arosez d’aigue chaude, et met sus ceu que nos avons dit, tant qu’il chiece; puis cure la plaie d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	For this happens many times, and leave the thread as long as it hangs by itself; and if it is slow to heal, then be raised with hot water, and put on what we have said, until it heals; then treat the wound with other remedies, until it is perfectly healed. 
de hernie carnouse	of a fleshy hernia
En ceste ramice ne vis je onques nul qui osast faire la cure par fer.	In this treatise I never saw anyone who dared to cure it with iron.
Et li ancien dirent qu’ele est faite si com li ramice qui est ensamble la vis, en teil maniere que tu lie les vasselz, aprés la taille sus ous legierement au desoz; puis cope em mi, et cure l’aposteme de ceu qui oevre, tant que li vasselz chient; et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the ancients said that it is made like the branch which is assembled with the twig, in such a manner that you tie the vessels, after the cut above or lightly below; then cut in the middle, and care for the abscess of those who work, until the vessels flow; and cure it as we have said, until it is healed.  
Aucune fois vient routure ens angres, si com nos avons dit, et apert li leus; et ne dessent nulz des intestines as coions, et s’il en i dessent, c’est poc, et repaire toutes houres; et toutevoie s’il demoure trop en cest point, si croit li plaie ou syphac, tant que li intestine dessent; et ceu avient par l’estension dou syfac qui est as angres, si com nos avons dit, car il est estendus, puis est mollifiez et enflez li leus et apert; et li cure si est par cautere, si com nos avons devant dit; et aucune fois est curee par fer en ceste maniere: et est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos entre tes mains, puis cope le leu de la routure enfleit dou large selonc la quantiteit de III dois; et puis estrai le syfac qui est desoz le cuir que l’ensuet, puis pren lou rait et lou met sor le leu apparant dou syfac; et lou presse au parfont dou ventre, puis cout les II leus apparans dou syfac sus lou chief dou rait, et cout l’un et l’autre; puis estrai le chief dou rait, et ne coper point dou syfac ne n’estendre l’uef n’autre chose, si com je t’ai fait savoir en la cure de la ramice des intestines; puis le cure par la cure des plaies.	Sometimes a rupture comes in the bowels, as we have said, and opens the entrails; and do not let any of the intestines go into the anus, and if any do go out, it is small, and repairs all hours; and anyway if it stays too long in this point, then the wound or abscess grows, until the intestine comes out; and this happens because of the extension of the abscess which is in the bowels, as we have said, because it is extended, then it softens and swells the entrails and opens; and the cure is by cautery, as we have said before; and sometimes it is cured by iron in this manner: and that is that the patient lies lying on his back between your hands, then cut the place of the rupture inflated with a wide according to the quantity of III finger widths; and then draw out the abscess which is under the skin that goes inside, then take the root and put it on the place appearing of the abscess; and press it at the bottom of the belly, then sew the two places appearing of the abscess onto the head of the root, and sew one and the other; then remove the head of the root, and do not cut the abscess nor extend the bowel or anything else, as I have told you in the cure of the ramification of the bowels; then cure by the cure of wounds. 
Et quant tu copes les filz, si le mundefie et cure la plaie, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And when you cut the threads, then cover and care for the wound until it is healed. 
Li syfac est constrains, et n’a point d’apparance en la routure, et li cauteres est muedres en cest leu, et plus prochiens a salut.	The sifac is constrained, and has no appearance in the rupture, and the cautery is moved in this place, and closer to salvation.
de l’amollissement dou cuir des coions	of softening of the skin of the testicles
Maintes fois est amollis li cuirs des coions en aucuns homes, por ceu que les chars que sont dedens sont mollifiees, et est lait a veoir; et est mestier, quant on le vuet curer, c’on faice gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li cope le cuir qui est mollifiez sus le cuir natureil; puis assemble les .ij. levres a une costure, et se tu vues, cout premier la superfluiteit dou cuir mollifiiez a .iij. costures ou .iiij. fermement; puis cope entre les costures, et lou cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez, et chient li fil.	Many times the skin of the testicles softens in some men, because the sacs that are inside are softened, and it is made visible; and it is necessary, when one wants to cure it, that one makes the patient lie on his back, and one cuts the skin that is softened on the natural skin; then assemble the two lips with a suture, and if you see, sew first the superfluity of the softened skin at three sutures or four firmly; then cut between the sutures, and treat the wound as other wounds, until it is healed, and pull out the thread.
dou chastrement	of chastisement
Saiches que chastremens est escomeniez en nostre loi, et por ceu il me plairoit que je n’en parlasse mie en cest livre; et n’est necessaires fuer que por II manieres: dont l’une est que li mires en saiche respondre quant on li demandera, et en saiche la cure; et li autre, por ceu que nos avons sovent mestier de chastrement d’aucunes bestes por nos aidier, si com de bouc et de mouton et de chait et d’autres bestes.	Know that cauterization is common in our law, and for this reason I would like to not speak of it in this book; and it is necessary only for two reasons: one of which is that the wise may answer when asked about it, and know how to cure it; and the other, because we often need cauterization of some animals to aid us, such as goats and sheep and cattle and other beasts. 
Je dis donques que chastremens est fais selonc II manieres: ou par atraction, ou par fendure.	I therefore say that fastenings are made in two ways: either by traction, or by fending. 
En celle que nos faisons par attraction, faisons nos seoir la beste en aigue chaude, tant que li coion soient mollifiez et pendant; puis les preing a ta main, tant qu’il soient remis et que tu ne les sentes plus.	In that which we do by traction, make the animal sit in hot water, until the joints are softened and pliable; then grasp them with your hand, until they are set and you no longer feel them. 
Du chastrement de taille: covient que tu teignes la beste, et li presse le cuir des coions a ta main senestre, puis lie le suspensoire, et cope sus chescun oef a I cop, quant tu les avras bien escorchiez; et i laisse aucun poc dou syfac et lou subtil syfac qui est sor les vasselz; et ceste maniere de chastrement est muedre que cele qui est faite par attraction, por ceu que a l’atraction demoure par aventure aucune chose des coions, par coi li beste desire luxure; puis cure la plaie tant qu’ele soit sanee.	Of the chastisement of the tail: It behooves you to hold the beast, and press the skin of the scrotum with your left hand, then tie the suspender, and cut above each ear at the time, when you have well scraped them; and leave no prick on it or the subtle prick that is on the vessels; and this manner of chastisement is better than the one done by attraction, because in attraction perhaps nothing remains from the scrotum, because the beast desires lust; then cure the wound until it is healed. 
des hermofrodites	of the hermaphrodites
Hermofrodie est selonc II manieres as homes: l’une si est que entre les II coions apert ausi com li figure de la nature d’une femme, ou il ait poil, et aucunes fois en cort li urine.	Hermaphrodite is according to two manners as men: one if it is that between the two sexes opens as much as the figure of nature of a woman, or it has hair, and sometimes in short the urine.  
Et li autre maniere si est en femmes, et ait sus lou poignil ausi com une verge et II coions.	And the other manner is so in women, and it is above the point as well as a rod and it joins. 
Et li cure de l’ome et de la fame si est que tu copes les chars ajostees toutes, et les cure si com autres plaies; en la seconde maniere, des homes dont li urine saut par lou cuir des coions, si n’a point de cure.	And the care of man and woman is that you cauterize all the joints attached to them, and cure them as other wounds; in the second manner, for men whose urine flows through the skin of the testicles, there is no cure. 
de la tentigene	of the tenting
Tentigene est une chars ajostee sus la partie natureil, tant qu’elle est trop laide a veoir; et aucunes femmes l’ont ausi grant com une main, et c’est li cure.	A wart is a hard growth on the natural part of the body, as long as it is too ugly to see; and some women have it as large as a hand, and that is the cure.  
Il covient que tu teignes la superfluiteit de la tentigene a ta main ou as oncines, et la cope legierement; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et a une autre char que naist a la bouche de la marris, et l’emple, et par aventure saut fuer, et est selonc la semblance d’une kowe, et por ceu l’apelerent li ancien «maladie kowee».	It is necessary that you remove the superfluity of the tongue with your hand or tongs, and cut it lightly; and do not cut too deeply, lest bleeding occur. Then cure it with another remedy until it is healed; and in another manner that arises at the mouth of the marsh, and the temple, and by chance happens to be, and according to its appearance like a cow, and for this reason they called it by the ancients “cow disease.” 
Si covient que tu la copes, si com nos avons dit la tentigene, et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	If it is necessary to cut it, as we have said before, and care for it until it is healed. 
de erratique	of erratic
Erratique si est quant li nature de la femme n’est mie percie, ou li pertus est petis; et est naturez par naissance, ou accidens par maladie que venue i est; ou c’est par char ajostee, ou dou syfac subtil ou espés, et est fais em parfont en la marris, ou en costez, ou desoz, ou que soit; et deffent le concevoir, et l’enfantement, et par aventure les flors a avoir; et li connoissance de ceu si est par le regart de la baile.	Erratic is when the nature of the woman is not perceived, or the opening is small; and it is natural by birth, or an accident by illness that came to it; or it is by cartilage attached, or by a subtle or thick syrup, and it is made in the groin, or ribs, or underarm, or wherever; and it prevents conception, and pregnancy, and perhaps the flowers to have; and the knowledge of this one is by the gaze of the belly.  
Se li estoupemens est prochiens apparans, si quier a tes dois ou au rait.	If the stoppage is near appearing, it desires to your two or to the root.  
S’il est dou syfac subtil, et il est prochiens as II leivres, si te haste, et la ront ensi: met tes II dois indices ensamble, et li femme soit sus son dos, espandues ses jambes; puis estent les II leivres forment, tant que li subtilz syfac soit rons, et soit overs li estoupemens; puis pren laine, et la moille en oile, et la met sus le leu, et gise li femme a home chescun jor, si qu’il ne puist souder.	If it is sore with subtle pain, and it is near the two books, then hasten, and do this: put your two fingers together, and let the woman be on her back, legs spread; then let the two books form, until the subtle pain is gone, and the throbbing subsides; then take wool, and soak it in oil, and place it on the spot, and let the woman lie down at home every day, so that she cannot move. 
Et se li syfac est dur et espés, si covient que tu lou copes au spatumile semblant a foille de mirte.	And if the sty is hard and thick, then it behooves you to cut it with the spatula like the leaf of myrtle. 
Se li estoupemens est de char nee, si la sospent a l’oncine et la cope; et aies les medicines estainchans sanc, si com acaice, sanc de dragon, encens, ensamble abun d’uef; puis amenistre une caine de plonc large, si que li plaie ne puisse souder; et ensi soit longement, et li amenistre une tente de lin sec; puis soit curez d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	If the stoppage is of flesh, suspend it to the wound and the cup; and have the medicines that staunch blood, such as dragon's blood, incense, and a mix with egg white; then administer a cloth of broad wool, so that the wound cannot close; and thus be prolonged, and administer a tent of dry linen; then be cured with other cures until it is healed. 
Et quant en la marris vient char nee, si la covient coper selonc ceste maniere, se ce n’est apostemes enchancrez.	And when in the marrow comes new flesh, then it is necessary to cover according to this manner, if it is not abscesses opened. 
Car a l’aposteme enchancreit qui est en la marris, ne doit on touchier de feir.	For an abscess that is festering in the flesh, one must not touch with fire. 
des emorroides	of hemorrhoids
Emorroydes sont overtures de voines dont sans cort acostumeement, et quant les emorroydes sont vielles si devienent thelul; et nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’aus, et les signes, et je dirai ci celles qui resoivent curation.	Hemorrhoids are openings of veins that without customary care and when hemorrhoids are old they become hardened; and we have said in the division their similarities with others and the signs and I will say here those that resolve healing.  
Je di que les emorroides et li thelul, quant il sont em parfont en la marris, et il n’aperent au sentir, si n’est mie li cure par fer.	I say that hemorrhoids and the piles, when they are made into the buttocks, and do not appear to the touch, except by iron treatment.  
Cil qui sont a la bouche de la marris, c’on puet sentir, sont cil c’on puet curer.	Those who are at the mouth of the marsh, they can feel, those that can be cured. 
Il covient donques que tu mettes la femme en une maison froide, puis estent l’altelul as tenailles, et le cope en ses racines, puis poudre sus medicines restraignans sanc, si com acaice et sanc de dragon et encens, et semblans choses; puis boute ses piez a la paroit une houre, puis la met en aigue froide; et se decorremens de sanc i vient, si la fai seoir en une decoction de sumac et d’escorce de pomes grenates et de gales et de semblans choses, et puis pren farine d’orge, et la confis avec miel et aisil, et en fai I emplaustre sus son dos.	It is therefore necessary that you put the woman in a cold house, then are the altelul as the tongs, and the cope at its roots, then powder upon medicines restraining blood, such as acaice and dragon's blood and incense, and similar things; then put her feet to the wall for an hour, then put her in cold water; and if there comes a bleeding, so make her sit in a decoction of sumac and pomegranate bark and gall and similar things, and then take barley flour, and the confite it with honey and aisil, and make a poultice on her back. 
Et se il estainche, c’est boin.	And if it stays, it is good. 
Se ceu non, se li fai aerdre ventouses au dos et as mameles sens ferir; puis pren lainne, et la moille en jus de plantain ou en jus d’aglentier avec vin viel, et fai aerdre au leu.	If this is not the case, if one applies suction cups to the back and breasts without wounding; then take linen and moisten it in juice of plantain or in juice of elder with old wine, and apply it on the spot. 
Et quant li aposteme repose, si cure lou leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et celle qui est apelee «albathir» est rouge, et est semblans a I chief aspre, si le covient coper si com j’ai dit le thelul; et puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when the abscess heals, care for its place with ointment until it is healed; and that one which is called "albathir" is red, and is similar to harsh chief, so it should be covered as I have said in the previous paragraph; and then the cure until it is healed.  
des apostemes de la marris	Abscesses of the buttocks
Maintes manieres d’aposteme vienent en la marris, si com chancre et aposteme pierous et herpes et estiomenes et fistules et emorroides et aposteme chaut, et plusors autres maladies que j’ai dit en la division.	Many kinds of abscess come in the body, such as boils and pyogenic abscesses and herpes and whitlows and fistulas and hemorrhoids and hot abscesses, and more other diseases that I have said in the division. 
Il covient donques que je die en cest traitier l’aposteme chaut qui vient en la marris, qui n’est mie des apostemes que coillent bowe; et se tu vues savoir l’ovraige de fer, si regarde se li apostemes est agus en l’encomencement de sa venue, et plain de chalor et de fievre, et s’il devient rouge se tu le pues veoir.	It is therefore necessary for me to say in this treatise the hot abscess that comes in the marshes, which is not like the abscesses that swell; and if you want to know the work of iron, see if the abscess is thick at the beginning of its arrival, and full of heat and fever, and if it becomes red if you can see it. 
Adonques ne te haster mie de percier, mais lou fais meurer tant que li dolor soit apaisie; et puis fai seoir lou malaide sus I siege, et ait II petis sieges ou il se cline, et apoie sus son dos et assemble ses piez as parties defuer la jambe; et soient ses cuixes espandues, et mette ses braz desoz ses genous, et les lie bien d’un boin liien; puis succe li baille devers lou destre costeit, et i amenistre l’estrument dont on oevre la bouche de la marris, de coi ci aprés vient li forme; et covient que quant tu i vues amenistrer cest estrument, que tu fiches le rait premier ens por savoir la parfondeté de la marris, si que ceu qui entre ens de l’estrument n’i viegne plus em parfont qu’il ne doit, et qu’il ne blece la malaide; et se li estrumens est plus grans, si covient covrir la parfondesce de la marris de drapelz, si que li estrumens ne li grieve; et covient qu’il mette le cornet de l’estrument au desus, et qu’il teigne l’estrument.	Therefore do not hasten to probe, but let him rest until the pain is calmed; and then make the patient sit on a seat, and have two small seats where he can recline, and support his back and bring his feet to the parts outside the leg; and let his hips be spread, and put his arms below his knees, and bind them well with a good band; then turn him towards the right side, and there administer the instrument that works on the mouth of the jaw, because this is how it comes in shape after; and when you see him administering this instrument, make sure he puts the point first in to know the depth of the jaw so that what goes inside the instrument does not come in too deep that it should not, and so that it does not bleed the patient; and if the instrument is larger, it must cover the depth of the jaw with cloths so that the instrument does not harm him; and make sure he puts the cone of the instrument above, and keeps holding the instrument.
Et quant li apostemes apert, et on lou fent a la main mol, si le covient coper au chief, au spatumile leit; et quant li bowe est vuidie, si covient que tu mettes en la plaie tentes moillies en oile roset, ou en oile vert sec; et met la tente fuer de la plaie au parfont de la marris, et met par defuer sus la marris et sus le poignil lainne nette moillie en aigue ou malves soient cuites; puis le cure aprés II jors d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez; et aucune fois leve on la marris et la plaie par clistere d’aigue et de miel, et puis d’aigue ou racines de lis et aristologe longe soient cuites; puis reveigne a l’oignement.	And when the abscess opens, and one makes it soft with one's hand, then it is necessary to cover it to the chief, to the spatula of lead; and when the boil is emptied, then it is necessary that you put in the wound tents moistened in rose oil, or in green dry oil; and put the tent further from the wound at the edge of the cavity, and put outside on the skin and on the linen cloth wet with water or mallows that are cooked; then cure afterwards for two days of ointment before this, until it is healed; and sometimes raise the skin and the wound by a clyster of water and honey, and then of water or roots of lilies and agrimony long that are cooked; then return to the ointment. 
Et se li plaie est reponue en la marris, si covient que tu te gardes de cuire de fer, mais cure la si com nos avons dit en la division.	And if the wound is returned to its place, then it is necessary that you guard yourself from cauterizing with iron, but treat it as we have said in the division. 
de l’enfantement	of childbirth
Mestier est premier a la baile qu’elle conoisse la figure de l’enfantement natureil, et li signes si est quant tu vois la femme apresser aval, et desire odorer l’ar: adonques se haste li enfes de fuer issir; adonc saiches que cil enfantemens est selonc la figure natureil, et est li issue soz son chief, et li secondine avec lui; et quant tu vois ces signes, si covient presser legierement son ventre, si que li enfes isse tost; car quant il dessent sus son chief, si ist li secondine avec lui, et est mondee li marris de ses superfluitez par bone mundification; et cist qui vient autrement ne vient mie naturelment.	The craft is first to the midwife that she knows the figure of natural childbirth, and the signs are when you see the woman push down hard, and desire to smell the air; then the child hastens to be born; so know that this childbirth is according to the natural figure, and is the issue under her head, and the secondine with him; and when you see these signs, it is necessary to press lightly on her belly so that the child issues quickly; because when it rises above its head, then the secondine comes with him, and the womb is freed of its superfluities by good cleansing; and this which comes otherwise does not come naturally. 
Car il vient aucune fois sus ses piez, et vient fuer li cors ou li chiés, et les mains, ou il vient sus son ventre, ou sovin, et est convertis par aventure sor son col, et par autres figures malvaises; si est mestier a la baile qu’elle soit saige et subtilz en ces choses, et se warse d’error et de decevement, et je vos mostrerai toutes les figures coment on li doit aidier.	For it comes sometimes upon his feet, and comes forth the body or shoulder, and the hands, or where it comes upon his belly, or groin, and is converted by chance onto his neck, and by other bad figures; so it is necessary that the bail should be wise and subtle in these things, and beware of error and deceit, and I will show you all the figures how one must aid them. 
Se li enfes vient sus son chief par issue natureil, et li femme enfante griement, et li vertus de li est foible, si la fai seoir sus une selle, ou les femmes la tienent; et arose sa nature d’oile ou fenugreic soit cuit, et puis boute li baile entre ses dois le petit spatumile dont ci est li forme:	If the child comes out on its head by natural issue, and the woman giving birth cries loudly, and the virtues of her are weak, then make her sit on a saddle, or the women hold her; and arose her nature d’oile or fenugreic be cooked, and then put the midwife between her thighs the small spatula whose shape is here:
et fende la secondine, et cope a son ungle tant que li moistors qui est ens corre fuers; et preint lou ventre de la femme tant que li enfes dessende, et s’il ne dessent, si covient clisterizer la femme de muscillaige de fenugrec avec oile de sisament; puis la fai preindre et esternuer de condisi, et tien sa bouche et son neis une houre: si istra maintenant l’enfes.	and cut the second bone, and chop at its finger until the moisture that is inside it comes out; and take the belly of the woman as long as the child descends, and if it does not descend, then it is necessary to give the woman a clyster of fenugreek with sesame oil; then have her drink and sneeze of condiment, and hold her mouth and nose for an hour: now the child will come out. 
Et se les II mains issent fuer, si covient que tu les ramoinne legierement poc et poc; et s’elles n’i puent entrer, si met la femme sus I siege, et li lieve les piés en haut; puis deboute le siege sus terre, et teigne on la femme, qu’elle ne chiece au deboutement; et se li mains n’i puet entrer, et li enfes muert, si li cope les mains au couteil qui est ci devant mis, et estrai l’enfant, et ramoine igalment.	And if the two hands come out, then it behooves you to gently push them back and forth; and if they cannot enter, then place the woman upon the seat, and raise her feet up; then throw the seat onto the ground, and hold the woman so that she does not fall during the throwing; and if the hands cannot enter, and the child dies, then cut off the hands with the knife which is put before, and extract the child, and reset it evenly. 
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses piés	of the issue of the child on its feet 
Quant li enfes vient sus ses piez, si lou covient bouter en haut; et puis le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit igalz; puis preigne I des piez et l’estende poc et poc.	When the child comes upon its feet, it is necessary to push upwards; and then turn it back and forth, until it is even; then grasp its feet and stretch them back and forth. 
Cant il saut jusc’as cuixes, si la comande a preindre, et la fai esternuer de condisi; si saut fuer, se Deus vuet.	He jumps up to his hips if he is commanded to jump, and it makes him sneeze from the cold; if he leaps far, God willing. 
Et s’il n’ist fuer si com nos avons dit, si le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit selonc la figure natureil.	And if it is not healed as we have said, then turn it back and forth until it is according to the natural figure.
Car adonques ist il legierement.	For therefore it is easily remedied.
Et s’il ne vient fuer si com nos avons, dit si pren muscillaige de altee, et oile de sisament, et gomme fondue, et broie tout en I mortier; et met sus la nature de la femme dedens et defuer cest oignement, puis la fai seoir en aigue tede jusque desoz les costelz; et quant elle est moillifie desoz, se li fai I coliere de mirre, et li met desoz, et li laisse une houre; puis la fai seoir sus I siege, puis la fai esternuer et estraint sa bouche et son neis, et li preint le ventre legierement, car li enfes saut maintenant.	And if it does not come out as we have said, then take muscillage of altee, and oil of sesame, and melted gum, and grind all in the mortar; and put on the nature of the woman inside and outside this ointment, then make her sit upright until below the ribs; and when she is softened below, make her a collar of myrrh, and put it below, and let her lie for an hour; then make her sit on the seat, then make her sneeze and restrain her mouth and nose, and take her belly gently, because the child jumps now. 
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses genous	from the issue of the child on its knees
Quant li enfes vient en ceste forme, si i mette li baile ses mains poc et poc; puis soit sovinee sus son col, et li pendent li piez aval, et soit gisans sor I lit; et plie ses mains poc et poc, et puis li preint les mains sus lou ventre, et li oste les cussins desoz, tant qu’elle soit appareillie aval; et se li enfes ne saut, si pren ses piez et li muef forment, puis li muef lou ventre amont, puis i boute tes mains; et ewe l’enfant poc et poc; et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse.	When the child comes in this form, he puts his hands pocket and pocket; then it is situated on its neck, and the feet are hanging down, and lying on the bed; and folds its hands pocket and pocket, and then takes the hands on the belly, and removes the cushions below, until it is arranged down; and if the child does not jump, he takes its feet and moves them strongly, then moves the belly up, then puts his hands; and makes the child pocket and pocket; and commands to the woman that she preigne as long as the child is.   
de l’issue de l’enfant qui vient dou large une main pendant	from the birth of the child coming out with one hand
I covient engignier a ramener la main: s’on ne la puet ramener, si fai lever la femme, et aler; s’elle ne puet aler, si la fai gesir sus I lit, et li deboute les jambes forment; puis amenistre lou muscillaige que j’ai conteit; et s’elle n’enfante, si la fai seoir sus I siege, puis estudie au rameneir la main; et ewe l’enfant selonc la figure natureil, et la fai esternuer, et li comande qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse fuer.	It is necessary to devise a way to bring back the hand: if it cannot be brought back, make the woman get up and go; if she cannot go, make her lie on the bed and untie her legs; then administer the ointment that I have described; and if she does not give birth, make her sit on the stool, then try again to bring back the hand; and when the child is born according to its natural shape, make her sneeze and command her to hold it as long as the child is out. 
de l’issue de l’enfant sus son col, et ait espandues ses mains, et sa faice tornee devers lou dos sa mere	of the issue of the child on its neck, and has spread its hands, and its face turned toward the back of its mother
I covient que li baile teigne sa main, puis le torne poc et poc, et l’ewe legierement; et quant il est igalz, si met sus la nature muscillaige de altee et oile, si com nos avons dit, puis li comande qu’elle se mueve poc et poc; et quant tu avras ce fait, si la fai seoir sus I siege, et li comande k’elle se preigne; et la fai esternuer.	It is necessary that the patient hold his hand, then turn it back and forth, and the elbow slightly; and when it is even, put on the nature of the muscle above and oil, as we have said, then command him to move it back and forth; and when you have done this, let her sit on the seat, and command her to wiggle; and let her sneeze. 
de ceste meisme maniere a tout la secondine	in this same manner to all of the spine
Quant il vient fuer en ceste maniere a tout la secondine, si cope la secondine a ton ungle, tant que li moistors soit vuidie; et se li enfes pent sus sa faice et sus son col, si la cope des la boude, qu’elle ne soit retenue, et muere li enfes; puis boute l’enfant dedens, tant que tu l’aies mis si com il covient, et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne aucune fois: adonques si istra legierement.	When it comes to do this manner on the entire body, strike the body with your finger, until the moisture is drained; and if the infant leans on its face and on its neck, strike from the back, that it be not held back, and let the infant die; then put the child inside, as long as you have placed it as it should be, and command the woman to abstain any time: then it will come out easily. 
de l’issue des gemelz	of the separation of the twins
Saiches que gemeil naissent maintes fois, et aucune fois en naissent .iij. ou .iiij.; et ceu n’est mie estrainge chose, et poc avient.	Know that twins are born many times, and sometimes three or four; and this is not a strange thing, and it often happens.
Dui sont estrainge chose, et ne vivent mie, se poc nom; je sai ceu, qu’il soient multipliiet, et sont desevrez par lou syfac qui les devise, qui est liiez a la boude; et aucune fois issent ausi naturelment com uns tous sous, si com nos avons dit.	Two are strange things, and they do not live, if one knows their name; I know these, that they be multiplied, and they are seized by the syfac who divides them, which is tied to the bud; and sometimes they come out as naturally as all together, as we have said. 
Et s’il issent griement, si la cure si com nos avons dit, et soit li baile subtilz, et faice tost et legierement ceu qu’elle fait; et faice ensi com il vaut mues a salut.	And if they are raised high, carry out the treatment as we have said, and let the patient be subtle, and do what she does quickly and lightly; and do so until it comes to salvation. 
de plusors enfans	of many children
Aucune fois sont formez en la marris I ou II ou III ou IIII ou V ou VI ou VII, ou plusors jusc’a XV, et sont tout formeit en forme d’enfant par le mesurement dou saige glorious, et couvient que li baile saiche tout ceu, car par aventure semblans chose li avient; si faice selonc ceu qu’il covient.	Sometimes they are formed in the marshes I or II or III or IV or V or VI or VII, or more up to XV, and they are all formed in the shape of a child by the measurement of their sage glorious, and it is necessary that the bailiff knows all this, because by chance similar things happen; so do according to what is necessary.  
de l’enfant mort	of the dead child
Quant tu cures la femme de l’enfant mort ou ventre, si com j’ai dit en la division, et il ne vient fuers, et tu es constrains d’ovraige de mains; si covient que tu saiches se li femme est de saine vertut, et n’ait accident ou elle ait paor de mort; si covient que li femme soit sovinee sus son dos, et soit ses chiés enclins aval, et les jambes levees; et li ministre la teigne de II pars, ou elle soit liie au lit si qu’elle ne soit traite au dessendement de l’enfant; puis frotez la bouche de la marris d’oiles moistes avec muscillaige de altee et de fenugrec et semence de lin, puis oigne li baile ses mains de ces oiles et de ces muscillaiges; puis les boute en la marris legierement, puis quiere I leu ou elle boute les oncines que soient covenaubles a ceu, et pren warde se li enfes est apparilliez qu’il dessende sus son chief; si fiche les oncines en ses eulz ou en son col ou en sa bouche ou en som palais ou desoz la barbe ou en la forcele ou pres des costez, et se li dessendemens est sus piez, se li fiche ou poignil et as costes moienes; et covient qu’il teigne l’oncine a sa main destre, et mette la corbeure entre ses dois de la senestre main, et li boute a tout sa main legierement, et fiche l’oncine en aucun de ces leus que nos avons dit, tant qu’il viegne a la chose vuide; et c’est li forme de l’oncine:	When you treat the woman with the dead child or womb, as I have said in the division, and it does not come out, and you are constrained to work with your hands; so it is necessary that you know if the woman is of healthy virtue, and has no accident or she has fear of death; so it is necessary that the woman be laid on her back, and her shoulders be inclined downwards, and her legs raised; and the minister teigne her from two parts, or she is tied to the bed so that she not be moved by the descent of the child; then rub the mouth of the womb with moist oils with a poultice of altee and fenugrec and flaxseed, then oil the hands of the midwife with these oils and these poultices; then put them in the womb gently, then desire I her where she puts the instruments that be suitable to those, and take ward if the child is appeared that it descends on his head; so put the instruments in her eyes or neck or mouth or in her palate or below the beard or in the throat or near the ribs, and if the descent is on its feet, so put it in the groin and in the middle ribs; and it is necessary that she holds the instrument with her right hand, and puts the curve between her fingers of the left hand, and she puts it to all her hand gently, and puts the instrument in any one of those places that we have said, until it comes to the empty thing; and this is the form of the instrument:
puis fiche encontre I autre oncine, ou le tier se tu en as mestier, si que li estractions soit igalz; et puis l’estent igalment en movant d’une part et d’autre, por mues issir, et soit li oncines dentez por mues tenir, si com ci est li forme:	Then place against the other bone, or the third if you need it, so that the extractions are equal; and then make them equally in moving from one side to another, to move freely, and let the bones be toothed to move hold, as this is the form: 
Et s’il en demoure une partie, si oigne li baile aucuns de ses dois d’oile, et les boute en celle partie, et traie l’autre partie; et s’il en i demoure point, si met cest oncine ou plus haut leu, et fai ceu tant qu’il s’en isse tout fuers.	And if a part remains,  he anoints the bail some of his oil, and puts them in that part, and draws the other part; and if none remain, he places this one or higher than its place, and does so until it comes out completely. 
Et se l’une mains vient devant l’autre, et il ne puet ramener por l’estreignement, si covient que tu envoloupes sus I drapeil, tant qu’il isse tote; puis la cope en la jointure de la plante ou au coute, et ensi covient que tu faices en l’autre main, et as II piés.	And if one hand comes in front of the other, and it cannot be brought back due to tightening, it is necessary that you wrap it on the cloth, until it becomes whole; then cut into the joint of the foot or at the knee, and so it should be done with the other hand, and for the two feet.  
Et se li chiés de l’enfant est gros et il est estrois en l’issue, ou il ait ou chief aigue assemblee, si covient que tu boute le spatumile espinous entre tes dois, et fent le chief et estrai l’aigue; ou tu la ront a l’estrument qui est apelez «almidach», de coi li forme vient avec les estrumens ou chapistre qui est aprés cestui; et ensi meisme faice se li enfes a grant chief naturelment; et puis traie fuer les osses as tenailles, et se li chiés saut fuer et il estraint a la forcele, si soit fendus, tant que li moistors qui est ou pis issue fuer; et s’elle ne puet issir, si le cope par pieces au mues que tu pues; et s’il est enflez au ventre ou desoz les costez, si covient que tu lou perces tant que li moistors corre.	And if the child's head is large and it is stuck at the exit, where there is a sharp peak assembled, then it is necessary that you insert the pointed spatula between your two, and make the chief and extract the sharp point; or you do it with the instrument which is called «almidach», so that the form comes with the instruments or chapter which is after this one; and in the same way, do it if the child has a large head naturally; and then pull the bones with pliers, and if the head jumps out and it is strained by force, then be split, as long as the moisture which is or worse exit; and if it cannot exit, then cut it into pieces at the point that you can; and if it is swollen in the belly or under the ribs, then it is necessary that you pierce it until the moisture runs. 
Et se li enfes est sus ses piez, si est li attraction legiere, et li adrecemens a la bouche de la marris est legier.	And if the child is on its feet, the attraction is light, and the application to the mouth of the mare is light.
Et s’il est estrois au ventre ou au pis, si couvient que tu l’estraies a I drapeil envoloupeit sus la main; et fent le ventre ou le pis, tant que li moistors qui i est corre; et se li autre membre sont osteit, et li chiez demoure, si boute li baile sa main em parfont de la marris, et le traie jusc’a la bouche de la marris; puis i boute I oncine ou II, et le trai fuer; et se li bouche de la marris est retrecie por aposteme chaut qui i est venus, si n’i covient mie travillier, ains covient amenistrer choses moistes et grasses; et li amenistre emplaustres, et siece en aigue mollifians et amoistans.	And if it is in the belly or the breast, it is necessary that you extract it to the drapery wrapped on the hand; and make the belly or the breast, until the moisture which is there is corrected; and if the other members are ossified, and the head remains, then put the bail your hand into the marrow; and pull it up to the mouth of the marrow; then put the pin or two, and pull it further; and if the mouth of the marrow is narrowed because of a hot pustule which has come, then it is not necessary to work it, but rather things moist and fatty must be administered; and administer plasters, and sieges in soft and moist water. 
Et se li enfes est sus son costeit, et tu le pues mettre igal, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit en l’enfant vif; et s’on nen ait pooir, si lou trai fuer par pieces, et n’i laissier rien de la secondine.	And if the child is on its side, and you can put it straight, so administer what we have said in a living child; and if one has no power, so the limb will be treated in parts, and leave nothing of the secondary.  
Et quant tu avras ce fait, se li amenistre ceu que nos avons dit ens apostemes chaus que vienent en la marris; et se decorremens de sanc vient, si soit mise en aigue restraignant, et li amenistre autres cures.	And when you have done this, if it is administered to those that we have said about abscesses which come in the marshes; and if bleeding occurs, then be put in vinegar restraining it, and administer other treatments.  
Et je vis une femme en cui ventre uns enfes avoit esteit mors, puis consut .i. autre sus celui, et refut mors li autres.	And I saw a woman in whose belly one child had been dead, then conceived another on top of it, and refused death to the other.
Aprés lonc tens li vint uns apostemes en la boude, et enfla tant qu’il ovrit, et comensa a grant porreture.	After a long time there came an abscess in the belly, and it swelled so much that it opened, and began to drain profusely.
je fui apelez a la cure, et i pensai lonc tens, et ne pot soder li plaie.	I was called to treat it, and I pondered for a long time, and could not suture the wound.
Je mis sus emplaustre de fort attraction, et en issit uns os, et aprés aucuns jors uns autres.	I put on a plaster of strong attraction, and from it came a bone, and after some days another.
Je me mervillai mout, por ceu c’ou ventre n’a point d’os.	I was greatly amazed, because this one whose belly has no bone.
Si pensai que c’estoit des os d’un enfant mort.	I thought that it was the bones of a dead child.
Je quis la plaie, et en traï mains os, tant que li femme fut em millor point; et vesquit li femme lonc tens ensi, et issoit adés un poc de bowe dou leu; et je n’ai recordeit cest chapistre fuer que por ceu que, quant li maistres trueve une estrainge chose, qu’il i saiche mettre aide.	I sewed the wound, and in the hand bones, as long as the woman was in a better state; and the woman lived for a long time thus, and it seemed to her a little bow of pain from there; and I have not recalled this chapter except because, when the masters find a strange thing, that they should know how to put help. 
dou ramener la marris a son leu	to bring the bone back to its place
Ci aprés vient li forme dou pressor, a coi on ewe les livres; et a .ij. tornans as .ij. chiés des .ij. liiens.	Here after comes the form of the presser, which we have in the books; and at two turns at two joints of the two limbs.
Toutevoie, li cornes soit plus subtilz dou restrictoire, et soit fais de ebene ou de bux; et soit li bouche dou fust I doi de large, et li marge des arbres I doit, et de lonc une palme et demi; et enmi les II liemens soient dui ajostemens de cest meisme fust, qui soient fermeit en l’un et en l’autre, de demi palme de lonc ou un poc plus; et cist dui ajostement sont bouteit en la bouche de la marris por ovrir quant on torne les II cornes.	However, the horns should be more subtle in the restrictor, and it should be made of ebony or boxwood; and the mouth of the tube should be large, and the margins of the trees should be long, one palm and a half; and between the two limbs there should be two adjustments of this same tube, which are fastened in one and the other, of half a palm long or an inch more; and these two adjustments are inserted into the mouth of the mortise to open when one turns the two horns. 
Une autre forme, a sa semblance plus subtilz et plus legiere, soit faite de fust de ebene ou de bux, selonc la semblance des tenailles; et ait as II chiés II ajostemens, si com tu vois, d’une palme de lonc, et II dois de large; et quant tu vues ovrir la marris a tout l’estrument, si fai seoir la femme sor I lit, les piez pendant et les jambes overtes, puis boute les II ajostemens ajostez ensamble en la marris, et tien le chief de l’estrument desoz entre ses cuixes; puis oevre ta main a tout l’estrument, si com tu as fait as tenailles igalment, selonc la quantiteit que tu vues ovrir la bouche de la marris, tant que li baile faice ceu qu’elle vuet.	Another form, similar in appearance more subtle and lighter, is made of ebony wood or boxwood, according to the appearance of the pliers; and have as II jaws II adjustments, as you see, an arm's length long, and II inches wide; and when you see open the mare with all the instrument, so make the woman sit on the bed, her feet hanging and her legs open, then put the II adjustments together in the mare, and hold the head of the instrument below between her thighs; then operate your hand on the whole instrument, as you have done with the pliers equally, according to the quantity that you see opening the mouth of the mare, until the girl does what she wants. 
Cist estrument sont tuit sormontez, et sont multiplies lor semblances; et quant li mires les ait apareilliez, tant est plus hastans li oevre, et plus haute as homes por lor quantiteit.	This instrument are all mounted, and are multiplied their likenesses; and when the viewer has seen them appeared, so much is more haste the work, and higher to men for their quantity.
Si ne despire mie l’estrument que tu ne l’aies apparelliet, car lor necessitez n’est mie escusauble.	If it does not despise the instrument that you do not have it appeared, because their necessities is not excusable.
Quant li secondine est retenue a l’enfantement, si covient que tu comandes a la malaide qu’ele reteigne son alaine, et puis la fai esternuer de condisi, et li estraint tes mains a la bouche et au neis; et s’elle saut per ceu, bien est.	When the secondine is retained in childbirth, it is necessary that you command the woman to retain her arm, and then make her sneeze with condiments, and restrain her hands to her mouth and nose; and if she leaps for this, well is. 
Se ceu non, si prent I pot, et fai I pertus ou cuvercle, et i met herbes que puissent ovrir la bouche de la marris, si com calament, rue, anis, camomille, cassialigne et centoire; toutes ces herbes, ou aucunes d’eles, soient cuites ou pot en aigue sus le feu; puis met une caine ou pertus dou pot, et l’autre chief en la bouche de la marris, et la teigne tant que li vapors viegne dedens la marris; puis la fai esternuer, si com nos avons dit.	If this is not done, take a pot and make it porous or covered, and put herbs that can open the mouth of the fistula in it, such as calamine, rue, anise, chamomile, cassia leaf, and centaury; all these herbs, or any of them, whether boiled or steeped in water on the fire; then place a strap or covering over the pot, and the other end in the mouth of the fistula, and leave it there until the vapors come from inside the fistula; then make it sneeze, as we have said. 
Si saut li secondine hastanment.	If the second time he sneezes quickly.
Et s’elle remaint aprés ceste cure, et n’ist mie fuer, si comande a la baile qu’ele moille sa main senestre en oile de sesement ou en muscillaige de altee, et puis la boute en la nature, et quiere la secondine; et quant elle l’avra trovee, si la preigne et l’estende poc et poc droitement, si que li marris ne chiece a l’estraction; mais la covient movoir legierement a destre et a senestre, et puis traie; si venra et se desaerdra.	And if it remains after this cure, and there is no force, command the midwife to moisten her left hand in sesame oil or in an ointment of hellebore, and then put it into the vagina, and seek the second one; and when she has found it, seize it and extend it gently, so that the fetus does not fall out during the extraction; but you must move it lightly from side to side, and then pull; so it will come and be detached. 
Et se li bouche de la marris est jai estrecie, nos avons dit la cure d’esternuer, et de fumigation des herbes; et s’elle n’ist de tout ceu que nos avons dit, si garde que tu ne foloies au traire; mais il couvient que ceu qui est a la bouche de la marris, que tu le lies a la cuixe de la femme, puis la clisterize d’oignement tetrafarmaçon; si la porrira et remettra, et venra fuer; mais toutevoie, quant elle porrist si en vient male odor au stomac et au chief, et blece la malaide.	And if the mouth of the marsh is too narrow, we have said the cure of sneezing, and fumigation of herbs; and if it is not from all that we have said, then guard that you do not use milk; but it is necessary that what is at the mouth of the marsh, you tie it to the hip of the woman, then clisterize with ointment tetrafarmaçon; if it will bear and return, and come forth; but nevertheless, when it bears so there comes bad odor to the stomach and head, and pales the patient. 
Si covient donques fumigations covenaubles a ceu: aucun des anciens ont esproveit fumigation de cresson et de figues seches.	Therefore, it is necessary fumigations suitable for this: none of the ancients have experienced fumigation of watercress and dried figs.
Li forme de l’estrument a coi on fumige la femme a la retenue des flors et de la secondine si est ceste:	The form of the instrument for fumigating the woman at the time of childbirth is this:
Et est de voirre semblant a une caine, et met on le chief subtil en la nature, et les chiés larges sus le feu; et soit li fumigations sus les charbons, et la teigne tant qu’elle soit gastee, et rencomence une autre.	And it is to be seen like a dog, and one puts the head subtle in the nature, and the shoulders wide above the fire; and let the fumigation be on the coals, and the soot until it is burned, and begin another. 
de percier lou fondement	to examine the foundation
Maint enfant naissent qui n’ont mie le fondement perciet, ains l’ait estoupeit uns subtilz syfac: si covient donques a la baile qu’ele perce celui syfac a son doit, et ne lou perce mie de spatumile agut, et garse le lacement qu’elle ne le touche; puis met sus lainne moillie en vin et en oile, puis la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	Many children are born who do not have the foundation pierced, but it is stopped with a subtle syfac: so it behooves the midwife to pierce that syfac at its right place, and do not pierce it with a sharp spatula, and guard the opening so she does not touch it; then put on a fleece moistened in wine and oil, then the cure of ointment until it is healed. 
Et se tu doutes qu’il ne restoupe, si met ou pertus une caine de plonc, et li laisse mains jors, et soit ostee quant li enfes vuet aler en chambres.	And if you doubt that it does not return, then place upon it a piece of plank and leave it for many days, and remove it when the child wants to go into chambers.
Et aucune fois vient cist estoupemens de soudement de plaie ou d’aposteme; si covient coper celui soudement: si soit curez, si com nos avons dit de la caine de plonc.	And at times this stoppage comes from a scab of a wound or an abscess; so it is necessary to cover that scab; if cured, as we have said of the cautery of lead.
de la fistule dou fondement	of the fistula of the foundation
Fistules qui vienent desoz le fondement sont nodation, et groissor que vienent delez lou fondement defuer, ou en l’espaice des II parties, si a une fistule ou plusors; et quant celle nodation est anciene, si aoeuvre, et encort moistor awouse blainche ou subtilz bowe, et aucune fois sont ces fistule persans; et sont conues par ceu qu’il en ist ou egestion ou ventositeit quant li malaide fait egestion, et par aventure en saut uns vers.	Fistules which come from under the foundation are nodules, and greater than those coming from near the foundation outside, or in the space of the two parts, if there is one fistula or several; and when that nodule is old, it works, and still moisture wakes white or subtle boils, and sometimes these fistulas pierce; and they are known by those who have them or discharge or wind when the patient makes a discharge, and perhaps in jumping some towards. 
Et si a fistules que percent jusc’a la vessie, et jusc’a la moitiet de la verge; et parvienent jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, et jusc’a nout de la kowe.	And if fistulas that pierce to the bladder, and to half of the penis; and reach to the junction of the hip, and to the knee.
Et ensi conoist on la fistule persant au fondement, et ne mie persant: et est que tu boutes ton doi indice ou fondement, et boute une aguille subtil d’arain ou de fer en la fistule quant il n’i a tortuositeit.	And thus one knows the fistula passing to the base, and not passing; and it is that you put your finger or base, and insert a fine needle of iron or steel into the fistula when there is no twisting. 
Et s’il ait tortuositeit, si i boute une tente de plonc subtil, ou I poil de cheval, tant que tu sentes la tente ou le poil a ton doit; et se tu ne le sens, et il ne vient dou pertus egestion ne ventositeit ne ver, si com nos avons dit: saiches qu’elle ne perce mie; si te haste dou curer.	And if there is tortuosity, put in a tent of fine lead, or horsehair, until you feel the tent or hair at your finger; and if you do not feel it, and there is no emission from the outlet nor windiness nor liquid, as we have said: know that it does not pierce; so hurry to cure.  
Et quant li fistule est persans jusc’a la vessie ou jusc’a conduit de l’urine, si en saut li urine, et ne puet soudeir par medicines.	And when the fistula is pierced to the bladder or to the urinary passage, if it leaks urine, and cannot be closed by medicines.
S’elle est percie jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, si est li tente venans jusc’au leu; s’il n’i a tortuositeit et li invention de la dolor entor, si est qu’il en ist adés bowe, et n’i vaut medicine ne soudement par oignement; et en ces fistules persans n’a point de cure fuer que labor, et vaniteit des folz mires qui s’en entremettent.	If it is pierced up to the joint of the hip, then the tendon coming to the place; if there is no tortuosity and the invention of pain around, then it is that there is a bow in it, and there is no medicine nor treatment by ointment; and in these fistulas piercing there is no cure except labor, and vanity of fools who intervene.  
En celle qui n’est mie persans et n’est mie anciene, a esperance de saniteit par fer, si com j’ai esproveit, et est que li malaides gise entre tes mains sus son dos; et li lieve les jambes jusque sus ses cuixes, et ait ses cuixes enclinees a son ventre; puis boute une tente d’arain, ou de plonc s’il i a tortuositeit, tant que tu saiches ou li tente vient.	In the one that is neither too young nor too old, there is hope of healing by iron, as I have proven, and it is that the patient lies between your hands on his back; and you raise the legs up to his hips, and have his hips inclined to his belly; then put a tent of iron, or of lead if there is tortuosity, as long as you know where the tent comes.  
Se li malaides la sent entor le fondement, si covient que tu i boutes ton doi indice, se sens adonques que li tente l’ait perciet; et soit descoverte ou tu sens entre ton doit le syfac ou la char, adonques saiches qu’elle est persans; si n’i travillier mie c’on ne la puet saner.	If the patient feels it near the foundation, then you should put your index finger there, feeling when he touches it; and be discovered or feel between your finger the syfac or the flesh, then you know that it is pierced; if one does not work on it one cannot heal it. 
On dist toutevoie c’on em puet bien saner aucuns, mais ce avient poc; et li aide c’on i fait, si est c’on eschaufe le cautere subtil selonc la largesce de la fistule, si com il est devant dit; et le boute tout chaut en la fistule, tant qu’il viegne delez le fondement; et faice ceu II fois ou III, tant que tu saiches que ces chars fautrees soient arses, qui sont semblant a une penne d’oiseil; et puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre, tant que celle chars isse fuer, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char et soudant.	It is said that one can heal some very well, but this happens rarely; and the aid one makes is thus: if one has heated the subtle cautery according to the width of the fistula as has been said before, and it puts all hot into the fistula until it reaches the foundation; and do this II times or III, until you know that these burnt threads are burned, which are resembling an eye's feather; and then cure with moist tents in butter, until those threads have come out, then cure with oil ointment joining flesh and soldering. 
S’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	If it is thus healthy, it is well. 
Se ceu, nom autrement ne puet estre sanez; et se li tente entre, et ne perce jusc’au doit qui est ou fondement, et a entre ton doi et la tente une coverture espesse de char ou de syfac, et tu vois la fistule a ceu qui enseut la coverture dou keur; si le cope des l’encomencement de la fistule, et boute adés avant la tente, et pues le cautere aprés, tant qu’il viegne au chief de la tente; et sera delivré li tente, et cherra; puis mondefie celles chars fautrees que semblent une penne d’oisel, et n’en remaigne niant.	If this is the case, it cannot be healed otherwise; and if it pulls inward, and does not reach to the point that is the base, and between your two tendons and the pull there is a thick covering of flesh or silk, and you see the fistula at this covering down towards the heart; so cut from the beginning of the fistula, and push forward the pull, and then cauterize afterwards, until it reaches the head of the pull; and it will be delivered, the pull, and fall; then remove those threads that seem like an owl's feather, and nothing remains. 
Et si li sans te vaint, et cort entre toi et l’uevre, si le cauterize de feu ou de medicine ague.	And if the skin pulls out, and goes between you and the work, cauterize it with fire or sharp medicine.
Car li cauteres de feu assemble II bones choses: c’est a savoir, l’arsure de ces chars ajostees, et l’esteinchement de sanc et la sechor de la moistor; puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre ou en choz broiez, tant que li leus giete bowe, et isse fuer li chars arse en la bowe; puis cure la plaie des oignemens soudans enjanrans dure char, et sont les medicines seches.	For the fire cautery assembles II good things: that is to say, the burning of these joined bones, and the stopping of blood and the drying of moisture; then the cure of wet bandages in butter or in crushed herbs, as long as the wound lies open, and if the bones are burned in the wound; then cure the wound of sudden swellings by applying hard dough, and those medicines are dry. 
Car quant il est restoree, si est sanee et ne revient mie.	For when it is restored, it is healed and does not return.
Et se fistule vient jusc’a parfont dou fondement, et est esloigniez dou cors, se li boute ton doi ou fondement, et enquier ceu.	And if a fistula comes all the way down to the bottom and is separated from the body, you put your hand or foundation there and examine it.
Se tu sens la tente, et entre II est li toile ou li syfac ou chars, ou il est pres a percier, si n’i ait fuers que voie de fiance et d’esperance, par l’aministrement de l’une des III manieres: ou tu le cauterizes si com nos avons dit, ou tu le cope jusc’a fons, ou se tu pues si i met tentes et cure si com premier; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que tu ne coper le tenement qui tient le fondement, et viegne li egestions par lai sens volenteit; puis le cure, si com nos avons dit; par aventure si sera sanez, ou tu esloigne celle coverture et la munde puis qu’elle est copee delez lou fondement, ou par tente ou par autre estrument apointé; puis mondefie cele char fautree qui est en la plaie, tant com tu pues; puis estudie a restorer la plaie, et a demorer la fistule en la partie defuers le fondement: si iert plus legiere chose au malaide.	If you feel the tent, and between it is the cloth or the syfac or chars, where it is near to piercing, if there is no other way except by faith and hope, by the administration of one of the three manners: or you cauterize it as we have said, or you cut it to the bottom, or if you can put tents and cure as before; and do not go too deep in that you do not cut the tenement that holds the foundation, and come the egestions by that sense will; then cure, as we have said; perhaps it will be healed, or you remove that covering and the munde once it is cut from its foundation, or by tent or by other instrument pointed; then moundify that char fautree which is in the wound, as much as you can; then study to restore the wound, and to remain the fistula in the part outside the foundation: so will be a lighter thing for the patient. 
Et aucune fois sont fistules selonc ceste maniere: et est quant tu boutes la tente en la fistule, et elle est ou costeit dou fondement delez lou cuir desus, si pren une tente percie au chief selonc ceste forme:	And sometimes fistulas are made in this manner: and when you put the tent in the fistula, and it is on the side of the base next to the skin above, then take a tent perforated at the top according to this form. 
Et i boute .i. fil tort en .ij., et boute la tente a tout le fil en la fistule tant qu’il soit au chief.	And he puts one twisted thread into two, and puts the tent on all the thread in the fistula as long as it is at the head.
S’elle est persans en la marge dou fondement dedens, adonc estrai lou fil de celui pertus, ensi que tu boutes ton doi ou fondement; et trai le chief dou fil, et assemble les II chiés ensamble, et estraint l’un a l’autre, et le laisse I jor ou II; et le restraint aucune fois, tant que li filz cope ces chars que sont entre dous, et chiecent; puis cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit soudee et sanee.	If it is pierced in the margin of the foundation within, then extract the thread of that which is pierced, as you place your foot or foundation; and treat the head of the thread, and assemble the two heads together, and restrain one to the other, and let it be for a day or two; and restrain it no times, until the threads cope those chars that are between two, and stick; then cure the wound until it is joined and healed. 
Se li fistule ne perce, si la fai percier en toutes les manieres que tu pues, s’ele n’est trop em parfont.	If the fistula does not pierce, then make it pierce in all the ways that you can, if it is not too deeply embedded.
Car il ne covient mie faire por le lacement coper si em parfont, et puis le cure, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	For it does not behoove to make by the lacing cover if too deeply embedded, and then cure it, as we have said, until it is healed.
Li forme dou spatumile espinous dont on fent la fistule si est mout agus d’une, part et trenchans; et d’autre part non, por ceu c’on ne cope mie ceu c’on ne doit mie copeir, si com tu vois ci:	The form of the spathulate spine from which one makes the fistula is very uneven on one side and trenches; and on the other side no, because one doesn't cut what one shouldn't cut, as you see here: 
des emorroydes	of hemorrhoids
Emorrydes sont selonc II manieres: ou elles sont dedens le fondement, ausi com grain de resin, et s’en i a petites et grans, et en cort adés sanc, et s’en i a une ou plusors, et sont defuer le fondement et au chief dou fondement; mais celles qui sont defuer si ont poc de moistor, et encort adés ou un poc d’aigue citrine ou un poc de sanc, et ont la color dou cors; et li cure de ces qui les ont dedens le fondement, si est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il s’espreigne por aleir en chambres, tant que li fondemens li isse fuer, et c’aperent li filz; si te haste, et le pent as tenailles, ou tu le tien a ton ungle, puis le cope en ses racines; et se li uncine ne les pueent tenir por ses moistors, si les prent a I drapeil, ou a couton, ou d’une piece de chamelot; et les estrai a tes dois, puis les cope, et poudre desus aucunes chaudes poudres que soient en leu de cautere; ou tu les cauterize si com il est dit ou chapistre de cautere, pues les cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li fondemens ne puet issir, si clisterize le malaide de clistere mordant et aspre por laver ceu qui est ou fondement, si qu’il puist issir apertement; cant li malaides se preint, et se li fil sont fuer dou fondement, si est li cure legiere; et est que tu les preignes a ton ungle ou as tenailles, et les cope, puis les cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez, et qu’il redoute l’incision par fer.	Hemorrhages are according to II manners: or they are within the foundation, like a grain of resin, and there are small and large ones, and in short, some blood, and there are one or more, and they are outside the foundation and at the head of the foundation; but those that are outside have little moisture, and in short, or a little bit of citrine water or a little blood, and they have the color of the body; and the cure of those who have them within the foundation, is that you order the patient to stretch himself to go into chambers, as long as the foundations are issued out, and the threads appear; if you hurry, and can hold them with pliers, or you hold it with your finger, then cut them at their roots; and if the tweezers cannot hold them for their moisture, then take them with the drapeil, or with cotton, or a piece of chamelot; and extract them to your thumbs, then cut them, and powder them with some hot powders that are in their place of cautery; or you cauterize them as it is said in the chapter of cautery, then cure them from other cures until he is healed; and if the foundations cannot issue out, then clisterize the patient with a harsh and sharp clyster to wash what is in the foundation, so that it may issue openly; when the patient strains, and if the threads are outside the foundation, then the cure is light; and it is that you pick them up with your finger or with pliers, and cut them, then cure them as we have said, until he is healed, and that he fears the incision by iron.
Si covient que tu amenistre la costure selonc ceste maniere: pren I fil tort, et le boute en une aguille, et puis trai le fil au desus et fai percier l’aguille d’autre part, et torne les II chiez dou fil desoz l’aguille, et si soit dou large; et estraint le fil forment, puis noe le fil, et estrai l’aguille, et fai ensi de toz les autres, et en laisse I por corre la superfluiteit dou sanc; puis met sus le fondement I drapeil moilliet en oile roset ou en cerote, et met sus le fondement, et comande au malaide k’il repose; et puis le laisse tant qu’il chiecent, et quant il seront cheut, si les cure d’oignement et d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If it is necessary that you bring the stitch according to this manner: take I thread tort, and put it in a needle, and then draw the thread upward and make pierce the needle on the other side, and turn the two ends of the thread under the needle, and so be of the wide; and tighten the thread form, then tie the thread, and remove the needle, and do thus of all the others, and leave one for correcting the superfluity of the blood; then put upon the foundation I drapelet moist in rose oil or in cerote, and put upon the foundation, and command to the patient that he rests; and then leave him as long as it is necessary, and when they will be dry, so cure with ointment and other cures, until it is healed. 
dou sechement dou fiens ou fondement	Dryness of the bowels or foundation
Maintes fois avient sechement de fiens en l’intestine, et par constrignement de nature, et quant li maladie est vielle et medicine n’i vaut.	Many times dryness of the bowels occurs in the intestine, and by constriction of nature, and when the illness is old and medicine is not effective.
Si covient que tu reses a la point d’un spatumile ou a ton ungle l’escorce desus, qui ne le laisse a moistir; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sodez si com il covient; et s’il ne puet soder, si rencomence la rasure plus fort que devant, tant qu’il saine mout, et soit escorchiez; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	If it is necessary that you scrape at the point of a spatula or with your fingernail the bark above, which does not let it become moist; then treat it until it heals as much as is needed; and if it cannot heal, restart scraping more strongly than before, until it heals well, and is scraped off; then treat it until it is healed. 
dou fremit	Of trembling
Formice est une petite apparance fautree antor le cors, et va mout em parfont; et aucune fois la trueve li frois, et le sent on ausi comme mort de fremit, et vient en tout le cors, et plus as mains que autre part.	Formic is a small appearance false before the body, and goes much in harming; and sometimes she finds it cold, and feels it one also like dead of trembling, and comes into all the body, and more to the hands than other parts. 
Et li cure si est que tu pren une cainne d’une penne d’oie, ou une penne de vultul fort, et met celle caine sus le fremit, tant que li cercles porpreigne le fremit tot entor; puis torne ta main a tout la cainne tant que tu copes tout entor le fremit, et le met em parfont, et esraiche le fremit de ses racines.	And the cure is that you take a cane of an owl's feather, or a vulture's feather very strong, and put that cane on the furrow, until the purple circles stain the furrow all around; then turn your hand to all the cane until you cut all around the furrow, and put it in apart, and scrape the furrow from its roots. 
Et se tu vues, si fai ceu d’une caine d’arain ou de fer selonc ceste forme, et soit subtilz desoz et traians desus:	And if you see, so do this of a dog of iron or steel according to this form, and be subtle below and trailing above:
ne mie perciet, por mues tenir au doi, et mues presser Et se tu vues, si cauterize lou fremit, si com il est devant ou chapistre de cautere.	do not pierce it, for the two to hold, and move pressed And if you see, so cauterize the frenulum, as it is before or in the chapter of cautery.
de la forme dou clistere	of the form of the clister
Aucune fois fait on clistere d’argent ou d’archaut, ou d’arain fondut ou mailliet; et aucune fois fait on de ces estrumens petis et grans, selonc ces a cui il sont amenistrez.	At no time is made a clister of silver or wood, or iron melted or woven; and at no time is made of these instruments small and large, according to those to whom they are administered.
Cil donques c’on amenistre en la cure des enfans et qui sont foible et dolorous, sont petis.	Those therefore who are administered in the care of children and who are weak and painful, are small.
Li forme dou clistere petit et grant si est desus large, ou li ventres est liiez selonc ceste maniere:	The form of the clyster small and large if it is above wide, or the belly is tied according to this manner:
et i ait une desevrance ou li ventres soit liiez, si com tu vois, et li chiez soit dedens perciez; et ait a l’un des costez II pertus, et en l’autre I; et soit li ventres ou om met les medicines d’une vessie de beste ou de parchemin, et soit perciez tout entor de menus pertus, et ait entre chescun pertus I doit d’espaice, puis boute en ces pertus I fil fort de fil crut tort en X ou enqui entor, et assemble le ventre si com est une chievre; et quant li medicine est dedens, si la lie a l’estrument devant d’un fil fort, puis clisterize; et c’est li forme dou cercle:	And there is a severance where the belly is tied, as you see, and the head is pierced inside; and on one side it has II holes, and on the other I; and the belly is where one puts medicines in a bladder of beast or parchment, and is pierced all around with small holes, and there is between each hole I space, then put in these holes I strong thread of thread cut twisted in X or in which around, and assemble the belly as if it were a kid; and when the medicine is inside, tie it to the instrument in front of a strong thread, then give an enema; and this is the form of the circle. 
Et soit li medicine ne trop chaude ne trop froide, et oint le chief dou clistere d’oile ou d’aubun d’uef, ou de semblant chose, puis le boute ens legierement; puis l’espreigne li ministres a ses II mains ensamble, tant qu’il soit toz vuis, puis estrai lou clistere, et lieve li malaides ses jambes a la paroit, et se li medicine vuet issir, si la teigne tant com il puet; et s’il dort une nuit atot, si est plus grans aide.	And let the medicine be neither too hot nor too cold, and anoint the chief with clyster of oil or of egg yolk, or something similar, then insert it gently; then the minister presses the ministers with his two hands together, until he is completely wet, then remove the clyster, and raise the patient's legs to the side, and if the medicine wants to flow out, let it flow as much as possible; and if he sleeps all night, then there is greater aid. 
Et se tu le clisterizes em maladie de decorrement de ventre, et li medicine se haste d’issir, si le rencomence tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you enema the patient with illness of stomach pain, and the medicine works quickly, then repeat it until he is healthy.
Et se li emorroide sont ou fondement, ou aposteme, si soit li clistere ausi subtilz com por I enfant; et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil sus coi li cuir soit estraint:	And if the hemorrhoids are at the foundation or abscess, so is the clyster as subtle as for a child; and this is the form of the subtle clyster on which the skin is restrained:  
des plaies	of wounds
Nos avons jai dit en la division la cure des plaies; or vos dirons les cures de mains et de medicine, selonc l’acomplissement.	We have already said in the division the cure of wounds; now we will tell you the cures of hands and medicine, according to accomplishment.
Je dis que les plaies sont diverses selonc ceu qu’elles sont faites, et selonc les leus ou les plaies sont faites, et de coi elles sont faites.	I say that wounds are diverse according to what they are made, and according to the places where the wounds are made, and from what they are made.
Les choses par coi plaies sont faites sont par gitement de piere, et taille d’espee et de couteil, ou de lance ou de fust ou de siette, ou de semblans choses; ou que sont faites selonc les leus dou cors, si com plaie que chiet sus le col, ou sus le chief, ou le peis, ou le ventre, ou le foie, et semblans membres; et je vos dirai la cure de chescune plaie, et encomencerai as plaies dou chief simples, car li remenbrance venra en son chapistre.	The things by which wounds are made are by blows of stone, and sword cuts and knives, or spear or staff or arrow, or similar things; which are made according to the places of the body, such as a wound that falls on the neck, or head, or back, or belly, or liver, and similar limbs; and I will tell you the cure of each wound, and I will begin with wounds of the head simples, because the remembrance comes in this chapter.   
Je dis que quant simple plaie vient ou chief, et li os n’est brisiez, si pren garde se c’est de gitement de piere ou de semblans choses, et li cuir est toutevoie rompus et est li plaie grans, et tu doutes levement d’aposteme chaut: si le fai tantost sainier de la cephalique meismement s’il vient poc de sanc de la plaie, et soit li sainie au contraire de la partie navree; et eschuisse li malaides repletion de vin et de viandes grosses.	I say that when a simple wound comes to the head, and the bone is not broken, if you take care that it is of kidney stone or similar things, and the skin is immediately torn and the wound is large, and you doubt heavily abscess heat: then I make it healthy from the cephalic itself, even if it comes little blood from the wound, and let the bloodletting be on the contrary of the diseased part; and avoid the patient repletion of wine and heavy meats. 
Et s’il ne vuet sainier, si soit amenuisie sa viande, et ne boive point de vin, ne ne menjuce point de char; et met sor la plaie, se apostemes chaus i vient, coton moilliet en oile roset soulement, ou en vin stiptice; et s’il n’i a aposteme chaut, si met sus la plaie, s’elle est fresche a tout son sanc, et elle n’est muee par l’air, poudre, que je dirai un poc ci aprés; et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucuns oignemens, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if he does not want to bleed, let his meat be reduced, and let him drink no wine, nor eat any meat; and put on the wound, if an abscess comes there, moistened cotton in rose oil only, or in styptic wine; and if there is no abscess hot, put on the wound, if it is fresh with all its blood, and it is not moved by the air, powder, which I will say a little later; and if it has been moved by the air, put on some ointment, until it is healed. 
Et se li plaie est grans si com de tailleure d’espee et de semblans, et les levres ne se pueent assembler par tentes, si les assemble par cousture, si com je dirai as plaies dou ventre, de la costure.	And if the wound is large like a sword cut and similar, and the lips cannot be brought together with tents, then assemble them with stitches, as I will say for belly wounds, of stitching.
Se li plaie est descoverte de l’os, et pent, et ne tient mais que a un poc, si le cope; puis cure la plaie de medicine, et restoure char dure en leu de cuir, et comande au malaide a mengier grosses viandes, si com testes et froment cuit, ausi com poulz, et semblans choses.	If the wound is exposed to bone, and is hanging, and only holds on by a bit, then cut it; then cure the wound with medicine, and restore hard flesh in place of skin, and command the patient to eat large meats, such as beef and wheat cooked, also poultry, and similar things. 
Et se tu trueves ou cuir porriture, et il n’aert a l’os, si cope lou porrit tot, et giete fuer, puis le cure; et se il ait artere en la plaie ou voine, dont sans cort, et il ne puet estainchier par medicines, si quier l’artere, et se tu la trueves desloie, si la lie d’un fil; et se ceu ne profite mie, si la cauterize.	And if you find a rotting skin, and it does not reach the bone, so cut all the rot away, and throw it out, then cure; and if it has an artery in the wound or vein, which cannot be stopped without cutting, and it cannot be stopped by medicine, then sever the artery, and if you find it dislocated, tie it with a thread; and if this does not help, cauterize it.  
Et se ces plaies sont petites et simples, si est li cure legiere: et est que tu mettes ens ceste poudre qui soude ainsois que li ars l’ait muee.	And if these wounds are small and simple, then the cure is light: and it is that you put in this powder which binds as soon as the wound has closed.
Et li maniere de la poudre si est: pren encens une partie; sanc de dragon II parties; chalz vive III parties, et le poudre subtilment, et emple la plaie, et l’estraint forment, tant qu’elle s’aerse bien et se joigne a tout son sanc; et puis la lie bien, et la laisse sens desliier, s’elle n’enfle; car on n’oste la madicine tant qu’ele soit sanee.	And the manner of the powder is this: take incense one part; dragon's blood two parts; quicklime three parts, and grind the powder finely, and apply it to the wound, and hold it firmly, until it dries well and joins with all its blood; and then bind it well, and leave it untied, if it does not swell; for one removes the medicine only when it is healed. 
Et aucune fois fait on ceu de chalz soulement, quant on n’ait l’encens ne lou sanc de dragon, mais que li ars n’ait muee la plaie.	And at no time is this made with only quicklime when one has neither incense nor dragon’s blood, but that the fire has not moved the wound.
Et se li ars ait mueit la plaie, meismement en esteit, si n’i met om mie ceste poudre; mais met sus aucuns oignemens digestis, ou poulz de farine d’orge faites d’aigue et de miel, tant qu’ele giete bowe; puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the fire has cauterized the wound, even in its state, do not put on this powder; but put some digested ointments, or poultices of barley flour made with water and honey, until it softens; then cure other cures until it is healed.  
Et se li brisure d’os vient avec la plaie, et elle est petite, si l’estrai as pinceures subtilz; et je vos dirai ci aprés les brisures dou chief.	And if the fracture of bone comes with the wound, and it is small, so extract it with fine pincers; and I will tell you here afterward the fractures of the head.  
de la plaie dou col	of the wound of the neck
Se plaie vient ou col et elle est simple, si n’a point de difference entre li et celi dou chief, mais se li ners dou col ou li artere est copee.	This wound comes from the neck and it is simple, if there is no difference between this one and that of the head, but if the nerve of the neck or the artery is cut.
Se c’est li ners, si n’i a autre engien que laissier la cure, et n’i mettre nulle chose restraignant, car il nuit as ners et les fait retraire; et ne mettre sus la plaie rien froit, car li substance des ners est froide, et li continuation d’aus si est avec le cerveil, qui est li plus haus membres; mais soit li medicine souez, si com chalz lavee en aigue douce, et mellee avec oile roset, et cucie lavee ausi en aigue douce, et autres pieres de mine selonc ceste maniere, et oignemens moistes.	If it is the nerve, there is no other thing to leave the cure, and do not put anything restraining, because it harms the nerves and makes them retract; and do not put on the wound anything cold, because the substance of the nerves is cold, and the continuation of it is with the brain, which is the highest member; but be the medicine warm, such as hazel washed in sweet water, and mixed with rose oil, and boiled water also in sweet water, and other stones of mine according to this manner, and moist ointments.  
Et se li plaie est grans, si la cout et lie de bendes, puis la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the wound is large, then stitch it and tie it with bandages, and treat it until it is healed.
Et se les plaies sont parfondes et ele est chevee et pleinne de bowe, si la perce ou plus bas leu; et se li artere est copee, et decorremens de sanc en vient, si la desoivre, et la loie, et la cauterize se mestier est; et se li espinee de la gorge est copee, ou li keurs, et li conduiz est gardez, par coi la viande va, si cout le keur sus la cainne de la gorge, et ne touchier la gorge mais la remet selonc sa figure naturel; et puis l’estraint avenanment, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le cure d’oignemens desechans tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li plaie a fait empression en l’os, si la quier; et s’il i a pieces d’os, si les trai fuers toz se tu pues, et ces que tu ne pues avoir, si laisse tant que li plaie porrisse, et soit desevree et aligie li issue; et se li plaie est fresche, si poudre sus la poudre que j’ai dit.	And if the wounds are deep and she is covered and full of pus, then pierce or lower them; and if the artery is cut, and blood flows, then stop it, and bind it, and cauterize as necessary; and if the spine of the throat is cut, or the windpipe, and the conduction is guarded, so that the flesh goes, then sew the heart on the chain of the throat, and do not touch the throat but put it back according to its natural form; and then bind it firmly, and leave it for some days, then cure with ointments until it is healed; and if the wound has made an impression in the bone, then remove it; and if there are pieces of bone, treat them externally as much as you can, and those that you cannot have, then leave them until the wound decays, and become free and aligned its issue; and if the wound is fresh, put powder on the powder that I have said. 
Et s’il a en la plaie os et il i a fistule, si la cure ensi com j’ai dit en son chapistre.	And if there are bones in the wound and it has a fistula, treat it as I have said in my chapter.
de la plaie de lance ou de coutel	of the wound from a spear or knife
Se c’est cop de lance ou de coutel, et li plaie est parfonde, si regarde se de la plaie saut ventositez cant li malaides alainne: saiches adonques que li plaie est mortelz; et s’elle n’est parfonde, et elle est fresche a tout son sanc, si n’i mettre mie a la premiere houre la poudre, ne ne la liier mie por le sanc que ne demorse em parfont, et reviegne au cuer, et ocie lou malaide; mais i met oignement atractif, et le lie II fois le jor; et se tu n’as oignement, si met en la plaie viel coton por succier fuers la moistor, et fai dormir le malaide sus la plaie III jors, ou IIII, ou plusors; si n’i venra mie spasme, ne tremor male de cuer n’estraingnemens d’alainne; et quant tu vois les bones dispositions, si saiches que li plaie est sauve.	If it is a wound from a lance or a sword, and the wound is deep, see if from the wound there are puffs of wind as the patient breathes: know then that the wound is mortal; and if it is not deep, and it is fresh in all its blood, do not put anything on it at first hour, nor bind it tightly for fear that the blood does not drain deeply and returns to the heart, and harms the patient; but put attractive ointment on it, and bind it twice a day; and if you have no ointment, put old cotton in the wound to suck out the moisture, and make the patient sleep on his wound for 3 days, or 4, or more; so that there comes no spasm, nor bad tremor of the heart nor constraint of the breath; and when you see the good dispositions, know that the wound is saved.   
Cure la donques de tentes et d’autres cures, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’elle ne puet saner, et oevre, adés saiches que il i a fistule; si la cure si com on doit.	Therefore treat with tents and other treatments, until it is healed; and if it cannot heal and works, then recognize that there is a fistula; then treat the fistula as one should.  
Et se li plaie est d’incision d’espee ou de coutel, et elle est simple, ou pis ou au dos, si la cure de ceu qui est devant; s’elle est grans, de cousture; et s’elle est petite, de poudre, et s’elle est empressee en l’os, et en a copeit pieces, si quier la plaie, et les trai fuers s’il sont desevrez; et s’il ne sont desevrez, si laisse porrir la plaie, si aligera li estractions; et des autres plaies as autres membres est li jugemens si com nos avons dit.	And if the wound is from a sword or knife incision, and it is simple, or worse, or on the back, then the cure of that which is in front; if it is large, stitch it; and if it is small, with powder; and if it is embedded in bone, and has struck pieces, then care for the wound, and pull out the fragments if they are loose; and if they are not loose, then let the wound rot, so that it will lighten the extractions; and for other wounds on other limbs is judgment as we have said.  
dou derrompement dou ventre	Of the displacement of the belly
Li derompemens dou ventre est grans et moiens et petis; de la grant plaie saut aucune fois li intestine, ou li ners des intestines, par coi li intromission d’aus; et li costure est plus malaisie, et aucune fois vaut pis li petite plaie que li grans, por ceu c’on remet plus a poinnes les intestines en, s’on ne les i remet de chaut en chaut; por ce que li intestine enflent tantost qu’il sentent le froit, si rentrent plus a poinnes, et por ceu vaut mues li moieinne plaie, por ceu c’on ramoine mues l’intestine a son leu que as autres II Et saiches que li routure dou ventre est selonc IIII manieres: les II costures communes avienent en la costure dou ventre, et li costure des autres plaies dou cors et II autres costures propres sont communes as autres plaies; et toutevoie elles sont plus propres avec la costure dou ventre, et je dirai une chescune et declairerai.	The rupture of the belly is large and medium and small; from a great wound, sometimes the intestine, or the nerve of the intestines comes out, because of which there is intrusion of something else; and the suture is more difficult, and sometimes it is worse than the small wound that the large one, because for this reason one puts the intestines back in with more care, unless they put them back quickly into hot; because the intestine inflates as soon as they feel cold, so they enter in more carefully, and for this reason the medium wound is worse for this reason, for which reason one brings the intestine back to its place that others II And know that the rupture of the belly is according to IV manners: the II sutures common happen in the suture of the belly, and the suture of other wounds of the body and II other sutures are proper common to other wounds; and anyway they are more proper with the suture of the belly, and I will say one by one and declare. 
Je di que quant li plaie est petite, et aucune chose de l’intestine ist fuer, et griés chose est dou remettre, ceu est par l’une des II manieres: ou por la petitece de la plaie, si com nos avons dit, ou por ce que li intestine est enflez por le froit.	I say that when the wound is small, and nothing of the intestine is protruding, and it is necessary to close it, this is done in one of two ways: or because of the smallness of the wound, as we have said, or because the intestine is swollen from the cold. 
Et quant il est frois, eschaufez lou en teil maniere: moillie une esponge ou I mol drapeil en aigue tede soulement, ou tu cuis en aigue squinant et cipre et spique, et arose l’intestine tant que li enfleure soit ostee; et aucune fois fait ce vins restraingnans, et est muedre que awe soule por desenfler.	And when it is cold, warm it in this manner: soak a sponge or a soft cloth in hot water only, or you cook in hot water with squill and cypress and spice, and raise the intestine until the swelling is removed; and sometimes do this restraining, and move it that it alone be untied to deflate.  
Et quant tu vois l’enfleure departir, si amoiste l’intestine d’aigue ou altee et malves soient cuites, car par ceu est aligie li entree a poc de chose; et s’il n’i puet entrer, si fent un poc la plaie a l’estrument de coi on cope les emorroydes; et li premiere cure est muedre que li taille, que nus n’i doit taillier sens grant necessiteit n’i ait; et c’est li estrumens por le fendre: si trenche dedens en la corbeure et defuer non, et vez ci la forme:	And when you see the swelling depart, moisten the intestine with water or ale and malves be cooked, because by this is aligned the entrance to a little thing; and if it cannot enter, make a hole in the wound with the instrument with which one copes hemorrhoids; and the first cure is to move that the tail, that no one should cut it unless there is great necessity; and this is the instrument for fending: so cut inside into the curve and outside not, and see here the form. 
Et quant li plaie est enlargie, et li intestine saut fuer, si le remet arer selonc la forme naturel en son leu propre, se tu en as pooir, car ce vaut mues.	And when the wound is enlarged, and the intestine has fallen out, put it back in place according to its natural form, if you are able, because this helps healing. 
Quant li plaie est large, et elle est en la partie desoz lou ventre, si covient que tu faices gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et met ses jambes plus haut que son chief; et s’elle est en la partie desoz le ventre, si met le chief et le pis plus haut que les parties desoz, et ausi se li routure dou ventre est en l’une des II parties si met t’entente en ceu que li partie navree soit plus haute que li autre; et ensi covient amenistrer ceu que je dis en plaies grans et moienes.	When the wound is large, and it is in the part below the belly, then you should make the patient lie on his back, and put his legs higher than his head; and if it is in the part below the belly, then put the head and the hips higher than the parts below, and also if the rupture of the belly is in one of the two parts, then put your attention to that the wounded part be higher than the other; and thus you should administer what I say in large and medium wounds.  
Es plaies petites met ceu que t’est apparilliet, puis aies entre tes mains I ministre pitous ki teigne toute la routure a sa main, et assemble les levres; et c’est la maniere commune de costures, et est que tu preignes une aguille ou plusors, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce de la plaie, puis laisse des le chief de la plaie I doi d’espaice, et i fiche une aguille ou il ait I boin fil fort; et perce les II chiés dou cuir avec les II chiés dou siphac, qui est desoz le cuir dedens, tant que tu la faices percier de celle partie, et assemble les II chief dou siphac les IIII ensamble; puis l’estrain d’un fil double entor l’aguille de II pars, puis assemble les II chiés de la plaie avenanment, et puis laisse I doi d’espaice, et i fiche une autre aguille; puis la lie dou fil si com tu as fait la premiere aguille, et ne cesser de ceu faire selonc ceu que tu as mestier des aguilles, tant que toute li plaie soit restrainte; et soient les aguilles moienes, entre subtilz et grosses, car les aguilles subtilz copent toute la char, et les trop grosses si ne pueent mie bien entrer: por ceu covient qu’elles soient moienes; et ne covient mie bouter les aguilles trop au defuer de la char et dou cuir, k’elles ne copent et oevrent la plaie devant la soudure; et puis cope les chiés des aguilles, qu’elles ne blecent lou malaide au dormir, et i met tentes ou drapelz au chiés des aguilles por mues tenir, et les laisse tant que li plaie soit soudee; et ceste maniere de costure as aguilles est plus covenauble en petites plaies, car il i soffist une aguille ou II Li seconde costure si est commune, et est que tu assemble les II chiés dou cuir et les II chiés dou syfac ensamble a une aguille ou il ait I fort fil moien; et quant tu avras perciez ces chiez toz IIII ensamble, si ramoinne l’aguille a la partie ou tu as encomenciet, en la maniere c’on cout les dras; et met d’espaice entre chescune costure la grossece d’un menor doi; ceste costure sevent li home, et je cousi une plaie c’uns hons avoit ou ventre, qui estoit navrez d’un coutel, et estoit li plaie plus d’une palme de grant, et issoit des intestines bien II palmes de grant, et estoit li plaie enmi le ventre.	Small wounds put that which appears to you, then hold between your hands the minister pitiful who holds all the rupture in his hand, and assemble the lips; and this is the common manner of stitching, and is that you prick a needle or more, according to the quantity of the breadth of the wound, then leave from the chief of the wound one span of space, and there put a needle where it has good strong thread; and pierce the two heads of the skin with the two heads of the siphac, which is under the skin within, as long as you make it pierce from that part, and assemble the two chiefs of the siphac together; then the strain of a double thread around the needle of two parts, then assemble the two heads of the wound again, and then leave one span of space, and there put another needle; then the tie of the thread like as you have done the first needle, and do not cease to do so according to what you have need of needles, until the whole wound is restrained; and let the needles be medium, between subtle and thick, for the subtle needles cut all the flesh, and the too thick ones cannot well enter: therefore it behoves that they be medium; and it behoves not to put the needles too far out of the flesh and skin, lest they cut and open the wound before the suture; and then cut the heads of the needles, so that they do not prick the patient while sleeping, and there put tents or bandages at the heads of the needles for the muse to hold, and leave them until the wound is sutured; and this manner of stitching with needles is more convenient in small wounds, for there suffices one needle or two for the second stitch, which is common, and is that you assemble the two heads of the skin and the two heads of the siphac together on a needle where it has good medium thread; and when you have pierced these heads all together, then move the needle to the part where you have commenced, in the manner in which one sews the clothes; and put space between each stitch the thickness of a finger span; this suture is used by men, and I sewed a wound on a man's belly, who was wounded with a knife, and the wound was more than a palm wide, and it was intestines well two palms wide, and the wound was in the middle of the belly. 
Je li ramenai l’intestine puis k’il ot esteit XXIIII houres fuer, et fut li plaie soudee jusc’a XV jors, et le curai, et fut sanez.	I brought back his intestine after it had been out for 24 hours, and the wound closed up for 15 days, and I treated him, and he was cured.  
Et li mire l’avoient jugiet qu’il morroit, et ce fut miracle; et ne le curai mie d’oignement, car je estoie en I leu ou on n’en trovoit point, ne nule medicines; et metoie sens plus sus la plaie coton viel II fois le jor, et le lavoie d’aigue de miel tant qu’il fut sanez.	And the wise men had judged that he would die, and it was a miracle; and I did not heal him with ointment, because I was in that place where one could find none, nor any medicine; and I put upon the wound cotton old II times a day, and washed it with honey water until it was healed. 
Or vos dirai les II propres manieres de cousture: pren l’aguille, et la boute des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens; quant elle a perciet le keur de droit en droit, si lai le chief dou siphac ou cousteit ou tu as bouteit l’aguille, et la fai percier d’autre part des la partie dedens jusc’a celi defuer; et li entendemens de ceste costure si est que tu cous ausi com li peletier font les pelz, et que tu laisses une fois le syfac d’une part, et le reprent d’autre, tant que li costure soit toute acomplie.	Or I will tell you the II proper ways of stitching: take the needle, and put it from the outside part to the inside; when it has pierced the core straight on straight, lay the point down on the skin or where you have put the needle, and make it pierce from the other side, from the inside to the outside; and the understanding of this stitch is that you stitch as the furrier does furs, and that you leave one side of the skin once, and take it back another, until the stitching is all complete. 
Li seconde maniere de costure, que Galiens dist proprement, si est si com aucun font, qui assemblent les II parties ensamble naturelment, et apploient l’un des chief dou syfac a l’autre chief, en teil maniere: fiche une aguille ou chief dou mirach prochiene, et fai percier celui leu soulement, et laisse les II chiés dou syfac; puis torne l’aguille, et la fai percier des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, as II chiés dou syfac; puis fai percier l’un et l’autre des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, en II autres chiés dou mirach que sont on l’autre costeit; et c’est li muedre maniere de costure et li plus commune.	The second manner of stitching, which the Galicians say properly, is like any font, which brings together the two parts naturally, and apply one end to the other end, in this manner: pierce a needle or end of mirach near, and make it pass through that place alone, and leave the two ends of the syfac; then turn the needle, and make it pass from the outside part to the inside, at the two ends of the syfac; then make it pass through one and the other, from the outside part to the inside, in two other ends of mirach that are on the other side; and this is the most common manner of stitching. 
Galiens si dist ceste parolle, et aucun le tesmoignent, c’on doit coudre le ventre a II aguilles, ou il ait fil en chescune; et doit on bouter l’une aguille d’une part, et l’autre d’autre, en la maniere de ces qui cousent corroies; et saiches que quant li routure est enmi lou ventre, si est li cousture plus griez que des autres leus dou ventre.	Galians says this word, and no one testifies to it, one must sew the belly with two needles, where there is thread in each; and one must push one needle on one side, and the other on the other, in the manner of those who sew belts; and know that when the rupture is in the middle of the belly, the suture is more grievous than the others of the belly. 
Li jugemens de la plaie si est telz com li jugemens des autres plaies: et est que quant tu trueves la plaie fresche a tout son sanc, ainsois que li ars l’ait muee, si remet arer l’intestine, et lou cout; puis met sus la poudre enjanrant char, et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucun oignement que soit present, tant que li plaie bowe; et chicent li fil, et soient soudez li sifac, et li mirach; puis cure la plaie si com les autres, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu n’as medicines, si met sus, tantost qu’ele comance a giter bowe, coton viel, et le remue II fois le jor tant k’il soit sanez.	The judgments of the wound are such as the judgments of the other wounds: and it is that when you find the wound fresh with all its blood, just as soon as the artery has been moved, then put back the intestine, and the gut; then put on powder enjanrant char, and if the artery has been moved, then put on any ointment that is present, until the wound bows; and stitch the thread, and be joined the sifac, and the mirach; then cure the wound as the others, until it is healed; and if you do not have medicines, then put on, as soon as it begins to get bowed, old cotton, and move it twice a day until it is healed.  
Car tu n’as mestier d’autre medicine en plusors dispositions cant les plaies sont simples; et se tu doutes que li plaie ne faice communiteit as membres principelz, si covient ke tu moilles lainne legiere en oile de tempree chalor, ou en oile roset, et la met entor les angres, et desoz les asselles; et s’il sent dolor ou porriture en bouelz, et maintes fois avient, si les clisterize de vin noir tede, et meismement se li porriture vient jusc’a l’intestine; et le perce dedens, et saiches que quant c’est li gros intestines, si est plus legier a saner que li petis.	Because you do not have need of other medicine in many dispositions as long as the wounds are simple; and if you doubt that the wound does not make communion with the principal members, it is necessary that you moisten the linen lightly in oil of tempered heat, or in rose oil, and put it around the angles, and under the buttocks; and if it feels pain or putrefaction in bowls, which happens many times, so the clysters of black wine help, and even if the putrefaction comes to the intestine; and pierce it inside, and know that when it is the large intestines, it is easier to heal than the small. 
Li intestine qui est apelez «jeun» ne puet saner quant il est navrez, et c’est por la planteit des voinnes que i sont, et por la subtiliteit de tout le cors, et l’aprochement de sa nature des ners.	The intestine that is called "jejunum" cannot heal when it is pierced, and this is because of the delicacy of the veins that are in it, and because of the subtlety of the whole body, and the proximity of its nature to the nerves. 
Et si li zirbe saut de la plaie, si le remet arrier ausi com l’intestine, tandis qu’il est fres; et s’il est vielz et devenus vers ou noir, si covient que tu lies le leu qui est noir, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, car il i a voinnes et arteres; puis cope ceu qui est entre le liien, et met les II chiés pendans des la partie desoz la plaie jusque defuer por aligier l’estraction quant li zirbes chiet, et li plaie bowe.	And if the thread jumps from the wound, put it back in as well as the intestine, while it is fresh; and if it is old and has become black or dark, then you must tie the place that is black, so that bleeding does not come from there, because there are veins and arteries; then cut what is between the ligature, and put the two heads hanging from the part below the wound up to outside in order to align the extraction when the thread falls and the wound bows.  
de la routure dou boueil	of the rupture of the boil
Quant li intestine est rons, et li plaie est petite, si la puet on restorer en aucuns homes, por ceu que je vis que uns hons fut navrez ou ventre d’une lance; et estoit li plaie au destre de l’estomac, et fut envillie et devint fistule, et en issoit li egestion et li ventositez; je i mis cure selonc ceu que je poi, et ne cessai de subtilier tant qu’il fut sanez, et li leus soudez.	When the intestine is pierced, and the wound is small, it can be restored in some people, because I saw that one man was struck in his belly by a lance; and the wound was on the right side of the stomach, and it became inflamed and became a fistula, and through it there was discharge and flatulence; I put treatment according to what I could, and did not stop working until he was healed, and the edges were soldered.  
Et quant je le vis souder, je doutai que li malaides n’eust mal en son ventre; et il n’i ot point de mal, mais demora en millors dispositions, et menjans et bevans; et dirent aucun experimentors que quant il a petite plaie en l’intestine, qu’il doit estre liiez en teil maniere: pren fremis a grans testes, puis assemble les levres de la plaie, et quant li fremis ait overte la bouche, si la met sus les II levres, si qu’elle estraigne sa bouche sus; et puis li cope la teste, et ce se tient si qu’il ne puet desliier, puis met I autre fremit aprés en celle maniere que devant, tant que li plaie soit toute porprise; et cout la plaie.	And when I saw him sutured, I doubted that the patient was ill in his belly; and there was no harm, but he remained in better dispositions, and ate and drank; and some experimenters said that when he has a small wound in the intestine, it must be tied in this manner: take two reeds with large heads, then assemble the lips of the wound, and when the reed has covered the mouth, put it on the two lips so that it strains its mouth upwards; and then cut off the head, and it stays so that it cannot untie, then put another reed afterwards in the same manner as before, until the wound is entirely captured; and stitch the wound. 
Cil chief si s’aerdent en l’intestine, et ne vient nulle nuisance au malaide, et se puet on liier l’intestine d’un fil subtil qui est copez de l’intestine d’une beste, en teil maniere: pren le chief de cest fil d’intestine que soit mout descharnez, et puis lie au chief de cest fil I fil de lin subtil tort, puis boute le fil en l’aguille, et en cout l’intestine, et le ramoinne en la routure; et ceste maniere de costure de fremis nen est fuers que selonc la voie de fiance et d’esperance; et se li plaie est grans et large, meismement quant elle est en l’un des grailes intestines, si n’i a engien ne santeit, fuer que subtiliteit.	If the head is set in the intestine, and no nuisance comes to the patient, one can tie the intestine with a fine thread that is cut from the intestine of a beast, in this manner: take the head of this intestinal thread that be well cleaned, and then tie it to the head of this linen thread twisted thin, then put the thread in the needle, and sew the intestine, and pull it back into the rupture; and this manner of stitching of threads is not worse than according to the way of fiance and hope; and if the wound is large and wide, especially when it is in one of the main intestines, there is nothing but subtlety.
de fistule ou qu’ele soit	of fistula or wherever it may be
Saiches que toute plaie ou aposteme, quant il enveillist, si est apelee universement «fistule», et meismement quant elle est chevee et rent bowe.	Know that every wound or abscess, when it opens, is universally called “fistula,” and even when it is healed and closed inward.  
Et fistule est selonc la verteit nodation fautree dure et blainche, ou on ne sent dolor, et est ausi chevee com li penne d’un oiseil; et aucune fois en saut clere bowe, et autre fois espesse; aucune fois poc, et autre fois assez; et je en ai jai parleit en la division des plaies, que toute plaie que n’est sanee, et il n’i a char, ce n’est fuers que par une des VIIII causes: c’est a savoir, par la petitece dou sanc ou cors; ou por sa malice; ou por ceu qu’il i a char dure dedens, et sus les levres, que n’i laisse naistre char; ou il i a trop de bowe; ou li leus est porris, et li matiere est de male qualiteit; ou li medicine n’est mie bone en la cure; ou por ceu que li corruption est maniere de pestilence; ou por la proprieteit en la region est tardive li digestion, et tarde li santeit, et enflee par nature; ou il i a voinnes ou os: et j’ai ja mostreit toutes ces causes, et les signes, et les cures de medicines en la division.	And fistula is according to the truth knotted false and white, where one does not feel pain, and it is also shaped like the feather of a bird; and sometimes clear bowe, and other times thick; sometimes small, and other times enough; and I have spoken about it in the division of wounds, that any wound that is not healed, and there is no flesh, it is nothing but by one of the IX causes: that is to say, by the little blood or body; or for its malice; or because there is hard flesh inside, and on the lips, which does not allow flesh to be born; or there is too much bowe; or the layers are rotten, and the matter is of bad quality; or the medicine is not good in the cure; or because corruption is a manner of pestilence; or because the property in the region is late digestion, and slow healing, and swollen by nature; or there are veins or bones: and I have already shown all these causes, and the signs, and cures of medicines in the division. 
Or covient que je te faice a savoir la cure de fistule qui est faite par oevre de mains.	Therefore it is necessary that I make you know the cure of a fistula which is done by the work of hands.
Saiches que fistule avient en tous membres dou cors; car il i a fistules que vienent as grans voines, et as arteres, et as ners, ou au syfac, ou a l’intestine, ou a la vessie, ou a aucunes des costes, ou a l’espinee dou dos, ou a aucune jointe des mains ou des piez; et si a teil que vient a la proprieteit dou membre principeil, et as semblans leus.	Know that fistulas can occur in all parts of the body; for there are fistulas that come to the large veins, and to the arteries, and to the nerves, or to the liver, or to the intestines, or to the bladder, or to any of the ribs, or to the spine of the back, or to any joint of the hands or feet; and so on that it comes to the propriety of the principal member, and to similar ones. 
Et toutes les fistules que sont de ceste maniere sont de grief sanation, et n’i a fors que labour, et ignorance; et se il i a aucune fistule que ne veigne mie jusc’a leu que j’ai dit, et tu as fiance de la cure, et tu la vues conoistre, si pren une tente d’arain ou de fer, se li fistule est droite, si la quier; et se li fistule est torte, si la cerche d’une subtil tente de plonc, car li plons se ploie mues entor la tortuositeit; et se li fistule a mains pertus et tu ne la pues mie bien cerchier par tentes, si la clisterize par l’un des pertus, car la moistors si cort d’un pertus a autre, et la mundifie; puis la quier saigement a ton pooir, que tu conoisses s’il i a os ou nerf, et est chevee em parfont, et demande bien au malaide de la dolor qu’il sent au presser de ta main, et le leu ou il la sent; et quant tu savras vraiement le leu ou elle est, et s’elle est loing de jointure, ou de nerf, ou d’artere ou de voine, ou en aucuns des leus que je t’ai dit, si la cope selonc ceu que je t’ai dit, et oste fuer la fautreure et les chars corrumpues que sont dedens; et puis la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee, et se li fistule est bien parfonde de droit endroit, si covient que tu copes em parfont, tant com tu pues, puis i met tentes moillies en medicine ague, et les boute jusc’au chief de la fistule, tant que li medicine corrode la superfluiteit qui est demoree au fons; et puis i met oignemens enjanrans sainne char, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il n’est sanez par ceu, si le cauterize si com nos avons dit, et se li os est corrompus de la fistule, si le cope.	And all the fistulas that are of this manner are of grievous healing, and there is only labor, and ignorance; and if there is any fistula that does not come to the place that I have said, and you have faith in the cure, and you want to know it, then take a tent of iron or of fer, if the fistula is straight, so much. And if the fistula is crooked, so wrap it with a subtle tent of lead, because lead bends itself around the tortuosity; and if the fistula has many openings and you cannot well wrap it with tents, so clistetize it by one of the openings, because the moisture comes from one opening to another, and it cleanses; then wrap it sagely according to your power, that you know if there is bone or nerve, and is healed in depth, and ask the patient well about the pain that he feels when pressing with your hand, and the place where he feels it; and when you will truly know the place where it is, and if it is far from the joint, or nerve, or artery or vein, or in any of the places that I have told you, so cut according to what I have told you, and remove the foul matter and corrupt matter that are inside; then cure until it is healed, and if the fistula is well deep and right, then it is necessary that you cut in depth, as much as you can, then put moistened tents in a medicine of vinegar, and put them to the head of the fistula, until the medicine corrodes the superfluity that is remaining at the bottom; then put ointments of healthy flesh, until it is healed; and if it is not healed by these, so cauterize it as we have said, and if the bone is corrupted by the fistula, so cut it. 
Se voinne ou ners ne te greve ou membres principelz, si com nos avons dit; et se li os est descovers, et il i a corruption et noiror, si lou reis tant que li corruption soit toute ostee, puis le cure de choses enjanrans char tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il n’est sanez, et rent bowe si com devant, saiches que tu n’es mie alez jusc’a font: si descuevre et quier tant que tu soies au fons, et oste toute la corruption, puis restore le leu; et s’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	If a vein or nerves or principal members do not trouble you as we have said; and if the bone is uncovered and there is corruption and blackness, then cleanse it as long as the corruption is entirely removed, then cure the flesh with things that come after until it is healed; and if it is not healed and returns like before, know that you have not gone as far as the bottom: uncover and search as long as you are at the bottom, and remove all the corruption, then restore it in its place; and if it is so healed, it is good.  
Se ceu non, saiches que la corruption est trop en parfont, que tu n’i pues avenir; si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier a nature; et s’il i a i petit os corrumput, et tu le pues traire as tenailles, si l’estrai a I estrument covenauble a ceu, et s’il i a maint os, si les trai trestoz, ne n’en laissier nes un; et se li moistor te fait contraire, et il n’i a error ne paour, si cope et moistor et char, et delivre les os.	If this is not the case, know that corruption is too far along, that you cannot come to it; if there is nothing else but to leave it to nature; and if there is a small bone corrupted, and you can extract it with pliers, then extract it with a suitable instrument for this, and if there are many bones, then treat them all, do not leave even one; and if the moisture opposes you, and there is no error or fear, then cut both the moisture and flesh, and deliver the bones. 
Et se tu ne les pues oster a une houre, si met sus la plaie chose enjanrant porriture, et laisse tant que li leus soit porris entor les os, et adonc si avront plus legierement les os; et se c’est uns grans os, si com de jambe ou de cuisse, si reis tant soulement la corruption tant que li noiror soit toute ostee, puis restoure la plaie; et s’il en i a grant partie dou corrumput, et vient jusc’a mole de l’os; si le covient soier et coper tout jusc’a la corruption, et puis le cure tant qu’il soit soudez; et je te dirai d’une fistule qui avint I home en sa jambe, si que tu i preignes exemple et aide en ton ovraige.	And if you cannot remove them in an hour, put on the wound something preventing rot, and leave until the flesh is rotten around the bones, then they will have more easily the bones; and if it is a large bone, such as of leg or thigh, so let it be only the corruption as long as the black is entirely removed, then restore the wound; and if there is a great part of the corruption, and comes to the marrow of the bone; so it should be sewn and covered until the corruption, and then cure it until it is joined; and I will tell you of a fistula which happened to a man in his leg, so that you take example from it and help in your work. 
Il fut I jovencelz entor XXX ans, qui ot une dolor en sa jambe d’une cause que vint dedens le cors, tant que les matieres vinrent a la jambe, et fut enflee d’un gros aposteme, et n’ot point de cause defuer por ovrir; mais li mire par lor folie ovrerent tant sus que li apostemes ovri, et en corroient mout de matieres, et devint fistule, et i vint mout de pertus que tuit gitoient bowe et moistor dou cors; et maint mire i mirent cure entor II ans, et n’i ot nul saige en l’art de mains, tant que je i fui apelez, et vi sa jambe et les medicines dont on le curoit, et ceu que corroit par les pertus a grant cors; et devenoit rouges li cors dou jouvenceil, et avoit color citrine.	There was a young man about XXX years old, who had pain in his leg from a cause that came from within the body, until the materials came to the leg, and it swelled with a large abscess, and there was no external cause to open; but the surgeons by their folly operated so much that the abscess opened, and they corroded much matter, and it became a fistula, and there came many openings that all secreted moist from the body; and many surgeons treated it for about II years, and there was no wise man in the art of hands, until I was called to him, and I saw his leg and the medicines with which he was treated, and what ran through the openings with great pus; and the young man's skin became red, and had a yellow color. 
Je boutai une tente en l’un de ces pertus, et puis cerchai toz les pertus, et trovai que li uns venoit encontre l’autre de toutes les parties de la jambe.	I covered a tent over one of these pits, and then I searched all the pits, and found that some came opposite each other from all parts of the leg. 
Je me hastai donques, et copai en l’un des pertus tant que je descovri une partie de l’os, et le trovai corrumput et perciet, et venoit li corruption jusc’a l’os dedens; je soiai ceu qui m’aparissoit de l’os corrumput, et cuidai qu’il n’i eust autre corruption, fuer que celi que je ostai; et comensai a restourer la plaie de medicines sodans par lonc tens, et ne pot souder; et puis rencomensai, et descovri l’os si com devant, et trovai la corruption continuee en l’os, et la soiai, et puis l’ostai, et me penai de souder le leu; mais je ne pou tant que je copai entor une palme de l’os, et le traï fuer a tout son mole, puis le restourai de medicines; et il fut sanez et soudez hastanment, et ne covint plus rencomencier l’ovraige fors por la foibleté dou malaide, qui ne pooit soffrir, et por la paour de mort que je avoie de lui.	I hastened therefore, and scraped in one of the openings until I discovered a part of the bone, and found it rotten and pierced, and the corruption came up to the inner bone; I saw what appeared to me of the rotten bone, and thought that there was no other corruption except that which I had removed; and I began to restore the wound with healing medicines for a long time, and could not join it; and then I began again, and discovered the bone as before, and found the corruption continued in the bone, and I saw it, and then removed it, and decided to solder the place; but I could not more than I scraped around an arm's length of the bone, and the trail was throughout its whole thickness, then I restored it with medicines; and it became healthy and joined quickly, and it did not need to begin the work again except for the weakness of the patient, who could not endure, and for the fear of death that I had of him. 
Car por l’evacuation sanglotoit sovent, mais il fut sanez entierement, et nasquit en leu de l’os une char dure, et fut de bone disposition et n’ot point de nuisement ne de contraire dou tout en tout, ne a l’aleir ne a venir.	Because for the evacuation of blood often, but it was healed entirely, and in place of the bone grew a hard cartilage, and he was of good disposition and did not have any harm or opposite at all, neither in going nor coming.  
Et se li os est brisiez en aucun leu dou cors, si le covient soier en ceste maniere: pren I liien, et l’estrain au chief de l’os qui apert, et comande aucun k’il l’estende en haut; et met I autre lien de lainne plus gros dou premier liien, et le lie sus la char qui est desor l’os, et estent le chief, si que tu traies la char corrumpue au desoz, et descuevre la char sus le leu ou tu vues soier, que li soie ne blece la char; et met I tison ou une tauble desoz l’os por mues coper la char corrumpue; et covient tant soier com on puet veoir et sentir la corruption, et soier ancor autre fois.	And if the bone is broken in any place of the body, it should be treated this way: take a linen cloth, and bind it to the head of the bone that opens, and order someone who will extend it upward; and put another linen cloth thicker than the first linen, and tie it above the skin that is over the bone, and extend the head, so that you draw the corrupted skin down, and uncover the skin in the place where you want to be, so that the bone does not bleach the skin; and put a stick or a board under the bone so that the corrupted skin can be covered; and it should be treated as much as one can see and feel the corruption, and it should be treated again. 
Et se li os est corrumpus, et n’apert mie, et li corruptions est en mileu ou en une partie, si descuevre la char toute; puis met I tison desoz, et puis soie des l’une partie a l’autre la corruption, et soit li soieure dou lonc de la corruption I poc, si com nos avons dit; et se li corruptions est en la jointure, si cope la jointure corrumpue, et soie l’os ou elle contient de l’autre part; et se li corruptions est en la continuation des II jointes, si n’i a autre angien que dou coper; et se li corruptions est ou poignil de la main, ou ou poignil dou piet, si est mout fort celle chose, mais toutevoie il covient que tu enquieres celle corrosion, coment elle t’apert; et la mundifie en toutes les manieres que tu pues, mais que li voine ou li nerf ne te faicent contraire; et saiches que li incisoire et les soies por coper ces os sont maintes, selonc l’assise des os et l’aparance d’ous, et lor grossece et lor subtiliteit, et lor grandor et lor petitece, et lor duresce; et por ceu covient il apareillier a chescune semblance d’ovraige son estrument; et saiches que l’uevre te moustrera l’estrument dont tu avras mestier, selonc la conissance de cest art, et le tesmoignaige des manieres des maladies; si porpense l’estrument dont tu as mestier selonc ceu qu’il le covient.	And if the bone is corrupted, and does not open well, and the corruption is in the middle or in one part, then uncover all the flesh; then put a hot coal underneath, and then move it from one side to the other of the corruption, and let the ligature be as long as the extent of the corruption; and if the corruption is at the joint, then cut the corrupted joint, and move the bone or where it contains from the other side; and if the corruption is in the continuation of the two joints, there is nothing else that needs to be done but to cut; and if the corruption is in the finger of the hand, or in the finger of the foot, then this thing is very strong, but nonetheless, it is necessary that you examine this corrosion, how it opens for you; and purify it in all ways that you can, but that the vein or nerve does not hinder you; and know that the instruments to cut these bones are many, according to the position of the bones and the appearance of them, and their thickness and their thinness, and their greatness and smallness, and their hardness; and for this reason it is necessary to prepare for each kind of work its instrument; and know that the work will show you the instrument that you will need, according to the knowledge of this art, and the testimony of the ways of illnesses; so consider the instrument which you need according to what it befits.  
dou feu	of fire
Li chiés porrissent ou par cause dedens, ou par cause defuer; et quant tu avras medicinee celle corrosion par la cure des medicines, et il ne profitent mie, si covient coper celui membre jusques au leu ou li corrosion vient, si que li malaides eschaipe par ceu de la mort, ou par la malice, qui est plus grans, de la defaute dou membre; et li signes si est que li membres devient noir, si qu’il semble qu’il soit ars dou feu, et porrist aprés la noiror, pues va celle corrosions de membre em membre, et prent par tout le cors; si te haste dou coper, et se c’est par la percussion d’aucunes venimouses bestes, si com scorpion de mer et wivre et semblans, se li corrosion est au chief dou doi, si le cope, et ne li doner mie espaice de venir jusc’a la main.	The joint can be affected either from within or from without; and when you have treated the corrosion with medicine, and it does not benefit, then it is necessary to cover that limb up to the place where the corrosion comes from so that the patient escapes by this from death, or from the malice which is greater, of the fault of the limb; and the signs are that the limb becomes black, so that it seems as though it has been burned by fire, and after the blackness it proceeds, then the corrosion of the limb goes from limb to limb, and takes over the whole body; therefore hasten to cover it, and if it is due to the puncture of some venomous beasts, such as a scorpion of the sea and a viper and similar ones, if the corrosion is at the head of the thigh, then cover it, and do not give him any space to come up to the hand.  
Et s’elle vient jusc’a la main, si la cope a la jointe, si que la corrosion ne viegne jusc’a bras; et s’elle vient au bras, si le cope au coute; et s’elle passe le coute, c’est li mors, et n’i vaut amenistremens fuers que li quantitez de sa vertut; et tot ensi fai quant li corrosion vient ou piet: s’elle vient en la premiere jointe, si la cope aprés l’autre jointe; et s’elle vient ou piet, si cope tout le piet; et s’elle monte en la jambe, si cope a la jointure dou genoil; et s’elle vient desus le genoil, si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier le malaide a mort; et li maniere dou coper ou dou soier le membre si est que tu le lie desus et desoz, et estende uns menistres l’un des liiens aval, et uns autres ministres l’autre liien amont, et tu dessevre la char qui est entre les II liiens a I spatumile large, tant que li os soit descovers; puis le cope ou soie, et met de chescune part I drapeil de lin, si que li soie ne touche le leu sain, et viegne au malaide autre lesion et aposteme chaus.	And if it comes to the hand, cut at the joint, so that the corrosion does not come to the arm; and if it comes to the arm, cut at the elbow; and if it passes the elbow, it is death, and there is no other treatment except the quantity of its virtue; and thus do all when the corrosion comes or foot: if it comes on the first joint, cut after the other joint; and if it comes on the foot, cut the whole foot; and if it goes up the leg, cut at the knee joint; and if it comes above the knee, there is no other means than to leave the patient to die; and the manner of cutting or sewing the limb is that you bind it above and below, and stretch one minister on one of the ties down, and another minister on the other tie up, and you loosen the flesh which is between the two ties a spatula wide, so that the bone be uncovered; then cut or sew, and put on each side the bandage of linen, so that the sewing does not touch the healthy place, and comes to the patient another lesion and abscess. 
Et se decorremens de sanc vient quant tu oevres, si cauterize le leu hastanment, ou tu met sus aucunes poudres restraignans; puis revien a ta medicine tant qu’elle soit acomplie, puis lie le membre navreit d’un liien covenauble, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et je te conterai k’il avint a I home en som piet: il li avint une noiror qui sembloit arsure de feu, et celle corrosion vint premier en son doi dou piet, tant qu’elle porprist tout le piet; et quant li hons vit la corrosion, si se hasta de coper le piet, et fut sanez; et lonc tens aprés li revint li corrosion ou doi de la main, et il vint a moi, et je li mis sus choses repercussives aprés la mundification dou cors, et ne pot cesser li corrosions; et il vot que je li copasse la main, et je ne vou, que je avoie esperance de repercuter la matiere; et doutai ausi que se je tailloie sa main, qu’il ne morist, car li vertus de l’ome estoit foible; et il se despera toz, et revint en sa terre, et se hasta de coper sa main, et fut sanez; et je n’ai ceu conteit fuers que por ceu c’on faice autreteil, s’on en a mestier.	And if bleeding occurs when you work, cauterize the place carefully, or put on some restraining powders; then return to your medicine until it is completed, then bind the affected limb with a suitable bandage, and care for it until it is healed; and I will tell you what happened to a man in his foot: he had a blackness that seemed burned by fire, and this corrosion first came in his heel, until it covered the whole foot; and when the man saw the corrosion, he hurried to cover his foot, and it was healed; and long after this, the corrosion returned in his hand, and he came to me, and I put on some corrective things after the purification of the body, and could not stop the corrosion; and he begged that I should amputate his hand, and I did not want to, because I had hope of correcting the matter; and I also doubted that if I cut off his hand, he would die, because the virtue of the man was weak; and he despaired of all, and returned to his land, and hurried to cover his hand, and it was healed; and I have recounted this story only for this reason, so that one can do otherwise, if one has need. 
Aucune fois vient aposteme en leu charnut, et demore si longement qu’il fait grant assemblee de bowe; et puis ront et perce, et en saut li bowe, et demoure li leus vuis, ausi com uns vasselz; et li cuir qui est desus est ausi subtilz com I drapelz deliiez, et ne corront mie jusc’a l’os, ne jusc’au nerf, et telz maladie si est apelee «sain», et n’est mie apelee «fistule»; mais s’elle est si alongie qu’elle viegne jusc’a l’os em parfont, si est apelee «fistule»; et li cuire si est que tu cope celui cuir tout entor, et meismement quant il est subtilz, ausi com uns drapelz; et ne s’aert mie por sa corruption.	Sometimes an abscess comes in a fleshy place, and stays for so long that it makes a large gathering of pus; and then it bursts and pierces, and from the pus the skin leaps up, like vessels; and the skin which is above is as subtle as delicate veils, and does not go to the bone, nor to the nerve, and such a sickness is called "a boil", and is not called "a fistula"; but if it is so long that it comes to the bone or penetrates it, then it is called "a fistula"; and the skin of it is that you cut that skin all around, even when it is subtle, like delicate veils; and it does not get worse for its corruption. 
Et se tu as fiance que li cuirs s’aerde, et li corruption n’est mie en parfont, et li cuir est espés de char, si le cure de clistere ensi: regarde se li seins est grans, et li bowe qui en ist est de puant odor, adonques le clisterize de medicine egiptiaine qui est ensi faite: prenez aisil, et oile, et litargire, igalment, et metez cuire en I vassel au feu, tant que li medicine soit rouge, et deviegne ausi espesse com miel; et puis pren de ceu selonc ta necessiteit, et le font en aigue et en miel, et en clisterize lou sein, et estraint le pertus; et laisse la medicine ens par II houres, puis l’estrai en espreignant; fai ce mout de fois, tant que li seins soit mondefiiez, et soit ostee li puor; et aucune fois est clisterizeis d’aigue de cendres, quant ceste medicine n’est presens, et est que tu preignes cendres de fust de vigne, et giete aigue desus, puis la coule, et en clisterize, tant que tu saiches que li seins est bien mondez; et se li malaides ne le puet soffrir, ne la medicine egiptiaine ne l’aigue de cendres, si le clisterize d’aigue et de miel ou il ait un poc de litargire broiet; ou tu la clistirize de miel et de vin melleit, que li mielz ait proprieteit de mundifiier et de laver, et li vins fait aerdre le sain; et quant tu as ce fait, et tu as fiance que li seins est bien mundifiiez, si le clisterize de ceu que fait naistre char en li, et est que tu preignes emplaustre diafinit, et le font avec oile roset et en vin; ou tu le clisterize d’aucunes medicines et d’oignemens, dont j’ai dit les proprietez ou traitier des oignemens; et se li pertus dou sein est petis, et li cainne dou clistere n’i puet entrer, si l’eslarge d’un fer un poc, et met ens une tente de l’oignement egiptiein, ou oignement basilicon, tant k’il soit eslargiez; et se li plaie est trop large, si la cout et i laisse tant soulement I leu ou li clistere puisse entrer, et se li pertus que giete bowe est au desus, si le cope ou plus bas leu que i est.	And if you have faith that the skin is hardened, and the corruption is not in full progress, and the skin is thick with flesh, then treat it with this enema: see if the breast is large, and the bow which is in it is of a foul odor, then administer an enema of Egyptian medicine which is made thus: take equal parts of honey, oil, and litharge, and put them into a vessel over the fire until the medicine becomes red, and as thick as honey; and then take of this according to your need, and mix it with water and honey, and enema the breast, and restrain the anus; and leave the medicine inside for two hours, then withdraw it by squeezing; do this many times until the breast is disinfected, and the odor is removed; and sometimes administer an enema of water from ashes when this medicine is not present, and that you take ashes from vine wood, and pour water on top, then filter it, and enema with it, until you know that the breast is well cleansed; and if the patient cannot endure either the Egyptian medicine nor the water from ashes, then enema with water and honey or a little ground litharge; or enema them with honey and mellow wine so that the honey has the property of purifying and washing, and the wine dries the flesh; and when you have done this, and you are convinced that the breast is well cleansed, then administer an enema of that which causes flesh to grow in it, and that you take diaphinit plaster, and mix it with rose oil and wine; or enema them with other medicines and ointments, about whose properties I have already spoken or treated of ointments; and if the opening of the breast is small, and the tube of the enema cannot enter, then enlarge a bit with iron, and put inside a tent of Egyptian ointment, or basil ointment, until it is enlarged; and if the wound is too wide, then stitch and leave only the space where the enema can enter, and if the opening that emits foul odor is on top, then place the cup or lower part where it is.  
Car quant li bowe est en parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char; et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues, si appareille en tel maniere que li bowe corre au plus bas leu que i est, car quant li bowe est parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues, si apareille en teil maniere: que li bowe corre legierement aval, et n’i lassier rien de la bowe; et pren medicines consolidatives por mettre sor le sain, et estent sus I drapeil de lin que cuevre tout le sain; puis cope as forces endroit le pertus dou sein I poc plus large dou premier, pues estent oignement souef sus I autre drapel selonc la quantiteit dou pertus, et le met sus le pertus dou sain por aligier la bowe, et n’oster mie le grant drapeil fuers que aprés maint jor une fois; et celui qui est sor le pertus dou sein, oste sovent por oster la bowe, et saiches ceu que corra de la bowe, se c’est venin ou poc ou assez, ou digeste, ou indigeste; et pren warde se li patiens sent dolor ou nom, et s’il i a aposteme ou non, et quant ta medicine s’est en teil maniere estendue et tu vois la nature que saut sus le pertus dou sain, si saiches que li seins s’aert ja, et aproche li santez; et puis le deslie le matin, ou le tier jor, et quant tu delies la plaie, si chainge I autre drapeil, et renovele l’oignement.	For when the bow is set in place, there shall not be any fat left in it; and if you cannot cover the chest underneath as well as you want, then arrange it in such a manner that the bow goes to the lowest point where it is, for when the bow is set in place, there shall not be any fat left in it, and if you cannot cover the chest underneath as well as you want, then arrange it in such a manner that the bow goes gently downwards, and do not leave anything of the bow; and take consolidating medicines to put on the wound, and stay upon the linen cloth that covers the whole wound; then cut as forces near the opening of the chest, slightly wider than the first, then place ointment under the other cloth according to the quantity of the opening, and place it on the opening of the wound to align the bow, and do not remove the large cloth except after many days once; and the one that is on the opening of the chest, often removed to remove the bow, and know what runs from the bow, whether it is poison or a little or enough, digested, or indigested; and take care if the patient feels pain or no, and if there is an abscess or not, and when the medicine has spread in such a manner and you see the nature that leaps upon the opening of the wound, then know that the chests are healing already, and approaching health; and then untie it in the morning, or the third day, and when you untie the wound, change the other cloth, and renew the ointment. 
Et se li seins giete bowe indigeste aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie.	And if the breast remains bowed undigested after many days, know that the breast does not heal well.
Et se venins subtilz cort aprés lonc tens, si ne te desperer mie de la santeit, car li santez aproche.	And if subtle poisons come after a long time, if it does not trouble your health, for the cure is approaching.  
Car il i a homes cui tarde enjanremens de char en ses plaies, et de ces que font le contraire; et se bowe indigeste saut dou sein aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie; et se li seins tarde d’aerdre, et est porloigniez, si ajoste medicines sechans moistes en substance et seches en vertut, si com oignement diafinit, car il i a grant partie de vitriole, et c’est li derriene medicine; pren oignement dyafinit, et le font avec oile roset, et l’arose de viel vin igal en substance; puis le confit et en use; et ceu meisme fait mielz cuit engroissiez, quant oignemens dyafinit n’est presens, ou tu pren mirre et aloen et encens, et le broie, et le poudre sus le miel quant il est sor le feu; et puis en glue I drapel, et l’estent sor le sein, et aucune fois i aministre on aristologe longe, et racines de lis celeste, qui est ausi com farine de veces et centoire; et en use de simples ou de compostes: broie les, et en fai poudre, et met sus le miel que j’ai dit, et en use; et se li cure est alongie, et n’est curez par ceste cure, adonc saiches que la corruptions est em parfont, et fait empression en l’os, ou as membres durs, ou as liemens; si le cure de la cure de fistule, si com nos avons dit ci devant.	Because there are men whose healing of flesh in their wounds is slow, and some who do the opposite; and if a boil arises indigestible from the chest after many days, know that the breasts do not close well; and if the breasts take long to heal and are distant, then apply drying medicines moist in substance and dry in virtue, such as diaphinit ointment, because there is much vitriol in it, and this is the last medicine; take diaphinit ointment, and make it with rose oil, and the aroa of old wine equal in substance; then confit it and use it; and these same things are made with honey cooked more than once when diaphinit ointment is not present, or you take myrrh and aloes and incense, and grind them, and powder them on the honey when it is over the fire; and then glue I draped, and place it on the breast, and no times administer a long aristolochia, and roots of lis celeste, which is also like flour of vicis and centaury; and use simple or composed: grind them, and make them powder, and put them on the honey that I have said, and use; and if the cure is prolonged, and is not cured by this cure, then know that the corruption is deep-seated, and makes impressions in the bone, or in hard members, or in limbs; so the cure of the fistule, as we have said before. 
de l’aposteme de l’ungle	of the abscess of the angle
Panarice est un aposteme que naist desoz l’ungle dou pouchiet de la main, ou dou piet, ou par aventure naist en autres dois; et quant il est envielliez, et on n’i prent garde, si i vient I aposteme chaus, et corront et giete bowe tant qu’elle corront la racine de l’ungle, et par aventure la corront toute; et vient li corrosions jusc’a l’os, tant qu’il i vient dolor puant, et est li chiés dou doi larges, et est li color fuxe.	Panarice is an abscess that arises under the nail of the hand, or the foot, or perhaps in other parts; and when it becomes inflamed and one does not take care of it, then it comes to a suppurating abscess, and runs and eats away the flesh until it reaches the root of the nail, and perhaps all of it; and the corrosion comes to the bone, so that there is painful pus, and the limb becomes swollen, and the color is foul. 
Quant tu le cures si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu copes a i. fer toute la superfluiteit qui est demoree de l’ungle, puis cauterize la plaie aprés.	When you treat it as we have said in the division, and the treatment does not help, then it is necessary that you cut to it, iron all the superfluity which is remaining of the ulcer, then cauterize the wound afterward.  
Li cauteres est mout grans aide se li os est sains, et li ungle est sainne; et se li ungle apresse la char ens, et l’encomence a poindre, et la blece, si covient que tu mettes lou rait desoz l’ungle que point la char, et la boute en haut, et cope celi char subtilment et legierement, et met sus le remenant de la char medicines ardans et corrosives por oster tout; puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	The cautery is a great help if the bone is healthy, and the nail is healthy; and if the nail presses on the flesh, and it begins to prick, and the blue, then you must put the root under the nail that point the flesh, and push it up, and cut that flesh subtly and lightly, and put on the remaining flesh medicines burning and corrosive to remove everything; then cure with ointments until it is healed. 
Et se li corrosion est en l’os, si le cope, et trai fuer, car tant com li os corrumpus i est, si ne puet saner; et se tu vois le doi corrumpre, si le cope en I des nous si com il est devant dit, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il est ferus, et boutez, et il sent grant dolor, si covient que tu le sainnes premier; puis cope l’ungle dou spatumile agut en taillant de travers desus, et warde que li taille ne viegne jusc’a la char qui est desoz l’ungle, car li malaides sentiroit trop grant dolor; et s’il avient, si met chose sus qui apaise.	And if the corrosion is in the bone, then cut it and treat it, because as long as the bone is corrupted, it cannot heal; and if you see it about to corrupt, then cut it in I before us as it was said, then cure it until it is healed; and if it is broken, and pushed, and it feels great pain, then you must first heal it; then cut the angle of the spatula sharp by cutting across above, and ward that the cut does not come to the flesh which is below the angle, because the patient would feel too much pain; and if it happens, then put something on top that soothes.  
la dolor dou sourdoit de la main	The pain from the hand is relieved
Li dois ajostez qui naist en mains d’aucuns homes par aventure est toz charnus, et par aventure i a teil ou il a osses, et aucune fois i a ungle, et aucun d’aus naissent en la racine de la jointure, ou li naissance est en aucuns nous des dois.	The two joints which are born in the hands of some men by chance are all fleshy, and by chance there is some where it has bones, and sometimes there is a nail, and none of these are born at the root of the joint, or the birth is in some of us in the thumbs. 
Cil qui naist en aucune nout dou doi ne se muet, et cil qui naist a la jointure dou doi, par aventure se muet; la taille de celui qui est charnus si est legiere, en teil maniere: taille le en sa racine d’un large spatumile.	He who is born in any nout of the hip does not move, and he who is born at the joint of the hip, perhaps moves; the size of the one who is fleshy is so light, in this manner: cut it at its root with a wide spatula. 
Cil qui naist en la racine de la jointure si est grief a curer: si te tien dou coper.	He who is born in the root of the joint, that is grievous to cure; so hold you to cut.
En celui qui naist ou doit au derrien nout, si covient que tu copes premier la char reondement jusc’a l’os, puis cope l’os a une soie convenable a ceu, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	In the one who is born or must at the rear end, it is necessary that you cut first the flesh round to the bone, then cut the bone to a suitable place for him, then treat it until it is healed. 
Li soudemens que vient as dois ensamble vient par naissance, ou par soudement de plaie, ou par arsure de feu, ou par semblans choses.	The solderings that come to the two assemblies come from birth, or from the welding of a wound, or from the burning of fire, or from similar things.
Si couvient que tu copes celle soudeure, si que li doit repairent selonc lor formes naturelz; puis met entre dous tentes ou drapelz moilliez en oile roset, qu’il ne se soudent; ou tu met entre dous pieces de plonc subtilz, tant que li leus soit soudez, si com il covient.	If it is necessary that you cut the suture so that the parts repair according to their natural forms; then put between two tents or cloths moistened in rose oil, so that they do not join; or you put between two pieces of subtle plank, until the joints are joined, as it is necessary. 
Se soudemens vient a aucun de ses dois avec la paume, si cope celle sodure si com il covient.	If the joint comes to any of its two with the palm, then strike that solder as it is fitting.
des vils	of villages 
Vis sont voinnes grosses envoloupees pleines de superfluitez melancoliouses, que vienent em plusors membres dou cors; et plus avient en jambes de ces qui vont a piet et qui travaillent et portent, que a autres.	Veins are large and swollen with melancholy superfluities, which come in more members of the body; and there is more often in legs of those who walk and work and carry, than others.  
Il covient donques que tu li aministres aucune fois espurgement de cole, et puis le saine de la basilique.	Therefore it is necessary that you administer to him once expurgation of honey, and then the ointment of the basilica.
Li cure de fer si est selonc II manieres: l’une est c’on les cope, et traie on fuer le sanc noir; et li autre maniere si est que tu lieves la voinne, et la trai toute fuer.	The cure of iron is in two ways: one is to cut and draw out the black blood; and the other manner is that you open a vein and treat it thoroughly.  
Li taille si est selonc ceste maniere: arose li premier la jambe d’aigue chaude mout fort, tant que li gros sans soit subtiliiez, puis estrain la jambe dou malaide des desus la cuixe jusc’a la partie desoz le genoil; puis cope la voinne en I leu, ou en II ou en III, d’une taille large, puis eslieve et trair fuer le sanc noir a ta main, des l’un chief jusc’a l’autre, tant que tant de sans en isse com li vertus dou malaide puet soffrir; et puis la lie, et li comande qu’il se teigne de viandes enjanrant cole noire; et recomence l’evacuation et la sainie quant les voinnes sont plainnes, et nuist au malaide.	The thigh is treated in this manner: first raise the leg of warm water very strongly until the hard vein becomes softened, then hold the leg of the patient from above the hip to below the knee; then cut a vein in one place, or another, or third place, with a wide incision, then elevate and squeeze out the black blood from one end to the other, as much as the strength of the patient can endure; then apply the ligature, and order him to stay on meat diet until it is black; and begin the evacuation and the bloodletting when the veins are full, and hurt the patient.   
Li alevemens de li est selonc ceste maniere: reis la jambe dou malaide, s’il i a mout de poil, puis le met ou bain, et li arose la jambe d’aigue chaude tant qu’elle deviegne rouge, et enflent les voinnes; et se tu n’as point de baing, si le chaufe au feu, et puis le cope endroit la voinne dou lonc au chief dou genoil, ou en la partie desoz a la cheville; puis aoevre le cuir a l’oncine, et escorche la voinne de chescune part, tant qu’ele apere quant on la sent; et on la voit rouge et noire, et quant elle entre ou cuir si semble ausi com une corde blainche; puis boute le rait desoz, tant qu’ele soit alevee dou cuir, et puis la pent a l’oncine legier, puis le cope en I autre leu ensus III dois; puis escorche le cuir sus la voinne tant qu’ele apere, puis la lieve au rais, si com tu as fait, et la pent a un autre uncine, si com tu as fait premiers; puis cope une autre taille, ou plusors se tu en as mestier, puis la lieve, et la cope au doi dou piet, puis la trai et lieve jusc’a la seconde taille; puis l’estrai de taille en taille, tant qu’elle isse toute fuer, puis la cope; et se tu ne la pues traire et lever, si i boute une aguille a tout I fil fort double, et la lie et la trai, et i boute desoz I rait, et torne ta main d’une part et d’autre, tant qu’il en isse; et garde qu’elle ne cope, car s’elle cope, si ne la puet on traire ne lever, et en vient nuisement au malaide; et quant tu l’as toute traite, si met sor le leu de la plaie laine moillie en vin et en oile roset; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	The raising of the leg is done in this manner: take the leg of the patient, if there are many hairs, then put it in a bath, and raise the leg in hot water until it becomes red, and the veins swell; and if you have no bath, then heat it by the fire, and then cut above the vein from the top of the knee to the foot, or in the part below the ankle; then open the skin with a knife, and scrape the vein on each side, until it appears when one feels it; and it is seen red and black, and when it enters the skin it seems like a white cord; then put the blade under, until it is raised from the skin, and then place it on the knife lightly, then cut it in another place above three fingers; then scrape the skin above the vein until it appears, then raise it to the point, as you have done, and place it on another knife, as you did first; then cut another piece, or more if you need it, then raise it, and cut at the top of the foot, then pull and raise it up to the second cut; then extract from cut to cut, until it is all brought out, then cut; and if you cannot pull and raise it, put a needle in the whole strong thread double, and tie it and pull it, and put it under the point, and turn your hand on one side and the other, until it comes out; and be careful that it does not break, because if it breaks, it cannot be pulled or raised, and it causes discomfort to the patient; and when you have treated it all, put a piece of wool soaked in wine and rose oil on the place of the wound; and dress it until it is healed. 
Et se li vis est contraite et torte et envoloupee ensamble, et ele n’est mie droite, si com nos avons dit, si covient que tu la fendes tortement, mais ne la coper mie; et la trai si com nos avons devant dit.	And if the vein is contracted and twisted and wrapped together, and it is not straight, as we have said, then you must cut it twisted, but do not cover it; and treat it as we have said before. 
Li forme dou fer dont on cope la vis si est corbes, et ne trenche mie, qu’il ne cope la voinne; et est de grosse corbeure, car s’il estoit subtilz, si coperoit la voine, mais soit gros si com nos avons dit, et ci est li forme:	The form of the iron with which one cuts the vein is curved, and it does not cut, so that it only cuts the vein; and is of thick curvature, for if it were thin, it would cut the vein, but be thick as we have said, and here is the form: 
de la voinne civile	of the civil vein 
Ceste voinne est enjanree en jambes, en chaudes parties ou il ne naist herbes ne arbre, et en terre ou il n’a point de moistor; et par aventure naist autre part qu’en jambes, et ceu avient de la porriture que vient desoz le cuir, si com il vient dedens le cors serpens et vers, enjanrez entre cuir et char.	This vein is found in legs, in hot parts where there do not grow herbs or trees, and in land that has no moisture; and by chance it can be born elsewhere than in legs, and this happens because of the rot that comes under the skin, as it comes from within the body serpents and worms, trapped between skin and flesh. 
Et se li signes de l’encomencement de ceste voinne si est qu’il vient en la jambe une tres grans enflammation, puis se chainge li leus, et comence li voinne fors issir, ausi com une racine d’une plante.	And if the signs of the beginning of this vein are that it comes in the leg a very great inflammation, then it changes its places, and begins the vein to issue out, as much as a root of a plant. 
Quant li chiés apert, si covient que tu envoloupes entor une piece de plonc des une З et demi jusc’a II З., et la noe, et laisse le plonc pendant a la jambe, et totes les fois qu’il en ist point au defuer, si l’envoloupe entor le plonc, et la nowe; et s’elle est trop longe, si en cope une partie, et envoloupe le remenant, et ne la coper mie en sa racine, tant qu’elle soit toute issue; car se tu la copes, si rentre en la char, et fait venir aposteme et porriture ou leu, et male maladie; por la queil chose il covient qu’elle soit traite poc et poc jusc’a chief, et n’en remaigne rien ou cors; et est aucune fois ceste voinne quant elle est traite de V paumes de lonc, ou de X, et uns hons vint ja a moi, a cui elle issit de X paumes de long, et quant tu la copes, si boute I rais ou pertus, et la perce jusc’a fons, si que tout en isse; et soit vuidie li matiere qui est dedens, et amenistre au leu medicines enjanrans porriture aucun jor, puis le cure si com les apostemes.	When the shoulder head opens, it behoves you to wrap around a piece of plank from one and a half to two inches, and knot it, and leave the plank on the leg, and every time that there is point in the fire, wrap around the plank, and tie it; and if it is too long, cut off a part, and wrap the remaining portion, and do not cut it at its root, until it is completely out; for if you cut it, it enters into the flesh, and brings forth abscesses and putrefaction there, and bad sickness; for this reason it behoves that it be treated bit by bit up to the head, and nothing remains in the body; and sometimes this vein when it is treated of V palms long, or X, and one son came to me once, to whom it was X palms long, and when you cut it, it brings out the root or spur, and pierce it to the bottom, so that all comes out; and empty the matter that is inside, and administer medicines there to prevent putrefaction any day, then cure it like the abscesses. 
Et aucune fois a ceste voinne mains rains, et meismement quant elle apert en la jointure dou piet, ou ou piet, et i vient mout de pertus, et dont il saut rains; cure le donques si com nos avons dit devant.	And sometimes at this vein mains rains, and similarly when it opens in the joint of the foot, or the foot, and there comes much of the hurt, and from which it jumps rains; cure then as we have said before.  
des vers qui naissent entre cuir et char	of worms that are born between skin and flesh 
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «maladie de buef», por ceu qu’elle avient maintes fois as bués, et est un petis vers qui naist entre cuir et char, et va par tout le cors montant et dessendant, et le sent om bien a l’aler de membre en membre, tant qu’il desront le cuir ou il vait, et saut fuer; et est enjanrez de porriture d’aucunes humors, si com vienent vers et serpens et lumbris et ascarides ou ventre; et doute on de son malice, car quant il va par le cors, et il monte au chief, et il vient a l’oil, par aventure rentre, et destruit l’oil; et ceu avient maintes fois.	This illness is called in our land "ox disease," because it happens many times to oxen, and is a small worm that is born between skin and flesh, and goes throughout the body going up and down, and one feels it well at the alarm of limb to limb, as long as it goes through the skin where it goes, and jumps further; and it is caused by rot of some humors, such as worms and serpents and embers and ascarides in the belly; and one doubts its malice, because when it goes through the body, and it climbs to the head, and it comes to the eye, perhaps it enters, and destroys the eye; and this happens many times. 
Quant tu le vues curer et traire, si ne puet on fuers que quant il vait: si covient donques que tu lies le leu desus et desoz d’un fort liien bien estroitement, puis cope sus et le trai fuer, et se li vers est em parfont en la char, et tu ne le trueves, si le cauterize de feu sus, tant qu’il muire; et li plus grans nuisemens que il fait, si est qu’il corront l’oil, si com nos avons dit; et se tu le vois venir ou chief pres de l’oil, si estraint desoz lui le sorcil forment, puis cope sus, et le trai fuer; et covient user le malaide de mundifiement de cors de medicines solutives por les males humors porries, et se warse de viandes enjanrans porriture.	When you see him cure and treat, one can only flee when he goes: so it is necessary that you bind the place above and below with a strong rope tightly, then cut above and treat the fur, and if the worm goes deep into the flesh, and you do not find it, then cauterize it with fire until it dies; and the greatest harm that it does is that it corrupts the eye, as we have said; and if you see him coming or chief near the eye, then restrain below him the eyebrow forming, then cut above, and treat the fur; and it is necessary to use the patient of purification of body of medicines solutives for the bad humors porries, and avoid eating rotten meat. 
de la dolor qui vient de ventositeit	Of the pain that comes from windiness 
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «vakirir», et est une dolor que vient en aucuns membres, et pues se mue de membre en membre; et je vis ceu que je vos di.	This disease is called "vakirir" in our land, and it is a pain that comes in some limbs, and then moves from limb to limb; and I have seen what I tell you.  
Je fui apelez a une femme malaide, et me descovrit som bras, et vis une petite enfleure en la voinne dou brais; et I poc aprés, li vis monter ausi com un ver a l’espaule, plus tost que nulle chose, ausi com vif argent quant il cort de leu a autre; li dolor se departit de celui leu, et se ficha en l’espaule, et puis un poc aprés corrut par tout le cors, tant qu’ele vint en l’autre brais; puis me contait qu’elle tornioit adés entor le cors, si com je la vis.	I was called to a sick woman, and she showed me her arm, and I saw a small swelling in the vein of the arm; and a little after, I saw it rise like a worm to the shoulder, faster than anything, as if alive silver when it leaves one place for another; the pain departed from that place, and went into the shoulder, and then a little after corrupted throughout the whole body, until she came to the other arm; then she told me that she returned towards the body again, as I saw her. 
Je me mervillai mout coment elle se movoit ensi de membre em membre, car je n’avoie onques veut ceste maladie selonc ceste maniere.	I was greatly amazed how she moved thus from limb to limb, for I never wished this illness in this manner.
Toutevoie, je avoie veut maint que bien avoient veut movoir dolor de leu a autre, mais je ne l’avoie mie veut, si com je le vis en la femme; et je me pensai que c’estoit por ceu que li femme avoit sec cors, et les voinnes descovertes, et por ceu apparoit celle ventositez constrainte; et n’aperent mie selonc ceste raison a ces qui sont delicious, et qui ont moistes cors et voinnes reponues.	However, I had wanted many to be moved from their pain to another place, but I did not want it, as I saw it in the woman; and I thought that this was because the woman had a dry body, and the veins exposed, and for that reason appeared that constraint of windiness; and they do not appear according to this reason those who are delicious, and who have moist bodies and covered veins.  
Et quant tu vues curer ceste maladie, et li malaides sent celle dolor, s’elle t’apert si com nos avons dit, si la lie desus et desoz hastanment, et puis cope sus tant que cele ventositez constrainte au leu isse fuer; et cauterize le leu; et se tu ne la vois a tes eulz, si le cure de ceu qui deboute les ventositez, si com pilules fetides, et pilules de serapin, et semblans autres.	And when you see to cure this illness, and the patient feels that pain, if it appears as we have said, then lie above and below gently, and then cut above until the windiness is constrained to its place; and cauterize the place; and if you do not see it with your eyes, then cure with those who loosen the windiness, such as fetid pills, and pills of serapin, and similar others.  
des saiettes	of arrows 
Les saiettes sont diverses, selonc lor semblances et selonc les leus dou cors ou elles chient.	Arrows are diverse, according to their appearances and according to the places in the body where they lodge.
Li diversitez de lor si est qu’il i a de celles qui ont grans pointes, et petites, et chevees, et soudees; et de celles qui ont II angles, et de celz qui ont lengues, et de celles ou il a pieces; et celle qui chiet en aucun membre si chiet selonc II manieres: ou en membre principeil cheveit, si com cerveil, cuer, foie, pormon, rains, intestine, vessie, et semblans membres.	The variety of them is that there are some which have large points, and small, and hairy, and welded; and those which have II angles, and those which have tongues, and those where there are pieces; and the one that falls in any member it falls according to II manners: or in a principal member such as brain, heart, liver, lung, reins, intestine, bladder, and similar members.  
Quant elle chiet donques en aucun leu de ces membres, et li signe de mort, que je te dirai ci aprés, t’aperent: si covient que tu te warses de l’estraction de ceste saiette, car li mors vient aprés en plusors dispositions; et quant cist mal signe ne t’aperent mie, et li saiette n’est mie em parfont, si la trai, et cure la plaie.	When she falls then in any place of these limbs, and the sign of death, which I will tell you afterwards, appear to you: it is necessary that you desist from the extraction of this arrow, because death comes afterwards in many dispositions; and when this bad sign does not appear to you, and the arrow is not yet deeply embedded, then treat, and cure the wound. 
Et li signe dou cerveil quant li saiette i chiet et perce l’os, et saut li syfac fuer qui est sus le cerveil, est quant scotomie et sode et esvertin et roujor ens eulz, et enflammation et roujor de lengue, et spasme et permixtion d’entendement, et vomissemens de cole; et per aventure ist sans fuer des narines, ou des oreilles; et par aventure pert la parole et la voix; et saut de la plaie moistor blanche semblant a poulz, et en saut ausi com bruee de char; et se cist signe t’aperent, si te tien de la cure, et trai la saiette s’elle n’est ens.	And the sign of the brain when the arrow strikes it and pierces the bone, and jumps the sifac which is above the brain, is when there is scotomy and swelling and turning and redness in the eyes, and inflammation and redness of the tongue, and spasm and confusion of understanding, and vomiting of phlegm; and perhaps without a discharge from the nostrils, or the ears; and perhaps loses speech and voice; and jumps from the wound moisture white resembling to poultices, and jumps also as burning of flesh; and if this sign appears to you, then hold yourself back from the cure, and treat the arrow if it is not yet in. 
Li signe de la siette quant elle chiet ou cuer, sont qu’elle est pres de la mamele senestre, et sent ausi com s’elle estoit fichie en chose dure, ne mie vuide; et par aventure li siette se muet ausi com li poulz, et en cort noir sanc, et vient froidor et suor froide, et sincope: saiches adonc sens doute ke li mors dessent.	The sign of the seventh when it falls or heart, are that it is near the left breast, and feels as if it were tied in something hard, not empty; and by chance the seventh moves as the poultice, and in short black blood, and comes coldness and sweat cold, and fainting: know then without doubt that death is present. 
Et li signe de la saiette que nevre lou pormon est que sans plains d’escume saut de la plaie, et li gorge enfle, et li malaides mue color, et sospire haut et quiert le froit ar.	And the sign of the seventh that does not move is that without plain foam jumping from the wound, and the throat swells, and the patient changes color, and gasps loudly and shivers with cold.
Et se li saiette chiet en la coverture dou pis, si est delez les petites costes; et giete grant alainne et grant dolor et sospire; et li muevent tuit li membre des espaules.	And if the arrow falls into the covering of the hip, it is near the ribs; and it gives great pain and much sorrow and sighing; and they move all the members of the shoulders.
Et se li saiette chiet ou stomac, par aventure si saut de la plaie aucune chose de la viande indigeste.	And if the arrow falls into the stomach, by chance it jumps from the wound some thing of undigested flesh.
Et se li saiette chiet ou ventre, et en saut point de fien par l’intestine rout, si n’a point d’esperance en la cure, ne en l’estraction de la saiette.	And if the arrow falls into the belly, and jumps a point of fiber through the intestine root, there is no hope in the cure, nor in the extraction of the arrow.
Et se li saiette chiet en la vessie, et li urine en saut et vient defuer, et li malaides sent fort dolor: saiches que li plaie est mortelz.	And if the arrow falls into the bladder, and the urine jumps out and comes forth, and the patient feels great pain: know that the wound is mortal.
Li autre membre, si com li faice et li colz et li gorge et li espaule et li adjutoire et li espinee dou dos et li forcele et li cuixe et les jambes, et li membre semblant, sont sauf selonc plusors dispositions.	The other members, like the face and neck and throat and shoulder and arm and spine of the back and thigh and hip and legs, and the seeming member, are safe according to more dispostitions.
Quant li saiette est en lou nerf ou l’artere, et elle n’est venimouse, si com je vos dirai qu’il m’avint, por ceu que vos faciez autretel.	When the arrow is in the nerve or artery, and it is not venomous, as I will tell you that it happened to me, for that you do otherwise.
Il avint a I home c’une saiette li chut ou larmier en la racine dou neis: je la tentai, et la traï d’autre part desoz la graisse de l’oreille, et fut sanez sens nusement.	It happened to a man with an arrow that shot into the root of his nose: I touched it, and pulled it out from the other side under the fat of the ear, and it was healed without feeling at all.  
Et traï a un jeu une saiette que li chut en la graisse de l’oil desoz la papiere desoz, et li saiette estoit reponue, et n’en poi ataindre que la pointe devers lou fust, et estoit li saiette grans d’un arc turcois, a tout I fer legier sens oreilles; li jeus fut sanez, et ne li vint nulz mavais accidens.	And treat with an arrow that it fell into the fat of the eye below the paper below, and the arrow was replaced, and could not be reached except the tip towards the shaft, and the arrow was large as a Turkish bow, to all its iron light without ears; the player was unharmed, and no bad accidents befell him.  
Et traï une saiette de la gorge a un crestien, et estoit li saiette arabique a oreilles: je soiai les barbions, et subtiliai tant que je la traï, et fut sanez li crestiens.	And treated an arrow from the throat of a Christian, and the arrow was Arabian with ears: I removed the barbs, and carefully extracted it as much as I could, and the Christian became healthy. 
Et traï une saiette a I home, que li estoit cheue ou ventre, et pensai qu’il moroit; et puis qu’il ot passez XXX jors, si ne mua point sa disposition; je taillai sus la saiette, et l’engignai, et la traï fuer, et n’ot point de mavais accident.	And treated an arrow to the man, who it was in his chest or belly, and thought he would die; and then that he had passed XXX days, he did not change his condition; I cut on the arrow, and cauterized it, and pulled it out, and there was no bad accident. 
Et si vis I home cui une saiette chut ou dos, et fut li plaie soudee sus; et demora li saiette dedens li, et ne chainja point ses dispositions naturez, ne ne trova nuisement en aucune de ses oevres naturelz.	And if you see a man who has an arrow in his back or shoulder, and the wound is sewed up; and the arrow remains inside him, and does not change its natural position, nor finds nuisance in any of his natural works. 
Et vis I autre homme, cui il chut une saiette en sa faice, et fut soudee li plaie; et demora ensi sens soffrir grant dolor; et mout d’autres semblans.	And see I another man, to whom a bolt fell in his face, and the wound was closed; and he remained thus suffering great pain; and many other similar things. 
Et traï une saiette a I home des princes le roi, que li estoit cheue enmi lou neiz, et estoit un poc declinans a la destre partie; et estoit li saiette toute reponue Je fui apelez a la cure aprés ceu qu’elle fut cheue III jors.	And treated an arrow in the man of the princes the king, that it was stuck in his groin, and was a little leaning to the right side; and the arrow was all lodged, I was called to the cure after it was stuck for three days.  
Si trovai la plaie mult estroite.	If found the wound very tight.  
Je la quis a tout une subtil tente, et ne la sentis mie; et il sentoit pointure et dolor desoz sa destre oreille.	I felt it with a whole subtle tent, and did not feel it at all; and he felt pricking and pain below his right ear. 
Je pensai que c’estoit de la pointe de la saiette Je mis sus lou leu emplaustre atratifet digestif, por ceu que li leus n’enflast; et m’aparut li leus de la saiette.	I thought it was the tip of the arrow
Je i mis l’emplaustre mains jors, et resouda li plaie derechief, et demora ensi li malaides lonc tens, tant qu’il sentit la saiette I jor dedens son neis; et il le me dist.	I put the plaster on his hand for several days, and sutured the wound directly, and left the patient like that for a long time, until he felt the arrowhead one day inside his flesh; and he told me this. 
Je mis sus la plaie medicine ague corrosive par mains jors, tant qu’elle fut overte, et la tentai, et sentis le chief de la saiette qui s’aerdoit au leu; puis ajostai en l’overture de la plaie par celle medicine ague, tant que li chiés de la saiette m’aparut visablement; et trespassa bien li termines entor IIII mois, et puis eslarja si li plaie que je i boutai les tenailles, et le meus d’une part et d’autre, et ne pot issir; adonques ne cessai de subtiliier et d’engignier de manieres d’estrumens, tant que je la pris I jor as tenailles bien faites, selonc ceu que sa forme venra en la fin de cest chapistre, tant que je la traï, et restourai la plaie.	I put on the wound medicine corrosive by hand for several days, until it was open, and I touched it, and felt the head of the arrow which hardened in place; then I adjusted it into the opening of the wound with that same corrosive medicine, until the head of the arrow appeared visibly to me; and it stayed well for four months, and then widened so much that I put the pliers on it, and the mine on one side and the other, and it could not go out; therefore I did not stop refining and devising instruments in ways, until I took one day the pliers well made, according to those which its form will come at the end of this chapter, until I extracted it, and restored the wound. 
Et li mire jugent que li cartillaige dou nez ne puet restorer: je la restourai adonques, et fut soudee li plaie, et fut sanez li malaides entierement.	And the healers judge that the cartilage of the nose cannot be restored: I restored it then, and was joined the wound, and was healed the patient entirely. 
Or t’ai dit la qualiteit de l’estraction d’aucunes saiettes, si que tu mettes ta cure sus ceu que je ne dis mie, car li livres ne puet mie tout porprendre; mais li saiges maistres compere sus bien poc grant chose, et sus ceu que li est present et defaillant, trueve nueve oevre, et nuef estrument, au dessendement des choses estrainges qui avienent en cest art.	Or I have told you the quality of the extraction of some arrows, so that you put your care on those which I do not say, because the books cannot comprehend everything; but the wise masters compare on well little thing, and on those which are present and lacking, find new work, and new instruments, at the descent of strange things which happen in this art. 
Je dis que les saiettes n’issent des membres ou elles sont fichies fuer que selonc II manieres: ou par lou leu ou elles entrent, ou par d’autre part; et celle que saut fuer par lai ou elle entre, c’est saiette entrans en leus charnus, et saut fuer aucune fois maintenant.	I say that arrows are not found in the limbs where they are lodged except according to two manners: either by the place where they enter, or by another part; and that which is found by the place where it enters, it is an arrow entering into the flesh, and that which is none of these times. 
Et s’elle ne saut maintenant, si la laisse tant que li chars soit porrie entor, et soit alegie li issue; et ausi s’elle est fichie en l’os, et elle ne puet issir, si la laisse ensi aucuns jors, et la muef chescun jor; et adonques elle saut, et s’elle ne saut, si perce entor a tout I foret subtil, tant que li leus entor soit eslargiez, et puis la trai.	And if it does not jump now, let it be so until the child is carried around, and it be relieved at the exit; and also if it is fixed in the bone, and it cannot exit, let it be left thus for several days, and move it each day; and then if it jumps, and if it does not jump, then pierce around to all the forest fine, until the surroundings are enlarged, and then treat it. 
Et se li saiette est fichie en l’os dou chief, et vait jusc’a l’un des ventres dou cerveil, et aucuns des accidens que j’ai dit apert au malaide: si ne la traire mie, mais la laisse tant qu’elle soit igalz aprés aucuns jors, car se li saiette vient jusc’a syfac, c’est li mors.	And if the arrow is lodged in the bone of the head, and goes up to one of the ventricles of the brain, and some of the accidents that I have said appear to the patient: do not remove it, but leave it there until it is equal after several days, because if the arrow comes as far as the syphysis, it is death. 
Et se li saiette n’est fichie fuer qu’en l’os soulement, et ne vient jusc’a syfac, et demoure li malaides aucuns jors sens mavais accident, si l’engigne dou traire.	And if the arrow is stuck only in the bone and does not come to the surface and the patient remains for some days without bad accident, then the engine of the milk. 
Et s’elle est mout fichie ensi et ne puet issir fuer, si i aministre tareres entor, si com je t’ai dit; puis cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if it is very stuck like this and cannot be pulled out further, then administer turpentine as I have told you; then treat the wound until it is healed.
Et se li saiette est reponue en leu dou cors si c’on ne la puisse veoir, si la quier a tout la tente; et se tu la sens, si la trai a aucun estrument covenauble; et se tu ne pues por l’estrecement de la plaie, et por la parfondesce de la saiette, et il n’i a os ne nerf ne voine, si la fens tant que li plaie soit grans; et trai la saiette se tu pues, et s’il ait en la saiette oreilles a coi elle tient, si oste la char qui est ens fichie de II pars au mues que tu pues, et puis brise ou ploie les oreilles de la saiette, tant que tu la puisses traire; et subtilie bien que tu ne brisier la saiette, que tu la trairoies plus griement.	And if the arrow is put back in its place in the body, if one cannot see it, then search for it with all your strength; and if you feel it, then treat it with any suitable instrument; and if you cannot because of the tightness of the wound, and the depth of the arrow, and there are no bones or nerves or vein, then widen as much as the wound is large; and treat the arrow if you can, and if it has ears to which it is attached, then remove the flesh that is stuck on the two parts as much as you can, and then break or bend the ears of the arrow, as much as you can draw it out; and be careful that you do not break the arrow, that you will draw it out more violently. 
Et se tu ne pues a une fois, si la lai jusque li leus entor soit porris, puis la trai, car li estraction iert alegie.	And if you cannot do it at once, then lay him down until his limbs are relaxed, then treat him, for the extraction is easier.
Et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de la cure en son chapistre; et te warde de l’incision dou nerf et de la voinne, et met engien coment tu pues mues traire la saiette sens peril, ou tost ou tart, ou fermement ou belement; et met le malaide selonc la forme qu’il estoit quant li saiette li chut ens, car c’est li plus grans aide que i soit, et se tu ne pues, si lou met selonc ceu que li signe lou te mostrent.	And if the bloodletting makes you contrary, then administer what we have said of the cure in its chapter; and guard against incision of the nerve and vein, and put everything as well as you can draw out the arrow without peril, quickly or slowly, firmly or gently; and put the patient according to the form that it was when the arrow fell into him, for this is the greatest help that there be, and if you cannot, then put it according to what the signs show you. 
Li saiette que vient fuer d’autre part, ou il apert aucune chose de li, ou li cuir est enflez endroit si c’on le voit ou sent aparamment: taille donques sus, tant que les tenailles i puissent prendre, et puis l’estrai: si saut fuer maintenant.	The arrow that comes from another part, where one does not see anything of it, or the skin is swollen in place so that if one sees or feels it apparently: cut then on top, as long as the pliers can take it, and then extract it: if it jumped out now. 
Et s’elle est retenue en l’os, si tornoie ta main rondement, tant qu’elle entre en l’os, et eslarge l’os, puis la trai.	And if it is held in the bone, then turn your hand roundly, until it enters the bone, and enlarge the bone, then remove it.
Et s’elle ne puet issir, si la laisse encor, et puis rencomence l’estraction tant qu’elle isse fuer; et se li fust de la saiette i est, se le boute a tout le fust; et se li fust chiet, et tu vues aministrer boutement, si i aministre I estrument cheveit, si que li pointe de la saiette entre en la cheveure de l’estrument; et puis boute fuer, et se li saiette est chevee, se i boute I estrument a pointe entrant ens, por alegier l’estraction.	And if it cannot be pulled out, leave it still, and then begin the extraction again until it comes out; and if there is an arrow in it, push it with all force; and if the shaft has fallen, and you see to administer a pushing instrument, administer it as carefully so that the point of the arrow enters into the head of the instrument; and then push further, and if the arrow is stuck, push the instrument again with its point entering inwards, in order to facilitate the extraction. 
Et se li saiette est entouchie, si covient que tu copes toute la char entor ou li venins est, se tu pues, puis cure la plaie si com il couvient.	And if the arrow is surrounded, it is necessary that you cut all the flesh around where the poison is, if you can, then treat the wound as it is necessary.  
Et se li saiette chiet ou peis ou au ventre ou a la vessie ou au costeit, et elle est prochiene, et tu pues coper sus, se i cope; et te garde de coper la voinne et lou nerf, et puis l’estrai, et puis cout la plaie, se mestier est; et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And if the arrow falls or on the belly or on the bladder or on the ribs, and it is near, and you can cover above, if you cover it; and guard yourself from covering the vein and the nerve, and then extract it, and then sew the wound, if necessary is; and care for it until it is healed. 
Li forme des tenailles dont on trait les saiettes sont semblans au bec d’oiseil, et vez ci la forme:	The shape of the forceps used to treat arrows resembles that of an eye, and behold here the form:
Et en sont mout de manieres: grans, moienes, et petites, selonc la quantitei de la saiette.	And there are many ways: large, medium, and small, according to the size of the arrow.
Li forme dou boutant cheveit est ausi com li penne d’un oisel, por bouter a la pointe de la saiette, si com ci est li forme:	The shape of the head of the spear is also like the feather of a bird, to pierce at the point of the arrow, as this is its shape. 
li forme des tenailles por bouter et por sachier si est ci:	The shape of pliers to insert and to grasp is this.
des voinnes dou cors communes	Of veins of the common body
Des voinnes dont on se saine sont XXXI, de coi il a ou chef XVI, c’est a savoir: II batans qui sont aprés les oreilles, qui sont apelees les dous «herbech»; et les II arteres qui sont en II temples apparans; et II voines que sont en II larmiers des II eulz, que sont apelees «aspires»; et li voine que est emmi le front; et li voinne que est au chief dou neis; et les II guindeges qui sont ou col; et les II voinnes que sont en levres desus de la bouche, et ce sont les voines que sont apelees «augeherich»; et II voinnes que sont desoz la lengue.	Of the veins from which one is healed are XXXI, of this there are XVI at the head; that is to say: II battens which are after the ears, which are called the two "herbech"; and the II arteries which are in the II temples apparent; and II veins that are in the II tear ducts of the II eyes, which are called "aspires"; and the vein that is in the middle of the forehead; and the vein that is at the top of the neck; and the II veins which are on the collarbone; and the II veins that are on the upper lips, and these are the veins that are called "augeherich"; and II veins that are under the tongue. 
Les voinnes dont on saine communement sont V en chescun bras: l’une est li cephalique, et est dou senestre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou chief»; et li moiene est apelee «faste», et est composte de la cephalique et de la basilique, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou cuer»; et li basilique si est ou destre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gent «voinne dou ventre», et est sus le foscile, et est celle dont on saine, qui apert manifestement sus le pouchet.	The veins which are commonly opened in each arm: one is the cephalic and it is on the left side, and the common people call it “vein of the head”; and the middle one is called “fast,” and it is composed of the cephalic and the basilica, and the common people call it “vein of the heart”; and the basilica is on the right side, and the common people call it “vein of the belly”, and it is above the fossil, and it is the one that is opened, which opens clearly over the pouch. 
Et li salvatelle est li voine qui est entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire, et si a II rains; et en la jambe et ou piet sont III voinnes: l’une si est desoz la corbeure dou pochet dou senestre costeit, et li seconde sophene qui est a la cheville dou destre costeit; et li voine qui est apelee «nesse», que est en la cheville de l’autre costei; et en l’autre jambe sont III voinnes desoz celles.	And the saphenous vein is the one between the ring finger and the little finger, and it has two tributaries; and in the leg and foot there are three veins: the one is below the curve of the pocket of the left side, and the second saphenous which is at the ankle of the right side; and the vein that is called "saphena", which is in the ankle of the other side; and in the other leg there are three veins below those. 
Li sainie des voinnes que sont aprés les oreilles si aide as catharres anciens, et a emigraine; et li qualiteis dou sainier, si com je te dis, et est que tu reises lou chief dou malaide, et frote lou leu ou les voinnes sont d’un drap aspre; puis estrigne li malaides son col a une vis, tant que les II voinnes aperent derrier les oreilles en II leus dependens dou chief: quier les donques a ton doi, et ou tu sens lou poulz desoz ton doi, si seigne d’enche; puis pren la lancette, et la boute par desoz la voine jusc’a l’os, puis lieve ta main a tout la voinne amont, et cope et lou cuir et la voinne bien II dois dou traver, et fai issir dou sanc tant que tu vues; puis l’estrain et lie, tant qu’ele soit sanee; et j’ai ja dit l’incision et le cautere ou premier livre.	The blood of the veins that are after the ears so helps with old catarrhs and migraines; and the qualities of the vein, as I tell you, is that you raise the head of the patient and rub the place where the veins are with a rough cloth; then tighten the patient's neck with a vise, until the two veins appear behind the ears in their places depending on the head: so aim your right, and where you feel the pulse below your right, seize it; then take the lancet, and put it below the vein to the bone, then lift your hand over the entire vein above, and cut through both skin and vein well two fingers deep, and make blood issue as much as you see; then tighten and bind it, until it is healed; and I have already said incision and cautery in the first book.  
Li sainie des II arteres que sont en II temples, si vaut a emigrainne anciene, et sode, et obtalmie acostumee, et au cors des larmes agues as eulz; et li qualitez dou sainier si est si com je dis: et est que li malaides estraigne son col, tant que les II voinnes aperent apertement; et sent lou polz desoz ton doi, et puis seigne d’enche; puis lieve lou keur sus la voinne en haut a ton doi indice, et boute la lancette desoz, et lieve la voine en haut, et la cope, si com tu as fait en II autres voinnes, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit; puis deslie lou malaide, et met ton doi sus la voine une houre, puis met sus coton; et puis la lie forment, et la laisse tant qu’elle soit sanee; et nos en avons jai parleit et de lor copement et de lor estraction, ou comencement dou livre.	The blood of the two arteries that are in the two temples, it is good for old migraine and sore eye and accustomed ophthalmia, and to the body of tears of the eyes; and the qualities of the bleeding, it is as I say: and it is that the patient strains his neck until the two veins appear clearly; and feels the pulse below your right hand, then signs on the inside; then lifts the heart over the vein high in your right index finger, and puts the lancet below, and raises the vein high, and the cut, as you have done in the other two veins, and make correction of blood according to your need; then untie the patient, and put your right hand on the vein for one hour, then put cotton on top; and then tie them together, and leave it until it is healed; and we have spoken about their cutting and their extraction, or the beginning of the book. 
Li sainie de la voine dou front si vaut autant com li sainie de la cephalique as maladies de la faice ancienes, et a emigraine, et a roujor; et li qualitez si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant, tant que li voine apere; puis pren l’estrument qui est apelez «fosseur», dont ci est li forme:	The bloodletting of the vein of the forehead is worth as much as the bloodletting of the cephalic for old facial diseases, and for migraine, and for a redness; and its qualities are that the patient strains his neck by twisting it, until the vein appears; then take the instrument which is called "digger," whose shape is here: 
Et met la pointe sus la voinne, et fier sus de ta main, ou d’autre chose, et laisse dou sanc issir selonc la quantiteit que tu vues; puis delie au malaide le col, et lie la voine tant qu’elle soit saneel et aucune fois l’uevre on d’un flaime large.	And put the point on the vein, and firm support with your hand, or something else, and let the blood flow according to the quantity that you see; then tie around the patient's neck, and bind the vein until it is healed and never work it with a wide flame. 
Toutevoie, il ne covient mie que li flaimes soit trop agus; et le saine de travers, car li os est pres, et par aventure brise li flaimes quant il est subtilz.	However, it does not suit that the flames are too thick; and the healing across, because the bone is near, and by chance breaks the flame when it is subtle.
Li sainie des II voines que sont en II larmiers si aide as eulz, et a la tigne, et a la roujor, et a l’oriuel en l’oil, et as maladies de la faice; et li qualitez de lor sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant d’aucun liien, si com devant; puis le saine, et soit li sainie dou traver, un poc dou lonc dou flaime un poc large, car il n’i a point de char.	The blood of the two veins that are in the two tear ducts helps the eyes, and the nose, and the cheek, and the corner of the eye, and diseases of the face; and the qualities of their blood is that the patient straitens his neck by twisting with any linen, as before; then the vein, and be the vein through, a bit through the length of the flame a bit wide, because there is no flesh.  
Et se li flaimes est subtilz, par aventure si brise; puis fai corre dou sanc, tant com tu en as mestier, et puis lie sus couton, et le lie bien.	And if the flame is subtle, by chance it breaks; then make a correction of the blood, as much as you need, and then tie up cotton, and tie it well.
Li sainie de la voine dou neis si vaut a ague, et a sode forsenee, et a maladies de faice, si com emigraine et roujor que vient en la faice, et meimement quant elle est anciene; et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estrigne son col, puis estrain son neis a ta main senestre, et pren lou flaime subtil lonc, et le fiche emmi la levre en l’espaice qui est entre les II narines, car li voinne n’apert mie bien enqui, et li sans comencera maintenant a corre; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit, puis la lie une nuit, car elle est mout tost restoree; et c’est li forme dou flaime:	The bloodletting of the vein near the nose is good for ague, and for feverish sickness, and for diseases of the face, such as migraine and redness that comes in the face, even when it is old; and the qualities of the blood are that the patient tightens his collar, then strains his neck to your left hand, and takes a subtle long flame, and puts it between the two nostrils, because the vein does not open well there, and the vein will now begin to flow; and do not allow too much to be taken out, and make bloodletting according to your necessity, then bind it for a night, because it is very quickly restored; and this is the form of the flame: 
Li sainie des II guindeges si aide a l’estrecement de l’alainne, et a l’encomencement de meselerie, et a mout de maladies, et a empetigine, et a corrodens, et a herpes, et estiomenes; et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col desoz l’une et l’autre, si com nos avons dit; et soit li maistres estans sus lou chief dou malaide, et li malaides siece sus I siege, puis saine la voine dou lonc un poc largement, puis trai dou sanc tempreement, ou tant com mestier est; puis refai autreteil en l’autre voinne, puis deslie lou liien, et estraint andous les voines moienement, que li malaides n’estrangle; et le laisse jusc’au matin, que li plaie soit sanee.	The bloodletting of the II veins helps in the treatment of the ailments, and at the beginning of the disease, and a multitude of diseases, and at epilepsy, and at corrosions, and at herpes, and scabies; and the qualities of the bloodletting are that the patient should restrain his neck from one side to the other, as we have said; and let the master be standing above the head of the patient, and the patient sitting on the seat, then bleed the vein of the long one a little widely, then draw out blood moderately, or as much as is necessary; then redo another part in the other vein, then untie the tie, and restrain all the veins moderately, so that the patient does not strangle; and leave him until morning, that the wound may be healed. 
de la sainie des leivres	of the vein of the books 
Li sainie des voinnes des levres desus si aident a cole en la bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et fendures de levres, et dou neis et entor.	The blood of the veins of the upper lips helps in collection in the mouth, and corruption of gums, and fissures of lips, and sores and inflammation.
Et li qualitez de la sainie si est de faire seoir lou malaide devant toi, et estraint son col si com j’ai dit; puis torne la levre, et regarde as II voinnes, dont l’une est a la destre levre et li autre a la senestre, et les conoist on par ceu qu’elles sont noires, et par ceu que entor elles a voines menues noires: cope donques l’une et l’autre, et se tu ne les conois, et tu en es en doutance, si cope la plus grosse de chescune part, et tout ausi fai des II voinnes que sont desus et desoz, car c’est une meisme maniere.	And the qualities of the vein are that you make the patient sit in front of you, and restrain his neck as I have said; then turn the lip, and look at the two veins, one is to the right lip and the other to the left, and know them by those that are black, and by those that around them have small black veins: therefore cut both, and if you do not know them, and you are in doubt, so cut the largest of each side, and also do of the two veins that are above and below, because it is the same manner. 
de la sainie desoz la lengue	from the vein below the tongue 
Li sainie des voinnes que sont desoz la lengue si aide aprés la sainie de la cephalique, et c’est a l’estrecement de la gorge, et as maladies de l’uve, et as maladies de la bouche; et li qualitez dou sainier si est que li malaides siece entre tes mains devant lou soleil, et li lieve la lengue, et regarde desoz en chescun costeit une voinne noire: saine donques l’une et l’autre, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car desoz sont les arteres.	The bloodletting of the veins that are below the tongue so helps after the bleeding of the cephalic, and it is to the treatment of the throat, and the diseases of the eye, and the diseases of the mouth; and the qualities of the bloodletting are that the patient lies between your hands in front of the sun, and he lifts the tongue, and looks below on each side a black vein: bleed therefore one and the other, and do not go too deep into them, because below there are the arteries.  
Les voinnes dou coute dont on saine communement sont sainies selonc II manieres: ou em poignant a tout I flaime mirtin large, ou olivaire subtil si com coutez trenchans, et est apelez «anesil»; et sont large et subtil selonc la largesce et l’estrecement des voinnes.	The veins by the cut of which one commonly bleeds are bled in two ways: either they prick at their entire flame mirror wide, or olive subtle as a cutter trenchant, and is called "anesil"; and are wide and subtle according to the width and the strictness of the veins. 
Li forme dou flaime mirtin si est mout renommee, et est large si com tu vois:	The shape of the flame mirror is very well-known, and is as wide as you see:
Et ait mestier por ovrir les voinnes chevees plaines de gros sanc apparent, et que contienent gros sanc et trouble; et c’est li forme dou flaime olivaire:	And there is need to open the veins with a flat and large blood containing vessels, and that contain much blood and thick; and this is the form of the olive flame. 
et est plus subtilz apointé, et est por sainier les voinnes subtilz, ou il a subtil sanc citrin.	And is more subtle pointed, and is for healing veins subtly, where there is subtle yellow blood.
Li sainie de la basilique, qui est une de ces voinnes, si aide as maladies que sont desoz la gorge, et ou col, et ou peis, et ou ventre; et covient au sainor qu’il saine saigement, et qu’il se warse de l’artere qui est desoz.	The vein of the basilica, which is one of these veins, helps with diseases that are under the throat, and in the neck, and in the chest, and in the belly; and it befits the surgeon to cut sagely, and to avoid the artery that is below.  
Et s’il cope l’arterre, et decorremens de sanc vient, si le covient estainchier, si com j’ai dit; et ne doit mie estre poignans li flaime, mais taillans si com anesil.	And if it cuts the earth, and a flow of blood comes, then you should cauterize it as I said; and it must not be pricking flame, but cutting like an axe. 
Et se li basilique n’apert manifestement, si covient que tu l’estrainges, et chainge une autre; ou tu quieres aucun rain de li, ou tu saine en leu de li la voinne emmi le bras: elle apert manifestement; et la cope au flaime anesil, si com nos avons dit.	And if the basilica does not open manifestly, then it is necessary that you restrain it and change another; or you want any vein of it, or you heal in its place the vein with the arm: it opens manifestly; and the cup to the flame anesil, as we have said. 
Et se tu vues conoistre le leu de la sainie, si covient ainsois que tu estraignes lou bras, que tu touches le leu tant que tu conoisses le poulz; puis signe le leu d’enche, et puis lie lou bras, et cope la voine dou flaime anesil; et warde que tu ne ferir en l’artere quant tu vois le leu enfleit, car c’est de l’artere: eschui la donques.	And if you see to know the place of the vein, then it is necessary that you extract the arm, that you touch the place as long as you know the pulse; then sign the place with ink, and then bind the arm, and cut the vein of the flame vessel; and ward that you do not wound in the artery when you see the place inflamed, for it is from the artery: avoid therefore.  
Et se tu vois saillir en haut ausi com l’urine d’un enfant, et li sans est rouges et subtilz, saiches que c’est sans de l’artere: haste toi donques, et met ton doi sus longement, puis oste ton doi se li sans estainche, que maintes fois avient; se lie lou bras, et laisse ensi, et ne lou mueve li malaides; et soit sus paour, et ne lou mueve tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you see it bulge upwards like the urine of a child, and the skin is red and smooth, know that it is blood from an artery: hurry then, and put your hand lengthwise on it, then remove your hand if the wound is bleeding; if he cries out, and let him lie still, and do not move him; be afraid, and do not move him until it is healed.  
Et se li sans n’est estainchiez, et il te vaint, et li medicine ne t’est presens, si cope l’artere s’elle apert, car li chief de li retraient; et estainche li sans.	And if the wound is not stretched and it aches, and the medicine is not present, then close the artery if it opens, because the head of the retraction; and stretch the wound.
Et pren une escorce de fistice, et la fent, et pren l’une des moitiez et lie sus bien jusc’a l’autre jor; se li sans estainche, c’est bien; se ce non, si le cure, si com nos avons dit, des poudres qui estainchent sanc; et li estainchemens n’est mie griés em plusors dispositions por le petit leu de la plaie, et la possance dou liien dou bras.	And take a strip of fig, and make it into strips, and take one of the halves and bind it well until the other day; if it does not hurt, that is good; if not, cure it, as we have said, with powders that stop blood; and the stopping does not sting in many positions for the small place of the wound, and the feeling of the linen of the arm. 
Li sainie de la voinne em mileu si aide qu’elle trait sanc dou chief desus, et dou cors desoz, por ceu qu’elle est composte de la basilique et de la cephalique, si com nos avons dit; et covient au sainor qu’il se warse por lou nerf qui est desoz, et s’il point trop em parfont, et il trueve lou nerf, et il enfle et li santez soit griés, et par aventure ne puet saner; et cist nerf apert mult de fois, et s’il n’apert en aucuns homes por sa subtiliteit, si covient que tu lou saines de l’estrument anesil; et eschui lou nerf a ton pooir.	The blood of the vein in the middle so aids that it draws blood from above the head and from below the body because it is composed of the basilica and the cephalic, as we have said; and it behooves the surgeon that he place himself for the nerve which is below, and if it is not too deeply drawn out, and he finds the nerve, and he swells and the patient feels pain, and perhaps cannot heal; and this nerve opens many times, and if it does not open in some men because of its subtlety, then it behooves that you feel it from the instrument anesil; and withdraw the nerve to your power. 
Et se il a voinne entre les .ij. ners, si la fent dou lonc.	And if it has a vein between the two nerves, then make it long.
Li sainie de la cephalique si aide, qu’ele atrait sanc dou chief, et aide as eulz; et covient sainier em poignant au flaime olivaire ou au flaime mirtin, car c’est li plus sauve de toutes les voinnes, car il n’a desoz li ne nerf ne artere.	The vein of the head helps so that it draws blood from the head and helps the eyes; and it is necessary to bleed by pricking it in the olive branch or in the myrtle branch because it is the safest of all veins because it does not have nerves or arteries underneath. 
Toutevoie, covient querir lou plus legier leu, et ne grieve rien s’on faut la premiere fois, et on rencomence; et par aventure enfle li leus a aucuns homes, cant on faut la premiere fois, mais il ne grieve rien.	However, it is necessary to seek the lightest position, and do not grieve if one must try for the first time, and start again; and by chance it swells the joints in some men, when one tries for the first time, but it does not cause harm. 
La qualitez de la sainie si est selonc ta pensee.	The quality of the blood is according to your thoughts.
Li premiere chose que tu dois savoir de sainier, si est que sainie n’est amenistree fuer que por garder santeit, et por eschuir les maladies a venir; et soit li sainie faite en l’une des III voinnes que sont ou coute: c’est a savoir, cephalique, faste, et basilique; et se doit on sainier en l’encomencement de prientens a geun, et en autompne et en yver aprés mengier, quant li signe de repletion aperent; et se doit on sainier le premier jor ou le tier, aprés II houres ou III dou jor.	The first thing that you must know of bloodletting, if it is brought to bear only for keeping health, and for avoiding the diseases to come; and let the bloodletting be done in one of the III veins that are or: that is to say, cephalic, femoral, and basilica; and one must bloodletting at the beginning of Lent on foot, and in autumn and in winter after eating, when the sign of repletion appears; and one must bloodletting the first day or the third, after II hours or III dou days. 
Li sainie qui est aministree as maladies n’a point d’oure determinee, mais que quant besoing est de jor ou de nut, en toutes houres et en toz tens; et ne covient mie sainier les enfans jusc’a XIIII ans, ne femme portant fuer que des lou quart mois jusc’a septime.	The bloodletting which is administered to the sick does not have a certain hour, but when it is necessary by day or by night, at all hours and in all times; and it is not good to bleed children until XIV years, nor women carrying fruit from the fourth month until the seventh.  
Ne ne se doient mie sainier li viel qui ont passez .lx. ans.	Do not bleed those who are over sixty years old.
Et quant aucuns se vuet sainier, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient k’il mondefie les intestines d’un clistere legier, s’il a mout de fiens retenut, si que les voines n’atraient des intestines les superfluitez porries nuisans as membres principelz; ne ne se saine mie cil qui est trop saolez de viandes, ne qui est yvres, tant k’il en soit fuer, ne ydropiques; et se warse on de sainier aprés colique passion, et vomissement, et decorrement de ventre, et multipliement d’abiter a femme, et de traval, de veiller et de juner, et ceu que tot la vertu, ou par chose de l’arme ou dou cors; puis subtilie les humors, se li sans est gros, par viandes et par bevraiges et par medicines, se tu en as lou poir; puis entre ou bain, s’aucune chose ne lou deffent, por subtiliier lou sanc, et te saine de la voinne dou pis entor la tierce, si com nos avons dit; et te garde celui jor de travail, et de poinne, et de luxure, et de semblans choses; et soies liez et joians, et soit li sainieres plus haut que cil cui on saine, et li frote lou bras II fois ou III, puis estraigne lou liien desus moienement, car quant il est trop estrois ou poc, si ne puet corre li sans; et puis le frote le leu as mains, tant que les voines enflent, et les sente on; puis moille li sainieres le flaime d’un poc d’oile viel, puis mette son doit de sa main senestre sus celle voinne desoz lou leu un poc ou il vuet sainier, que li voinne ne fue et faille au ferir.	And when some one wants to be bled, in what manner that it may be, it is necessary that he should make empty the intestines with a light enema, if he has much of phlegm retained, so that the veins do not attract the superfluities rotten harmful to the principal members; and let no one be bled who is too full of flesh, nor who is drunk, as long as he is thus, nor those who are dropsy; and it is worse to bleed after colic passion, and vomiting, and loosening of belly, and multiplication of labor in woman, and travel, and watching and fasting, and anything that weakens the virtue, or by thing of the arm or of the body; then purify the humors, if he has a lot, by flesh and by drinks and by medicines, if you have the power; then enter into a bath, if nothing prevents you, to purify the blood, and bleed from the vein of the wrist, as we have said; and keep yourself that day from work, and from pain, and from lust, and similar things; and be lie down and joyful, and let the one who is bled be higher than he who bleeds him, and rub his arm two or three times, then restrain the ligature above the middle, because when it is too tight or loose, it cannot correct the blood; and then rub the place with your hands, until the veins swell, and you feel them; then moisten the one who is bled with a little bit of old oil, then put his finger of his left hand on that vein under the place where he wants to bleed, so that the vein does not be and fail when it is pierced. 
Car il i a voinnes que fuient ausi com cordes au sainier, et si a de telz que sont plainnes de ventositeit, si que quant on met sus le flaime, si retrait a flaime, et ne puet ovrir li voinne, et ensi est on de ceus; et s’il aoevre la voinne, si est li plaie trop estroite, por ceu si covient que li sainieres soit avisez en ces choses.	For there are veins that are as thick as cords in the body, and some are so full of windiness, that when one puts the flame on them, they retract from the flame, and cannot open the vein, and thus it is with some; and if he opens the vein, then the wound is too tight, for this reason the practitioners should be advised about these things. 
Et se li voine oevre la premiere fois, c’est boin; se ceu non, si rencomence ancor un poc desoz celui leu ou sus hastanment, se li leus n’est enflez.	And if the vein is opened for the first time, it is good; if not, he begins again a little below where it was or above, if the place is not inflamed.
Et se li leus est enflez, et li malaides s’espoante, se li laisse I jor ou II, et ne liier mie le bras: par aventure i venra apostemes chaus; ne n’entre ou bain, puis rencomence la sainie s’elle li plait; et se li pertuis est petis, ou li sans cort subtilment et tu doutes qu’il n’isse mie tant de sanc com tu vues, si fier en celui pertuis meisme a tout le flaime droitement; et l’uevre un poc hastanment, ainsois que li leus soit enflez; car ceu avient maintes fois, quant li plaie est petite.	And if the swelling is inflamed, and the patient fears, let him leave it for one or two days, and not bind the arm: by chance there will come boils; do not enter into a bath, then restart the bloodletting if he pleases; and if the wound is small, or the vein short subtly and you doubt that there isn't as much blood as you see, so fire in that same wound all the flame directly; and make it pierce gently, thus that the swelling be inflamed; for this happens many times, when the wound is small. 
Se tu vois le leu enfleit, si ne rencomencier mie la sainie, et met sus un poc de lie d’oile, car elle alige lou cors dou sanc, et est muedre en cest leu li lie que li oile; et ensi aministre la lie de oile en chescune sainie que tu saines les voines, por estanchier lou cours dou sanc; et ceu meisme fait triaicle et bowe d’eus, quant on le met sus le leu; si subtilie li sans et s’espart quant il est trop gros.	If you see the place inflamed, do not begin the bleeding again, and put a little bit of oil there, because it calms the body of blood, and is more suitable in this place than the lie that the oil; and thus administer the ointment of oil in each cut that you bleed the veins, to stop the flow of blood; and the same thing does triacle and balm of them, when one puts it on the place; so subtly the bleeding and separates when it is too large. 
Et s’il i vient uns apostemes gros, qui avient maintes fois, meismement quant il n’est sainiez fuer que a celi fois ou li overture de la voinne est petite, si te haste, et met sus le leu esponge moillie en aigue et en seil un poc chaut, et l’estraint une houre; et covient que tu faices ceu aprés l’issue dou sanc de la voinne, et s’il demoure au leu aprés aucuns jors aucune noiror ou verdor, si ne li nuist mie; et se tu vues, met sus aucune chose de aloes ou de mirre remise en jus de calament, monstastre, ou semblant.	And if there comes a large abscess, which happens often, even when it is not drained except for the time when the opening of the vein is small, then hurry and put on the place a sponge moistened in water and a little hot, and hold it for an hour; and it is necessary that you do this after the blood flow from the vein, and if it remains in its place after several days without any blackness or greenness, it does not harm him; and if you see it, put on top of anything aloes or myrrh remixed with juice of calamine, monument, or similar. 
Et maintes fois avient aposteme et aparance a la sainie de la basilique: met donques ta main sus, et se tu trueves le leu mol a la compression de la main, si est celle aparance male.	And many times abscesses and appearances at the wound of the basilica happen: put therefore your hand upon it, and if you find the place soft to the compression of the hand, so is that appearance bad.
Eschui donques que tu ne mettes sus aucune chose de ceu que nos avons dit, car par aventure en cort sans de l’artere; mais li fai .i. emplaustre sec por endurcir le leu, puis le cure d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Therefore avoid that you put on anything of those things we have said, for by chance it cuts without the artery; but make  one plaster dry to harden the place, then cure it with another cure, until it is healed.
Et trai a chescun dou sanc selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu, et de la color dou sanc.	And treat each according to the quantity of his virtue, and the color of the blood.
Car se li sans est noir, si en laisse issir tant qu’il soit rouges; et se tu lou vois gros, si lou laisse tant qu’il soit subtiliiez; et s’il est trop chaus, si le laisse refroidier.	For if the wound is black, let it bleed until it is red; and if you see it swollen, let it subside until it becomes thinner; and if it is too hot, let it cool down.
Et covient a celui qui est plains et fors, et ait mestier d’estraction de sanc, c’on li faice plus large plaie, et soit li flaimes larges; et a celui qui est foibles, fai le contraire, et le covient sainier poc et sovent, et le doit on sainier en taillant de travers, ne mie en poignant; et ceste maniere de sainie est sauve de decorrement de sanc et de copement de nerf, et vaut mues que li sainie dou lonc ne dou large.	And it is necessary for him who is plump and strong, and has need of bloodletting, to make a wider wound, and let the flames be wide; and for him who is weak, do the opposite, and it is necessary to bleed him little by little and often, and one must bleed him by cutting across, not by pricking; and this manner of bleeding is safe from a decrease of blood and a severing of nerve, and is worth more than the bleeding done through the long or the wide. 
Et a celui cui li cors faut a la sainie, covient doner pain moilliet en jus de pomes grenates; s’il est eschaufez, si trai dou sanc III fois ou IIII Et s’il est de froide complexion, si menjuce devant la sainie pain moilliet en sirop muzé, ou en sirop de miel aromatique avec espices, si com poivre, canelle, gingibre, et chiches, et sirop bien odorant.	And to him whose body needs bloodletting, it is necessary to give soft bread in pomegranate juice; if he is hot, treat with blood III times or IV And if he is of cold complexion, let him take beforehand soft bread in mule syrup, or in honey aromatic syrup with spices, like pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and chickpeas, and well-scented syrup. 
Et s’il paume a la sainie, aprés l’issue de mout de sanc, si covient qu’il hume brouet de char, et sirop odorant subtil, et use des autres choses que nos avons dit en la division ou chapistre de sincope, por l’evacuation de voinne.	And if it bleeds at the vein, after the outflow of much blood, it is necessary that he moisten a broth of flesh and fragrant syrup and uses other things that we have said in the division or chapter of fainting, for the evacuation of the vein. 
Et s’il vuet esventer som bras, et sainier autre fois, si covient, quant il est afoiblis par grant sainie, k’il se saine poc et poc, selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu continueement.	And if he wants to bleed his arm, and bleed another time, if it is necessary, when he is weakened by much bleeding, that he bleeds little by little, according to the quantity of his virtue continuously.
Et qui vuet esventer som bras aprés la premiere sainie, et il a cors fort, si se saine .vij. houres aprés la premiere sainie, ou aprés la nuevime houre.	And who wants to bleed his arm after the first bleeding, and he has a strong body, then he bleeds seven hours after the first bleeding, or after the ninth hour.
Et qui se vuet sainier d’autre part, si se doit sainier lou secont jor ou le tier.	And who wants to bleed from another place, then he must bleed on the second day or the third.
Car il a mout de sanc dedens le cors qui est ja eschaufez, et fait venir fievre; si en covient traire grant quantiteit, et eslargir le pertus tant qu’il chiece em pameson; puis que tu rewardes toutes les conditions de sainie, et met ta main sus som poulz quant il saine, que li mors ne viegne en leu de pameson, et ceu avient maintes fois, quant li sainieres est negligens; et ne covient mie quant tu vues desliier lou bras, et faire issir sanc la seconde fois, et li pertus est clos, que tu presses forment sus; ne s’il est corbes, qu’il estende lou bras hastanment, car ce seroit malz; mais le laisse tant qu’il saine la seconde fois; ou tu i point a la pointe dou flaime, tant que li sans qui est congelez a pertus de la voinne isse fuer, et met sus I poc de seil remis en aigue, et presse sus legierement.	For there is much blood within the body that has already coagulated, and it brings fever; so it is necessary to draw a great quantity, and widen the opening until it flows in small pieces; then when you have fulfilled all the conditions of health, and put your hand upon his arm while he heals, that death may not come in place of the wound, and this happens many times, when the healer is negligent; and it is not fitting when you see untie the arm, and make blood flow a second time, and the opening is closed, that you press strongly; nor if it is curved, that you extend the arm greatly, because this would be bad; but let it remain until he heals the second time; or you point to the tip of the flame, as long as the blood which is frozen at the opening of the vein flows out, and put upon I spot of wool placed in water, and press lightly. 
Et se li voine est enflee, si la laisse et ne l’estreindre mie, tant que li aposteme soit apaisiez.	And if the vein is swollen, let it be and do not tighten it at all, until the abscess is calmed.
Et se necessitez est dou traire dou sanc la seconde fois, si le saine en celui leu meisme, ou en un autre voinne, ou en l’autre bras.	And if necessity requires bleeding a second time, let it be done in the same place, or in another vein, or in the other arm.
Li voinne emmi le bras est sainie en leu de la voine dou chief por ceu qu’elle est composte.	The vein in the arm is bled in place of the vein in the neck because it is composed
Et li maniere de la sainie si est que li malaides boute sa main en aigue chaude, tant que li foscile soit rouges; puis soit liiéz moienement, si que li voinne apere bien, puis le saine maintenant dou travers, ne mie dou large ne dou lonc; et soit li pertus larges, et soit sainiez bien pres de la jointe de la main, et se sans n’en puet issir, si remet la main en aigue chaude, et laisse corre lou sanc en l’aigue, tant que tu en aies assez; et se c’est en esteit, si ne rebouter mie la main en aigue chaude, car on l’i met plus en yver que en esteit; et li sainie de ceste voine est plus sauve de toutes autres voinnes, qu’il n’i a ne artere ne nerf.	And the manner of this vein is that the patient puts his hand in hot water until the bone is red; then it is bound moderately so that the vein appears well, then the leech is now drawn through, neither too wide nor too long; and let the punctures be wide, and let the leeching be done close to the joint of the hand, and if he cannot draw any out, put his hand back in hot water, and let the blood flow into the water until you have enough; and if it is in summer, do not put his hand back in hot water, because it is put there more in winter than in summer; and the leeching of this vein is safer of all other veins, because there is neither artery nor nerve. 
Li sainie de la salvatele de la main destre si vaut a toutes les maladies dou foie, et c’est li maniere: estrain la main, et boute en aigue chaude, tant que li voinne soit enflee, si c’on la voie; et se la saine de travers, et se tu la copes dou tout en tout, si ne grieve rien; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car li nerf sont desoz toz desnuez de char, et puis remet la main en aigue chaude, se li sans est congelez en la plaie, et n’en puet issir.	The blood of the salvation of the right hand is good for all diseases of the liver, and this is the manner: strain the hand, and put it in hot water, until the vein is swollen, if one sees it; and if the vein is sideways, and if you cut it entirely, it does not grieve anything; and do not let it be too much profaned, for the nerves are under all naked flesh, and then put the hand back into hot water, if the blood is congealed in the wound, and cannot issue. 
Et quant tu avras trait dou sanc tant com mestier t’est, si met sus la voinne oile et seil por souder hastanment, et ensi fai de chescun rain.	And when you have treated the blood as much as is necessary, then put oil and wool on the vein to stop it firmly, and do the same for each wound.
Li sainie de li en la main senestre si vaut a la maladie de la mice, et fai tout ausi com je t’ai dit devers destre.	The vein of them in the left hand is equal to the disease of the mouse, and do all as I have told you towards right.
Li sainie de la sophene si vaut a toutes les maladies que sont desoz le cors, si com maladies de la marris, et retenement de flors, et maladie des rains, et des cuixes et des jambes ancienes, et semblans maladies.	The sap of the sophene is good for all illnesses that are below the body, such as illnesses of the marrow, and retention of flowers, and illness of the reins, and hips and legs and similar illnesses. 
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides boute som piet en aigue chaude, et frote sus la voinne tant qu’elle pere, et lie desus la jointure dou piet; et li voinne si est a la cheville, et par desus lou piet en vont mout de rains; saine la donques ou plus large rain, ou a la cheville, que mues vaut.	And the qualities of its salve are that the patient puts his foot in hot water, and rubs on the vein until it is sore, and binds above the joint of the foot; and the vein is at the ankle, and above the foot go many veins; so moisten where more broad vein or at the ankle, which he deems best. 
Et se tu la saines sus lou piet, si te warde des ners qui sont desoz, et la saine de traver ausi com en copant; et soit li flaimes anesil.	And if you bleed it on the foot, ward off the nerves that are below, and make the cut across as when cutting; and let the flame be untied.
Et se li sans n’en puet issir, si remet lou piet en l’aigue, et laisse bien vuidier la voine.	And if he cannot feel it, put the foot in water, and leave the vein to bleed well open.
Et se li sainieres faut la premiere fois, si rencomence la seconde au desus un poc, car li leus est salz; ne ne douter de nerf, si com nos avons dit, et ensi fai de la sophene de l’autre piet igalment.	And if the vein must be cut the first time, then it begins again above a point, because the place is salty; do not doubt of the nerve, as we have said, and thus make from the spine of the other leg equally.  
Li leus de la voinne sciatique est a la cheville de fuer, et sa sainie vaut a la dolor de la hainche, quant c’est por sanc chaut.	The vein of the sciatic nerve is at the ankle, and its incision relieves pain in the hip, when it is hot blood.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides entre ou bain, et estraigne desus la cheville IIII dois en tordant, car autrement n’apert li voinne; et s’elle apert, si le saine en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et en traversant; et vaut mues que tu la copes, car li leus est saus, et elle est mout reponue a mains homes.	And the qualities of his vein are that the patient enters into bath and is strained above the ankle four times by twisting, for otherwise it does not open the vein; and if it opens, so you put on the sail in all ways that you can, and by crossing; and it is better that you cut it, because the skin is dry, and she is well recovered by hand.
Et se tu ne la trueves, si saine aucun rain de li qui apert ou dos dou piet, et vers lou petit doi, et te warde des ners; et fai tant corre dou sanc que tu vues, et puis deslie lou lien, et met sus coton et l’estraint; ele est maintenant sanee.	And if you do not find it, so healthy any vein of him who opens or back of the foot, and towards the little toe, and guard the nerves; and make as much correction of blood that you see, and then untie the bandage, and put on cotton and restrain it; she is now healed. 
des sainies de ventouse	of the leeching of a suction cup 
Ventouses sont fait de cornes, ou d’arain, ou de voirre; et ventosation si est faite selonc .ij. manieres: ou par ferir et atraire sanc, ou sens ferir.	Suction cups are made of horns, or glass, or wood; and suction is done in two ways: either by pricking and drawing blood, or without pricking.
Et ceste ventosation qui est sens ferir si est selonc II manieres: ou elle est a tout feu, ou sens feu; et ventosation qui est faite par ferir et par estraction de sanc si est faite en XIIII leus dou cors, de coi li uns est tout en som le chief; et li autres est emmi le col; et II autres en II costeis dou col; et li ventouse desoz lou menton; et li ventouse des II espaules; et li ventouse sus les crupies; et les ventouses emmi les II bras; et les ventouses des II jambes; et les ventouses des II chevilles; et li ventosation ne trait point de sanc, fuer que des menues voinnes que sont esparses en la char, et por ceu n’en afoiblist om mie, si com on fait de sainie de voinne; et ne covient mie qu’elle soit aministree, ne a tout feu ne sens feu, en aucune maladie qui vient de repletion, tant que toz li cors soit vuidiez.	And this cupping which is done with fire is according to II manners: or it is with all fire, or without fire; and cupping which is done by wounding and extracting blood is done in XIV places of the body, of which one is whole in the head; and the other is in the neck; and II others in II ribs of the neck; and the cup on below the chin; and the cup on the II shoulders; and the cup above the hips; and the cups between the II arms; and the cups on the II legs; and the cups on the II ankles; and cupping does not treat blood, except for small veins that are scattered in the flesh, and because of this it does not weaken at all, as one does with blood from a vein; and it should not be administered, either with all fire or without fire, in any disease that comes from repletion, until all the body is emptied. 
Et se par necessiteit de maladies covient ventoser, ou por acostumances, si l’amenistrons chescune houre en l’encomencement dou mois, ou en la fin, et emmi et en chescun tens; car il i a de telz qui, quant il ont mestier de ventoser, si ont pesant chief; et si a telz qui truevent repletion et roujor en lor faice, et en lor chief, et au col, et tenebrour as eulz; et telz qui truevent une goute de sanc en lor bouche, et ont enflee la lengue, et raichent sanc; et si i a de telz qui songent, et voient par nut sanc et navrez et mors et semblans choses.	And if by necessity of diseases it is necessary to bloodletting, or for customs, we shall administer each hour at the beginning of the month, or at the end, and in every time; because there are such that when they have need for bleeding, they have a heavy head; and there are who feel repletion and redness in their face, and in their head, and in the neck, and darkness around their eyes; and some who feel a drop of blood in their mouth, and have swollen tongue, and spit blood; and there are those who dream, and see by blood and numbness and death and similar things.  
Et quant nos voions ces signes, et meismement quant c’est emmi lou mois, nos lou commandons a ventoser aprés .iij. houres dou jor.	And when we see these signs, and even when it is in the middle of the month, we command them to vomit after 3 hours of the day.
Li sainie de la muze si aide a la grieteit dou chief … que vient as eulz, et ne covient mie que ce soit aprés l’evacuation de tout lou cors; et ceste ventosation si est en leu de la sainie de la cephalique, et ne covient mie que cil qui est de froide complexion en use, ou qui ait chatharre, car ce lor fait mout grant nuisement; et por ceu ne covient mie que li veillart en usent, ne qui ont ou chief froides maladies.	The bloodletting of the temple helps to treat the headache... that comes to the eyes, and it is not fitting that this be done after the evacuation of all the body; and this ventilation is in place of the bloodletting of the head, and it is not fitting that those who are of a cold complexion use it, or who have cataracts, because it does much harm to them; and for this reason it is not fitting that the elderly use it, nor those who have or cold diseases.  
Et cil qui s’en saine sovent, si devient oblious, et por ce covient mettre la ventouse un poc plus aval par la doutance d’obliance.	And those who recover from it often become oblivious, and for this reason it is necessary to put the suction cup a little lower down due to the fear of oblivion.
Li ventosation emmi le col est en leu de la sainie dou chief et de la basilique, et por ceu vaut elle a l’estrecement dou pis, et a fendure de la chenal dou pormon, et a toust, et a repletion; et la covient poc bouter, car s’elle tient trop fermement, si enjanre obliance ou stomac et ou cuer.	The ventilation of the neck is in the place of the vein of the head and of the basilica, and for this reason it is good for the tightening of the groin, and for opening the channel of the womb, and for all, and for repletion; and one should not put it too tightly, because if it holds too firmly, it engenders a blockage in the stomach or in the heart. 
Li ventosations as II costelz dou col si vaut as dolors dou chief, et obtalmie et emigrainne, et a l’estranglement, et a la dolor as racines des dens, et est en leu de la sainie de la basilique; et covient que tu comandes au sainor qu’il espresse sa main au mettre, qu’il ne cope l’artere, et ne veigne decorremens de sanc.	The ventosations as II costelz dou col si vaut as dolors dou chief, and obtalmie and emigrainne, and a l’estranglement, and a la dolor as racines des dens, and est en leu de la sainie de la basilique; and covient que tu comandes au sainor qu’il espresse sa main au mettre, qu’il ne cope l’artere, and ne veigne decorremens de sanc. 
Li ventosations desoz lou menton si vaut a maladie de bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et semblans maladies qui sont en la bouche; et est en leu des sainies des .ij. levres.	The ventilations under the chin are worth for mouth disease, and gum decay, and similar diseases that are in the mouth; and it is in the place of the veins of the two lips.
Li ventosations des espaules vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de remplissement.	The ventilation of the shoulders is good for the illness that comes from heat and swelling.
Li ventosations des coutes si vaut autant com des III voinnes dou bras, car elle atrait sanc de ces grosses voinnes; et comande au sainor qu’il ne fiere mie trop em parfont, car li leus est nus de char, et sait desoz ners et arteres.	The incisions of the veins are as valuable as three veins of the arm because they draw blood from these large veins; and instruct the patient not to make them too deep, for the skin is bare of flesh and near nerves and arteries. 
Li ventouse qui est sus la croupe si vaut as emoroydes dou fondement, et as maladies desoz, et covient que li ventouse soit grans, et soit d’arain, qu’elle a mestier de bien traire; et par aventure, s’elle estoit subtilz, si briseroit; et i fai grans plaies.	The suction cup which is on the rump is good for hemorrhoids from the foundation, and for diseases below, and it is necessary that the suction cup be large, and be of iron, that it has need to well milk; and perchance, if it was subtle, it would break; and I make great wounds.
Les ventouses des jambes si sainent apertement, car elles atraient sanc de tout le cors, et valent as dolors ancienes des rains, et de la marris, et de la vessie, et ramoinnent les flors; et sont en leu des .ij. sophenes, et des .ij. chevilles, et toutevoie elles afoiblissent lou cors aprés lonc us, et font venir paumison em plusors dispositions.	The suction cups of the legs are applied openly, because they attract blood from the whole body, and are good for old pains of the reins, and of the thighs, and of the bladder, and soften the flowers; and are in their place of two shins, and of two ankles, and nevertheless they weaken the body after long use, and bring weakness in many dispositions.
Li maniere de mettre la ventouse si est que tu la mettes premier vuide, et succe tempreement, et la met hastanment, et remue igalment, et ne cesser de ceu faire, tant que tu voies lou leu rouge et enfleit, et apere li roujor dou sanc; puis fier, et remet les ventouses, et pren warde en la disposition des cors, car il i a telz qui ont tanre char, et clers porez: si covient ferir une fois soulement, et covient faire larges plaies, et un poc parfondes; et suce legierement.	The manner of putting on the suction cup is that you put it first empty, and succeed temperately, and put it gently, and move evenly, and do not cease from doing this, until you see the place red and inflamed, and appear the color of blood; then firm, and replace the suction cups, and take care in the disposition of the bodies, because there are such who have tender flesh, and clear pores: so it is necessary to strike only once, and it is necessary to make wide wounds, and a prick deep; and suck lightly.
Et se li sans est gros, si couvient ferir .ij. fois: la premiere fois por subtiliier la voie dou sanc gros.	And if the vein is thick, it is necessary to prick it twice: the first time to make a subtle passage for the thick blood.
Et se li sans est tres espés, si covient ferir la tierce fois; et quant nos volons traire dou sanc poc et poc, si nos soffist soulement une fois.	And if the vein is very thick, it is necessary to prick it a third time; and when we want to draw blood little by little, we only pierce once.
Et se nos volons mout de sanc, si rencomensons sovent; et se li sans est espés, si fier em parfont, et li termines si est que li keurs soit perciez soudement, et couvient a celui qui a gros cuir et dur, et qui ont estrois porelz, que tu oignes les leus des ventouses d’oile aperitif et dissolutif: se c’est en esteit, d’oile violet, ou d’oile d’amandres douces, ou d’oile de semence de cucurbite; et se c’est en yveir, d’oile de cresson, ou de lis, ou de camomille, ou autre semblant.	And if we want a lot of blood, so let us often restart it; and if the blood is thick, so let us make it thin, and the end is that the veins be pierced soundly, and it is necessary for him who has thick skin and hard, and who has hairs pores, that you anoint their places with cupping glasses of oil aperitif and dissolving: if it is in summer, of violet oil, or almond sweet oil, or seed of gourd oil; and if it is in winter, of cresson oil, or lily, or chamomile, or a similar. 
Et se li superfluitez est grosse et froide, si pren oile amaratin, ou de balsamite, ou oile d’anet, et les semblans.	And if the superfluities are large and cold, then take wormwood oil, or balm oil, or anise oil, and similar things.
Et se cil cui on saine a tendre char et larges porelz, se n’i covient mettre point d’oile, mais le covient laver aprés la ventosation d’aigue rose, ou d’aigue froide, ou d’aigue de morelle, ou d’aigue de cucurbite, ou d’aigue de porcelainne, ou autre semblant.	And if the one to whom one tends has tender flesh and large pores, one must not put any oil on it, but one must wash it after the inflation of rose water, or cold water, or mulberry water, or gourd water, or porcelain water, or something similar. 
Et cil qui a mout de moistor, si se leve d’aisil, ou d’aigue de mirte, et de sumac, et de semblans choses.	And he who has much moisture, may rise from ash, or myrtle water, and sumac, and similar things.
Et cil qui ont grosses superfluitez se levent de vin viel, ou d’aigue de seuc, ou de decoction d’anet ou de camomile, ou d’autres semblans; et ne se covient mie sainier de ventouse devant le bain ne em bain, mais aprés lou bain une houre ou II; et ne dorme mie aprés la ventosacion, et covient k’il se warse, quant il se doit ventoser et quant il est ventosez.	And those who have large superfluities, raise themselves from old wine or from their own water, or from a decoction of anise or chamomile, or others like it; and it does not become well to draw blood with leeches before the bath nor in the bath, but after the bath one or two hours; and do not sleep after the cupping, and it is necessary that he should warm himself when he must be cupped and when he is cupped.  
Et warde se cil qui se saine est coleriques, et se li sans est trop agus et enflamez; si covient qu’il preigne choses froides, si com pomes grenates et endives et laitues a l’aisil, et semblans choses; et menjuce pucins, et char de chastron, et viandes moistes.	And guard those who are recovering are choleric, and if their insides are too hot and inflamed; then it is necessary that they eat cold things, such as pomegranates and endives and lettuces at the side, and similar things; and cooked beans, and roasted meat, and moist meats. 
Et cil qui a froide complexion, si preigne syrop de miel, et vin odorant moien, qui est entre viel et noveil, et menjuce poc, et menjuce pucins et petis oiselz et pijons; et lou jor qu’il se ventousera, si doit plus boivre que mengier; et covient doner a aucuns homes aucune fois triaicle ou muscate devant la ventosacion, ou aprés, por conforter les membres principalz; et soit subtiliiez li sans, mais il ne covient mie que cil qui sont chaut le boivent.	And those who have a cold complexion, take syrup of honey, and fragrant wine, which is between old and new, and minced pear, and minced quince and small onions and pigeons; and on the day that he will be bled, he must drink more than eat; and it is necessary to give some men once triacle or musk before bleeding, or after, to comfort the main limbs; and let it be subtle, but it is not necessary for those who are hot to drink it. 
Les ventouses que sont mises sens ferir sont celles que sont mises sus lou foie, et sus la mice, et podagre, et sus lou ventre et la boude et les rains et la hainche, car cil membre ne soffrent mie ferir sus oulz, et ne le fait on fuer que por atraire sanc de membre em membre, si com nos mettons sus les mameles quant li neis sainne; por oster la viscositeit qui est au membre, si com nos metons ventouses sus le ventre et sus la boude por amenuisier le membre; et oste la dolor, quant il i a opilation ou piere, si oste par sa vertu atractive par aventure l’opilation, ou desaert la piere de son leu; et ensi fait ele quant on le met sus lou foie et sus la mice quant il i a ventositeit retenue, et ces ventouses sont aministrees vuides por sucier tant soulement; et aucune fois sont aministrees ensamble feu, et aucunes fois plainnes d’aigue tede, si com em maladies dou pleuresin, et en tel maniere c’on emplisse la ventouse d’aigue chaude soule, ou d’aigue ou il ait cuit herbes covenaubles a ceu.	The cupping glasses that are placed without hurting are those that are placed on the liver, and on the spleen, and gout, and on the belly and bladder and the hips and the groin, because these members do not suffer to be hurt on their own, and it is done only to draw blood from limb to limb, like we put them on the breasts when the child is born; to remove the viscosity that is in the limb, like we put cupping glasses on the belly and bladder to reduce the limb; and to remove the pain, when there is an abscess or a stone, so it removes by its attractive virtue perhaps the abscess, or dislodges the stone from its place; and thus it does when it is placed on the liver and spleen when there is retained wind, and these cupping glasses are administered empty to suck only so much; and sometimes they are administered together with fire, and sometimes filled with hot water, like in illnesses of the pleura, and in such a way one fills the cupping glass with hot water alone, or with water where herbs suitable for this have been cooked. 
Li forme de la ventouse aministré a feu si est ci:	The form of the cupping glass administered with fire is as follows:
Et ait II dois de large et demi palme de parfont, et ait ou costeit entor lou mileu I petit pertus, ausi com por bouter une aguille, et soit d’arain, souef devant si qu’ele ne blece lou malaide au mettre sus lou membre; et ait em mileu une verge de travers d’arain ou de fer, por mettre une chandoile emprise, et en soient et grans et petites selonc les maladies et l’eaige de ces qui les prenent; car les ventouses des enfans sont autres que des vielz, et des maigres que des gras.	And it has two parts of large and half a palm from front to back, and it has or rib around the middle small hole, as for putting in a needle, and be iron, soft in front so that it does not burn the patient when put on the member; and it has in the middle a bar across of iron or steel, to put a candle ember, and they are both large and small according to the diseases and the age of those who take them; for the cups of children are other than the old, and the thin ones than the fat. 
Et doit on ensi mettre ceste ventouse sus lou membre: empren la chandoile de cire ou I linement, et le met emmi la ventouse au traver de la verge qui est emmi la ventouse, si que li clartez soit au fons de la ventouse qu’elle ne brule le malaide; et puis la met sus lou membre, et tes dois soit sus lou pertus que nos avons dit, si que quant on vuet, si en va li vapor, et oste on la ventouse; et emprent on le linement si com devant, et le rencomence sovent, se tu as mestier.	And one must thus put this suction cup on the limb: grasp the candle of wax or linen, and place it inside the suction cup across from the rod which is inside the suction cup, so that the clarity is at the bottom of the suction cup that it does not burn the patient; and then put it on the limb, and the two ends should be on the opening that we have said, so that when one wishes, vapor goes in, and one takes off the suction cup; and grasp the linen as before, and begin again often, if you need. 
En la ventouse donques qui est aministree em maladie de pleuresin, a tout aigue, n’a point de verge ne de pertus, et n’est amenistree fuer que quant ele est plaine d’aigue, et est mise sus lou membre tant soulement; et c’est li forme:	In the suction cup therefore which is administered in illness of pleuresin, at all acute, has no rod nor pierced, and is administered only when it is full of fluid, and is put upon the member so only; and this is the form: 
Sansues ne sont amenistrees fuer que en membres ou on ne puet mettre ventouses por lour petitece, si com levres et gencives, et semblans leus; et en leus desnuez de char, si com doi ou neis, et autres semblans; et li qualitez de l’user si est que quant tu trueves sansues que sont en aigues douces nettes sens porreture, si les pren; et les met une nut en aigue douce, tant qu’elles soient famillouses, et n’aient rien en ventres; et puis soit sainiez de voinne et de ventouse, puis frote le membre tant k’il soit rouges, et met sus les sansues; et quant elles seront plainnes, et cherront, se c’est leu ou on puisse mettre ventouse, se li met, car ce vaut mout aprés.	Abscesses are brought forth only in members where it is impossible to apply leeches because of their smallness, such as lips and gums, and similar; and in those denuded of flesh, such as two or one, and others similar; and the qualities of its use are that when you find abscesses that are in clear water, no more porous, so take them; and put them in a nut in clear water, until they become familiar, and have nothing in their bellies; and then cleanse them from vein and leech cup, then rub the limb as long as it is red, and place the abscesses above; and when they are full, and fall, if it is their place where one can apply a leech cup, so put it on, because it is very good after.  
Se ceu non, si leve le leu d’aisil, et puis d’aigue, mout bien, et puis l’espreint; et se li leus saine trop aprés lou cors des sansues, si moille I drapel de lin en aigue froide, et met sus, tant que li sans soit estenchiés; et se li sans est multipliez, si met sus vitriole broié, ou gales, et semblans choses, tant qu’il soit estenchiez; ou tu met sor le leu moitiez de feves pelees, et les laisse tant qu’elles s’aerdent au leu, si estanchera maintenant; et se tu en as de plus mestier, si pren autres sansues.	If this is not the case, lift the head of the joint with a towel, then with water, well, and then tighten it; and if the skin heals too late after the body of the wound, soak the linen cloth in cold water and put it on top, until the wound is closed; and if the wounds are multiplied, put crushed vitriol or salt and similar things on top, until it is closed; or put half of peeled beans on the place and leave them until they dry out on the place, then it will stop now; and if you need more of this, take other herbs. 
Et se les sansues ne se vuellent prendre, si frote le leu de sanc fres, ou tu i fiche une aguille tant que li sans en isse, et puis les met sus, et tantost com elles sentent lou sanc, si s’aerdent; et quant tu vues qu’elles chieent, si poudre sus un poc d’aloen et de seil broiet, ou de cendre, si cherront maintenant.	And if the sutures do not want to be taken, rub the place with fresh blood, or stick a needle there until the suture is released, and then put them on top, and as soon as they feel the blood, they will harden; and when you see that they are shrinking, sprinkle on a little bit of aloes and soil ground, or ashes, and they will now hold. 
Ci comence li livre des brisures	Here begins the book of fractures
Cist chapistres est maintes fois necessaires en l’art de medicine, et est restorement de brisure et de desaluement.	This chapter is many times necessary in the art of medicine, and is the restoring of fracture and dislocation.
Saichiez, chier fil, que li fol mire se gietent de cest chapistre, qu’il ne virent onques nul des anciens livres, ne lettre n’en lurent; et por ceste cause est estraingie li science en nostre terre, car je n’en trovai onques nul boin; et n’en sai nient, fuer que par la science des anciens livres, ou j’ai tant estudiiet que je en ai traite la science, et par experiment, et par l’acostumance de ma vie; et je vos ai jai descrit en cest chapistre ceu qui est contenut, et l’ai abregié en la fin, et ai mostreit clerement les formes des estrumens que sont amenistrez, si com j’ai fait en ces II chapistres ci devant.	Know, dear friend, that the fool mire lies in this chapter, who never saw any of the ancient books, nor read a letter from them; and for this cause is science estranged in our land, because I have never found any good one; and I know nothing, except by the science of the ancient books, where I have studied so much that I have treated the science, and by experiment, and by the custom of my life; and I have shown you in this chapter what is contained, and I have abridged it at the end, and have clearly shown the forms of the instruments that are brought, as I have done in these II chapters before. 
Il covient donques que nos disons ou prologue de cest livre les sommes de la parole et les chapistres ou li saiges met son entendement, et demore sus la verteit, si que cil qui sont esproveit saichent et aprenent cest art noble, et l’aprenent a autrui.	It is therefore necessary that we say in the prologue of this book the sum of words and chapters where the sages put their understanding, and stay on the truth, so that those who are experienced know and learn this noble art, and learn it to others.
Je dis que quant brisure ou dislocation ou torsions ou quasseure vient a aucun, si covient que tu te hastes de sainier lou malaide d’une part et d’autre, s’aucune chose ne lou te tot, si com foiblece de cors, ou enfes, ou viellars; ou se li tens n’est tres chaus, ou trop frois; et menjuce cholz frois, c’est a savoir froides joutes, et char d’oiseil et de chevril, et ne boive point de vin, ne menjuce nules grasses chars, et ne s’emplisse mie trop de viandes qui remplissent les voinnes de sanc, tant que tu n’aies doute d’aposteme chaut, ne d’espandement de matiere au membre; si reviegne li malaides a som premerain governement k’il a useit.	I say that when a fracture or dislocation or torsion or sprain comes to anyone, it is necessary that you haste to heal the patient on one side and the other, if nothing prevents it, such as weakness of body, or infancy, or old age; or if his strength isn’t very warm, or too cold; and avoid cold things, that is to say cold meats, and venison and mutton, and do not drink wine, nor eat any fatty foods, and do not fill yourself too much with meats which fill the veins with blood, until you have doubt of a hot abscess, or an expansion of matter in the limb; if then the patient returns to his first rule that he has used. 
Et quant li os brisiés comence a restourer, si covient que on norrisse le malaide de viandes que font gros norrissement, ou il ait viscositeit, si com froment cuit en aigue, et ris, et testes, et piez, et pance de vaiche, et oefz, et poissons fres, et gros vin, et semblans chose.	And when the broken bone begins to heal, it is necessary that one nourish the patient with meats that make great nourishment, or which have viscosity, such as wheat cooked in water, and rice, and testicles, and pies, and tripe of veal, and eggs, and fresh fish, and red wine, and similar things.
Car a teil norrissement se reprent mues et plus tost li brisure.	For with such nourishment it regains strength and the fracture heals faster.
Et saichiez que li os brisiez des vielz et des decrepites ne se pueent mie bien reprendre ne souder selonc lor nature por la sechor des membres, ne cil ausi qui sont trop tendre, si com os de petis enfans; mais n’a cure, ramoinne sus l’os brisiet I gros tenrons qui s’aert et joint le membre ensamble, tant qu’il enforce si com il fut devant; et ne li tot point de son oevre, et por ceu le covient norrir de grosses viandes, si com nos avons dit.	And know that the bones broken of the old and decrepit do not well rejoin or heal according to their nature because of the dryness of the limbs, nor those who are too tender, like the bones of small children; but don't worry, reset on the broken bone, the large tendons that hold and join the limb together, as long as it forces as it was before; and do not point anything in its work, and for this one must nourish with thick meats, as we have said.  
Et saiches que les briseures sont diverses em maintes manieres.	And know that fractures are diverse in many ways.
Car li brisure dou chief est autre que li brisure dou pis, ou de la jambe, et je vos dirai en cest chapistre toutes manieres de brisure.	Because a fracture of the head is different from a fracture of the leg, or foot, and I will tell you in this chapter all kinds of fractures.
Car il i a brisure que vait a arvol, et autre en aguisant, si com li taille d’une penne por escrire.	Because there are fractures that go in a circle, and others in sharpening, like the point of a pen for writing.
Et si a brisure avec plaie, et brisure a tout une petite fendure.	And if there is a fracture with a wound, and a fracture all over with a small fissure.
Et a chescune maniere ait son engien, et son estrument propre en la restauration, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient en son leu; et est conue li brisure de l’os par ceu que li leus est tors, et apert bien par defuer, et sone au presseir de la main; et quant il n’i a tortuositeit ne son au tochier, et li malaides ne sent mie grant dolor, se n’i a point de brisure; mais il puet bien avoir tortuositeit, ou fendure, ou petite brisure.	And for each manner has its tool and instrument proper in restoration, according to what the remembrance comes in its place; and is known the fracture of the bone by this that it is twisted, and opened well by outside, and feels under pressure of the hand; and when there is no twist nor feels under touching, and the patient does not feel great pain, there is no point of fracture; but it can well have twisting, or tear, or small fracture. 
Si ne covient mie que tu lou mueves a la main, mais met sus medicines que vienent ci aprés, et puis l’estraint maintenant subtilment.	You should not move it by hand, but apply the medicines that come after, and then restrain it carefully.
Et saiches que li brisure que vait en arvol, et sont les II parties desjointes, il les covient maintenant mettre a point igalment, ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne; et se apostemes chaulz i vient, si lou laisse aucun jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez; puis le met igal au mues que tu pues legierement et saigement, et saiches que li restauration de li est plus legiere que li restaurations de celi ou il ait pieces; puis l’estraint, si com il covient ci aprés.	And know that the fracture that goes into a bow, and are the two parts disjointed, it is necessary now to put them equally together, so that abscesses come not; and if abscesses do come, leave none of them for any day, until the abscesses are calmed; then put it equal to the joint as you can gently and wisely, and know that the restoration of this is lighter than the restoration of that which has pieces; then restrain, as it is necessary afterward. 
Et se en l’os a piéces brisies, si l’estent de II pars, se c’est mains ou piet, ou a ta main se c’est uns petis membres, ou a II cordes, ou a une corde et a ta main; et met le membre selonc sa figure natureil, si que quant les parties dou membre brisiet sont desevrees, si ramoinne par toz engiens les additions en lor leus au mues que tu pues, et garde que par ton ovraige ne viegne au malaide lesion ne doulor; et ajoste bien les II chiés des os selonc les millors formes.	And if the bone is broken in pieces, if it’s two parts, whether it’s the hand or foot, or to your hand if it’s a small limb, or to two cords, or to one cord and to your hand; and place the limb according to its natural figure, so that when the parts of the broken member are separated, you put back together with all means the additions in their places as much as you can, and keep that by your work comes no injury or pain to the sick person; and adjust well the two heads of the bones according to the best forms.  
Et le sent bien a la main s’il te semble k’il ne soit mie bien: si la dresce bellement, et ne l’estraindre mie trop, ne presser si com font cil qui i font venir par lor ovraige aposteme chaut et contraction au membre, si com nos avons veut maintes fois.	And he feels it well in the hand if it seems to you that it is not well; if it is beautifully straightened, and do not restrain it too much, nor press as those who bring it by their work abscesses hot and contraction to the limb, as we have wanted many times.
Et quant li membres est a point, si chastie bien lou malaide qu’il ne lou mueve, ne en veillant ne en dormant, ne en tornant, ne en autre maniere; et warde bien que li membres soit si asseurez qu’il ne sente nule dolor.	And when the limb is in place, carefully instruct the patient that he does not move it, neither watching nor sleeping, nor turning, nor in any other way; and guard well that the limb be so assured that he feels no pain. 
Car quant il sent nulle dolor, si n’est mie a point, et le covient mettre en teil disposition qu’il ne sent nule dolor; et te garde k’il soit mis droitement, que tortuositez n’i veigne quant il iert restorez; et li qualitez dou membre brisiet est selonc ceu que je te dis.	For when it feels no pain, except at a point, and it behooves to put it in such a disposition that it feels no pain; and keep that it be put straight, that twistiness does not come when it is restored; and the qualities of the broken limb are according to those that I tell you.  
Saiches que li membre brisiet sont divers em petitece et en grandor et en forme.	Know that broken limbs are diverse in smallness and largeness and in form.
Car il i a petis membres, si com brais et dois et semblans: si covient envoloupeir drapelz de lin molz et subtilz; et cil qui sont gros, si com cuixe et jambe: si covient envoloupeir d’un liien large et dur, car li larges liiens embraice tout le grant membre, et l’estraint de toutes pars igalment, si qu’il n’i a nule taiche; puis lie entor estoupes legieres, III tours ou IIII selonc lou membre, et estraint ta main un poc a tout le liien, puis vai au desus de la brisure et l’estraint moins, que la brisure puis esloigne un poc la brisure; et mollifie lou liien poc et poc, tant que tu preignes grant partie dou leu sain, puis repren I autre liien, et torne entor derechief sus lou leu brisiet; puis revai a la partie desoz de la brisure, et l’estraint moienement, ne mie trop fort ne trop molement, si com nos avons dit en la premiere lieure desus; puis met entre les liiens estoupes de lin ou drapelz, tant qu’il soit toz igalz, puis lie tout par desus I bendeil, et puis met tes esteles bien faites sus, s’il n’i a aposteme ou enfleure.	For there are small limbs, such as arms and legs and similar things: it is necessary to wrap them in cloths of soft and thin linen; and those which are large, such as the hips and thighs: it is necessary to wrap them in a wide and hard bandage, because the wide bandages embrace the entire great limb, and restrain it from all sides equally, so that there is no gap; then bind above the splint light wraps, III tours or IIII according to the limb, and restrain your hand a little on the whole bandage, then go to the top of the fracture and restrain less, so that the fracture moves away a little from the fracture; and soften the bandage little by little, until you reach a large part of the healthy place, then take the other bandage, and turn it back over the broken place; then return to the bottom part of the fracture, and restrain it moderately, neither too much nor too little, as we have said in the first section above; then put between the bandages wraps of linen or cloth, so that they are all equal, then bind everything from above with a bandage, and then put your well-made splints on top, if there is no abscess or swelling. 
Et s’il i a enfleure ou aposteme, si met sus chose apaisant aposteme chaut, et qui oste l’enfleure, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors; puis estrain sus tes esteles, et soient de moitiet d’une large cainne rese saigement, ou de fust dont on fait les clives, ou de rains de palme, et soient selonc ceste figure:	And if there is a swelling or abscess, put upon it something soothing for the abscess hot, and which removes the swelling, and let it remain thus for some days; then strain upon the eyelids, and be of half a breadth of a cane well-seasoned, or of a staff from which they make the cleves, or of palm leaves, and be according to this figure:
mais il covient que li estele que om met sus la brisure soit un poc plus grosse et plus large que les autres; et soit ausi longe com il covient au membre de petitece ou de grandor; puis estraint sus les esteles ausi com tu as fait a la premiere lieure, puis lie desus un fil avenanment, si com en la premiere lieure sus la briseure; plus estroit est ensus, adés moins; et covient que li fil soient moien, ne trop gros ne trop menus, et soient de lin mol; car se li fil sont gros, si com j’ai veut des oevres des folz qui font lor lieures des cordes de linement tort, et c’est grant error, car li lieure ne puet estre igal s’il est trop subtilz, et ne covient mie qu’il ait entre chescune estele moins dou doi d’espaice.	but it is necessary that the splint that one puts on the fracture be a little larger and wider than the others; and also as long as it is suitable for the limb of smallness or bigness; then tighten on the splints as you have done at the first hour, then tie above a thread evenly, as in the first hour on the fracture; tighter it is above, less below; and it is necessary that the threads be medium, not too thick nor too thin, and be of soft linen; for if the threads are thick, as I want works of fools who do their dressings with cords of twisted linen, and this is a great error, because the dressing cannot be equal if it is too subtle, and it does not become that there be between each splint less than two finger's width. 
Et se li malaides est navrez par les chiés des esteles aprés l’estrignement en leus sains, si met desoz elles estoupes de lin, ou lainne charpie, si qu’il ne se blece.	And if the patient is bruised by the edges of the stitches after the tightening in their flesh, then put under them bandages of linen or wool, so that it does not turn blue.
Quant li plaie est avec la briseure, et li keurs est rompus, je en dirai la cure ci aprés.	When the wound is with the breaking, and the sinew is broken, I will say its cure here after.
Et saiches qu’il ne covient mie estraindre d’esteles toz les membres brisiez le premier jor.	And know that it is not necessary to set all broken limbs on the first day.
Car quant li membres est grans, se n’i covient mie mettre esteles fuer que aprés V jors ou VII, ou plus selonc ta seurteit d’aposteme chaut sorvenant; et vez ci la maniere des emplaustres anciiens por restorer brisure, dislocation, et torsion: et est que tu pren de la farine que se tient as parois dou molin, et la confis avec abun d’uef, et met ceste confection, ne trop clere ne trop espesse, et en use, et c’est li commune maniere de l’emplaustre restorant la brisure a plusors dispositions, et meismement as femmes et as petis enfans, car il n’est mie ne trop chas ne trop frois.	For when the limb is large, it is not advisable to put splints because after V days or VII, or more according to your certainty of an abscess appearing; and here is the manner of the old plasters for restoring fractures, dislocations, and torsion: and that you take flour that holds on the walls of the mill, and boil it with abundance of egg, and put this mixture, not too light nor too thick, and use it, and this is the common manner of the plaster restoring the fracture to many dispositions, and also to women and to small children, because it is not too hot nor too cold.  
Autre maniere d’emplastre restorans la brisure et la dislocation et la torsion: pren З abareis et ladani et enule et asefetide et gomme arabique et mugat, ana .x. З.; mirre et aloes, ana .v. З.; alechil .viiij. З.; et en fai poudre, et les melle avec aubun d’uef; se li complexion de l’ome est chaude, si use de cest emplaustre, car il est de bone composition, et restoure les os brisiés hastanment, et vaut a plusors homes.	Another manner of plaster restoring a fracture and dislocation and torsion: take 3 parts of  barberries and ladane and euphrasia and asafetida and gum arabic and mugwort, ana .x. З.; myrrh and aloes, ana .v. З.; and alechil .viiij. З.; and make it into powder, and mix it with the white of an egg; if the complexion of the man is hot, use this plaster, because it is of good composition, and restores broken bones well, and it is useful to many men.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a torsion: pren mugat et vismalve, ana X З.; mirre et aloes, ana VIIII З.; acaice VI З.; bolic armenic X З., et broie bien, et confit avec aigue ou abun d’uef, et l’aministre.	Another manner of ointment that is good for torsion: take mugwort and wormwood, ana X Z.; myrrh and aloes, ana VIIII Z.; acacia VI Z.; Armenian bolus X Z., and grind well, and confit with water or the white of an egg, and administer. 
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a jointes et as os desevrez de lor leus, et apaise la dolor sorvenant, et le taille usent de l’os, et la briseure: pren lainne novele, et la moille en aisil et en oile cuit, et met sus lou leu.	Another manner of plaistering joints and bones dislocated from their places, and appeases the pain coming, and the size uses of the bone, and the fracture: take new linen, and moisten it in vinegar and oil cooked, and put on the place. 
Cist emplastres ne restoure mie, mais il est boins por apaisier d’aposteme chaut, et oste proprement les dolors.	This plaster does not restore [something], but it is good for soothing a hot abscess, and properly removes pain. 
Autre maniere d’emplaustre qui restoure les os brisiez: pren foilles de figuier seches, et foilles de pavol terrestre, et broie ensamble, et fai emplaustre.	Another manner of plaster that restores broken bones: take dried fig leaves and ground ivy leaves, and grind them together, and make a plaster.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a la restoration de la brisure de l’os et por amenusier lou remenant de l’aposteme.	Another manner of treatment for the setting of a broken bone and to lessen the remainder of an abscess. 
Pren racine de vismalve, camomille, flors de violettes, farine de veces, de chescune une partie; et broie, et confis avec vin, et se li membres est eschaufez, se le confis avec aigue de coriandre moiste, ou d’aigue, et en use.	Take root of wormwood, chamomile, flowers of violets, powder of quince, of each one part; and grind, and boil with wine, and if the limb is cold, boil it with moist coriander water, or water, and use it. 
Autre maniere d’emplaustre plus fors que li premier, quant aposteme dur vient a la restauration dou membre.	Another manner of plastering more forceful than the first, when an abscess hardened comes to the restoration of the member.  
Pren racines de vismalve, et semence de lin, balauste, mellilote, et sansuce, et flors de violetes et de camomille, de toutes ana une partie; et broie, et confit avec aigue de salz, ou aigue douce, ou avec vin, selonc la chalor du membre, et son repos.	Take roots of wormwood, and seed of flax, balm, melilot, and marshmallow, and flowers of violets and chamomile, of all one part; and grind, and confit with water of salt, or sweet water, or with wine, according to the heat of the limb, and its rest. 
Ypocras dist en son livre c’on ne mette sus lou membre brisiet por restorer fuer que cerote fait de cire et d’oile, et nulle autre chose plus, et dist qu’il soit entre dous ne trop molz ne trop durs.	Hippocrates says in his book that one should put on the broken limb for restoration only cerate made of wax and oil, and nothing else more, and he says it should be neither too soft nor too hard.
Et il semble galien c’on doit mettre sus lou membre brisiet, por restoreir, choses seches un poc chaudes, si com mirre et aloes et encens et semblans choses, si com nos avons dit.	And it seems Galen one must put on the broken limb, to restore, things dry a little warm, such as myrrh and aloes and incense and similar things, as we have said.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a lesion et a dolor: pren mugath et chevolz d’omes decopez, ou pennes d’oiseil, et vismalve, et seil igalment, et les broie, et en fai emplaustre et lou lie.	Another way of making a plaster that is good for the injury and pain: take mugwort and horsetail of sheep cut up, or feathers of eye, and marsh mallow, and silk equally, and grind them together, and make it into a plaster and apply it.
Et puis lou deslie un poc aprés, et pren garde se li malaides ne sent nule dolor, ne ne s’est meus li os de son leu; si ne lou deslie par mains jors Et se dolor vient au leu, ou prurite, sens repos ou enfleure, si te haste, et le deslie, et oste l’emplaustre maintenant; et pren drapeil legier, et esponge de mer moiste, et plonge en aigue, et en leve lou leu, tant que li prurite cesse, et soit apaisie li dolor; puis laisse reposer lou membre une houre, puis met sus lainne seche, moillie en aigue ou en oile roset, et lie sus une nut, tant que tu soies seur d’aposteme chaut; et repose li enflammation dou membre, et soit ostee li dolor, puis rencomence la lieure subtil, et un poc d’emplaustre, et ne l’estraindre mie si fort com devant; et subtilie tant qu’il soit sanez.	And then loosen it a little after, and take care if the patient does not feel any pain, nor have the bones moved from their place; if not, do not loosen it for many days And if pain comes to the place, or itching, no rest, or swelling, so hasten, and loosen it, and remove the plaster now; and take a light cloth, and sponge of sea moist, and dip in water, and raise the place, until the itching ceases, and the pain is calmed; then let the member rest an hour, then put on dry linen, moistened with water or rose oil, and tie up with a nut, as long as you are sure of the hot suppuration; and rest the inflammation of the member, and be the pain removed, then begin again the subtle bandage, and a little plaster, and do not constrain it as hard as before; and continue thus until it is healed. 
Et se tu vois que aposteme chaus et roujor et dolor et enfleure sont jai osteit dou tout, et tu as mestier d’emplaustre et de liien, si le rencomence, si com tu a fait premier igalment.	And if you see that the abscess is hot and red, and pain and swelling have been removed entirely, and you need plaster and bandage, then recommence it, as you did at first equally.
Et s’il ne vient au membre nient de ceu que nos avons dit, si ne le desliier fuer que aprés III jors ou IIII ou V ou VII; et aucune fois le laisse XX jors, selonc ce c’on voit, tant que li briseure s’aert, et aproche li ajostement de la char sus; adonques lou restraint plus que premier, et li engroisse sa viande, si com j’ai dit devant; et se tu vois lou leu sechier plus que mestier n’est, saiches que norrissemens n’i puet venir; arose lou donques d’aigue chaude tede, toutes les fois que tu lou deslies, et ce soit chescun tier jor, et eslaiche un poc la lieure; par cest ovraige donques cort li norrissemens au membre, et esmende hastanment ceu que font li fol mire, que restourent le membre tortement: c’est malvais, et si est ovraiges paourous, et je n’i voi autre chose que dou lassier et de l’ovrer droitement.	And if it does not come to the limb anything of what we have said, then do not unbind it before III days or IV or V or VII; and no time let it XX days, according to what one sees, until the fracture heals, and approaches the adjustment of the bone above; then you restrain it more than first, and make its flesh fat, as I said before; and if you see it drying more than is necessary, know that nourishment cannot come there; rose therefore hot water bath, every time you unbind it, and let it be each third day, and soften a little the flesh; by this work then shortens the nourishment to the limb, and amends quickly what fools do, who leave the limb twisted: it is evil, and so are these works perilous, and I see no other thing than to leave it and to work it straightly. 
des diverses manieres de brisure	of various ways of fracture
Maintes manieres de brisures sont, et diverses figures, et les causes sont destintees; car il a brisures que sont faites de percussion d’espee, et li colz oste tout l’os jusc’a syfac qui est desoz l’os, si com fait haiche ou fust; et por ceu est apelee ceste maniere de briseure «haichure».	Many kinds of fractures there are, and various figures, and the causes are destined; for there are fractures that are made by the percussion of a sword, and the collarbone breaks the entire bone to the point which is below the bone, as it is made with a hatchet or staff; and for this reason this kind of fracture is called «haichure». 
Ou li espee cope l’os par desus sens percier, et est apelee ceste maniere de brisure «absolue»; et est li plaie de ces .ij. brisures grans ou petite.	Where the sword cuts the bone from above without piercing, and this manner of fracture is called "absolute"; and the wound of these two fractures great or small.
Et s’il i a percussion emboee, ou fendure ou de colz de piere, ou de cheoir sus piere, ou d’autres semblans.	And if there is an enclosed percussion, or fissure or of the neck of the bone, or of the cheek on the bone, or similar things.
Et s’il a brisure persant, qui aproiche jusc’a la toile qui est desoz l’os, ou elle est sus l’os, et est ceste plaie ou grans ou petite.	And if there is a fracture passing through, which approaches near the membrane that is beneath the bone, or it is above the bone, and this wound is large or small.
Et si a plaie qui est reponue en l’os ausi subtil com uns chevous, et est li fendure petite, et por ceu est apelee ceste brisure «capillaire»; et si la plaie qui est faite ou par ferir de piere, ou par cheoir, ou par semblant chose, et fait entrer la piece de l’os aval, et est li leus chevez si com font li chaudelier quant il fierent sus les chaudieres; si entre li piere dedens.	And if the wound is laid back in the bone as subtle as a horsehair, and is the fissure small, and for this reason is called this fracture "capillary"; and if the wound which is made either by striking with a stone, or by falling, or by similar thing, and makes enter the piece of bone down, and is the piece like how do the blacksmith when they forge on the cauldrons; so enters the piece into. 
Et ceu avient plus a sous qui ont ou chief moistes os, si com chief d’enfant; et avient a toutes ces manieres de brisure que pieces menues en sont desevrees si com esteles; et je em parlerai en son leu.	And this happens more to those who have or whose chief is moist bone, like the head of a child; and it happens in all these manners of fracture that small pieces are separated from them like stars; and I will speak about this in its place.  
Et conoissons toutes manieres de briseures par la detraction sus elles, et l’inquisition a tentes, et par la char corrumpue qui est sus.	And let us know all the ways of fractures by the traction on them, and the examination of their ends, and by the rotten flesh which is on them.
Li semblance capillaire est conue par ceu que quant on a descovert l’os, et on frote enche sus, si apert li brisure noire.	The appearance of capillary [like] is known by this: when one has uncovered the bone and rubs it above, black fracture appears.
En la cure de la brisure, pren garde as accidens dou malaide, et se tu vois nul malvais accident, si com vomissement de cole, et amission d’entendement, et estension, et paumeson, et fievre ague, et les eulz issir fuer et rougir, et autres semblans em plusors dispositions, si ne puet saner sens doute.	In the cure of the fracture, take heed to the accidents of the patient, and if you see no bad accident, such as vomiting of blood, and loss of understanding, and swelling, and paleness, and fever ague, and eyes red and inflamed, and other similar things in more dispositions, then it cannot heal without doubt.
Et se tu ne vois accident espoantauble, et tu esperes salut, si comence la cure.	And if you do not see an inescapable accident, and you hope for salvation, then begin the treatment.
Et quant li navrez vient premier a toi, et c’est en yver, si covient oster l’os devant lou quatorzime jor au mues que tu pues.	And when the broken bone comes to you first and it is in winter, then it is necessary to remove the bone before the fourteenth day at the time that you can.
Et se c’est en esteit, si te haste d’oster l’os devant lou septime jor, ainsois que li toile desoz l’os soit corrumpue, et vienent li accident que nos avons dit.	And if it is in summer, then hurry to remove the bone before the seventh day, so that the cloth beneath the bone does not rot, and comes the accident that we have said.
Et se li brisure de l’os vient jusc’a la toile que cuevre lou cerveil, si covient que tu fendes la partie fendue ensi: et est que tu preignes lou chief dou malaide navreit, et descuevre sus l’os en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et sus la figure de la plaie plus souef que tu pues, et se decorrement de sanc vient au descovrir l’os, ou aposteme chaus, se li aide de ceu qu’il covient, et est que tu emplisses lou leu de drapelz moilliez en oile roset; et fai reposer la plaie tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et soies asseurez de decorrement de sanc; puis comence entor l’os a oster, et c’est fait selonc II manieres d’ovraige: l’une manieres si est que tu copes au taillement estroit devant, et c’est li forme:	And if the bone fracture comes to the membrane that covers the brain, it is necessary that you split the fractured part like this: and it is that you prick the head of the sick person carefully, and uncover on the bone in all ways that you can, and on the figure of the wound more gently than you can, and if blood comes when uncovering the bone, or abscess put, if he helps with what is necessary, and it is that you fill the place with cloths moistened in rose oil; and make the wound rest until the abscess put is appeased, and be sure of blood flow; then begin to remove around the bone, and it is done according to II ways of work: one way is that you cut at a narrow point in front, and this is the form:
Et puis i boute .i. autre taillement plus grant que lou premier.	And then put .i. other incision larger than the first.
Et li seconde maniere si est que tu aies nombre de taillemens divers, les uns estrois et les autres larges, et soient a pointe, et soient de fer inde; et en oevre legierement, que tu ne bleces le chief.	And the second way is that you have a number of incisions of various kinds, some narrow and others wide, and they are pointed, and made of iron; and in working lightly so that you do not break the head.
Et se li os est fors et durs, si covient que tu lou perces entor, ainsois que tu i aministres taillemens avec tareres, ne mie parfont qu’il ne percent outre l’os dou test, et doit avoir desus la pointe une marge ou .i. cercle, que ne laisse passer la pointe outre l’os; et t’en covient avoir plusors, si que chescuns viegne en son leu de l’espés de l’os, si que tu aies tareres por toz test; et c’est li forme des .iij. manieres de tareres:	And if the bone is hard and stiff, it is necessary that you pierce it inward, so that you administer splints with drills, lest they go beyond the bone of the test, and it must have above the tip a margin or circle, that does not allow the tip to pass beyond the bone; and you should have several, so that each one comes in its place from the thickness of the bone, so that you have drills for all tests; and this is the form of the three kinds of drills:
Li qualitez por percier entor l’os brisiet est que tu mettes .i. tarere sus l’os, et torne a tes dois tant que tu saiches que li os est perciez; puis remet lou tarere autre part un poc aprés, et ensi fai tout entor, puis cope as incisoires l’espaice de l’os qui est entre les pertu, et fai ceu plus subtilment que tu pues, et legierement, si com nos avons dit, tant que tu en traies l’os a ta main, ou a aucun des estrumens que tu as si com tenailles, pinceures; et garde que tu ne touchier au cerveil ne au syfac.	The qualities for piercing inward the broken bone is that you put one drill on the bone, and turn to your two hands until you know that the bone is pierced; then put the drill elsewhere a bit afterwards, and so do all around, then cut with the incisors the space of the bone that is between the perforations, and do this more subtly than you can, and lightly, as we have said, until you draw the bone to your hand, or to any of the instruments that you have like pliers; and keep that you do not touch the marrow nor the surface.
Et quant tu avras l’os perciet, et trait, si couvient que tu reses l’apreteit qui est demoree de l’os a tout I autre estrument semblant a un incisoire, mais il covient qu’il soit plus tenves et plus subtilz que li autre incisoire; et s’il demore rien des petis os, ne nulles escailles, si les oste legierement a I des estrumens; puis cure la plaie de tentes et d’oignemens que nos avons dit.	And when you will have pierced the bone, and treated it, it is necessary that you reset the apparatus which is stayed away from the bone to all the other instruments seeming like an incisor, but it is necessary that it be more firm and more subtle than the other incisor; and if there remains nothing of the small bones, nor any scales, then cure the wound lightly with the instruments; then cure the wound with tents and ointments as we have said. 
Et li autre maniere d’ovraige si est cil que Galiiens dist, qui est plus saus; et le loa molt fort, et c’est sa parole.	And the other manner of work is that which Galen says, which is drier; and it is very strong, and this is his word.
Il covient premier que tu descuevres une partie de l’os, lai ou li brisure apert mues, si que quant tu avras descovert celle partie, si metras desoz lou chief de cest incisoire lenticulaire, de coi ci est li forme:	It is necessary first that you uncover a part of the bone, where the fracture appears open, so that when you have uncovered that part, you will place beneath the head of this lentil-shaped incision, which is the shape:
Et ne trenche mie d’une part, et est li partie ague en II costez, si que li trenchans est devers l’os; puis fier d’un petit maillet sus, si que tu copes legierement l’os tout entor, et te done bien en garde de la toile que est desoz; s’elle est aerse a l’os, si l’oste legierement, car on l’oste bien sens nuisement, et sens paor.	And do not cut from one part, and is the piece acute in II costs, so that the trenchans is towards the bone; then strike of a small hammer up, so that you lightly chop the bone all around, and give yourself well guard of the cloth that is below; if it is hard to the bone, so lightly the bone, because one lightly bones without nuisance, and without fear.   
Et se li brisure de l’os ne perce jusc’a la toile, et li os est copez tant soulement par desus, et il i a petites pieces, si couvient rere celle asperiteit, et oster les escailles au raseur subtil dont tu dois avoir diverses quantitez, por amenistrer en chescun leu le plus covenauble, selonc l’ovraige et la figure de la brisure.	And if the broken bone does not pierce to the skin, and the bone is only cut from above, and there are small pieces, then it is necessary to put this asperity back together, and remove the scales with a fine razor which you must have various quantities of, in order to apply in each place the most suitable one, according to the work and the figure of the fracture.
Si reis devant de grant raseurs, et aprés de plus subtilz, et ne cesser de ceu faire tant k’il soit bien.	If you begin with large razors, and afterwards with finer ones, and do not cease to do this until it is well.
En chescune des autres tailleures capillaires et brisure subtil, covient que tu amenistres cause selonc son adrecement; et c’est chose que n’est mie reponue a celui qui a mis son estude en cest art.	In each of the other capillary cuts and subtle fractures, it is necessary that you apply the cause according to its appropriateness; and this is something that is not well-repaired to him who has put his study into this art.
Et se li syfac est descovers, si covient que tu preignes I drapeil de lin, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et le moille en oile roset, et le mete sus la plaie; puis pren I autre drapeil doublé en II ou en III, et le moille en vin et en oile roset, et le met sus le premier drapeil; et fai ceu plus legierement que tu pues, que tu ne grever lou syfac, puis aministre par desus I autre liien, et ne l’estraindre mie fuer que tant k’il teigne la plaie soulement; et le laisse ensi I jor ou II, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, puis le deslie, et i aministre medicines si com racines de lis, et farine de veces, et poudre d’encens, et aristologe, et semblans choses; et de ces choses fai poudre, et met sus la plaie, et i aministre adés medicines mondefians sens mordication; et warde que li plaie soit adés nette, que tu n’i laissier mie l’oignement, ne n’i laissier mie assembler bowe, car quant bowe s’asemble sus la toile dou cerveil, si la corront et porrist, et avient au malaide grans malice; car quant on met sus lou syfac chose mordant, si nercist par desus.	And if the wound is open, you must take a linen cloth, according to the quantity of the wound, and soak it in rose oil, and place it on the wound; then take another cloth doubled in two or three, and soak it in wine and rose oil, and place it on top of the first cloth; and do this more lightly than you can, that you do not damage the skin; then administer a bandage from above, and do not bind it too tightly except as long as it holds the wound only; and leave it so for one or two days, until the abscess has subsided, then untie it, and administer medicines such as roots of lilies, and flour of violets, and incense powder, and ariadne, and similar things; and make powder from these things, and place it on the wound, and administer additional medications without biting; and guard that the wound is always clean, that you do not leave any oil, nor allow it to gather pus, for when pus gathers on the cloth of the brain, it rots and irritates, and brings great harm to the patient; for when one puts a stinging thing on the skin, it stings from above. 
Pren warde donques, se nulz mavais accidens vient au malaide, si com nos avons dit, si est doutable sens doute.	Take guard therefore, if no bad accidents come to the patient, as we have said, then it is doubtful without doubt.
Et se noiror n’i vient fuers que por la medicine c’on a mise sus, que teil vertu ait, si covient que tu preignes une partie de miel, et III parties d’oile roset et en glue I drapel, et lou met sus lou syfac; puis lou cure de manieres de cures qu’il couvient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the pus does not come out except for the medicine that has been put on it, that it has virtue, then it is necessary that you take a part of honey and III parts of rose oil and glue one cloth, and place it on the wound; then cure it in ways of cures as it is necessary, until it is healed. 
Saiches que aucune fois sont brisies les .ij. parties dou neis desus, ou li une par li soulement, car ce sont .ij. os; et cil desoz est cartillaginous, et ne brise mie, si ne fait fuer k’enbower ou tordre, et puis saine.	Know that sometimes the two parts of the bone above are broken, or one by itself, because they are two bones; and the lower one is cartilaginous, and does not break, unless it is forced to bend or twist, and then heals.
Et se l’une des II parties est brisie, si covient que tu boutes ton petit doi ou pertus dou neis, et met igal cele brisure dedens a ton doi indice, et au pouchet par defuer, tant que li neis reveigne selonc sa figure natureil; et fai ce legierement, et warde que li malaides ne sente dolor par ton ovraige.	And if one of the two parts is broken, it behooves you to put your small finger or through the two, and place each fracture within your index finger, and in the palm outwards, until the two returns according to its natural figure; and do this gently, and watch that the patient does not feel pain from your work. 
Et se li brisure est en la partie desus lou neis, et ne puet venir li dois au leu, si couvient que tu lou mettes igal au chief d’un rait un poc gros.	And if the fracture is in the part above the knees, and it cannot come to its place, then you must put it equal to the head of a rail, a piece thick.
Et se li brisure est de II pars, si refai autretel, et te haste de restorer lou premier jor, se tu pues; se ce non, aprés lou septime ou le disime, quant li apostemes chaus est apaisiez, puis bouthe au chief dou neis tentes de drapelz de lin, se li brisure est en une partie.	And if the fracture is of two parts, make another splint, and hasten to restore it on the first day, if you can; if not, after the seventh or tenth, when the abscess has calmed, then band it at the head with two layers of linen cloth, if the fracture is in one part. 
Ou tu boutes .i. autre d’autre part, se li brisure i est; et soient les tentes si grosses qu’eles emplissent les pertus dou neis.	Or you put one on the other side, if the fracture is there; and let the bandages be so thick that they fill the hollows of the knee.
Et dirent aucun restorour c’on doit moillier les tentes em burre, et muer chescun jor.	And said any restorer one must moisten the tents with butter, and change each day.  
Il ne me semble mie que ce soit bien, mais covient qu’elles soient moillies en confection d’aubun d’uef, et de poudre de molin; puis laisse la tente, tant que li os soit fers, et li cartilaiges endurcis.	It does not seem to me that this is good, but it should be moistened in the making of auburn from an egg, and powdered millet; then let the tent remain until the bone is hard, and the cartilage hardened.  
Et aucune fois boute on ou neis pennes d’oie en leu de tentes, et si a .i. souef drapeil entor, et se tient la briseure, et soffle li malaides parmi; or fai lou kel ke tu vues.	And sometimes one puts goose feathers in their place, and if it is i.e., a single sheet of cloth, wrapped around, and the breeze holds it, and blows on the patient; or do as you please.
Et se apostemes chaus vient au neis tandis com tu i oevres, si i met cerote ou coton moilliet en oile roset, ou en .i. poc de dyaquilon.	And if an abscess comes to the boil while you are working on it, put a certain kind of cloth or cotton moistened in rose oil, or in i. p. (one part) of dyacylon.
Et se apostemes chaus n’i vient, si met emplastre par defuer, de farine de sisament, et de poudre d’encens, confites avec aubun d’uef, puis met sus estoupes legieres, et ne liier mie lou neis; et se li brisure dou neis est petite, et il est brisiés em menues pieces, si l’estrai as estrumens covenables a ceu, puis cout la fendure, et la cure de choses enjanrans char, et soudant, si com emplastres et oignemens covenables a ceu; et s’il n’a dedens lou neis nule plaie, si lou cure de tentes, et i met cainnes de plonc, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if abscesses do not come, then put a plaster from outside, of sesame flour and incense powder, cooked with yolk of egg, then put light compresses on top and bind it not at all nor the sides; and if the fracture is small and broken in small pieces, then extract it with suitable instruments, then sew the opening, and cure it with things like flesh and sutures, as well as plasters and ointments as are suitable for it; and if there is no wound inside, then cure it with tents, and put twigs of plantain in it, until it is healed.  
de la routure de la mandibule	Of the fracture of the jawbone.
Quant li mandibule est route desoz, et il n’i a point de plaie defuer, et li brisure est defuer tant soulement, et n’est mie brisiez en dous, fuer que corbelz dedens, si le conoist on legierement.	When the jaw is broken from below and there is no wound outside and the fracture is outside only, and is not broken in two, except for the corner inside, if one knows it lightly.
Il covient, se li brisure est en la destre partie, que tu boutes ton doi indice en la bouche dou malaide; et se li brisure est en la mandibule senestre, si boute ton doi indice de la main destre, et boute la brisure dedens legierement, et l’afaite a l’autre main par defuer, et met igal.	It is necessary, if the fracture is in the right side, that you put your right index finger into the mouth of the patient; and if the fracture is in the left mandible, then put your right index finger, and push the fracture inward lightly, and hold it with the other hand outside, and make it even.
Et se li brisure de la mandibule est desevree en .ij., si covient que tu aministres extension de .ij. pars, tant qu’il soit igalz.	And if the jaw fracture is separated into two, it is necessary that you administer extension to two parts, until it is even.
Et se commovemens des dens avient, ou routure, si les estrain d’un fil d’or ou d’argent ou de soie, puis met sus la mandibule brisie cerote, et met sus .i. drapel double; et met sus lou drapel une grant estele bien faite, ou une piece de cuir igal, longe et large selonc la mandibule, et la lie sus au mues que tu pues, et comande a malaide qu’il se repose, et menjuce viandes legieres.	And if movement of the teeth occurs, or rupture, then strain with a thread of gold or silver or silk, then put on the broken jaw cerote, and put on i. drapel double; and put on lou drapel a great estele well made, or a piece of leather equal, long and wide according to the mandible, and tie it up as much as you can, and command the patient to rest, and eat light meats.
Et se tu vois que li figure se chainge, si le deslie au tier jor, et puis remet a point ceu que c’est chaingiet; et met emplaustre sus, de la poudre dou moulin avec abun d’uef ou farine de sisament, aprés ceu que tu as osteit lou cerote; et met sus l’emplaustre lainne legiere, et se li emplaustres s’aert, et li disposition dou malaide ne se chainge, laisse le tant k’il soit sanez; maintes fois est sanez en .iij. semainnes.	And if you see that the figure changes, then untie it on the third day, and then put back what is changed; and put a plaster above, of powder from the mill with an abundance of egg or sesame flour, after what you have removed the cerote; and put on the plaster light linen, and if the plasters adhere, and the disposition of the patient does not change, leave it as long as it is healthy; many times is healed in iii. weeks.
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit maintes fois.	And if an abscess comes, then administer what we have said many times.
Et s’il i a brisure et plaie ensamble, rewarde se nule piece de l’os en est ostee; si subtilie de l’oster as estrumens covenaubles a ceu.	And if there is a fracture and wound together, reward no piece of the bone in it is removed; so subtle of the remove with instruments suitable to this.
Et se li plaie est estroite, si l’eslarge a flaime selonc ta necessiteit.	And if the wound is narrow, so enlarge it with flame according to your need.
Et quant tu avras ostees toutes ces pieces, et il n’i demore nule, si cout la plaie, s’ele est large, et met sus .i. des emplaustres covenaubles a ceu, por enjanrer char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you will have removed all these pieces, and there remains none, then cover the wound, if it is wide, and put upon it one plaster suitable to this, to prevent flesh, until it is healed.
de la forcele	of the forceps
Li forcele brise plusors fois devant, devers l’espaule, et li brisure si est selonc .iij. manieres: ou elle est brisie et desevree en .ij., et i a pieces, et est li plus legiere a restorer; ou il i a brisure avec plaie.	The fracture breaks many times before, towards the shoulder, and the fracture is according to .iij. manners: or it is broken and severed in .ij., and there are pieces, and it is the lightest to restore; or there is a fracture with a wound.
Et li ovraiges si est quant li brisure est sens plaie, que tu aies .ij. ministres, si que li uns teigne l’ajutoire que sent la forcele brisie; et li autres estende lou col vers la partie; puis met igal la brisure a tes dois, si que li forme soit si com il covient, et n’i ait ne apparance ne chevement.	And the work is when the fracture is without a wound, that you have .ij. ministers, so that one holds the shoulder which is the fractured bone; and the other extends the neck towards the part; then put equal the fracture to your hands, so that the form is as it should be, and there is no appearance nor blemish.
Et se tu a mestier de plus estendre, si met desoz l’espaule au malaide une spere reonde de drap, ou de lainne, et soit grosse selonc ta necessiteit; et estent et lieve la forcele, et estraint le spere a ta main, si que tu mettes igal la brisure, si com il covient.	And if you need to extend it more, put under the shoulder of the patient a round sphere of cloth, or wool, and be thick according to your necessity; and being and lift the fracture, and restrain the sphere in your hand, so that you put equal the fracture, as it should be.
Et se tu ne pues traire le chief de la forcele au defuer, por ceu qu’elle vient em parfont, si covient que li malaides gise sovin sus son hatereil, et met desoz l’espaule .i. oreillier moien, et boute li ministres l’espaule aval, tant que li os de la forcele soit levez.	And if you cannot draw the head of the shoulder with force because it comes in front, then it is necessary that the patient lie often on his back and place under the shoulder one hour glass, and put the ministers the shoulder down, until the bone of the shoulder be lifted.
Et puis adrece la brisure a tes dois, et se tu lou trueves debrisiet, si covient que tu fendes sus; et trai fuer les pieces legierement, et se li os ne puet joindre por aucun sormontement, si le cope a l’un des incisoires que tu as; mais que tu mettes desoz la forcele cest estrument, por warder lou syfac:	And then direct the fracture to your two hands, and if you find it broken, then it is necessary that you split it up; and treat the pieces gently, and if the bones cannot join for any mounting, then cut it at one of the incisors that you have; but put under the shoulder this instrument, in order to ward off the syfac:
et semble une cuiller, et n’est mie chevez, et soit ausi large com il lou covient, selonc la grandor de l’os et la possance de l’uevre; et ait II chiés, si com tu vois, et soit li uns larges, et li autres estrois, si com est li routure de la plaie que tu as fait quant tu as trait les os; et quant tu es asseurez d’aposteme chaut, si cout la plaie, et se li routure est petite, ou tu doutes aposteme chaut, si emple la plaie de drapelz et de tentes, selonc sa quantiteit.	and it appears like a spoon, and is not entirely hollow, and be as wide as it is fitting, according to the size of the bone and the force of the work; and it has two handles, as you see, and one is wide, and the other narrow, as is the rupture of the wound that you made when you treated the bones; and when you are assured of a hot abscess, so stitch up the wound, and if the rupture is small, or you doubt about a hot abscess, then apply the wound with bandages and tents, according to its quantity. 
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si moille .i. drapel en oile roset et en aisil et en vin, et met sus.	And if the hot abscess comes, then moisten one bandage in rose oil and honey and wine, and put it on top.
Li estrignement de l’os, quant il est sens plaies et sens tailleure, est que tu mettes sus l’os l’enplaustre de la poudre dou molin et d’aubun d’uef, et met estoupes legieres sus, et met une spere desoz l’assele, se tu en as mestier; puis pren une tres grant bende d’une palme de large, puis met I drapeil double sus estoupes, et l’emplaustre; puis pren une estele subtil de III dois de large et de lonc, et l’envoloupe entor celui bendeil, si que li chief dou bendeil soient pendant; et met l’estele sus la briseure, et torne le bendeil sus lou col, et desoz l’asselle sainne, et desoz l’asselle malaide; et la ramoinne de chescune partie, et quant tu vois ke li lieure tient la briseure avenanment, et tu vois clerement que li estele ne se muet desus l’os brisiet, si le rewarde chescun jor, et quant li liiens eslaiche, si lou restraint; et fai gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li met quant il dort I petit orillier desoz l’assele, por lever l’ajutoire en haut; si aligera li brisure de la forcele par l’aligement de l’espaule, ou tu li lie lou bras au col, et ne lou desliier se malvais accidens n’i vient, jusc’a XX jors; puis rencomence l’emplaustre, se tu vois qu’il en ait mestier, et l’estraint et le laisse ensi, tant qu’il soit restorez; et elle est restoree au plus en XXVIII jors, et en moins a aucuns homes.	The tightening of the bone, when it is without wounds and without cutting, is that you put upon the bone the plaster of the powder of the mill and of albumen of egg, and put light poultices upon, and put a spear under the ass-hole, if you have need; then take a very great bandage of one palm wide, then put the double drape upon the poultices, and the plaster; then take a strip subtle of III fingers wide and long, and envelop it around that bandaged, so that the head of the band be hanging; and put the strip upon the fracture, and turn the bandage upon the neck, and under the healthy ass-hole, and under the broken ass-hole; and tighten each part, and when you see that the ligature holds the fracture well, and you clearly see that the strip does not move above the broken bone, so reward each day, and when the ligatures slacken, so restrain it; and make the patient lie upon his back, and put him when he sleeps the small pillow under the ass-hole, to raise the shoulder upwards; thus alleviate the fracture of the force by the lightening of the shoulder, or you bind the arm to the neck, and do not untie it unless bad accidents come to pass, until XX days; then recommence the plaster, if you see that he has need, and restrain and leave him so, until it be restored; and it is restored at most in XXVIII days, and less for some men. 
de la brisure de l’espaule	of the breaking of the shoulder
Poc avient que li espaule brise ou large leu ne em mileu, et ne lou seit on fuers que par lou touchement; si l’apareille selonc la figure de la brisure, et la ramoinne selonc sa forme natureil, en toutes les manieres que tu pues; puis met sor le leu poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, et estoupes legieres, et met sus I drapeil double; puis met sus une estele large et subtil, un poc plus large de l’espaule, et se desoz l’estele est chevemens en aucun leu de l’espaule, si emple celle cheveure d’estoupes de lin, si que li estele siece igalment; et puis l’estraint a tout une grant bende fermement, si que li estele ne se mueve de son leu, et regarde le liien chescun jor; et toutes les fois k’il amolist, si l’estraint, et met igal l’estele s’elle est fuer de son leu, et gise li malaides sus son costeit; et li espaule est restouree en XX jors ou en xxv, Et quant cist nombres est acomplis, si le deslie, et soies seur, car ce n’est mie os qui se mette fuer legierement.	It happens that the shoulder breaks or its large bone is in the middle, and it is not felt other than by touch; therefore, arrange the apparatus according to the shape of the fracture, and set it according to its natural form, in all the ways you can; then put on the place powder of the mill with abundance of egg, and light bandages, and put a double cloth above; then put on top a wide and fine plate, a little wider than the shoulder, and if the plate is chafed at any place on the shoulder, use that chafing with lin bandages, so that the plate rests equally; and then restrain it with a very strong bandage tightly, so that the plate does not move from its place, and look at it every day; and every time it softens, bind it again, and put the plate back in its place if it is out of place, and lie the patient on his side; and the shoulder will be restored in 20 days or in 25, and when this number is completed, then untie it, and be sure, because it is not a bone that puts itself out easily.
Et se une piece de l’os tent avant, et point desoz lou keur, si fent sus, et l’oste, et fai ceu que nos avons dit en la brisure de la forcele d’apaisier aposteme chaut.	And if a piece of the bone comes before, and not under the heart, so make it up, and the bone, and do what we have said in the breaking of the collarbone to soothe an abscess hot.
de la brisure dou pis	of the fracture of the leg
Li peis est aucune fois brisiez em mileu, mais ce avient poc; mais il brise sovent au defuer.	The bone is sometimes broken in the middle, but this happens little; but it often breaks at the end. 
Et quant il est brisiez emmi, si decline au desoz, et sent li malaides grant dolor, et faute d’alainne, et toust, et par aventure vomist sanc, et apert li chevemens en l’os brisiés, et lou sent om bien.	And when it is broken in the middle, it sinks to the groin, and the patient feels great pain, and lack of strength, and all, and perhaps vomits blood, and opens the joints in the broken bone, and he feels it well.  
Et li restoracion si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, et li met .i. cussin entre les espaules, puis presse les espaules, et li assemble les costes des .ij. costelz a tes mains, et subtilie dou mettre igal a toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que li figure de l’os soit si com il covient; puis met sus emplaustres et estoupes desus l’estele subtil de salz, ou d’autre fust legier, et l’envoloupe en .i. drapeil, et la lie sus l’os brisiet, si qu’elle ne se mueve; et torne le liien reondement au dos, et l’estraint avenanment, et rewarde chescune houre la liure, et s’elle ramolist, si l’estraint; et s’il lou covient desliier, por corrosion ou por prurite que vient au leu, ou dolor ou aposteme, si te haste, et lou deslie, et raie l’emplaustre, et adresce ceu qui i est venus de manieres de cures; puis ramoinne l’emplaustre, et l’estraint tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the restoration is that the patient lies often on his back, and one cushion is put between the shoulders, then the shoulders are pressed, and the sides of the two bones are brought together with your hands, and subtly in all ways as you can, until the shape of the bone is as it should be; then bandages and poultices are put on top of a thin layer of salt, or another light plaster, and it is wrapped in one cloth, and laid upon the broken bone, so that it does not move; and the bandage is turned around back and forth, and kept tight, and each hour the bandage is checked, and if it loosens, it is tightened; and if it needs to be loosened for corrosion or itching that comes to the place, or pain or abscess, then hurry, and loosen it, and wipe off what has come out in ways of cures; then reapply the bandage, and keep it tight until it is healed.
de la brisure des costes	of the breaking of the ribs
Saiches que li briseure des costes ne vient fuer que en leus gros aprés le dos, et au chief dedens, et ne ploient fuer que por ceu qu’eles sont glairouses; et le sent om bien a l’inquisition as dois.	Know that the breaking of the ribs comes only in their thick parts after the back, and at the head within, and they bend only for this reason because they are glassy; and one feels it well upon inquiry on the sides.
Et li restoremens si est que tu met igal la brisure, si com il covient.	And the restoration is that you put each fracture equal as it befits. 
Et puis met l’emplaustre, et l’estraint d’une estele, se tu en as mestier.	And then place the splint, and restrain it with a strap, if you need it. 
Et se li brisure des costes est declinans au dedens, si sent li malaides tres grant dolor, et pointure, ausi com de pleuresin, car li os point la toile; et alaine a poinnes, et toust et vomist grant planteit de sanc, et c’est de grief santeit, et li ancien i ont mis grant engien.	And if the breaking of the ribs is sloping inwards, the patient feels very great pain and stabbing, as well as shortness of breath, because the bone pricks the lung; and also, they have pains, and cough and vomit blood greatly, and this is a serious illness, and the ancients put much importance on it.
Et si a de ces qui dient qu’il le covient aministrer viandes qui enflent le ventre, por bouter la briseure au defuer.	And if there are some who say that it is necessary to administer meats which swell the belly, in order to expel the wind outward.
Nos ne faisons mie ceu, que apostemes chaulz n’i viegne, s’il n’i est venus.	We do not do this, except for abscesses that have come warm.
Et s’il i est venus, si le saine.	And if it has come, treat it.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on met ventouses sor le leu, por sucier forment, et c’est semblant a raison; toutevoie, doutance i a que li ventouse n’atraie les superfluitez au leu por la disposition de foiblece.	And some of you say that one should put suction cups on the spot, to suck out forcefully, and this seems reasonable; however, there is doubt that the suction cup attracts superfluities at the site for the sake of weakness.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on doit covrir le leu de lainne moillie en oile chaut, et met on tentes entre les costes por metre igal la lieure entor, puis soit curez de la cure de pleurisin, de viande et de medicine.	And they say none of you should cover the place with wool soaked in hot oil, and put a tent between the ribs to make the area even, then be cured from the treatment of pleurisy, meat, and medicine.
Et se li malaides sent grant dolor qu’il ne puet soffrir par l’os qui point la toile, et doutance est au malaide, si covient fendre sus lou leu de la coste brisie, et covient mettre desoz I estrument por warder lou syfac; et adonques doit on trenchier l’os, et traire legierement, et puis coudre les II levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, et le curez d’emplaustres, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the patient feels great pain that he cannot bear from the bone which points to the cloth, and there is doubt in the patient, then it is necessary to split above the place of the broken rib, and it is necessary to put underneath an instrument for guarding the syfac; and afterwards one must cut into the bone, and gently draw (it), and then sew the two lips of the wound, if it is great, and cure it with ointments, until it is healed.  
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si met sus drapelz moilliez en oile roset, et met sus lou leu; et cure tandis le leu de ceu qu’il covient a aposteme, et soit gisans sovins sus lou costeit ou il doit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if an abscess comes, put on it soft cloths soaked in rose oil, and put on top of it; and cure as long as the place of the abscess is needed, and lying flat on his side or where it must be, until it is healed.  
de la brisure dou col	of the fracture of the neck
Aucune fois vient briseure as os dou col, et poc avient k’il ploie; et ausi a l’espinee dou dos.	Sometimes a fracture comes to the bone of the neck, and sometimes it happens that it bends; and also in the spine of the back.
Et quant ce avient a aucun, et tu vues savoir s’il sera sanez ou non, si pren warde se tu vois ses mains mollifiies et enflees et mortes, et ne les puet movoir ne estendre, et quant tu les poins d’une aguille, si ne lou sent.	And when this happens to anyone, and you want to know if he will be healed or not, then take ward if you see his hands softened and swollen and dead, and he cannot move them or stretch them, and when you prick them with a needle, he does not feel it.  
Saiches qu’il est mortelz em plusors dispositions, et s’il les muet et sent bien quant on les estraint et point, saiches que li jointure de l’os est sauve, et que li malaides iert curez, s’on i met cure.	Know that it is mortal in many positions, and if they move and feel well when they are pulled and pointed, know that the joint of the bone is saved, and that the patient will be cured, if one puts care to it. 
Et se semblans chose vient a l’espinee dou dos, et tu vues savoir s’il iert sanez ou non, si pren warde se li piez sont amollis, et se li accident i sont qui sont em mains, et sus lou dos saut ventositeit et egestion sens volonteit; et quant on l’a sovineit sus son ventre, si saut egestion sens volonteit.	And if such things happen to the spine of the back, and you want to know if it is healthy or not, if you see that the feet are soft, and if the accident there are in hands, and on the back there is windiness and ejection without will; and when one supports it on its belly, it ejects without will. 
Et quant il est sovinez sus son dos et il vuet asseller, si ne puet.	And when he is healed on his back and wants to sit up, he cannot.  
Saiches qu’il est mortelz: si ne laboreir mie en sa cure.	Know that it is deadly if you do not labor in its care. 
Et se cist accident ne li vienent, si est li chose plus legiere.	And if this accident does not come to him, it is the lighter thing.
Et li cure si est que tu rewardes s’il i a aposteme chaut, si met sus l’espinee oile roset ou oile de moieuf d’uef, tant qu’il soit apaisiez; puis met sus un des emplaustres confortans et sechans, et le lie d’un liien, et comande au malaide a reposer; et ne dorme mie sus celle partie ou il sent la dolor, tant k’il soit sanez.	And the cure is that you reward if there is an abscess hot, then put on the spine rose oil or the oil of egg yolk, until it be appeased; then put on a comforting and drying plaster, and bind it with a bandage, and command the patient to rest; and let him not sleep on that part where he feels pain, as long as he is sound.
Et se aucuns os se dessevre, si covient coper sus lou keur; et oste l’os, puis assemble les .ij. levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, a une costure, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li chiés de l’os est brisiez, ki est apelez li «chiés de la kowe», se i boute ton pouchet de ta main senestre, et le met igal a l’autre main a ton pooir, puis met l’emplaustre et l’estele sus, se tu en a mestier; puis l’estraint, et s’il i a os desevreit, si fent sus, et l’oste, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And if any bone is broken, it behoves to cover on the heart; and take out the bone, then assemble the two lips of the wound, if it is large, with one suture, then cure it with ointment that promotes flesh, until it is sound; and if the head of the bone is broken, which is called the “head of the cow,” put your left hand pouch into it, and set it equal to the other hand as best you can, then put the plaster and splint on top, if you need it; then restrain it, and if there are bones dislocated, do so again, take them out, and cure the wound until it is sound.
de la brisure de l’os de la hainche	of the fracture of the hip bone
Poc avient que li os de la hainche soit brisiez, et s’il avient, si n’avient fuer c’un poc d’amenuisement au chief; et fent dou lonc, et decline au pardedens, et vient au malaide dolor au leu, et pointure, et enfle ceu que brise.	It happens that the bone of the hip is broken, and if it happens, there should not have been much decrease at the top; and making it long, and declining to the side, and comes to the patient pain at the place, and prickling, and swells what breaks.
Et li restoration si est que tu estendes ta main sus, tant que tu soies sus la briseure; et saiches quelz est li brisure et li figure de li; et se li brisure est au chief soulement, si met igal cele brisure, tant qu’ele soit a figure natureil.	And the restoration is that you extend your hand above, as long as you are on the fracture; and know which is the fracture and the figure of it; and if the fracture is at the top only, so put equal the fracture, as long as it is to natural figure.
Et se li brisure est dou lonc, ou elle decline au dedens, si fai gesir le malaide sus son ventre, tant que li restauration de cele brisure te soit aparillie.	And if the fracture is long, or it declines to the inside, so make the patient lie on their belly, as long as the restoration of that fracture be apparent to you.
Et quant tu l’avras mise igal, si met sus l’emplaustre, puis met sus une estele de fust ou de keur, et estraint la briseure, si qu’ele ne se mueve; et emple le leu desoz les costes, tant que li lieure soit igalz.	And when you have put it even, put it on the plaster, then put on a splint of wood or of horn, and restrain the bandage so that it does not move; and apply the place under the ribs, until the ligament is even.
Et comande au malaide k’il dorme sus son costeit sain, ou sus son dos.	And command the patient to sleep on his healthy rib or on his back.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si n’i tochier, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et met sus ceu que nos avons devant dit; et puis revien a la restauration, et l’estraint si com il covient, s’il n’i a nul mavais accident; et c’est li maniere.	And if an abscess comes there, do not touch it until the abscess is calmed, and put on what we have said before; and then return to restoration, and restrain it as is proper, if there is no bad accident; and this is the manner.
de la brisure de l’ajutoire	of the dislocation of the shoulder
Li adjutoires est ceu qui est entre lou coute et lou chief de l’espaule, et s’il est brisiez, si le doit on restorer selonc l’une des .ij. manieres: dont l’une est que tu pren .i. fust plain de moiene groissor, selonc ceste forme:	The shoulder is that which is between the shoulder and the head of the shoulder, and if it is broken, one must restore it according to one of the two ways: one of which is that you take a single stick of medium thickness, according to this form:
Et lie as .ij. chiés .ij. liens, et les pent en haut, et siece li malaide sus .i. siege; puis li giete som bras brisiet sus le fust, tant qu’il viegne a l’aissele, et ait em mi une corbeure de fust, puis pent sus aucune pesant chose ou li ministres l’estende aval; puis mette li mires la briseure igal a ses mains ensamble, tant que li briseure retorne si com il covient.	And tie the two heads two strings, and bend them upward, and place the patient on one seat; then lay his broken arm on the stick, as far as it reaches to the armpit, and make a curvature of the stick in the middle, then place on any heavy thing or the ministers extend it downward; then put the mirrors the fracture equal to their hands together, until the fracture returns as it should.
Et li autre maniere si est que on sovine le malaide sus son hatereil, et li lie la main a son col, puis comande a .ij. ministres que li uns teigne ceu qui est sus la briseure a ses mains, et li autres teigne desoz a tout .i. liien, et estende chescuns a sa partie.	And the other way is that one supports the patient on his back, and ties his hand to his neck, then commands two ministers that one holds that which is above the fracture with their hands, and the other holds below at one length, and extend each to their part.
Et se tu vues que li estraction soit plus fors, si estraint I liien desoz la briseure, et sus la briseure, et estende chescuns des ministres a sa part.	And if you see that the extraction is more out, restrain the ligament under the fracture, and over the fracture, and extend each minister to its side. 
Et se li briseure est prochiene au chief de l’espaule, si covient que tu mettes I liien moien desoz l’assele, et I autre vers lou coute, desoz la briseure; et ausi se li briseure est devers lou coute, si i covient mettre I liien legierement, sens labor, tant que li briseure soit igalz sus lou leu, et sus lou coute; puis met igal la brisure, si com il covient, et l’estraint, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	And if the fracture is near the shoulder, it is necessary to put one band under the breastbone and the other towards the side, under the fracture; and also if the fracture is towards the side, it is necessary to put the band lightly, without effort, until the fracture is equal on top and on the side; then put the fracture in place as it should, and restrain it, if a boil does not come. 
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si ne l’estraindre mie jusc’a .vij. jors, et met sus lainne moillie en aisil et en oile roset, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez; puis l’estraint, et li maniere de l’estraindre si est que tu mettes l’emplaustre sus la briseure, puis assemble le bras sus l’ajutoire, et met ta main sus l’espaule ou sus lou sein; et met le drapeil, et estraint sus l’ajutoire, et sus lou bras, si que li bras soit en leu d’esteles, s’aucune chose ne le te deffent, ou se li os n’est muez.	And if an abscess comes, do not restrain it until seven days, and put on a linen cloth moistened in honey and rose oil, until the abscess calms; then restrain (it), and the manner of restraining it is that you place the splint on the fracture, then assemble the arm on the shoulder, and place your hand on the shoulder or on the chest; and put the drape, and restrain on the shoulder, and on the arm, so that the arm is in its right place, unless something prevents you, or if the bone is not moved.
Et se tu doutes que li os ne se mueve, si use d’esteles, et met sus la brisure une estele plus large et plus fort des autres, et ait entre chescune estele .i. doi d’espaice, et soit chescune estele si grans qu’elle passe la briseure .iij. dois de chescune part; puis estrain sus les esteles, ensi com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre sus la briseure, plus fort et moins en aloignant.	And if you doubt that the bone is not moving, use splints, and place on the fracture a splint larger and stronger than the others, and have between each splint two fingers of space, and be each splint so large that it passes over the fracture three fingers on each side; then restrain on the splints, as I said at the beginning of the chapter on the fracture, more strongly and less in widening.
Et se tu vois l’assise des esteles, et l’estrignement, si com nos avons dit, en l’oure que tu restoures le membre brisiet, et tu doutes l’aposteme chaut, si le laisse a liier jusc’a septime jor, si com nos avons dit; puis regarde chescuns III jors lou lien, que prurite ne enfleure n’i viegne au leu, ou li norrissemens ne puist venir au membre por ceu k’il est trop estrois.	And if you see the seat of the splints and the tightening, as we have said, in the hour that you restore the broken limb, and you doubt the hot abscess, then let it be bound until the seventh day, as we have said; then look every three days the bond, that itching or swelling does not come to the place, or the numbing does not come to the limb for that he is too foreign.  
Si l’adrece, si com nos avons dit.	If it occurs, as we have said. 
Et se nulz telz accidens n’i vient, si ne lou desliier fuer que aprés III jors ou plus, et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ait ses mains sus son stomac; et met desoz l’ajutoire I cussin plain de laine igalment, et regarde chescune houre dou jor ou de la nut, que li figure dou membre brisiet ne se mueve, ou ne soit amollis li liiens; si l’adrece par la vertu de medicine, et li done la viande que nos avons devant mis, en teil maniere que li viande soit au premier subtilz; et quant il comance a reprendre, si soit grosse.	And if no such accidents come, then do not untie it before III days or more, and have the patient sleep on his back, and have his hands on his stomach; and put under the shoulder one cushion full of wool evenly, and look each hour of the day or of the night that the figure of the broken limb does not move, or be softened the ligaments; if the receive by the virtue of medicine, and give him the meat that we have before set out, in such a manner that the meat is at first subtle; and when he begins to recover, let it be coarse. 
Et est costume que li ajutoire et li jambe doient estre repris en XL jors dou tout; et adonques lou doit on desliier et aministrer bain et medicines d’oignemens por le leu adrecier.	And it is customary that the shoulder and leg should be taken back in forty days from all; and then one must untie and administer baths and ointments to heal the place. 
Et se li estricture est laide et emboee, si demore a desliier L jors ou II mois.	And if the constriction is bad and clogged, it remains for a day or two months to be untied. 
de la brisure du bras	of the fracture of the arm
Li bras est compos de .ij. os, qui sont apelez li dui «foscile», de coi li uns est petis, et est cil qui enseut le pouchet; et li autres est grans, et est cil qui est desoz, devers lou petit doi; par aventure brise li grans foscile soulement, ou li petis, et par aventure andui ensamble.	The arm is composed of .ij. bones, which are called the two "fossiles," because one is small, and it follows the pocket; and the other is large, and it is below, toward the small toe; perhaps the large fossil breaks alone, or the small one, and perhaps both together.
Quant li petis fosciles est brisiez, li restaurations est legiere, et li sanations; et quant li grans est brisiez, si est li sanation male, et plus griés que quant il sont brisiez andui ensamble.	When the small bones are broken, the restoration is light, and the healing; and when the large ones are broken, the healing is bad, and more grieves than when they are broken together. 
Se c’est li petis foscile qui est brisiez soulement, si le covient poc estendre legierement, et mettre igal.	If it is the small bone that is broken alone, then it should be gently extended and made even. 
Et se c’est li grans foscile, si le covient estraindre plus fort; et l’estende sus I cussin, et teigne le pouchet de la main plus haut des autres, et li petis dois plus bas des autres dois, et soit li malaides croisiez sus lui meisme, et I cussin devant lui plus haut, que li malaides ne soffre nule labor; puis estende li ministres som bras a la partie desoz a sa main, ou a I liien, et uns autres ministres a I autre au desus.	And if it is the great fossa, then it is necessary to pull harder; and extend it above the cushion, and hold the pouch of the hand higher than the others, and the small toes lower than the other toes, and let the patient be crossed on himself, and the cushion in front of him higher, so that the patient does not suffer any labor; then extend the ministers with your arm to the part below his hand, or at the knee, and one other minister to the other above.  
Et puis le mette li mires igal, selonc sa millor forme.	And then put the mirrors equal, according to its best form. 
Et se en la brisure a pieces, si met chescune en son leu, et s’il en i a nule desevree ke poigne lou keur, et tu ne la pues restorer en son leu, si fent sus et l’oste, si com nos avons dit devant.	And if in the fracture there are pieces, put each one in its place, and if there is any detached that grasps the heart, and you cannot restore it to its place, then do as above with the bone, as we have said before.
Et se avec la briseure a plaie, je en ai parleit au chapistre singuler; si pren la cure.	And if with the fracture there is a wound, I have spoken of it in the singular chapter; so take care of it.
Et se en l’encomencement dou restorement sorvient apostemes chaus, si glue I drapeil de cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire blainche, que ne soit mie ne trop durs ne trop molz; et lie I drapeil par sus subtilment, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez.	And if at the beginning of the restoration abscesses come out, then glue a cloth made of rose oil and white wax, that it be neither too hard nor too soft; and lay the cloth carefully on top, until the abscesses are calmed.  
Et puis oste lou cerote, et i met l’emplaustre de la poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, pues met les esteles, et soit li estele de la briseure adés plus fors, et un poc plus large que les autres; et saiches que il doit avoir VI esteles ou bras em plusors dispositions: soit que li briseure soit en l’un des os, soit en II; et estraint plus sus la briseure que autre part, et toz jors moins en aloignant, si com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre; et soient li drapelz que sont sus la briseure molz et moistes, et ne soient mie dur ne aspres; et soit li filz, dont il est estrains, de lin, ne trop gros ne trop menus, si com nos avons dit.	And then put the plaster on the cerote, and place the molding powder with an abundance of egg there, then put the splints on, and let the splint of the breakage be a little more outward, and a little wider than the others; and know that it must have VI splints or arms in more arrangements: whether the breakage is in one of the bones, or two; and tighten more above the breakage than elsewhere, and every day less as I said at the beginning of the chapter; and let the coverings that are on the splint be soft and moist, and not hard nor rough; and let the thread with which it is strained be of linen, neither too thick nor too fine, as we have said. 
Et rewarde lou membre et lou liien aprés aucuns jors.	And reward the limb and the ligature after some days. 
Et se aucuns mavais accidens vient au membre, si com prurite ki vient au membre, si covient que tu aroses lou membre d’aigue chaude, tant que cil prurites soit apaisiez; et laisse le membre ne mie estroit reposer.	And if any bad accidents come to the limb, such as itching that comes to the limb, it is necessary that you raise the limb in hot water, until the itch is appeased; and let the limb not be too much at rest.  
Et puis rencomence l’estrignement, et se li liiens est amolis et li os desevrez, et semblant chose, si l’adresce.	And then begin the tightening again, and if the ligaments are loosened and the bones dislocated, and similar things, so as to address it. 
Et se pren warde se li norrissemens ne puet venir au membre, por ceu qu’il est trop estrois, si covient que tu l’amollisses .i. poc, et laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant que li norrissemens i corre, et puis l’estraint.	And if it happens that the numbing cannot come to the limb, because it is too constricted, then it is necessary that you soften it a little, and leave thus some days, until the numbing comes, and then constrain it.
Et se nules de ces choses que nos avons dit ne vient au malaide, si ne lou desliier jusc’a XX jors.	And if none of these things that we have said come to the patient, do not unbind him until 20 days. 
ou enqui entor, puis li pent les mains a son col, et soit ses cols igalz, et se warde de movement et de degitement, et dorme sus son dos; et saiches que ceste briseure est restoree en XXX jors ou en XXXV, et par aventure en XX jors, selonc les compositions et les complexions des vertus.	or when the neck is bent, then he lays his hands on his neck and makes his collarbones even and guards against movement and agitation, and sleeps on his back; and know that this fracture is restored in thirty days or thirty-five days, and perhaps in twenty days, according to the constitutions and the complexities of virtues. 
de la brisure de la main	of the fracture of the hand
Saiches que au dos de la main et as nous des dois avient poc de briseures, et n’i vient mais que ploieure maintes fois.	Know that on the back of the hand and as we have two it comes but little fractures, and there comes only many times a sprain.
Et quant li plante de la main est brisie ou ploie, si covient que li malaides siece croisiet, et siet droitement devant lui igalement; puis met sa main sus la toie estendue, et estende li ministres les os brisiez, et les mete igalz li mires, tant qu’il soient bien joint; et met l’emplastre et les estoupes, se apostemes n’i vient, puis i met une estele selonc la quantiteit dou leu; et soit envoloupee en .i. drapeil de lin.	And when the palm of the hand is broken or sprained, it befits the patient to sit crossed, and to be straight before him as well; then put his hand on top stretched, and extend the ministers the broken bones, and set them equal the mire, until they are well joined; and put the plaster and bandages, if abscesses do not come, then he puts a splint according to the quantity of the place; and be wrapped in one linen cloth.
Et se li briseure est au pardedens entor lou ventre de la plante, si fai une spere de drapelz, et comande au malaide qu’il l’estrigne a sa plante brisie; et puis l’estrain d’un lonc drapeil, et soit li estele de keur souef ausi grans com li plante de la main, et l’estraint, si com il covient.	And if the fracture is at the bottom towards the belly of the palm, make a sphere of cloth, and command the patient to tighten it to his broken palm; and then strain with a long cloth, and let the splint be of tough stuff as big as the palm of the hand, and strain it, as it befits.
Et se li brisure est au defuer, si covient que tu mettes une estele sus, et une autre desoz en la plante, si que li mains soit overte et droite, puis le lie tot entor la main, et estanche lou liien entre les dois.	And if the fracture is in the forearm, you must put a splint on top and another underneath in the palm, so that the hand be open and straight, then tie it tightly around the hand, and staunch the connection between the two.
Et se li briseure vient a aucun des nous des dois, se c’est li pouchés, si le met igal, si com il covient; et l’estraint avec la plante, et se tu vues si met une estele droite petite por lever la briseure, et ne se mueve; et se li brisure est as autres dois, si com en l’indice ou l’un des autres, si le met igal, et lou lie avec lou doi sain qui est aprés; ou tu les lie toz en .i. tenant, que mues vaut, ou tu met sus une estele, si com ou pouchet; et pren warde en la restauration et en la disposition d’aposteme chaut, et secor ceu qui i vient, si com j’ai dit.	And if the fracture comes to any of the two [arms], if it is the ulna, put it straight as it should be; and restrain it with the palm, and if you see fit put a small straight splint to raise the fracture, so that it does not move; and if the fracture is in the other bones, as in the index or one of the others, put it straight, and tie it with the healthy bone which comes after; or you tie them all together in one holding, whichever is better, or put a splint on top like a sling; and take heed in the restoration and in the disposition of an abscess hot, and secure what comes to it, as I have said.
de la cuixe brisie	of the broken hip
Li os de la cuixe est maintes fois brisiez, et bien le voit on quant elle torne devant et derrier; et li restauration si est c’on lie .i. liien desus la briseure, et .i. autre desoz.	The bone of the hip is many times broken, and it can be seen well when it turns forward and backward; and its restoration is done by binding one above the fracture, and one below.
Et li malaides gise sus sa faice, puis estende chescuns ministres son lien a sa part igalment; et c’est quant li brisure est emmi l’os.	And the patient lies on his face, then extend each minister his band to his side equally; and this is when the fracture is between the bones.
Et se li brisure est prochiene a la racine de la cuixe, si soit li uns des liiens devers lou poignil, et li autres liiens desoz la briseure.	And if the fracture is near the root of the hip, one ligament should be towards the sword hilt, and the other ligaments below the fracture. 
Et ausi s’elle est prochiene au genoil, et adonques soit li liens delez lou genoil, et soit li extension aval; puis mette li mires l’os igal a ses II mains, tant qu’il soit selonc sa figure natureil, et puis met l’emplaustre, et lou lie, se apostemes chaz n’i vient.	And also if it is near the knee, and therefore let the ligaments be below the knee, and let the extension be down; then put your hands on the bone equal to its two hands, until it is according to its natural figure, and then put the splint, and the tie, so that no abscess comes. 
Et s’il i a aposteme chaut, si le laisse apaisier puis revien a ton ovraige et a ta cure; li lieure est faite en teil maniere.	And if there is a hot abscess, let it appease then return to your work and your care; the tie is made in this manner.
Il covient que tu envoloupes sus la briseure I bendeil dur doublé en II ou III, et en demoure li superfluitez, puis torne la jambe tant que li talons veigne a la racine de la naige, et boute I fil lonc entre la cuixe et la jambe, delez lou genoil desoz, et veignent li chief dou fil au desus; puis torne sus la jambe et sus la cuixe le bendeil, puis met sus la briseure esteles, et met une estele sus l’os de la jambe; puis emple le leu vuit entre la jambe et la cuixe de drapelz souef por mettre igal l’estrignement, puis comence a liier forment III tors ou IIII sus la briseure; et quant plus vas en sus de la briseure, et moins l’estraint; puis enten as II chiés dou fil que tu as bouteit entre la jambe et la cuixe, et en lie III esteles que sont desus, puis revai au desoz au chief dou fil, tant que tu veignes delez le piet; et l’estraint, si qu’il ne se mueve de son leu, puis le laisse ensi, puis k’il n’i vient ne aposteme ne enfleure n’autre semblant.	It is necessary that you wrap the fracture with a thick bandaged doubled in II or III, and keep the superfluities, then turn the leg so that the heel comes to the root of the thigh, and put the long thread between the hip and the leg, below the knee, and bring the head of the thread upwards; then turn upwards the leg and on the hip the bandage, then place above the fracture splints, and place a splint on the bone of the leg; then employ the space between the leg and the hip with cloths soft to put equal pressure, then begin to bind firmly III turns or IIII on the fracture; and as much as you go higher up from the fracture, and less restrain it; then take hold of the II heads of the thread that you have put between the leg and the hip, and tie III splints that are above, then return downwards to the head of the thread, until you come near the foot; and restrain it, so that it does not move from its place, then leave it thus, then let it not come an abscess or swelling nor any other appearance. 
Et s’il i avient, si le deslie, et adresce ceu que i vient, si com nos avons dit maintes fois; et se il i a pieces de l’os que poigne, si le covient ewer, s’om puet; et s’on ne puet, si covient fendre le leu, et traire fuer; et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant k’il soit sanez.	And if it happens, untie it, and address what comes, as we have said many times; and if there are pieces of bone that pierce, it is necessary to remove them, if one can; and if one cannot, it is necessary to split the place, and draw out the pus; and cure it as we have said, until it is healed.
Et aucune fois est brisie li cuixe ensi c’on i met esteles, si com en l’ajutoire et ou bras; toutevoie, en la restauration ensi faite ne cloche mie li malaides.	And sometimes the hip is broken as one puts splints in it, like in the shoulder and the arm; however, in this restoration done does not ring the patient.
Et saiches que li cuixe est restoree en .l. jors, ou poc moins ou poc plus, selonc les diversitez des complexions.	And know that the hip is restored in one day, or a little less or a little more, according to the diversity of temperaments.
de la ruelle dou genoil	of the  knee joint
Saiches que en la ruelle dou genoil avient poc brisure, mais elle ploie maintes fois.	Know that in the joint of the knee there are few fractures, but it bends many times. 
Et s’elle brise, si n’est mais c’une fendure, ou I pertus, et avient a tout plaie, et sens plaie, et ce sent om bien.	And if it breaks, it is no longer just a fissure, or a puncture wound, and it becomes any kind of wound, and without a wound, and everyone feels it well. 
Et li restauration si est c’on mette igal ceu qui est rons a ses dois, tant qu’il soit assemblez mues c’on puet; puis met l’emplaustre, et i met une estele reonde, se tu en as mestier, et l’estraint si com il covient, puis rewarde toutes les dispositions que nos avons dit ens autres briseures, si com aposteme chaut et autre semblant; si met a chescun accident ceu k’il li covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the restoration is done by putting each thing that is round in its place, as long as it can be assembled and moved; then put the splint on it, and put a rounded stele on it, if you need it, and restrain it as necessary, then return to all the arrangements that we have said in other fractures, such as hot poultices and similar things; so put on each accident what it needs, until it is healed.
de la brisure de la jambe	Of the fracture of the leg
Saiches que en la jambe ait II os, de coi li uns est apelez par droit non «mustelz», et li autres est apelez «foscile»; et avient tout auteil briseure com il vient au bras, et por ceu est li restauracion si com celle dou bras igalment, et li ovraiges est tout i. Et se li dui os sont brisiet ensamble, si torne li jambe de toutes pars.	Know that in the leg there are two bones, so one is called by right "tibia," and the other is called "fibula"; and it has all the same fracture as it comes to the arm, and for this reason the restoration is like that of the arm equally, and the work is all the same. And if the two bones are broken together, then the leg turns in every way. 
Et se li os subtilz est brisiez, si torne devant.	And if the small bone is broken, it turns forward.
Et se li gros os est brisiez, si sent on grant dolor, et le voit on bien; et torne desoz.	And if the large bone is broken, one feels great pain, and one sees it well; and it turns downwards.  
Adonques amenistre extension, et le met igal, et lie les esteles igalement; mais toutevoie, il covient se li brisure est laide, et il i a plusors pieces, que li extension soit menor et plus legiere; et l’alige selonc ta vertu.	Therefore administer extension, and set it equal, and tie the limbs equally; but nonetheless, if the fracture is bad, and there are many pieces, that the extension be less and lighter; and the splint according to your virtue. 
Et quant tu as tout acomplit ton ovraige, si pren .ij. faixes de fust chevees que porpreignent la jambe d’une part et d’autre, et soient dou lonc de la jambe des le genoil jusque desoz; puis envoloupe en .ij. leus .i. bendeil desus et desoz, et le lie em mileu ausi, et a ceste lieure ne pora li jambe decliner a destre ne a senestre, et ensi est bien; et aucun i aministrent .i. bers dou lonc de la jambe, et s’est de fust, et i met on la jambe por warder de movement, et proprement fait on ceu en la brisure ou il a plaie; et remue chescun jor la jambe, por veoir s’il i a aposteme chaut n’autre accident; si le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you have completed your work, take two bands of splints that encompass the leg on both sides, and be as long as the leg from the knee down; then wrap in two layers one bandage above and below, and tie it in the middle, also, and at this juncture the leg will not be able to decline to right or left, and thus is well. And none administers a single splint along the length of the leg, and if it is of wood, and it is placed on the leg to ward off movement, and properly one does this in the fracture where there is a wound; and move each day the leg, to see if there is an abscess or other accident; so cure until it is healed.
de la brisure des os dou piet	Of the fracture of the bones of the foot
A la cheville ne vient point de brisure, mais as os dou piet vient aucune fois brisure et as dois poc, et n’i avient fuer que quassure em plusor dispositions.	To the ankle does not come any fracture, but to the bones of the foot comes no time fracture and two parts, and there happen only as much in more positions.
Et s’il avient as os dou piet brisure, et tu vois ces os sormonter l’un l’autre, si mette si malaides som piet sus la terre, ausi com s’il voloit aler, et puis met maintenant ton piet sus lou sien, lai ou li os sont levez, puis le presse tant k’il reveignent en lor leus; puis met l’emplaustre et estoupes sus, et met desoz lou ventre dou piet une petite tauble a .ij. chiés plains, puis l’estraint au piet avenanment, puis que tu as envoloupez drapelz entor, et autres choses dont tu as mestier.	And if there happen the bones of the foot fracture, and you see these bones overlapping each other, put the patient's foot on the ground, as if he would like to walk, and then put your foot on his, where the bones are raised, then press them until they return to their places; then put the splint and bandages on it, and put under the belly of the foot a small board at 2 fingers wide, then restrain the foot firmly, and after that you have wrapped cloths around it, and other things that you need.
Et quant .iij. jors ou .iiij. seront passez, si deslie lou liien, car tu troveras les os igalz, soient brisiez, soient desaluez.	And when 3 days or 4 will have passed, you untie the linen, because you will find the bones aligned, whether they are broken or dislocated.
Et s’il i a aucuns des dois brisiez, si les restoure, si com nos avons dit as dois de la main; puis met au doi brisiet une estele selonc la longesce dou doi, et soit un poc plus large, puis met desoz le piet celle tauble que j’ai dit, et l’estrain avenanment; et s’il en i a .ij. ou .iij., ou plus, brisiez, si met sus chescun doi une estele selonc sa quantiteit, envoloupee en .i. drapeil de lin, et estraint la tauble desoz lou piet; et soit estans sus lou chief de la tauble defuer lou ventre dou piet, si qu’il le teigne bien.	And if there are any of the bones broken, restore them as we have said about the bones of the hand; then put on the broken bone a splint according to the length of the bone, and be one poke more wide, then put under the foot that table that I have said, and restrain well. And if there are .ij. or .iij., or more, broken, put on each bone a splint according to its quantity, wrapped in one cloth of linen, and restrain the table under the foot; and let it be standing on the top of the table outside the belly of the foot, so that it holds it well.
Et covient que tu n’oblier mie les autres choses que j’ai dit as autres briseures, des que nos avons dit; et secor chescun accident si com il covient.	And it is necessary that you do not forget the other things that I have said about the other fractures, as we have said; and cure each accident as it is necessary.
de la brisure de l’os dou poignil	of the fracture of the bone of the hand
Quant li os de la nature la femme est brisiez, si la fai seoir enlargie, puis l’encline a la partie dou dos, et soit tenue par derrier; puis emplisse li baile la nature de la malaide de couton, et en i mette ausi gros com I sto; puis deboute la femme, et lieve lou dos poc et poc, et adonques saut li coton, tant qu’il vient a l’entree de la nature, et revient li os avec lou sto; et quant elle vuet pissier, si oste lou coton, et quant elle a pissiet, se li remette, et ensi faice VII jors ou entor: si sera restoree li brisure, et se tu vues, pren une vessie de berbis, et lie au pertus une cainne, et boute toute la vessie en la nature; puis soffle en la cainne forment, tant que li vessie soit enflee dedens: la nature si revenra li brisure; puis soit emplie de coton, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the bone of the woman's nature is broken, make her sit down enlarged, then incline it to the back part, and hold it in the back; then fill the basin of the woman with cotton, and put as much in as the fist; then take out the woman, and lift her back up and down, and then jump the cotton, until it comes to the entrance of nature, and the bone returns with the fist; and when she wants to pee, take out the cotton, and when she has peed, put it back, and do this for VII days or about that: so the fracture will be restored, and if you see, take a bladder of sheep, and tie it at the opening a chain, and put the whole bladder in nature; then blow into the chain, forming, until the bladder is inflated inside: nature will return the fracture; then fill it with cotton, and leave it like that for some days, until it is healed. 
Et quant li os dou poignil de l’ome est brisiez, ou de la femme, si le restoure ensi com nos avons dit en l’os de la hainche; et ne sont mie occultees ces briseures prochienes a celui qui i met son estude et son us, et entent mon livre.	And when the bone of the finger of the man or woman is broken, restore it as we have said in the bone of the hip; and are not concealed these fractures near to him who puts his study and his use there, and attend my book.  
Car li brisure li signifie em plusors dispositions la droite voie de la restauration: enten le donques.	For the fracture signifies to many the right way of restoration therefore.  
En la verge, quant elle est brisie, pren une gorge d’oie et i boute la verge; puis envoloupe drapelz entor, et le laisse .iij. jors ou enqui entor, et il sera sanez hastanment.	In the phallus, when it is broken, take a goose's throat and put it into the phallus; then wrap cloths around it, and leave it for .iij. days or around, and it will be healed quickly.
de brisure avec plaie	of fracture with wound
Il covient a celui qui a brisure avec plaie, meismement s’elle est grans, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire ou semblant, qu’il soit sainiez maintenant, si que les sainies que nos avons dit le tesmoignent.	It is necessary for one who has a fracture with a wound, even if it is large, such as the bones of the hip or shoulder or similar, that they be treated now, so that the treatments that we have said testify to it.
Et se li plaie saine, si la restainche de vitriole, se tu n’as autre chose, puis rencomence a restorer la briseure en cele meisme houre, ou celui jor, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	And if the wound is clean, then retain the vitriol, if you have nothing else, and then begin to restore the fracture in the same hour, or on that day, if there does not come an abscess.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si laisse la restauration jusc’a nuevime jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et n’i touchier ne au tier jor ne au quart, car tu i feroies venir malvais accident.	And if an abscess does come, then leave the restoration until the ninth day, as long as the abscess is calmed, and do not touch it neither on the third nor fourth day, for you would bring a bad accident upon it.
Et se li os brisiez est aparans sus lou keur descovert, si covient que tu lou mettes a point legierement a tes mains, a extension petite.	And if the broken bone is appearing on the uncovered chest, then it befits that you put it gently in place with your hands, with slight extension.
Et se li extensions ne t’est apareillie por mettre igal a tes mains, si le ramoine a cest estrument qui est de fer, qui a .vij. dois ou .viij. de lonc, et li largesce est selonc la quantiteit de la plaie; et por ceu est mestier au mire qu’il empreigne .iii. ou iiij., selonc ceu qu’il en ait mestier en chescune cure de briseure; et soit rons et un poc gros, k’il ne ploie mie a la compression sus lou membre a ton ovraige, et soit agus devant, et gros des le mileu en avant, ensi:	And if the extension does not suit you to put it straight with your hands, then resort to this instrument which is of iron, which is .vij. or .viij. long, and its width is according to the quantity of the wound; and for this, it is necessary that the maker imprints .iii. or iiij., according to what he needs in each cure of a fracture; and be round and about an inch thick, so that it does not bend under compression on the member during your work, and be tapered at the front, and thicker from the middle forward, like this:
Et est apelez «palainche», por coi il covient que li chiés corbes soit mis sus lou chief de l’os apparent; et le boute a une fois, tant k’il reviegne, et soit igalz l’un encontre l’autre.	And is called "palainche", for which the shoulder bone must be placed on top of the visible bone; and it should be pushed at once, until it returns, and be equal to each other. 
Et se li brisure est subtilz, et li estrumens ne puet bien prendre l’os, si covient que tu copes lou chief de l’os, tant que li estrumens en ait possance.	And if the fracture is subtle and the instruments cannot well grasp the bone, then it is necessary that you cut the head of the bone, until the instruments have hold. 
Et se tu ne pues ramener l’os, si com nos avons dit, si lou cope d’un estrument covenable a ceu, ou incisoire ou soieure, a ton pooir; puis reis ceu qui est demorez en l’os d’aspreteit et de menues escorces.	And if you cannot bring back the bone, as we have said, then cut it with a suitable instrument, either an incisor or a saw, to your power; then clean that which is left in the bone of asperities and small splinters.
Et quant li os est ramenez, et li malaides sent grant dolor aprés, saiches qu’il n’est mie en son leu natureil.	And when the bone is brought back, and the patient feels great pain afterward, know that it is not in its natural place. 
Si fai tant qu’il soit en son leu, puis moille I drapeil en vin stiptique noir, et proprement se c’est en esteit; et ne mettre mie sus la plaie cerote ne autre chose ou il ait oile, qu’il n’i faice venir porriture et corruption; puis aministre esteles quant tu as restoreit l’os, et laisse la plaie descoverte, et cope la coverture tout entor, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et te done bien en garde que li plaie ne soit estrainte avec la brisure; et maintes fois ont ce fait li fol mire, et ont fait venir sus le malaide ou mort ou corrodent aucune fois; et soit li estrignemens plus molz et plus souef des autres brisures.	If you do so until it is in its place, then moisten the drape with black stichtic wine, and properly cover it if there is an injury; and do not put any above the wound, such as cerote or anything else where there is oil, lest it cause rot and corruption; then administer splints when you have restored the bone, and leave the wound uncovered, and cut the covering all around, according to the quantity of the wound, and warn carefully that the wound is not strained with the fracture; and many times have fools done this, and brought upon the patient either death or corrosion at any time; and let the strapping be softer and more gentle than other fractures.  
Et se li plaie est male ou grans, et tu doutes que mavais accidens n’i veigne, si com nos avons dit, et tu trueves dolor au leu, si n’i covient mie mettre sus esteles; mais envoloupe entor, en leu d’esteles, drapelz durs, et les lie.	And if the wound is bad or large, and you doubt that a bad accident may happen, as we have said, and you find pain in the place, then it is not necessary to put on bandages; but wrap around, in place of bandages, hard cloths, and tie them. 
Et quant tu vois aprés I jor ou II enjanrer bowe a la plaie, si oste ceu que tu as mis sus a tout vin, et i met oignement sanant plaies, si com oignement tetrafarmaçon et semblans.	And when you see after one day or two an in-growth on the wound, remove those that you have placed over all wine and place healing ointment for wounds, such as ointment tetraformation and similar.  
Et covient que tu deslies lou membre .ij. fois le jor, lou matin et au vespre, tant qu’il soit soudez et sanez.	And it is necessary that you unbind the member two times a day, in the morning and in the evening, until it is fused and sound.
Et covient que li membres soit aparilliez en teil maniere que li bowe corre aval legierement.	And it is necessary that the member be pulled apart in such a manner that the bone goes down easily.
Et se maint jor trespassent, et il ne puet souder mais rent adés bowe, saiches k’il i a petites pieces d’os, por coi il covient que tu quieres la plaie avec tente, et oste toutes ces pieces desevrees que font venir celle dolor.	And if each day it passes, and it cannot fuse but returns to its place again, know that there are small fragments of bone, which is why it is necessary that you cover the wound with a cloth, and remove all these loose fragments which cause pain.
Et se fistule vient au leu, ou autre maniere de corruption, si covient que tu le cures, selonc ceu qu’il dist en son chapistre ci devant.	And if a fistula comes to the place, or other manner of corruption, then it is necessary that you cure it, according to what he says in his chapter previously. 
Et quant li os est brisiez, et apert sus lou membre, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire, et autres semblans des grans membres, si ne le traire mie, car maintes fois en vient li mors, mais le laisse tant qu’il porrisse; par aventure cherra par lui aprés XX jors ou XXX, puis cure la plaie, se tu pues; et se tu ne pues, si la laisse.	And when the bone is broken and open on the limb, like the bones of the hip or shoulder, and other similar large limbs, do not treat it, because many times death comes from it, but leave it until it rots; perhaps after twenty days or thirty it will heal itself, then cure the wound, if you can; and if you cannot, leave it. 
des brus qui vienent sor la sodure	Of burns which come from the burn
Nous vienent maintes fois aprés la santeit de la briseure, meismement quant c’est pres de la jointure, et laide chose est a veoir li figure dou membre; et par aventure ne puet faire li membres ses ovraiges naturelz.	We often come after the health of the fracture, even when it's near the joint, and a bad thing is to see the figure of the limb; and by chance it cannot make the limbs its natural works.
Pren warde donques se li nous est fres: si li aministre medicines stiptiques, si com aloes, encens, et mirre, et sarcocolle, acaice, et semblans autres, ensi que tu preignes aucune de ces choses, ou toutes ensamble, et les confit avec vin stiptique ou avec abun d’uef ou avec aisil; et les met sus le nout en estoupes, et l’estraint bien, et ne la desliier en mains jors; et puis la desloie, et rencomence une autre, tant que li nodations soit ostee; ou tu estrain sus une piece de plonc bien faite; car li proprietez dou plonc si est qu’il oste toutes les enfleures desus les membres; et se li nodation est ja convertie en durteit ausi com piere, et il est besoing de l’oster, si la cope desus, et fent la superfluiteit apparent; ou tu la reis a aucun raseur, tant qu’ele soit ostee, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee.	Take ward therefore if it is fresh: If you administer medicines astringents, such as aloes, frankincense, and myrrh, and sarcocolla, acacia, and similar others, in the way that you take any of these things, or all together, and mix them with astringent wine or with beaten egg white or with oil; and put it on the wound in poultices, and bind it well, and do not loosen it in hands for days; and then untie it, and begin another one, as long as the swelling is removed; or you bind upon a piece of plank well made; because the properties of wood are that it removes all the swellings from the limbs; and if the swelling has already been converted into hardness like stone, and it is necessary to remove it, then cut above it, and make the superfluity apparent; or you reapply it to any razor, as long as it is removed, and the cure as long as it is healed.
dou membre qui est foibles aprés la garison	of the limb that is weak after healing
Quant li brisure de l’os est restoree, et demoure aprés li membres foibles et subtilz, si avient por mout de causes: de coi l’une est por ceu qu’il fut liiez trop estroit, et ne fut mie liiez si com il covenoit; ou por ceu qu’il i ot trop de liiens, et ne pooit venir li norrissemens au membre; ou por multitude d’arosement; ou por trop grans movements, ne mie en son houre; ou por ceu qu’il a poc de sanc en son cors, si est foibles.	When the bone fracture is restored, and afterwards the limb remains weak and subtle, this happens for many reasons: one reason is because it was bound too tightly, and was not bound as it should; or because there were too many bindings, and it could not come to nursing the member; or for multitude of dressings; or for too great movements, not at its time; or because it has little blood in its body, so it is weak.
Et li cure si est que tu faices mengier le malaide, et faire le cors tendre, tant que li sans soit multipliiez en lui; et li aministre bain, et li done joie et liesce; puis met poix sus le membre, si que li poix atraie a li grant norrissement, et l’arose sovent d’aigue tede, tant que li norrissement corre au membre; et reviegne a sa figure natureil.	And the cure is that you make the patient eat, and make the body supple, until the blood is multiplied in him; and administer bath, and give him joy and lightness; then put poultices on the limb, so that the poultice attracts great nursing, and the dressing often of warm water, until the nursing cures to the member; and returns to its natural figure.
dou membre tort aprés la santeit	the limb twisted after the healing
Quant li membres est tors aprés la restauration, et li os brisiez apert, et li forme dou membre est laide, toutevoie ne pert mie son ovraige natureil: si ne croire mie les folz qui dient c’on doit brisier lou membre tout de noveil, et maint fol mire ont ce fait en nostre terre; et cist ovraiges est blamez, et en vient grans malz, et par aventure li mors; toutevoie, se li nodations et li torture sont fres, si covient k’il soient arosez d’aigue chaude, ou herbes mollifians soient cuites, si com foilles de vismalve, et racines, et mellilote, et semblans choses; et li fai .i. emplaustre mollificatif, si com dyaquilon bien fait, et tu pren le muscillaige de vismalve, et la confit avec graisse de geline ou oile de sisament, et fai emplaustre sus; ou tu pren figues graisses, et les broie avec fien de colon, et semblans medicines que amenuisent le soudement.	When the limb is twisted after restoration, and the broken bones are apart, and the shape of the limb is ugly, nonetheless it does not lose its natural function: so do not believe the fools who say that one must break the limb anew, and many foolish people have done this in our land; and this work is blamed, and comes great harm, and by chance death; nonetheless, if the nodes and the torments are fresh, then it behoves them to be raised with hot water, or softening herbs are cooked, such as leaves of marsh mallow, and roots, and melilot, and similar things; and the make i. a softening plaster, such as diaconium well made, and you take the mash of marsh mallow, and you confit it with fat of geline or oil of sesame, and make a plaster on top; or you take figs fatty, and grind them with hemp of colon, and similar medicines that lessen the swelling.
Et aucune fois est ostee li nodacion por froter continuelment et longement a mains moistes.	And sometimes is dislocation removed by rubbing continuously and lengthily with wet hands. 
Et soit amenistrez movement au membre chescune houre.	And let there be movement to the limb every hour.  
Et se li tortuositez est enveillie et endurcie, ausi com piere, et besoins est de l’oster au fer, si la covient coper jusc’a l’os, a l’incisoire subtil legierement; et mettre cusenson et estude en la cure.	And if the torsion is ingrained and hardened, as well as stone, and there is need to remove it with iron, then it behooves to cut up to the bone, with a subtle, light incision; and put care and study into the cure.
Ci encomence li livres des dislocations	Here begins the book of dislocations
Dislocations est issue d’aucune jointe de son leu, por coi il ne se puet muevre, et est li membres mal figurez, et sent li malaides grant dolor et grant lesion.	Dislocation is from any joint out of its place, for which it cannot move, and the limb is misaligned, and the patient feels great pain and great injury.
Quant dislocation vient a aucun, si le covient maintenant ramener sens targier.	When dislocation comes to anyone, now it is necessary to bring back without strapping.
Car s’on tarde, si enfle li leus, et par aventure si le remet on a poines au leu; por ceu ne covient mie c’on le mueve a l’oure k’il est enflez: maintes fois fait venir spame et autres dolors; toutevoie, quant ce avenra, si fai sainier lou malaide, puis le laisse, tant que li apostemes chas soit apaisiez; puis arose le membre d’aigue chaude et d’oile, puis le ramoinne legierement, et cure chescun membre si com li cure venra en son leu.	For if one delays, then the member swells, and perhaps if one tries to put it back in place, it causes pain; for this reason it is not fitting to move it when it is swollen: many times it brings on lameness and other pains; however, when this happens, first make the patient bleed, then leave them alone, until the abscesses are calmed; then apply hot water and oil, then reset it gently, and cure each member as you would bring it back into place. 
Et j’ai ordenez les chapistres des dislocations des lou chief jusc’a piez.	And I have ordered the chapters of dislocations of the head to the foot.
des mandibules	of the jaws
Poc avient que les mandibules soient desaluees andous, et li dislocations d’ambedous est selonc .ij. manieres: ou elles sont un poc ostees de lor leus, et mollifies un poc; ou elles sont desaluees entierement, et pendent vers lou pis, et cort li salive de la bouche qu’il ne la puet tenir, ne ne puet clore sa bouche, et envoloupe sa langue avec la parole.	Sometimes it happens that the jaws are dislocated backwards, and the dislocations of both are according to 2 manners: or they are a little bit removed from their places, and softened a little; or they are dislocated entirely, and hang towards the cheek, and cut off the saliva from the mouth so that he cannot hold it, nor can close his mouth, and encircles his tongue with the word.
Quant li dislocations est petite, si revient par li em plusors disposicions.	When the dislocation is small, it returns by the more dispositions.
Et s’elle est entiere et acomplie, si covient que tu la ramoinne hastanment, et ne targier mie; et en tel maniere que li ministres teigne le chief dou malaide, et boute li mires som pochet de l’une de ses mains en la racine de la dislocation de la mandibule dedens la bouche, se li dislocations est de II pars; et li autre doi des mains soient defuer, por mettre igal; et comande au malaide qu’il les amollisse, ses mandibules, et les mueve de toutes pars.	And if it is whole and complete, then you must reset it carefully, and do not delay; and in such a manner that the minister holds the head of the patient, and puts his fingers into the root of the dislocation of the jaw within the mouth, if the dislocation is of two parts; and the other two hands should be outside, to put it even; and command the patient to soften them, his jaws, and move them in all directions. 
Et li mires la mete igal, tant qu’elle reveigne en son leu.	And the fist he puts even, until it returns to its place.
Et se li ramener est griés, meismement se ce sont les .ij. mandibules ensamble, si les arose d’aigue chaude et d’oile, tant que les ramoinnes legierement; ne ne targier mie dou ramener, si com nos avons dit.	And if it is brought back injured, even if they are the two jaws together, apply hot water and oil to them, as long as you gently move them; do not fear to bring it back, as we have said.
Et quant elles sont ramenees igalment, et li bouche dou malaide clot bien sens mollifiier, si met sus drapelz moilliez en cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire, puis le lie legierement de molz liiens; et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ses chiés soit estans entre II cussins, si qu’il ne lou mueve ne a destre ne a senestre, ne ne s’efforce mie de maixier, mais preigne legiere viande, tant que les dolors soient ostees, et soient noees les mandibules; et puis menjuce ce qu’il vuet legierement, et ne se travaille mie d’ovrir la bouche au mengier et au boivre, tant que li mandibule soit bien noee et sanee.	And when they are brought back evenly, and the mouth of the patient is well closed without softening, put on cloths moistened in cerote made of rose oil and wax, then tie it lightly with soft bandages; and let the patient sleep on his back, and his shoulders be between two cushions, so that he does not move them neither to the right nor to the left, nor does he strive to chew, but takes light food, as long as the pains are removed, and the jaws are healed; and then eat what he wants lightly, and does not try to open his mouth to eat and drink, until the jaw is well set and healed.
Et se les .ij. mandibules ne pueent estre remises a point a une houre, et ne sont mie converties a lor leus, si en vient fievres et sode acostumees, et par aventure solution de ventre, et par aventure vomist cole pure.	And if the two jawbones cannot be put back in place within an hour, and are not converted to their places, then fever and accustomed sores come, and perhaps a bellyache, and perhaps pure vomit.
Et quant tu verras ceu, adonc saiches que c’est perdicions; et maintes fois muert cil cui il avient, en .viiij. jors.	And when you see this, then know that it is a peril; and many times die those who have it, within 8 days.
de la forcelle	of the fork
Li forcele ne puet desaluer dou costeit dedens la continuation de li et dou pis, et est desaluee aucune fois au defuer, et bien le sent on.	The splinter cannot dislocate from the rib inside the continuity of it and of the hip, and is dislocated no time at the outside, and well it is felt.
Et li restauration si est que li malaides gise sovin sor son dos, et estende ses bras; et puis presse le leu forment a ta palme, et elle revenra; puis met sus l’emplaustre et lou bendeil, et l’estraint; et li chiez qui est devers lou coute ne puet desaluer; se poc non, et se il desalue aucune fois, si le ramoinne a son leu, si com nos avons dit; puis met sus l’emplaustre et le bendeil, et l’estraint, et coumande au malaide qu’il se repose tant qu’il soit sanez; et ensi meisme est ramenez li chiés de l’espale, quant il est desevrez de son leu.	And the restoration is that the patient lies soundly on his back, and stretches his arms; then press the place firmly with your palm, and it will return; then put on the splint and bandage, and restrain it; and the head which is towards the outside cannot dislocate; if perhaps, and if it dislocates any time, you reset it to its place, as we have said; then put on the splint and bandage, and restrain it, and command the patient that he rest until he be healed; and in the same way is brought back the head of the shoulder, when it is dislocated from its place. 
de la dislocation de l’espaule	of the dislocation of the shoulder
Saiches que li espaule n’est desaluee fuer que selonc III manieres: de coi l’une est qu’ele desalue a la partie de l’assele au desoz; et li seconde est a la partie dou pis; et par aventure desalue a la partie desus, et ceu avient poc; et ne desalue mie derrier por l’espaule, et ne desalue mie dedens por les ners; et plusors fois desalue desoz vers l’assele, meismement a ces qui ont poc de char, car a ces saut ele fuer hastanment; a ces qui ont assez char, saut ele a poines, et rentre a poines.	Know that the shoulder is dislocated in only three ways: one is that it is dislocated to the part of the seat toward down; and the second is to the part of the breast; and by chance dislocated to the upper part, and this happens little; and does not dislocate behind for the shoulder, and does not dislocate inside for the nerves; and many times dislocated down towards the seat, especially those who have little flesh, because at these it goes easily; at those who have enough flesh, it goes with pain, and enters with pain. 
Et par aventure avient a aucuns homes percussion ou casseure, et enfle li espaule d’un aposteme chaut, et cuide qu’elle est desaluee par ceu.	And perhaps it happens to some men a percussion or fracture, and inflames the shoulder with a hot abscess, and thinks that it is dislocated because of this.
Il covient donques que tu l’esprueves, tant que tu en soies certains; et adonques encomence la cure.	Therefore you must feel it, as long as you are certain; and then commence the cure.
Et est conue li dislocations quant il est aval vers l’assele, et met difference entre l’espaule malade et la saine, et tu troveras entre lor diversiteit manifeste; et troveras au chief de l’espaule une fosse, et desoz l’assele au tochier le chief de l’espaule, ausi com se ce soit uns oes; et ne puet li malaides ramener sa main a son neis, ne movoir de nulz movemens; et ausi, s’elle est desaluee en haut, si n’est mie occultee, car tu le trueves manifestement au tochier; et ceste maniere de dislocation n’est mie fors a ramener, quant elle est novele, ou se li enfes est malaides.	And is known the dislocations when it is drawn toward the seat, and puts difference between the sick shoulder and the healthy one, and you will find between their diversity manifest; and you will find at the head of the shoulder a hollow, and below the seat to touch the head of the shoulder, as if it were ones; and the patient cannot bring back his hand to its place, nor move from any movements; and also, if it is dislocated upwards, it is not hidden, because you find it manifestly at the touch; and this manner of dislocation is not much for bringing back, when it is new, or if the child is sick. 
Et li maniere est que li ministres lieve la main dou malaide en haut, puis met tes peuchas desoz l’assele, et lieve la jointure a force en haut au leu; et li ministres lieve la main, et l’estende en haut, pues le mette desoz; si venra hastanment.	And the manner is that the ministers lift the hand of the sick person upward, then put their shoulders under the seat, and lift the joint with force upward to its place; and the ministers lift the hand, and extend it upward, then put it down; so it will come gently.
Et s’elle ne vient si com nos avons dit em mains jors aprés, si covient ke li malaides soit baigniez en aigue chaude; et li amenistre arosement mollifiant et assouajant, si com decoction de altee et de fenugrec et de mellilote en aigue, et soit amenistree; puis soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos, et mette on desoz l’assele un sto de lainne igal, ne trop mol ne trop dur, puis mette li mires son talon sus le sto, et lieve le chief de l’espaule vertuousement, et traie la main dou malaide; et uns autres ministres teigne lou chief dou malaide, si qu’il ne se mueve aval; celle espaule revient tout maintenant, et se tu vues si le ramoinne selonc ceste maniere: et est que tu faices estre present I home qui soit plus grans que li malaides; et soit drois devers lou costeit, et boute s’espaule desoz l’assele dou malaide, et lieve l’assele en haut, si que li malaides pende en l’ar; et uns autres ministres traie la main dou malaide aval devers lou ventre.	And if it does not come as we have said in a few days after, it is necessary that the patient be bathed in hot water; and administer softening and soothing ointment, such as decoction of althea and fenugreek and melilot in water, and let it be administered; then lay the patient on his back, and put under his seat a pad of wool equal, neither too soft nor too hard, then put the heel of the foot on the pad, and lift the head of the shoulder carefully, and pull the hand of the patient; and another minister holds the head of the patient so that it does not move down; this shoulder returns now, and if you see that you reset it according to this manner: and it is that you make present a man who is larger than the patient; and be right towards the side, and put his shoulder under the seat of the patient, and lift the seat up, so that the patient hangs in the air; and another minister pulls the hand of the patient down towards the belly. 
Et se li malaides est trop legiers, si pent avec lui aucune chose pesant, et li dislocation revient maintenant.	And if the patient is too light, so it can with him no heavy thing, and the dislocation returns now. 
Et le ramoinne on ausi en autre maniere: et est c’on fiche I lonc tison en terre, dont li chiés soit ausi reons com I pistal, et ne soit ne trop gros ne trop graile; puis soit mis desoz lou malaide, mais k’il ait drapelz souef sus, et li malaides soit estans dou lonc dou fust; puis soit estendue sa main aval d’autre part forment, et li jointure revenra en son leu hastanment; et s’elle ne vuet revenir por toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si fai ceste cure: pren I tison de II bras de grant et IIII dois de large, qui ait le chief reont por mues entrer em parfont desoz l’assele, selonc ceste forme:	And reset it in another way: and is one stick long in the earth, whose head is as if the post, and not too thick nor too thin; then it is placed below the patient, but that he has blankets above, and the patient lies on the long end of the shaft; then his hand is extended to the other side forming, and the joint will return to its place quickly; and if it does not want to return for all these things we have said, so do this cure: take a stick of two arms of great and four fingers of wide, which has the head round for to enter in the shaft below the armpit, according to this form: 
puis lie sus le chief dou fust drapelz souez, que li fust ne blece lou malaide, puis le met desoz l’assele dou malaide; et estende som bras sus le fust dou lonc, et lie l’ajutoire sus le fust, et lou bras au chief de la main, puis met le bras sus .i. eschillon d’une eschiele dou large, et soit estendue li mains aval, et soit laissiez li cors pendans d’autre part: li jointure reva ens maintenant.	then tie above the head of the staff cloths soft, that the staff does not bruise the patient, then put it under the shoulder of the patient; and extend his arm on the length of the staff, and tie the shoulder onto the staff, and the arm to the head of the hand, then put the arm on one rung of a ladder wide, and let the hands be stretched down, and let the body hang from the other side: the joint will return now.
Et quant elle est ens, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient que tu mettes desoz l’assele une spere de laine igal, puis met l’emplaustre aparilliet de poudre dou molin, avec encens et aubun d’uef, sus toute l’espaule et entor, puis l’estrain desoz l’assele avenanment, et torne le liien sus l’emplaustre, et embraice la main a son col, et soit li mains demorans ensi.	And when it is ens, in whatever manner that it may be, so it behoves you to put under the saddle a sphere of wool even, then put the plaster covered with powder of the mill, with incense and auburn of egg, over all the shoulder and around, then strain it under the saddle evenly, and turn the linen upon the plaster, and embrace the hand at its neck, and let the hands remain thus.
Et covient qu’il menjuce poc, tant que li membres soit confortez, car il sanera plus tost; et puis menjuce plus aprés .v. jors ou .vij., et le mueve; et s’il est fermeis et il n’est mollifiez, si est sanez.	And it behoves that he massage little, as long as the limb is fortified, because it will heal more quickly; and then massage later after 5 days or 7, and move it; and if it is hardened and is not softened, then it is healed.
Et se li jointure est fuer de leu por moistor que i est venue, ou por autre cause, si covient que tu i aministres cauteres a III pertus, si com il est mis devant ou chapistre des cauteres.	And if the joint is out of place because of moisture that has come or for another cause, then it befits you to administer cautery at three points, as it is shown in the chapter on cautery. 
Et se tu fais tout ceu, et il deslie aprés .vij. jors, et li jointure ne se tient, et ne puet lever som bras amont, adonc saiches que li nerf au chief de l’espaule sont copeit ou estendut ou amollis; et saiches que li jointure n’iert jamais fichie en son leu.	And if you do all these things, and it loosens after seven days, and the joint does not hold, and cannot lift his arm upwards, then know that the nerve at the head of the shoulder is cut or stretched or softened; and know that the joint will never be fixed in its place.
Li dislocation qui est devers lou pis, et les mameles, ou derrier, si est faite par impulsion, et estendement de mains, et i aministre on autre lieure; et cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	The dislocation that is toward the hip, and the breasts, or rear, is made by impulse, and stretching of hands, and it is administered in another place; and treatment until it is healed.
Et se aprés la sanation vient grietez au membre, et tardemens em movement, si use li malaides bain maintes fois, tant que celle grietez soit alegie, et reviegne a sa premiere nature.	And if after healing comes pain to the limb, and slow movements, then the patient uses baths many times, until that pain is alleviated, and returns to its first nature.
de la dislocation dou coute	of the dislocation of the hinge
Saiches que li jointure dou coute est desaluee a poinnes, et a poinnes revient; et s’est desaluee de toutes pars, et meismement devant et derrier, et li dislocations n’est mie reponue, car on la voit bien et sent bien; et desalue selonc chescune figure.	Know that the hinge joint is dislocated to points, and to points it returns; and if it has been dislocated from all sides, and even in front and behind, and the dislocation is not set because it can be seen well and felt well; and dislocated according to each figure.
Et quant tu joins le coute malaide avec lou sain, si le pues veoir apertement.	And when you join the blade of the cautery with the healthy one, if you can see it clearly. 
Car li jointure est chevee, et ne puet ploier lou bras, ne touchier son espaule a tout.	For the joint is dislocated, and cannot bend the arm, nor touch its shoulder at all. 
Et covient que tu le ramoinnes ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne, car se apostemes chaus i venoit, si seroit grief li ramener; et par aventure ne puet estre ramenez dou tout en tout, meismement quant ele est au derrier; si vaut pis que les autres dislocations, et est de plus grant dolor, et par aventure i vient li mors.	And it is necessary that you reset it in the same way as an abscess should come to a head, because if an abscess should come to a head, it would be harmful to bring it back; and perhaps it cannot be brought back completely at all, even when it is in the rear; so it is worse than other dislocations, and is of greater pain, and perhaps death comes from it.
Et li restauration si est, quant elle est telz c’on la puet ramener, que tu li estendes sa main a tes .ij. mains; et ses bras soit espandus, et les mains dou mire selonc le coute entor, desor et desoz, et boute la jointure a ses peuchas ensamble, ou a la racine de sa palme, tant qu’ele reviegne a son leu.	And the restoration is thus, when it is such that one can bring it back, that you extend your hand to its two hands; and his arms be spread, and the hands do move according to the cut around, above and below, and put the joint to its shoulders together, or at the root of its palm, until it returns to its place.
Et se li dislocations est au devant, si revient quant il double sa main a sa main, et fier de la racine de la palme lou coute qui est desaluez.	And if the dislocation is in front, it returns when it doubles its hand to its hand, and firm of the root of the palm the cut which is dislocated.
Et s’il ne vuet revenir au leu, si aministre fort extension; et est que dui ministre estendent le bras, et le teignent dui ministre, si qu’il ne se mueve a l’estension; puis torne le bras de chescune part, puis que tu as envoloupeit un drapeil double lonc et large; et quant li mires a jointe la jointure a sa main, si l’oigne d’aucun oile por amolir la jointure, puis boute la jointure forment, tant qu’ele reviegne; et quant elle est au leu, si met sus emplaustre sec avec aubun d’uef, et l’estrain forment, et pent le bras au col dou malaide, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le deslie.	And if it does not want to return to its place, administer strong extension; and that two ministers extend the arm, and hold them with two ministers, so that it does not move during the extension; then turn the arm on each side, then when you have enveloped a double long and wide cloth; and when the minister joins the joint with his hand, he puts oil of any kind to soften the joint, then pushes the joint together, until it returns; and when it is in place, put a dry plaster above with a yolk of egg, and hold it firmly, and bend the arm to the neck of the sick person, and leave it for some days, then untie it. 
Et se li jointure est ferme en son leu, si deslie lou liien, et le laisse; et se tu vois que li jointure n’estrigne bien, si rencomence l’emplaustre et lou lien, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit fermement mis; puis le deslie.	And if the joint is firm in its place, untie the bandage, and let it be; and if you see that the joint does not tighten well, start the plaster and bandage again, and let it so for some days, until it is firmly set; then untie it.
Et se il sent grieteit aprés le ramenement de la jointe, et elle se muet, si le baigne et frote bellement, et presse tant qu’il soit assouagiez; ou tu met sus la jointure une naige de mouton grasse, puis la laisse I jor et une nuit, puis l’oste, et lou fai entrer ou bain; et quant il sue, se li frote la jointure tempreement, puis remet la naige sus, et puis entre ou bain; et ensi fai II fois ou III, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vues, si met sus fien de vaiche moiste chaufeit avec burre, et l’estrain sus; si revenra a sa disposition.	And if he feels pain after the return of the joint, and it moves, bathe him well and rub him, and press until he is appeased; or you put on the joint a sheepskin fat, then let it rest one day and night, then take the bone, and let it enter the bath; and when he sweats, rub the joint moderately, then put the sheepskin back, and then enter the bath; and thus do it two or three times, until it is cured; and if you see, put on a fleece of moistened wool heated with butter, and strain it over; it will return to its place.
li dislocation de la main	The dislocation of the hand
Li jointure de la main desalue, et li revenue est legiere, plus que les autres jointures Toutevoie, il la covient ramener au leu hastanment, en l’oure meisme qu’ele est desaluee, ainsois que li leus soit enflez, ou qu’il i viegne aposteme chaut.	The joint of the hand is dislocated, and its return is light, more than other joints Nevertheless, it is necessary to bring it back to its place immediately, as soon as it is dislocated, so that the limb does not become swollen or that an abscess comes up hot.
Et li ramenemens si est que tu mettes la main malaide sus une tauble, et estende li ministres la main, et li mires la mette igal, ensi que il mette sa paume sus l’aparance de la jointure, et la boute tant qu’elle reviegne Toutevoie, il covient que vos regardez s’il est bien a leu; adonc mette li malaides lou dos de sa main sus une tauble a l’estension et au ramenement.	And the putting back is that you place the diseased hand on a table, and extend the minister's hand, and he makes it even, so that it puts its palm on the appearance of the joint, and pushes it until it comes back whole; it behooves you to see if it is well in place; then put the patient's back of his hand on a table for extension and putting back. 
Et se li dislocations est au dos de la main, si mette li malaides son dos de sa main sus la tauble, et li mires mette sa main sus cele apparance de la jointure.	And if the dislocation is at the back of the hand, the patient puts their back of their hand on the table, and the surgeon places their hand on the appearance of the joint.  
S’elle revient maintenant, c’est bien Se ce non, si l’estrain d’emplaustres apaisans apostemes chaus, et lou laisse ensi sens rencomencier.	If it returns now, that is good. 
Et s’il ne le puet soffrir, et tu ne la pues mettre au leu aprés aucuns jors, si demore li jointure torte; et ne nuist niant au malaide fuer que tant que li mains est amoillie, et ne puet estraindre aucune chose a tout: adonc saiches que li nerf sont copez, ou li artere; si n’i a autre engien fuer que d’estraindre par cautere delez le cas, et par aventure n’i vaut autre chose.	And if he cannot bear it, and you cannot put it back in place after some days, then the joint remains twisted; and harms nothing to the patient further than while the hand is weak, and cannot restrain anything at all: therefore know that the nerves are cut, or the artery; so there is no other means except to restrain by cautery according to the case, and perhaps there is no other thing.  
Et quant li mains est au leu, si met sus l’emplaustre que nos avons dit, puis l’estrain et le laisse .v. jors, puis le deslie et laisse ensi.	And when the hand is in place, put on the splint that we have said, then constrain and leave it for five days, then unbind and let it be so.
Et s’il ne la puet bien movoir, et il i a aucune grieteit, si la moille d’aigue chaude, et le frote tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if he cannot move it well, and there is no injury, then moisten with hot water, and rub it until it is healed.
de la dislocation des dois de la main	Of the dislocation of the wrists of the hand
Aucune fois sont desaluez li doi de la main a chescune part, aucune fois au dos de la palme ou au ventre; adonques estent le doi, et boute la dislocation a tes pouchés tant qu’il reviegne, puis sostien lou chief dou doi, et le pent vers la partie ou il est desjoins; et le laisse II jors, et puis le met igal celui jor; et de nut le lie, si com nos avons dit, et lou deslie de jor, et lou fai movoir, et le relie la nut; et fai ce sovent, tant qu’il soit estroit, et tout ausi fai, se il est desaluez au ventre de la main, et fai si com tu as fait ci devant, tant qu’il soit sanez; et tout ausi fai, quant il est desaluez d’autre part.	Sometimes the thumbs are dislocated on each side, sometimes on the back of the palm or on the belly; therefore, is the thumb and puts the dislocation in your pouches until it returns, then support the head of the thumb and the bend towards the part where it is disjoined; and let it II days, and then put it even that day; and do not tie it, as we have said, and untie it from day to day, and make it move, and tie it again; and do this often, until it is tight, and just as well, if it is dislocated on the belly of the hand, and do as you did before, until it is healed; and just as well, when it is dislocated on another part. 
dou desaluement de l’eschinee dou dos	of the dislocation of the shoulder blade
Quant l’eschinee dou dos ou dou col est desaluee, ou il en i a plusors desaluees, si n’i a point de cure, car li mors haste le malaide.	When the shoulder blade of the back or neck is dislocated, or there are more dislocations, if there is no cure, for death hastens the patient.
Et li signes si est que li egestions saut fuer sens volunteit, ne ne la puet tenir, et maintes fois sont mollifiez aucun membre, ou les II cuixes ou li dui bras ou I Et maintes fois se muet li eschinee a IIII pars; celle qui se muet au derrier si est apelee «gilbositez»: li cure si est que tu rewarde se li gilbositez est venue d’enfance: si n’i ait point de cure ne de sanation dou tot.	And the signs of this are that the gestions jump out without willing, and cannot hold it, and many times are softened any member, or the two hips or the two arms or one. And many times the leg moves at four parts; the one who moves to the rear is called «gilbositez»: the cure of this is that you reward oneself if the gilbositez has come from childhood: if there is not a cure nor healing of all. 
Et celle que vient de cheoir ou de percussions ou de semblans choses, dirent li ancien manieres de cures par grans paroles, ou il n’a mie en toutes grant profit; mais je l’ai abregiet selonc mon entention, et ai formez estrumens en diverses manieres.	And those that come from a fall or percussion or similar things, the ancients said ways of cures with great words, where there is not in all much benefit; but I have abridged it according to my intention, and have formed instruments in diverse ways.  
Je dis que en la gilbositeit que vient au pis devant, nen a engien ne santeit; et ausi cele que vient droitement en II costez, et ne puet on curer fuers que celi proprement qui vient au dos, si com je dis; et est que li malaides soit estendus sus sa faice en I leu igal, et ait de l’estrain desoz lui, qu’il ne se blece; puis fiche I tison au chief en terre forment, et I autre as piez, et lie un liien pardesoz les asseles dou malaide, et I autre as hainches, et as genous, et as chevilles; et dui ministre saichent les liiens, li uns au chief et li autres as piez, parmi les II tisons; et soient bien fermez, li tison si com nos avons dit, et li mires mette ses paumes sus l’espinee forment, tant qu’ele reviegne.	I say that in the swelling that comes to the breast before, there is nothing that heals; and also that which comes straight in II sides, and one cannot cure except properly that which comes to the back, as I say; and it is that the patient be stretched upon his face in I place equal, and have strain under him, so that he does not tremble; then put the stick at the head in earth forming, and the other at the feet, and tie a linen band between the shoulders of the patient, and the other at the hips, and at the knees, and at the ankles; and two ministers hold the bands, one at the head and the others at the feet, among the II sticks; and be well closed, the stick as we have said, and the mire puts his palms upon the spine forming, until it returns. 
Et s’elle ne revient par ceste cure, si pren une tauble de III bras de lonc, et chevé desoz la paroit, et li malaides soit en costé, et boute le chief de la tauble desoz la paroit, puis met le mileu de la tauble sus l’espinee; et mette li mires ses piez sus l’autre chief de la tauble, et presse bien, tant qu’il reviegne au leu; et se tu vues, si le fai au tornet qui torne a la main.	And if it does not return by this cure, then take a board three arms long, and lay it under the armpit, and have the patient lie on his side, and put the head of the board under the armpit, then place the middle of the board on the spine; and put the feet of the patient on the other end of the board, and press well, until it returns to its place; and if you see that, do the same to the opposite one which turns by hand.  
Et est que tu fiches II tisons au chief dou malaide d’un bras de grant, et devers les piez II autres, et ait entre chescun tison, desoure et desoz, une paume d’espaice de lonc; et ait en chescun tison I pertus, ou li tornet corre, et soient li tison fermement en terre, si qu’il ne se muevent; et entre chescuns II tisons ait I tison tornant, sor coi li liien tornent, et ait en II tornans II petis tisons d’une paume de lonc, por torner le tornet; et puis lie lou lien qui est parmi les asseles au tornet devers le chief, et l’autre liien devers les piez a l’autre tornet, et chescuns des ministres torne son tornet a tout le liien, et li maistres mette l’espinee igal si com nos avons dit.	And it is that you put II twigs at the head of the sick man's arm of a great, and towards the feet II others, and there are between each twig, under and above, a palm's width of long; and have in each twig I pierced, where the string runs, and be the twigs firmly in the earth so that they do not move; and between II twigs there is one turning twig, on which the cord turns, and have in II turning II small twigs of a palm’s length, to turn the twine; and then tie the cord which is among the splints to the string towards the head, and the other cord towards the feet to the other string, and each of the ministers turns his string to all the cord, and the master puts the spine straight as we have said. 
Et quant elle est igalz, si met sus emplaustre desiccatif avec abun d’uef, et puis les estoupes, et puis l’estele d’une tablete de III dois de lonc, que porpreigne lou leu de la gilbositeit et la partie de l’espondile sainne, puis le lie d’un liien, si com nos avons dit, et use li malaides de norrissement subtil, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’aucune chose vient en la fin de la santez, si covient aministrer medicines amollissans et asouajans, avec l’estele que nos avons dit ci devant; et aucune fois i aministre on une piece de plonc, et aucune fois vient li apparance en la derriere spondile dou dos, et cuide on que ce soit dislocations; et c’est li os qui apert, por coi on n’i doit mie avoir presumption: par aventure feroit venir la mort.	And when it is leveled, put a drying plaster with an abundance of egg, and then the bandages, and then the splint of a tablet of III digits long, that reaches the place of the gibbosity and the part of the spine healthy, then tie it with a band, as we have said, and use the patient of subtle nourishment, until it is healed; and if any thing comes in the end of the healing, it is necessary to administer softening and soothing medicines, with the splint that we have said before; and sometimes one administers a piece of plank, and sometimes it appears in the back spine of the back, and they think that it is dislocations; and it is the bone which opens, for which one must not have presumption: by chance would come death.  
des dislocations de la hainche	of dislocations of the hip
Saiches que as jointures de la hainche et as jointures de l’espaule ne vient fuers que dislocacions soulement, ne n’i vient mie si com as autres jointures; et li jointure de la hainche est desaluee selonc .iiij. parties: dedens et defuer ,et devant et derrier; et plus dedens c’aillors, et poc desalue devant et derrier.	Know that the joints of the hip and the joints of the shoulder come out only as dislocations, and not like other joints; and the joint of the hip is dislocated according to .iiij. parts: inside and outside, and front and rear; and more inside then, and little dislocated front and rear.
Et li conoissance de sa dislocations dedens si est que quant on joint la jambe malaide avec la sainne, si est plus longe, et apert plus li malaides genous que li sains, et ne puet li malaides doubler son genoil au feu; et est li leus qui est delez enflez d’aposteme chaut, por ceu que li chiés de la cuixe vient lai.	And the knowledge of its dislocation inside is that when one joins the sick leg with the healthy one, it is longer, and opens more the patient's knee than the healthy one, and the patient cannot double his knee at all; and it is the leg which is beside inflamed from hot abscess, because the head of the hip comes there.  
Et li signe de celui cui il vient au defuer, si est que cist accident sont contraire a ces devant.	And the sign of him to whom it comes at the fever, thus is this accident contrary to these before.
Et li signes de celui cui avient au devant, si est qu’il estent bien sa jambe selonc l’acomplissement; toutevoie, ne double mie le genoil sens dolor, et s’on le vuet faire aler, si ne puet avant, et retient son urine, et enfle li angre, et quant il vait, si passe sus le talon.	And the signs of him to whom it comes at the front, thus is that he is well his leg according to the fulfillment; however, do not double the knee without pain, and if one wants to make him walk, he cannot before, and holds back his urine, and inflames the groin, and when he goes, he passes over the heel.
Et li signes de celui cui il avient derrier, si est qu’il ne puet espandre son genoil, ne doubler, et est celle jambe plus torte de l’autre, et li angre est mollifié, et est li chiés de la cuixe au leu desoz les costes.	And the signs of him to whom it comes behind, thus is that he cannot spread his knee, nor double, and is that leg more twisted than the other, and the groin is softened, and is the hip bone in place under the ribs.
Li ramenemens de ceste semblance de dislocation si est que tu rewarde se li dislocations est anciainne, et elle demore selonc sa disposition, si n’i a nule cure; et n’i covient mie qu’il ait presumption.	The return of this semblance of dislocation is that you watch if the dislocation is old, and it remains according to its disposition, then there is no cure; and it does not behoove him to have presumption.
Et en celi dont li dislocation est fresche, et c’est des .iiij. manieres de dislocation, si te haste que tu tornes la jointe, et l’esten dedens et defuer, et la muef a destre et senestre; par aventure si revenra, et n’a mestier d’autre cure.	And in those whose dislocation is fresh, and there are .iiij. manners of dislocation, so haste that you return the joint, and stretch it inside and outside, and move it to the right and left; perchance it will return, and there is no need for other care.
Et s’il ne revient en ceste maniere, si covient que tu apareilles I ministre fort, et esten la jambe fort a II mains, ou a I liien que soit liiez sus lou genoil; et uns autres ministres estende sa main desus en teil maniere qu’il boute ses mains desoz ses asseles, puis l’estrigne d’un souef liien sus la cuixe; et uns autres tigne lou chief dou liien; et estendent amont et aval tuit a une fois, tant que li malaide soit levez de terre a une fois, et demoure pendans.	And if it does not return in this manner, then it behooves you to appear the minister strong, and hold the leg firmly with two hands, or at the ligament that is bound above the knee; and another minister extends his hand above in such a manner that he puts his hands below his shoulders, then he squeezes with a firm grip on the hip; and another holds the head of the limb; and extend both upward and downward all at once, until the patient is lifted from the ground at once, and remains suspended. 
Ceste maniere d’estension si est commune as .iiij. semblances, et se li dislocation est revenue, si com nos avons dit, c’est bien.	This manner of extension is common to four likenesses, and if the dislocation has returned, as we have said, it is good.
Se ceu non, si covient mettre cure a sa semblance Quant li dislocations est au pardedens, si covient que tu sovines le malaide sus son costeit sain, puis met le liien sus la racine de la cuixe, et le leu qui est desoz l’angre, puis estent le liien en haut devers l’angre, et devers la forcele; puis preigne uns autres ministres ses bras, et embraice le gros leu de la cuixe malaide, et l’estende au defuer forment: si revenra a son leu maintenant; et ceste maniere de dislocation est plus legiere des autres.	If this is not the case, then it is necessary to take care of its semblance. When the dislocation is at the end, then you must support the patient on his healthy side, then put the linen above the root of the hip, and the place that is below the groin, then stretching the linen upwards towards the groin, and towards the force; then seize with other ministers his arms, and embrace the large part of the diseased hip, and extend it outward: now it will return to its place; and this manner of dislocation is lighter than others. 
Et se tu ne la pues serrer en ceste maniere que nos avons dit, si covient que tu lies les II piés dou malaide ensamble d’un fort liien souef sus les II talons, et sus les II genous, et soit li jambe malaide estendue II dois plus que li autres; puis soit pendus sus le chief d’un fust, et soit en sus de terre II bras de lonc; puis comande a I ministre qu’il embraice le chief de la cuixe, et soit uns autres ministres pendans avec le malaide, qui embraice forment la cuixe, car li jointure revient maintenant hastanment.	And if you cannot tighten it in this manner that we have said, then it behooves you to bind the two feet of the patient together with a strong linen cloth over the two heels, and over the two knees, and let the sick leg be extended two palms more than the other; then let it be hung from the top of a pole, and be above the ground two arms long; then command the minister that he embrace the head of the hip, and let other ministers be hanging with the patient, who embrace firmly the hip, for the joint now returns easily. 
Et quant li dislocations est au defuer, si gise li malaides, si com nos avons dit en celui qui a gilbositeit, et estraigne I liien sus la jambe malaide proprement, et sus le peis ausi; puis met II tisons, I au chief et I autre as piez, puis fiche I tison entre les cuixes au malaide emmi la forme; et ait plantei de drapelz moistes entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide, puis estende chescuns ministre devers lui, et li mires mette igal a sa main la dislocation.	And when the dislocation is at the rear, the patient lies down, as we have said in the one who has gilbosite, and restrain the limb above the bad leg properly, and above the hip too; then put two sticks, one at the top and the other at the feet, then put a stick between the hips of the patient in the middle of the form; and have a plant of moist cloths around it so that it does not bleed the bad leg, then extend each minister towards him, and the mire puts equally in his hand the dislocation. 
S’elle revient, c’est boin.	If it returns, it is good. 
Se ce non, met sus .ie. table, et le presse ensi com nos avons dit en la gilbositeit, et gise li malaides sus le sain costeit.	If this is not the case, place it on a table, and press it as we have said in the chapter on dislocations, and lay the patient on his healthy side. 
Et quant li dislocations est devant, si covient estendre la jambe malaide hastanment, et selonc ce que j’ai dit; et mette li mires sa paine d’estre sus l’angre malaide, puis presse a l’autre main, et l’estent aval devers lou genoil.	And when the dislocation is in front, it is necessary to extend the diseased leg as far as possible, and according to what I have said; and put the minister's pain on the affected ankle, then press with the other hand, and the extension downward towards the knee.
Et se li dislocations est au defuer, si ne covient pas estendre le malaide aval, ne lever sus la terre, ains covient qu’il soit ausi com se li hainche estoit desaluee au defuer, si com nos avons dit dou couchement sus les II hainches; et soit sus sa faice, et li lien estendut si com nos avons dit ci devant, et doit om presser sus la jointure a la table; et sera a point quant li malaides estendra ses jambes, et elles seront igalz; adonques ajoste les cuixes, et met l’emplaustre, et l’estrain d’un bendeil, si que li hainche ne se mueve; et se repose III jors ou IIII, puis le deslie, et met l’emplaustre sus; et se tu vois qu’elles soient igalz, si l’estrain, si com devant, et le laisse III jors; puis le deslie, et lou fai aler belement, tant que li membres soit confortez.	And if the dislocation is at the hip, it does not behoove to stretch the patient down or raise up on the ground, but it behoove that he be as if the thigh was dislocated at the hip, as we have said about lying on the two hips; and be upon his face, and the bandage stretched as we have said before, and one must press upon the joint to the table; and will be in place when the patient stretches his legs, and they are even; then adjust the thighs, and put the splint, and the strapping of a band, so that the hip does not move; and rest III days or IV, then untie it, and put the splint on; and if you see that they are even, strap it as before, and let it be for III days; then untie it, and let him walk well, until the limb is strengthened. 
de la dislocation dou genoil	of the dislocation of the knee
Li genous est desaluez selonc .iij. manieres: c’est a savoir, dedens et defuer, et derrier; et ne desalue point devant.	The knee is dislocated in three ways: namely, inside and outside, and behind; and it does not dislocate forward.
Et li signes si est que tu comande au malaide qu’il plie sa jambe a sa cuixe, et s’ele ne s’aert a sa cuixe, saiches qu’il est desaluez; et li restauration de toutes si est que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et estende sa jambe s’il puet, et li met ton dos sus sa faice, et met son piet sus tes piez; puis pren son genoil a tes paumes, et retrai entre tes dois, puis plie les II costez dou genoil forment; et uns autres ministres estende son piet, tant que li genous reviegne a son leu, et li signes est qu’il aert bien sa jambe a sa cuixe legierement; et met l’emplastre sus, et fai aerdre la jambe a la cuixe, et les loie ensamble fort III jors ou IIII, puis le deslie; et ne se travaille mie li malaides d’aler, tant que li membres soit confortez.	And the signs are that you command the patient to bend his leg to his hip, and if it does not rest on his hip, know that it is dislocated; and the restoration of all this is that you make the patient sit straight, and extend his leg if he can, and put your back on his thigh, and put his foot on your feet; then take his knee in your palms, and retract between your two fingers, then bend the two bones forming the knee; and other ministers extend his foot, until the knee returns to its place, and the sign is that it rests gently on his hip; and put the plaster on top, and make the leg rest on the hip, and tie them together firmly for three days or four, then untie them; and do not let the patient work to go, as long as the limb is strengthened. 
Et se li membres n’est a point, si aministre estendement fort, si com nos avons dit en la cure de la hainche, tant qu’il soit sanez	And if the limb is not set, administer a strong extension, as we have said in the treatment of the hip, until it is sound 
de la dislocation dou talon	of the dislocation of the heel
Li talons est aucune fois esmeus, et aucune fois desaluez plenement, et dedens et defuer.	The heels are sometimes dislocated and sometimes fully dislocated, both inside and outside.
Et li signes si est que li cheville est enflee, et tent avant a la partie ou elle est desaluee: li ramenemens si est legier, et le doit on estendre legierement a ses mains quant il est esmeus soulement.	And the signs of this are that the ankle is swollen, and feels ahead to the part where it is dislocated: the resetting is light, and one should extend it gently with one's hands when it is only bruised. 
Et quant il est desaluez dou tot, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et le tigne I ministres fors par la jambe, desus la cheville; puis trai le piet a toi a ta main destre, et puis a la senestre II fois, puis l’estent en haut, et boute bellement lou piet en haut; et fai ce II fois, si com nos avons dit, em boutant et en traiant lou piet; s’elle revient, c’est bien; se ce non, si rencomence l’ovraige, car il revient; et s’il ne puet revenir ensi, si fai gesir lou malaide sor son dos sus terre, et fiche I passeil fermement en terre entre ses cuixes, et lie drapelz entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide; puis teigne li ministres la cuixe, et uns autres ministres estende lou piet a ses mains ou a I liien, k’il lie sus le col dou piet; puis estende chescuns ministres igalment, et li passelz soit adés entre les cuixes dou malaide por retenir le malaide quant on l’estent; puis mette li mires igal la dislocation a ses mains, et uns autres ministres teigne la jambe sainne au desoz, et li dislocation revenra hastanment.	And when it is dislocated completely, then you must make the patient sit upright, and hold him with your ministers except by the leg, above the ankle; then draw the foot to yourself with your right hand, and then with the left two times, then up the side, and push the foot well upwards; and do this two times, as we have said, pushing and drawing the foot; if it returns, that is good; if not, start the operation again, because it will return; and if it cannot return like this, then make the patient lie on his back on the ground, and place a stake firmly in the ground between his thighs, and tie belts around him, so that he does not move; then hold the ministers the thigh, and other ministers extend the foot to their hands or at the groin, so that it lies above the joint of the foot; then extend each minister evenly, and let the stakes be well placed between the patient's thighs in order to retain the patient when being extended; then place the midwives on each side the dislocation with their hands, and other ministers hold the sound leg below, and the dislocation will return easily. 
Et quant elle iert a point, si met l’emplastre et estoupes sus, et l’estrain forment, et lie lou piet a la jambe, et warde les ners qui sont sus la cheville derrier, que li liiens ne soit trop estrois; puis le laisse II jors ou III, et se li liiens amolist, si l’estrain; puis le deslie au tier jor ou au quart, et deffent a aler lou malaide par IIII jors; et s’il va devant cel termine, ce n’est mie seurtez qu’il ne desalue encor.	And when it is pointed, put the plaster and dressings on top, and strain them, and tie the foot to the leg, and guard the nerves which are above the ankle behind, that the ligatures not be too tight; then let him leave it II days or III, and if the ligatures soften, tighten them again; then untie it at the third day or fourth, and forbid the patient to walk for IIII days; and if he goes before that term, it is not certainty that he does not dislocate again. 
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si covient que tu l’apaises, si com nos avons dit autre part, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if an abscess comes to him, then it is necessary that you soothe it, as we have said elsewhere, until it is healed.
des dois	of two
Quant li doi sont desaluez, si les covient bellement estendre sens travail, et c’est legiere chose.	When the hips are dislocated, it is well to extend them gently, and this is a light thing.
Et se li dislocations est en aucun nout dou dos dou piet, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide sus I leu plain ou sus .ie. table tot droit, et met ton piet sus ce qui apert de ces jointures, puis presse a ton piet forment, tant qu’il reviegne; et quant il est igalz, et il n’i apert nient, si met desoz la plante dou piet une table a II chiés, puis l’estrain forment, et le laisse III jors, puis le deslie; et le fai reposer, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the dislocation is in any joint of the back or foot, then it is necessary that you make the patient sit on a level surface or on a table straight, and put your foot on what separates the joints, then press with your foot firmly, until it returns; and when it is equal and there is nothing apart, then put under the sole of the foot a board at the shoulder, then strain it firmly, and let it for three days, then untie it; and let him rest, as long as he is healed.  
de plaie et de dislocation ensamble	of wound and dislocation together
Quant plaie vient avec la dislocation, et on la vuet restorer, maintes fois avient que li malaides muert: si ne soies mie presumptuous en la cure, se tu n’es saiges en l’art et tu ne l’as useit longement, et se tu n’es pitous et misericors et tardis, ne mie hardis; et use au comencement de choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et laisse le malaide en la main Deu, se tu n’i vois esperance de santeit; et quant tu i vois esperance, si ramoinne maintenant le membre au leu, ainsois que li apostemes chaus i viegne; et quant li membres est a leu, si aministre choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et cure la plaie, si com il covient, d’oignemens desiccatis; et se avec la dislocation a brisure, et os menus desevrez, si les oste, et fai ce que nos avons dit en maladies simples; et te garde d’entrer en voie de paour, selonc ce que j’ai dit, car ce te vaut mues selonc ton Creator, et por la saveteit de t’arme et de ton cors.	When a wound comes with dislocation, and one wants to restore it, many times happens that the patient dies: so do not be presumptuous in the cure, if you are not wise in the art and have not used it for a long time, and if you are not compassionate and merciful and patient, nor rash; and use at the beginning soothing things of hot poultice, and let the patient in God's hand, if you do not see hope of health; and when you see hope, so reset the limb to its place, so that the poultices may come there alive; and when the limb is in place, administer soothing things of hot poultice, and cure the wound as it is right, with drying dressings; and if with the dislocation a fracture, and small bones are separated, set them, and do what we have said in simple diseases; and guard yourself from entering into the way of fear, according to what I have said, for this costs you death according to your Creator, and for the safety of your arm and body. 
Amen	Amen 
